
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            

               Champagne Charlie Champion
            

            In fixing his attentions
solely on an extreme close-up in "Charles, Earl
Spencer," I think David Plotz may have overlooked the larger tableau. True,
if this "Hugh Grant-y" type's acid remarks toward the press were due to having
been caught wearing his pants in "Hugh Grant-y" fashion, Plotz's portrayal of
Charles Spencer as just another hypocritical, bratty royal would have
resonance.

            But that's not the case
here. Had Plotz pulled his focus back a bit, he may have noticed that at the
time Spencer made his remarks, he was in a church. More importantly, there was
a funeral going on. And, rotten luck, The Loved One just happened to be
Spencer's sister. Given the setting, one could posit that Spencer's invective
was not concerned so much with the convoluted interplay of the press with his
past peccadilloes, but rather was more driven by the unavoidable necessity of
having to plant his 36-year-old sister in the earth later that day. Plausible,
wouldn't you say?

            Lacking
the sophistry of Plotz's editorial credentials, my interpretation of Charles,
Earl Spencer's remarks is fairly basic. What I heard him say was: If the
parasite lives, but the host dies, it really can't be described as a symbiotic
relationship.

            -- Brad
Bower Dallas

            
               The
Missionary Position
            

            In your
section titled "The
Week/The Spin," the caption under the picture of Mother Teresa says,
"Hell's Angel." Is this a sick joke or, I hope, a typo, because it is offensive
and wrong. With this one slip you lost complete respect and reliability by me,
a daily Slate reader. You'd better check this out because I'm sure I'm not the
only one who noticed it.

            -- John
Shefferly Detroit

            
               Hear,
and Now!
            

            I find
myself in disagreement with "Hear Me," by Bill Barnes, about the quality of IBM's
VoiceType software. Although I am a poor typist, I find that I am able to type
a document much more quickly and accurately than the above-named software can
perform. Although I speak with an English accent, my pronunciation can be
modified to American English. Whatever I dictate is 50-percent misinterpreted
by the program. The correction modification seems to have no effect. My
software definitely does not learn by its mistakes!

            
               --Michael T.
Shaw Ramona, Calif.

            
               Bill Barnes replies:
"The product I reviewed was IBM ViaVoice. VoiceType is IBM's previous
generation of voice-recognition software."
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
