
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Queer
Numbers
            

            A few points to additionally
bolster Walter Olson's excellent "William Bennett, Gays,
and the Truth":

            As the "Fact Sheet on Paul
Cameron," put out by the University of California at Davis, points out, U.S.
District Judge Buchmeyer concluded in a 1985 decision that Cameron had perjured
himself to Buchmeyer's court. Thus, Cameron hardly seems to be a source on
which Bennett, "Mr. Virtue" himself, should be relying.

            Olson
criticizes Cameron's findings that gays experience "shockingly high rates of
violent death." There may actually be a grain of truth to this conclusion, but
it is not the kind that does Cameron or Bennett any good. Over the last several
years, incidents of gay-bashing have gone up across the country. There is no
doubt that this is due, at least in part, to the increasingly poisonous
rhetoric of homophobic hatemongers such as Cameron and Bennett.

            -- Roger
Simon Austin, Texas

            
               William
Bennett, Vogue Readers, and the Truth
            

            Thanks for "William Bennett, Gays,
and the Truth," a clear and timely example of how conservatives like
William Bennett will manipulate the most far-fetched data on gays and lesbians
to serve their bigoted interests. Sadly, even mainstream media routinely parrot
gay-newspaper studies as representative of all gay Americans. Yet no reputable
news organization or political pundit would dare get away with using, say,
Vogue- reader surveys to make a point about all American women's
attitudes. It's refreshing to see 
                  Slate
                doing simple math as
other media snooze and bigots take advantage of them.

            -- Grant
Lukenbill
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
