
   
   
      
         
            Mi NASA Es Su NASA

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Mi NASA
Es Su NASA
            

            Scott Shuger seems to have
it wrong when he editorializes while reporting on coverage of cosmonaut Vasily
Tsibliev's press conference in "Today's
Papers": "Imagine a NASA astronaut having the nerve to say such things!
You'll have to, because it's never happened, even when things went as awry as
they did with the Challenger."

            I guess Shuger doesn't
recall John Young taking NASA management to task about flawed decision-making
after the Challenger accident. If he'll refresh his memory, he might recall
that Young, speaking as the leader of the entire astronaut corps, said
astronauts would refuse to fly until there were significant changes in the
decision tree.

            I guess
we're so used to our freedoms here that we quickly forget their use.

            -- Jim Andress
            

            
               We Got
NeXT
            

            In "Steven Jobs'
Totalitarian Vision," James Surowiecki is too hard on Steve Jobs when he
notes Apple's failure to build a business selling system software rather than
complete computer systems. The Microsoft business model is an attractive one in
hindsight, but before Microsoft, every large company in the industry's
history--IBM, Digital Equipment, Hewlett-Packard, etc.--had prospered by
selling complete systems. In 1984, when the Macintosh was released, Microsoft
was dwarfed by both its hardware-selling clients and the vendors of popular
applications. It was Bill Gates' genius to understand that his tiny company
could own the link between those two sides of the business, reducing PC
manufacturers to commodity box-builders and forcing software developers to
compete with Microsoft applications on Microsoft turf. But as successful as the
system-software strategy has been for Microsoft, it isn't a panacea; see IBM's
experience with OS/2 and Jobs' own experience with NeXTStep for
counterexamples.

            It is
interesting to note what Microsoft gave up in order to pursue a software-only
strategy: Today, 13 years later, Microsoft systems still do not approach the
tight integration and polish of the original Macintosh. They don't even know
when the user has inserted a floppy disk! Jobs' hubris was not that he wanted
to own the personal computer business, but that he wanted to sell a product
that was better than anything the industry could put together piecemeal.

            -- Jim
Matthews Hanover, N.H.

            
               DOS and
Don'ts
            

            In "Steven Jobs'
Totalitarian Vision," James Surowiecki gives one of the finest examples of
Monday morning quarterbacking I've ever seen. He states, "[Jobs] wanted to make
the computers and the systems that ran them. ... Had Apple allowed
Compaq, Hewlett-Packard, perhaps even IBM to build hardware running the Mac OS,
it might very well have seen its software become the industry standard."

            Well,
yes. We all know that now. But in 1982, it was taken for granted that the
manufacturer of the computer also designed the operating system. I didn't know
anyone with a DOS system in the early '80s, but I knew plenty of people with
Commodore 64s, TI 99-4As, Apple IIs, computers by Tandy, and even Timex--all
with distinct and incompatible operating systems. This was the state of the
industry when the Mac was born. Bill Gates realized it would be more efficient
if all computers, regardless of manufacturer, ran the same system (which is why
he's the richest man in America today). As obvious as this insight seems today,
though, it wasn't in 1983--Steve Jobs didn't realize it, my computer nerd
friends and I didn't realize it and, I suspect, James Surowiecki didn't realize
it either.

            -- Kim
Scarborough Chicago

            
               High
Infidelity
            

            The
premise of Jacob Weisberg's "Adultery
and Boredom" is simply wrong. The allegations against Mayor Giuliani and
President Clinton are not the contemporary equivalent of Gary Hart's
videotaped escapades on the appropriately named Monkey Business . Do you
remember the grainy video of Hart--stop motion, circle around Hart, circle
around Rice, drinking, fun--that was broadcast for days on local and national
news programs? Have you seen any such videos of President Clinton or Rudolph
Giuliani? In the court of public opinion there is no parallel between video and
a bare allegation--something often forgotten by zealous reporters and
columnists. Weisberg's conclusion that Americans are apathetic about infidelity
may be true, but it is totally unsupported by his argument. If anything, the
column merely supports the conclusion that the American public is more careful
than Weisberg in branding individuals with a scarlet letter.

            
               --Charles Van Cleef
Tyler, Texas

            
               Where
There's Smoke There's Hire
            

            Jacob Weisberg is certainly
correct, in "Liberal Tobacco Whores," to condemn the shameless
immorality of liberal ex-politicians who have sold their services to the
tobacco companies, but he fails to properly identify why their actions are
wrong.

            Defending the freedom of
people to make dumb decisions is not morally wrong. Whether it is sky diving,
eating Big Macs, smoking, or engaging in promiscuous sex, people should be free
to take risks with their own lives. Advocates of the nanny state may respond
that society bears some of the costs of these behaviors, but that is the fault
of the health, welfare, and other government programs that protect people from
the consequences of foolish behavior.

            No, there
is nothing at all wrong with defending tobacco companies. What is immoral,
instead, is taking lots of money to lobby for something you do not believe in.
This is why Ann Richards, George Mitchell, and all the others deserve the scorn
of principled people of all persuasions.

            -- Daniel J.
Mitchell The Heritage FoundationWashington

            
               True
North
            

            Jodie T. Allen's "Polar Politics"
makes us Alaskans out to be a pretty sorry lot. We would "log, mine, and drill
every corner" of the state. We are an odd collection of "adventurers, loners,
and losers," as illustrated by a sex crime described in lurid detail. On top of
that, we get huge gobs of money from Uncle Sam but are not sufficiently
grateful.

            We do have our share of
"loners and losers," but most Alaskans have families and jobs, go to churches
or synagogues, and are the same as the rest of America except for having to
dress warmer. We have chosen to live in a beautiful place where some of the
world's most scenic areas have been closed to mining and oil development
forever. But thanks to advances in mining and petroleum technology, other areas
of the state can be safely developed, leaving only a minuscule "footprint" on
the environment.

            As for federal spending in
Alaska, keep in mind that you will get skewed statistics on a per capita basis
when you are dealing with a small "capita." The federal government is the
outright owner of most of the land in Alaska and has financial responsibilities
the same as any other landlord. Add to that Alaska's strategic position in a
world where the threat comes increasingly from Asia, and you can see that the
money spent here on the military is hardly a boondoggle dreamed up by the
locals. In addition, the federal government spends a large amount of money on
Alaska's native peoples. It would certainly save money not to deliver mail to
scores of isolated native villages that can only be reached by air, but the
natives hardly intend to apologize for living in their ancestral
communities.

            Sensible
environmentalism deserves everyone's support, and gets it up here.
Environmentalism as a secular religion, though, is another matter. Alaska and
Alaskans will never satisfy those who believe that the only good development is
no development. Those with a more rational view, however, have been and will be
accommodated.

            -- Herb
Berkowitz Anchorage, Alaska

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
