
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            

               @$#%&!!!
            

            I want to
tell you how really disappointed I was, when reading the first entry of the
"Diary" from
Lorenzo Semple Jr., to encounter a really vulgar word. To be sure, I've been
known to use that particular Anglo-Saxon expletive myself, and with great
verve, too; but to encounter it in the pages of 
                  Slate
                was just
too much. Don't you edit the diary submissions of your contributors? Was it
absolutely necessary to use that particular word? Just because it's a diary
doesn't mean it should be published unexpurgated.

            -- Bob
Solon Indianapolis

            
               With
Seven You Get Egg Roll
            

            I very much enjoy "Today's
Papers," and I'm sorry that this first message to you comes on the occasion
of a complaint.

            In his Nov. 20 entry, Scott
Shuger suggested a contradiction between (septuplet father) Kenny McCaughey's
statement that "God gave us those kids" and the fact that 40 specialists were
involved and that Bobbi McCaughey had been hospitalized for more than a month.
If that's a contradiction, then no one could ever properly say, "God gave us
those kids," or even "God gave us that kid," because, as you know, there is
some human effort involved in all human births--whether from doctors, nurses,
midwives, even mothers and, to a much lesser extent, fathers.

            If you don't believe in God,
that's one thing. The alleged contradiction would therefore have nothing to do
with the number of specialists involved or the length of stay in the hospital.
It would have only to do with your theological presupposition. But if you allow
for the possibility of a sovereign, you should not be surprised that He uses
His creatures to achieve His ends--whether in the birth of a child (or
children) or in the rearing of them.

            God is
good, Mr. Shuger. I'm looking forward to Today's Papers tomorrow.

            -- Nickolas S.
Eicher
            

            
               Down the
Hatch
            

            GOP efforts to derail
President Clinton's appointment of Bill Lann Lee as the nation's chief
civil-rights enforcer ("Payback
Time," by Jacob Weisberg) only demonstrate what bad sports Republicans have
become in the last few years. If they can't have their own man in the Oval
Office, it seems, they will do anything--no matter how petty or self-serving or
just plain stupid--to cripple the Democratic agenda that won Clinton his office
not once, but two times in a row.

            Even Sen. Orrin Hatch has to
acknowledge that Lee is well qualified for the post he seeks. Yet the senator
is trying to kill Lee's nomination, complaining that he might be an activist at
the Justice Department. Hatch worries that Lee would use his new position to
halt any spread of anti-affirmative-action legislation or seek to subvert
California's abolition of such practices.

            Hatch's
campaign may play well to GOP extremists, those folks who have always feared
that civil-rights legislation and affirmative action would somehow bring down
Western civilization. But it's obvious to the rest of us that contesting this
nomination on the basis that Lee might be an activist in government is rank
hypocrisy. If the rule from now on is that nobody can hold office in Washington
unless they swear not to try to sway public opinion or undo existing laws, then
every congressional Republican with a hankering to overturn Roe vs. Wade
might as well start looking for new employment--Hatch included.

            -- J. Kingston
Pierce Seattle

            
               I Come to
Berry Seizures--Not to Praise Them
            

            Paul Krugman, in his recent
article, "A Raspberry
for Free Trade," suggests that the opponents of imports from countries with
poor working conditions are in fact being disingenuous: They don't really
oppose the bad conditions. What they oppose is the competition.

            This may be true for some.
But for me, and for many others, there is a legitimate concern about whether
we, through our purchases, are encouraging the abuse of others. And despite
Krugman's argument, it would matter to me if I knew that the shirt I just
purchased was produced by laborers who were beaten and tortured in order to
increase their productivity.

            It is,
unfortunately, difficult to determine reliably if the labor that went into a
particular item was handled humanely. But that doesn't mean that the issue of
humane treatment of workers is unimportant. Krugman argues persuasively that
the berry-based argument is irrelevant--but the moral argument remains,
nonetheless, quite cogent.

            -- Yaron
Minsky
            

            
               Free
Trade's Been Berry Berry Good to Me
            

            As a staunch supporter of
free trade, I couldn't agree more with "A Raspberry for Free
Trade," Paul Krugman's critique of the arguments put forward by the
opponents of fast track. They are not only specious, but also deeply
disingenuous.

            But supporters of free trade
should look beyond the intellectual caliber of these arguments and consider the
political realities that sustain them. And here free traders may only have
themselves to blame.

            Sensible free traders argue
that jobs lost to free trade are more than made up for by jobs gained, and make
further, quite correct, arguments that American trade barriers are already
quite low and that we have the most to gain by global trade liberalization.

            Still, none of the many
benefits of free trade overcome the fact that some will lose in the more
dynamic economy that aggressive free trade creates, and that the very dynamism
of free trade can cast a penumbra of insecurity that goes well beyond those who
will actually lose employment.

            The political answer to
this, which many progressive supporters of free trade have endorsed, is a
combination of aggressive free trade coupled with programs aimed to cushion and
compensate for the social dislocations which free trade causes. This is, in
some sense, the New Democrat line, the Clinton line, the DLC line, etc.

            The
problem is that progressive supporters of free trade have been able to get
their free-trade agreements, but very little in the way of cushioning programs
for the kind of dynamic economic order we're clearly moving into. A
sustainable, progressive free-trade coalition requires both. I don't pretend
that the politics of the situation are simple by any means. But getting one and
not the other has played a major role in creating the increasingly successful
popular backlash against free trade.

            -- Joshua Micah
Marshall
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
