
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               A
Utilitarian Burial
            

            In your
"Egghead"
column, it is stated that Jeremy Bentham's corpse was preserved according to
his wishes. Unfortunately, as so often happens, his last wishes were not
fulfilled in accordance with his will. His wish was to have his clothed
skeleton displayed, not a dressed, mummified corpse. I attach herewith the
.

            -- Robert
Bjorkland Toronto

            
               True
Grits
            

            In his "Dialogue" on population, Ben Wattenberg refers to something slicing
through something else "like a laser through grits."

            The
metaphor is initially appealing, but on further examination it demands
clarification from Engineer Wattenberg. A laser strikes one as a particularly
infelicitous tool for grits-slicing. Awkwardness aside (we're not talking laser
pen-pointers here; do we take the laser to the breakfast table or the grits to
the laser?), at least two practical difficulties arise: As the slicing begins,
some considerable quantity of steam should be produced, shielding the subject
grits from our slicing instrument. Moreover, sliced grits show a disconcerting
tendency toward self-healing. I'm reminded of thousands of Egyptian extras
following Charlton Heston into the (temporarily) parted Red Sea. Will the grits
stay sliced? I think not.

            -- Jonathan
Lundell Half Moon Bay, Calif.

            
               Why
Couldn't He Be Kam Ho? Or Chin Fong?
            

            From "Today's Papers"
on Jan. 23: "Amidst all this, Jack Lord and his hair died. The obits fail to
clear up an abiding mystery: Why did Kam Fong play 'Chin Ho'? Why couldn't he
just be 'Kam Fong'?"

            Sorry,
but this is pretty offensive. Would Shuger ever have said: "Why did Irving
Goldberg play 'Sol Bernstein'? Why couldn't he just be 'Irving Goldberg'?" or
"Why did Luigi Santini play 'Giuseppi Romano'? Why couldn't he just be 'Luigi
Santini'?" That boy needs an editor. Can't you pay somebody else to stay up all
night to keep a lid on his, er, excesses?

            -- Gary Krist
            

            
               Greed
Goeth Before a Fall
            

            Nancy Griffin writes in
"Hollywood Strikes Back" that Michael Eisner extended an olive
branch to former friend Mike Ovitz, but Ovitz declined to accept it. She then
notes that Ovitz might be someone whose pride exceeds his greed.

            This is an
absurd statement. Ovitz didn't engineer a $90-million severance package because
he was proud of leaving Disney or his brainchild, Creative Artists Agency. And
now that he has more money than God (or, at least, Oral Roberts), he doesn't
need Eisner's friendship. He can open a studio on his own and thumb his nose at
everyone else.

            -- Brian Hamburg West
Hills, Calif.

            
               The
Troubles
            

            In "The Luck of the Irish,"
James Surowiecki makes statements that are flat-out false, and omits many
issues that are at the real root of the problems.

            The Irish Republican Army
always notifies ahead of time when a bomb will be set off in a civilian
area. There is an established code just for that. He omitted this fact. When
Surowiecki calls the Irish Catholics a minority he should point out that they
make up 45 percent of Northern Ireland. But only 5 percent of Irish Catholics
have been accepted into the police force.

            Further, there was no
mention of the release of Robert "Basher" Bates. Bates, who took part in dozens
of murders of Catholics, has spent less time in prison than Joe Doherty, who
was convicted of one killing. (Bates' method was to beat the victims with
hammers and then dismember them with butcher knives.)

            Finally, the founding
fathers of the United States promised to help free Ireland. On Oct. 4, 1778,
Ben Franklin assured the Irish, who made up half of Washington's army, that he
was "charged to assure you that means will be found by the Continental Congress
to establish your freedom." On June 17, 1781, Franklin said of Ireland, "Now is
the time for France and the United States to help secure her independence."

            Had
America kept its word, Surowiecki wouldn't have anything to lie about.

            -- M.G.
McCormick Glen Oaks, N.Y.

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
