
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               The
Pique in Review
            

            Having
read David Brock's essay in the July Esquire , I am aware of his penchant
for the witless smear. But for him to claim in his latest "Dialogue" that "Ramesh Ponnuru ... sounds like a David Brock
wannabe" is a truly low blow. For one thing, I don't rifle through people's
underwear drawers to get my stories. Nor do I try to pass off rumors as fact. I
make a point of checking facts before criticizing people in print. Finally, I'm
not in the habit of being photographed surrounded by kindling and tied to a
tree. But I suppose these are minor differences that shouldn't get in the way
of the truly important things. Brock is still welcome at National
Review 's next party.

            -- Ramesh
PonnuruNational Review
            

            
               Greece Is
the Word
            

            David Franklin's complete
misunderstanding of the Socratic method in "Trials of Socrates"
leads him to the right conclusions for all the wrong reasons. Franklin writes
under the impression that, as the law is a practical art and not a science, the
Socratic method is improper. This is absurd. The Socratic method is effective
only in seeking resolution to nonscientific matters: morality, justice, ethics.
Thus the Socratic method is extremely effective for the training of
attorneys.

            The problem is that law
schools fail to practice the Socratic method. Socrates never engaged more than
a few individuals in a dialogue. Law school question-and-answer teaching is as
Socratic as slam dancing is balletic. Contrary to Franklin's claims, a true
Socratic method would require a student-to-faculty ratio of 5-to-1 and a higher
quality of faculty.

            Franklin
is ultimately correct; radical reforms are needed. Nevertheless, the answers
involve embracing the Socratic method (it is impossible to think of anything
more radical than first-year law school classes with half a dozen students),
not demeaning it.

            -- Patrick Daniel Gatti,
Esq. Midvale, Utah

            

               Hemlock
            

            In
reference to David Franklin's "Trials of Socrates," which is subtitled, "It's worse than
sexist. It's idiotic," I ask you: Isn't sexism idiotic? To what are we
comparing idiocy? A considerably audible "tsk, tsk" I send you, Slate.

            -- Elisabeth
Meyer Paducah, Ky.

            
               Passive
Voice
            

            In "Passive Aggressive,"
Daniel Akst is wrong to think that index investing is an example of the tragedy
of the commons. Akst reasons as follows: 1) When markets are efficient it is in
everyone's self-interest to passively invest in index funds; 2) When everyone
passively invests in index funds, markets will no longer be efficient; 3)
Therefore, index investing leads to inefficient markets. The flaw in the
reasoning is that it is not in an individual's self-interest to invest in an
index fund if everyone else is doing so.

            Suppose that everyone invests
in an index fund. Since no one does any research, shares in Microsoft will sell
for the same price as shares in the Imafraud Gold Mining Co.--hence the evil of
index investing according to Akst. But, should this situation ever occur,
anyone who does even an iota of research could make a killing by buying
Microsoft stock at a ridiculously low price. More generally, as the amount of
index investing increases, the return to market research increases. We need not
lose sleep, therefore, about any lack of market research.

            Akst is
perhaps confused by the following two truths: 1) If everyone researches the
market, an individual should passively index invest; 2) If everyone passively
index invests, an individual should research the market. The paradox is solved
by realizing that everyone need not follow the same strategy. Index investing
makes sense for those of us who don't have the time or inclination to closely
monitor our investments. Researching the market makes sense if you are good at
it and you are willing to do it full time. Index investors rely on researchers
to keep the market tolerably efficient. Researchers rely on index investors to
leave enough opportunity for them to make money based on their research. In
either case, no tragedy occurs.

            -- Alex Tabarrok Ball
State University, department of economics Muncie, Ind.

            
               Daniel Akst
responds: It's possible that, as at least one other reader has suggested in
"The Fray,"
if indexing goes far enough, the marginal returns to research will become so
great that research will pay, the market will be made efficient, and everyone
will live happily ever after. It's also possible that this will not happen. In
a world of indexers, I can certainly discover, through my research, that XYZ
Corp. is a great deal at a given price, but in such a world, who will pay me
the price I think I deserve? Certainly not the indexers. Indexing probably has
already made the stock market less efficient, simply because a growing
proportion of the money invested is now indifferent to ratios of price to
performance and other measures of value, not to mention expectations of growth.
Bad companies are already being subsidized in this way, and to the extent that
the larger economy is any kind of commons, indexing is undermining it.

            
               Girls
Just Wanna Have Funds
            

            In "Good Girl, Bad
Girl," Graef Crystal has some very convoluted logic at the end of his
piece. He writes: "We need a lot more women CEOs, and not merely because of
considerations of fairness. Those extra women will expand the supply of CEOs
and help to drive down, or at least moderate, the currently obscene levels of
CEO pay. I only hope those new women CEOs are like Marion Sandler, rather than
like Linda Wachner."

            How will more women CEOs
"moderate the current levels of CEO pay," when the two women he cites in his
article represent both extremes? His assumption is that all women CEOs will
manage alike. Can't we get past the gender stereotypes and just evaluate
individuals, not groups? Maybe he meant that more CEOs will dilute pay, but he
states in his piece that if a CEO wants to squeeze out more money from the
compensation board, he/she will.

            And isn't this issue more
about a nation's culture than the gender makeup of CEOs? In Japan, most CEOs
are paid only 10 times more than the lowest-paid worker in the company. In the
United States, it's capitalism mixed with greed run amok.

            Crystal's
illogical argument reflects poorly on his journalistic abilities and the
magazine.

            -- Janet
Reynolds Washington

            
               Dish
Pan
            

            I share Herbert Stein's
disappointment in "207 Channels" at the lack of quality programming on small
satellite dishes, but it was strangely satisfying to learn that a leading
economist was so thoroughly ripped off in the purchase of his dish. Next time
any economist assumes that consumers behave rationally, they should be forced
to read Stein's article.

            Firstly, it's ridiculous to
spend $120 (or any amount) on a service contract for one of these devices. Most
service contracts are scams, and this sort of solid-state consumer-electronics
gadget certainly doesn't warrant one. Secondly, $350 to install one of these
things in an apartment is just plain gouging (and Stein, I'm guessing, is only
in Washington, not New York). I did mine in two hours with a drill, a
screwdriver, and a pair of pliers. And, unlike Stein's "professionally"
installed dish, mine worked perfectly right away.

            But I too
wish there were more worthwhile things to watch--say, an enlightening
discussion of microeconomic theory by a fellow of the American Enterprise
Institute.

            -- Ken
Broomfield Arroyo Grande, Calif.

            
               Herbert
Stein responds: Ken Broomfield thinks it was not rational for me to have my
TV satellite dish installed by professionals and to buy a three-year service
warranty. Whether it is rational for a person to make the decision I made
depends on a number of factors, including: 1) the physical conditions in which
the device is to be installed; 2) the person's manual dexterity; 3) the
alternative uses of the person's time; 4) the person's risk aversion; 5) the
person's tolerance for hassle; 6) the person's income; 7) the person's age; 8)
the prospective marginal tax on the person's estate.

            
Considering these factors, I think that my decision was rational for me; it
might not have been rational for Broomfield. I am not an economist who believes
that people always make rational decisions, but I believe that they often
do.

            
               Chain
and Fable
            

            In 1988, I wrote an article
in SPY magazine about the "St. Jude" chain letter. I am an unwitting
expert on the subject--until recently I was the 29 th person in the
Manhattan phone book, and so received hundreds of copies of it. I started
collecting them in 1984.

            Seth Stevenson's "Bound In Chains"
says, "The U.S. Postal Service estimates that the chain has circled the globe
at least nine times." It is a curious claim. Firstly, because with $10 worth of
stamps and a pen pal I could make it circle the globe another nine times all by
myself. Secondly, because a reading of the St. Jude letter reveals this
sentence: "It has been around the world nine times."

            The
recipient of the letter is asked to make copies and send them to friends, who
are instructed to do the same. Eventually, the letter becomes illegible and has
to be retyped and re-photocopied. As errors are introduced and propagated, it
evolves. Names change--a man mentioned in a 1984 copy of the letter is named
Carlo Daddit, then Carlo Laditt, then Andy Paddit, and by 1988 his name had
mutated to Grodotit. One would expect that by now the letter would have mutated
almost beyond recognition. But curiously, over the years the names revert to
their original spellings. I have recent copies that are almost identical to
ones I received 14 years ago. Obviously, there is a person or organization that
continues to publish the original letter. But who?

            -- Andy Aaron New
York City

            
               Ruffled
Feathers
            

            Michael Kinsley makes some
good points in "The Stock Market Chicken-Counting Orgy," but relates the
arithmetic to the trillions of dollars in the U.S. economy. While the United
States is a notable part of the world, there are quite a few of us who don't
live there, and we consider ourselves to have economic activity. The U.S. stock
market doesn't live in isolation. My investment in it breaks down one part of
the Kinsley equations, as I'm not in the United States and didn't earn my money
there. My investments are in Qualcomm and Globalstar. These are companies that
plan to get a lot of money from places other than the United States, indicating
that the U.S. stock market includes production worldwide. So Kinsley needs to
have a more expansive view of the world to decide whether the chickens are
over-counted.

            Another of his points was the
variation in valuation year by year. He is quite right to question it. The fact
is that investors, myself included, have a very rough idea of what a company is
worth, and plus or minus 20 percent is as accurate as people can guess, though
we do our best. But on top of that, he asks what's new. Well, there is a
realization that there is a never-before-in-human-history amalgamation of human
activity and astronomical growth in creativity, with each development
propelling us faster. One of the big ones, now widely recognized, is the
computer revolution. Look at his own business, publishing. I read Slate for
zero marginal cost. It would have cost $10 a couple of years ago.

            We are entering the golden
age of humanity, and to be a little sci-fi, people can now imagine there really
might be a new form of life heaving into sight: a hybrid of organic [us] with
human-created technology. The wild blue yonder is the limit. There is no
limit.

            Watch the
Dow soar to 16,000 by 2002. And beyond. Don't forget another sneaky little
matter that is much more prosaic than human imagination and the amalgamation of
6 billion people. Money printing. We are not richer because of money printing,
but it does cause stock market valuations to soar. Economists torture
themselves because they think there should be concomitant inflation, but they
are now starting to see that the inflation that would normally exist as a
result of such enthusiastic money printing is not happening because technology
has reduced costs and improved productivity dramatically. Basically, the money
printers are nicking off with much of the productivity improvements. It is just
another tax, though a very sneaky and well-hidden one. In the good old German
money printing, inflation did soar. But you don't see it this time. And
won't.

            -- Maurice
Winn Auckland, New Zealand

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
