
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               One
Thumb Down
            

            You have
your nerve, touting Slate Explorer and making me go through the whole process
of registering before revealing that it's not available for the
Macintosh. This information belongs up top. Of course, if you're obtuse enough
not to support the Macintosh, I guess I shouldn't be surprised. Just remember:
If it weren't for the Mac, there wouldn't be any Windows for Slate
Explorer to run on. Ingrates!

            -- Roger Ebert
            

            
               Down on
the Farm
            

            This is in response to
Stephen Chapman's "Smokey and the Bandits." Finally--a voice in the wilderness.
I have been trying to understand why I should cry for tobacco farmers, and
can't understand why others do. When slavery ended, cotton growers had either
to figure out how to harvest their crop without dirt-cheap labor, or find
another crop to grow. Many opted to grow tobacco, and it looks like it's time
to switch again.

            I find it
interesting that my representative in Congress, Thomas Bliley, can, with a
straight face, recommend subsidies for these farmers when he and others in his
party have vowed to get rid of "welfare as we know it." Tobacco subsidies are
just another form of welfare. I say give the growers two years, then make them
get a job like everybody else!

            -- Dina Coles Glen
Allen, Va.

            

               Shugerless Latte
            

            Slate received several
letters in response to the Oct. 8 absence of "Today's Papers,"
whose author, Scott Shuger, had fallen ill:
            

            Wow!
Shuger withdrawals this morning. My morning latte just isn't right without it.
Get well soon!

            -- Barbara
Rose Pacific Grove, Calif.

            
               Diary of
an (Under-) Gradman
            

            The notion
of having college freshmen explore the "realities" of these two campuses in a
"Diary" (Seth Bisen-Hersh of MIT, Ben Trachtenberg of Yale) is very appealing--the problem arises in
the execution. Why did you choose two pompous, straight, white ultranerds for
your subjects? These kids aren't the stuff of excitement, controversy,
provocation! Their particular narcissism renders them incapable of viewing any
sort of interesting scandal around them.

            -- Jay Schwartz
            

            
               High
Frat Content
            

            I just wanted to make a
comment on your "Diaries" of Ivy League students (Bisen-Hersh and Trachtenberg) that, in your words, "tell us what life at these top
schools is really like." First, when you pick two guys that are basically
similar in background and basically similar in every other way, you get two
diaries that--here comes a shocker!--sound similar. Therefore, how is two
better than one? What kind of sample of real college life is that?

            Second, speaking from
experience of being at an Ivy and being in a fraternity, there are some things
that are really missing in their diaries. It's a crime to quote that
story about the fallen teen-ager, and then bring in two guys who would have no
clue about Greek life! Sure, I find it interesting to read that some people
have fun playing Boggle and touring the dorms together, but is this a good way
to find an answer to a question that uses "hotbed" and "sexual abandon" in the
same sentence?

            Next
time, fit your point--pick somebody in a fraternity or a sorority, or somebody
that would bring meaning to the anecdote you quoted. Be prepared to take the
good with the bad. For instance, members of Greek organizations have a higher
average GPA than regular students. Or maybe that's not what Yale or MIT wanted
everyone to hear. We wouldn't want everybody to know about our games of binge
drinking, sexual abandon, and Boggle, too!

            -- Brad Webber
            

            
               Four
Weddings and an Assimilation
            

            There was a funny moment in
one of Eric Liu's responses to Elliott Abrams in their "Dialogue" on mixed marriage. Liu declared himself unconcerned with
the very high rate of intermarriage among Asian-Americans, and proposed that
the same easygoing attitude should work for Jews. And on the face of it, why
not? It is only when one considers numbers that the comparison becomes quite
hilarious. To Abrams' concern that the (fewer than) 15-million Jews in the
world might disappear through assimilation, Liu replies with the generosity and
lack of worries of one backed by a billion people. Give me a tenth of that in
Israel and I could also see it his way. Instead, in the case of Jews the depth
of the mother country runs at about 4 (embattled) million.

            Of course,
underlying this discussion is the deeper question of whether there is any value
in the preservation of Jewish religion and culture. Those of us who believe
there is such a value are worried.

            
               --Sanda
Kaufman Cleveland

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
