
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            

               Punditariat
            

            In the Nov. 15 "Readme," Michael Kinsley
rejects my coinage of the word "punditocracy " in favor of "commentariat,"
coined by Meg Greenfield. He says punditocracy is "clumsy," while commentariat
is "much wittier." He is in good company, but it is a hopeless battle, and he
should relent. William Safire complained in the Sept. 11, 1994, New York
Times Magazine that the word was "too intellectual." But Safire knew better
than to fight the tides of history and included the word in his political
dictionary, lest that weighty tome prove useless to future generations. I am
informed that the next edition of the Oxford English Dictionary will
also include it. I am sorry to have to inform Michael of this, but New York and
Oxford are where etymological decisions get made. In Redmond, you people are
charged only with the momentous decision of choosing whether to name new
software programs "Three-Point-Three" or "Four-Point-Oh."

            So while
I admire Kinsley's lonely battle on behalf of his witty friend and former
editor's sorry-ass word, I think he should stick to moral causes still worth
fighting. For instance, I hear Bill Gates is being unfairly harassed by the
can't-stand-to-see-anybody-be-successful Justice Department.

            -- Eric Alterman
            

            
               The Age
of Innocence
            

            While I actually agree with
Michael Kinsley's main points in the Nov. 27 "Readme," one aside
disturbed me. Kinsley wrote, "Often in the past ... the press has brushed aside
the question of what exactly is wrong with the explanation that the situation
creates the perception of impropriety." Uhm, wasn't it none other than Michael
Kinsley, in his years at the New Republic , who originated this line of
reasoning when castigating the top Reagan (and later Bush) administration
officials who had a nasty tendency to do sleazy things but avoid technical
illegality--and thus proclaim themselves "innocent"?

            While that
line of reasoning can be taken too far--and has in the most recent case with
the Arlington plots--I do believe Michael Kinsley circa 1987 was right to say
that high officials should observe standards of propriety which surpass the
merely legal. I don't know why Michael Kinsley circa 1997 seems to
disagree.

            -- Matthew
Singer Budapest, Hungary

            
               Michael Kinsley
replies: I'm clean. I maintained throughout the Reagan years that "appearances"
was a dodge for accusers and malefactors alike. I doubt you could find a single
example of my ever having used it myself.
            

            
               Talk of
the Talk of the Town
            

            I have enjoyed participating
as a voter in Slate 's "Hackathlon,"
but the criteria are ambiguous. The nature of the events suggests that we are
to vote on who best imitates a New York Times editorial or a "Talk of
the Town" piece. Malcolm Gladwell's exegesis, however,
suggests that we are to vote for the most impressive display of empty
virtuosity. (Actually, I think his definition of a hack is incorrect; a hack is
one who's paid by the word or line, not one to whom the rules of journalism
don't apply.)

            So, do we vote for
virtuosity in imitation or virtuosity in itself? If the former, then all the
contestants have missed the boat on the second event. There is a formula for
New Yorker "Talk of the Town" pieces. First, the focus of the event (as
defined by the headline of the press release) would never be the focus of the
article. It is therefore unlikely that Donna Karan (or any other celebrity)
would have been quoted. It is much more likely that the correspondent would
have talked to the caterer or a disgruntled unknown sitting in the corner.
Also, no New Yorker correspondent would include details of clothing
unless it were to make some larger, allegorical point about the subject.

            Confusion
and uncertainty have never kept me from voting before, however.

            -- Tracy
Warren Washington

            
               Camus
Snafu
            

            In "Suicide
Watch," Atul Gawande makes a very poor effort. He may claim to know
something about science and policy, but he is bumbling out of his depth when it
comes to matters of philosophy.

            I agree with Gawande that
Capt. Button's alleged suicide was a strange event indeed. However, after
ruling out addiction or mental illness, by what logic does Gawande assume that
Button--and all others who commit suicide--are not thinking rationally? Wasn't
it Camus who wrote that "the only reasonable decision a man can make is whether
or not to commit suicide"? This letter does not permit me the space to develop
a definition of rationality, to examine its compatibility with the decision to
end one's life, or to explain why it's so important that we must always be
strictly rational in the first place. However, I would expect exactly that from
Gawande before accepting his somewhat outlandish claim. In fact, the way
Gawande explains Capt. Button's situation, his decision seems quite reasonable:
Assuming you have no a priori moral or religious objection to suicide and do
not greatly fear death, death seems like a rational (if not recommended)
alternative when faced with likely court-martial, professional ruin, a possible
jail term, and a very public dishonor brought upon oneself and one's
family.

            Perhaps
Gawande's own prejudices are showing when he simply assumes that the elderly or
terminally ill, in wishing to escape from constant pain or degeneration through
suicide, are--if not actually addicted or mentally ill--then "obviously"
irrational. Perhaps the need for rationality does not enter into the
assisted-suicide debate simply because it is taken for granted by all parties.
In the two other countries that have flirted with voluntary
euthanasia--Australia and the Netherlands--at least two psychiatrists must
first agree that the candidate's (why does Gawande assume they are all
"patients"?) decision is not made under the influence of addiction, mental
illness, or Gawande's dreaded scourge of "irrationality."

            -- Chet
Pager Melbourne, Australia

            
               Atul
Gawande replies: Though I didn't say all who commit suicide are irrational, I
did argue nearly all are. By what logic? Well, for starters, I noted that
studies show that over 90 percent of suicides suffer from mental illness or
substance abuse. In addition, I pointed out that psychiatrists find that an
additional group kill themselves on impulse.
            

            
               I
wasn't trying to use the word "rational" in any fancy sense. When I say most
people who die by their own hand are irrational, I mean that their thinking is
usually clouded. Generally, mental disease or drugs impair their thinking. If
not, victims are often simply caught up in circumstances and exaggerated fears,
as it appears Button was. I've seen such victims myself. One girl I saw rashly
swallowed a bottle of pills after a fight with her boyfriend. Later she thanked
the team for saving her from what she called a "stupid thing to do." Is it
possible to kill yourself while thinking clearly? Yes, but it is far rarer than
Pager would like to believe. In Button's case, it's particularly doubtful given
his tendencies toward dumb, impulsive action revealed in his records.
            

            
               Playing
the Percentages
            

            Regarding the "Dialogue" involving
Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom and Randall Kennedy:

            Though I
admire the Thernstroms' new book America in Black and White , I was more
than slightly disturbed by the facile understatement from the Thernstroms when
they pointed out (in reference to residential choices among whites): "Only 18
percent said they would move if blacks came to live in great numbers. Much
other reliable polling--summarized in our book--paints an equally reassuring
picture." We should all be aware of our diction. "Only" 18 percent is huge.
Nearly 1 in 5 whites would relocate if blacks became their neighbors? (Purely
on racial grounds, not class.) And other sources paint an "equally reassuring
picture"? Is this fact a "reassuring" one? Any number greater than zero is too
big.

            -- Chris H.
Kwak Cambridge, Mass.

            
               Roof
Goof
            

            Seth Stevenson's "Signs and
Wonders" incorrectly traces the lineage of "Raising the Roof." I think you
will find that it is Broadway that gave birth to this sports gesture. In the
musical The Pajama Game , the big dance number, "Once a Year Day," has
the lyrics "Everyone's entitled to be wild, be a child, be a goof, raise the
roof," at which point the entire chorus raises a "two-armed palms-skyward
pump."

            I am sure
that this is not the first time that the theatrics of Broadway have crossed
over to the sports field.

            -- Richard
Stewart
            

            Ecclesmachan, Scotland

            
               Deriving
High-Fiving
            

            Contrary
to Seth Stevenson's "Signs and Wonders," credit for the first High-Five should go to Mel
Brooks, director of the 1968 classic The Producers . Actually, Brooks did
not execute the maneuver, but directed Dick Shawn, as a flowery actor in the
title role of the fictitious Broadway play Springtime for Hitler , to
complete the first High-Five with another actor who was giving a Nazi salute,
to which Shawn responded, "Heil, Baby!" and slapped the man's outstretched
right hand in the exact same manner that thousands, yea millions, have done
since.

            -- L.C.
Renbaum Bethesda, Md.

            

               Terminatour II: Judgment Day
            

            It is as
incorrect for you, as an American publication, to refer to the "Labor
Party"--in "This Is (Not Quite) Your Life," by Jodie T. Allen--as it would be
for an English publication to refer to "Pearl Harbour." Both are proper nouns
and should be spelled accordingly. In other words, you could legitimately state
that "The Labour Party represents the interests of organized labor in the U.K."
To modify the names of people and organizations to fit a localized spelling
style is to show disrespect to the owners of those names, and condescension to
your readers.

            -- Peter
Kendell Wokingham, England

            
               I Don't
Like Writing Headlines, I Like Having Written Headlines
            

            

               
                  Slate received several replies to a request in the Nov. 22 "Readme" 
               for
attribution of a quotation:
            

            When I
was a sophomore about 45 years ago, I was told by my English professor that "I
don't like writing, I like having written" was said by Robert Louis Stevenson.
I was an impressionable lad and have believed that ever since. I have also
passed on the remark and the attribution to two or three generations of my
students. You may be hearing from some of them.

            -- Norman T.
Burns Vestal, N.Y.

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
