
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               (r) (u)
(a) 501(c)(3)?
            

            Jacob Weisberg's "Happy
Birthday, Heritage Foundation" is wrong on one major point. In it he wrote,
"Heritage is a tax-exempt 501(c)(3) organization, which means it is not
supposed to lobby Congress." This is not true. Nonprofit organizations, or
501(c)(3)s, are in fact encouraged to lobby under existing law, subject to
certain limitations.

            When nonprofit organizations
lobby, they make an invaluable contribution to the public-policy process.
Charities and nonprofit organizations speak for the public interest, not
private interests. They often represent large numbers of ordinary Americans on
issues like the environment or consumer protection, or vulnerable populations
who lack the resources or skills to assert their basic rights.

            Moreover, as service
providers, charities are often on the front lines combating the worst problems
besetting our communities. Their voices help produce more efficient and
effective public policy. Although we might disagree with the Heritage
Foundation, as a 501(c)(3), they are doing nothing wrong by lobbying.

            Current law does prohibit
501(c)(3)s from working for or against candidates for public office, and that
is appropriate. Nonprofits also are prohibited from using federal funds for the
purposes of lobbying (see Office of Management and Budget Circular A-122), but they may
lobby using other funding sources, such as foundations or their membership.

            In devising the laws
governing nonprofit lobbying, Congress recognized that 501(c)(3)s should be
encouraged to exercise their First Amendment rights. Certainly Congress is in
no danger of being overrun by Gucci-clad lobbyists working for the poor and the
environment.

            
Weisberg's mistake reflects a common misconception. The Washington Post
recently made the exact same error in discussing 501(c)(3)s.

            -- Reece Rushing OMB
Watch

            
               
                  Editors' note:
The Internal Revenue Code does not encourage lobbying by 501(c)(3)
organizations, but it does allow it under limited circumstances. Here's a
laying it all out, helpfully provided to us by a Washington lawyer who just
happens to be the husband of a Slate editor.
            

            
               Hot
Air
            

            I read David Plotz's
"The (Not
Yet) Around-the-World Balloonists" on a flight from London to L.A., sitting
next to a New Zealander who had just won a transatlantic rowing race. Perhaps
that's why I feel Plotz's article is the silliest explanation of the logic of
adventure I've ever read. In particular, Plotz's notion that adventures used to
be (and need to be) driven by practical considerations, such as opening trade
routes, strikes me as daft. While Plotz is right that the number of challenges
remaining seems to be decreasing--it could hardly increase--I find it almost
impossible to believe that previous record-setters were driven by the kind of
practical, commercial concerns that Plotz ascribes to Ferdinand Magellan and
Dick Rutan.

            If his
theory were true, Edmund Hillary's ascent of Mount Everest would have been
motivated by a desire to test new oxygen tanks, and Joshua Slocum would have
circumnavigated the world in order rack up frequent-sailing miles. Yes, of
course balloons are a uniquely terrible mode of transportation. Sticking ice
axes in the sides of mountains is a pretty stupid way to get to 29,000 feet as
well. The motivation of adventurers everywhere is to achieve something no one
else has achieved and to derive the pleasure that arises from that--and, not
incidentally, to get famous by writing books about it. And the reason why the
rest of us sit in our armchairs and read about these accomplishments is because
we wish we'd done something as interesting with our time. If there is an
occasional practical benefit to these shenanigans, so much the better. In the
meantime, the world will probably be content to support the world of adventure
through an occasional perilous walk to Borders.

            -- Ravi Desai
            

            

               Deflating Lindy
            

            According to David Plotz
("The [Not
Yet] Around-the-World Balloonists"), "Charles Lindbergh's crossing wasn't
just a stunt: It made real the idea of transatlantic air travel." By the time
Charles Lindbergh made the first solo crossing, the idea of transatlantic air
travel had already been made real by other flyers who had crossed the Atlantic
Ocean.

            While
Lindbergh's crossing certainly captured the public imagination (as some of
today's balloonists have also), it did little to advance the technology of
aviation.

            -- Edward
Ehrlich
            

            
               Mustang
Sally
            

            Jacob
Weisberg's "No Respect," on why the establishment hates Clinton, was
outstanding. Of all the obnoxious, hypocritical statements he collected, the
worst was Sally Quinn on why people "who have attained a certain social or
political position" feel dissed by Clinton. Let's see: Clinton attained his
position by being elected president; Quinn attained hers by marrying her boss.
And he's supposed to suck up to her? Another reason for Georgetown's hostility
is that Clinton's 1993 tax increase fell hardest on upper-crust types. They
like to talk about their social consciences, but Clinton is the first political
leader in a generation to make them put their money where their mouths are.

            -- Tom
Scarlett Hyattsville, Md.

            
               Remember
Venn?
            

            I wondered if someone
writing for 
                  Slate
                could be dispassionate, honest, and objective
about the browser issue. I wish I could say that "You Be the Judge" fit the
bill, but I just don't buy it. I tried your experiment. Yes indeed, remove
those three .dll files and several other files don't work correctly. But
restore those three files without IE 4 and guess what? Everything runs
just fine.

            So, as far as I can see, the
whole distinction really boils down to a few overlapping files. This is hardly
an existential issue. It reminds me of a Venn diagram with two overlapping
circles, A and B. If Microsoft removes all of A (IE 4), including the little
portion that overlaps B (Windows 95), B is no longer a viable whole.

            The distinction that
Microsoft refuses to admit, however, is that it can and should remove all of A
that is not part of B. It can and should include in its operating system those
.dll files that Windows 95 and other applications need. The engineers at that
firm know full well which .dll files could and would be needed by other
applications, including the OS.

            This reminds me of buying a
car without a factory-installed stereo. Just because I didn't buy Ford's stereo
doesn't mean that Ford left out the battery or the fuse box, both of which are
needed for the user to install and operate a stereo after the purchase.

            The
bullies at Microsoft are simply refusing to obey the judge's orders and are
trying to obscure the issue with a lot of techie hot air. They should be fined
heavily for contempt of court. Ultimately, I suspect the company will need to
be broken up (much as AT&T was), with the OS division allowed to retain its
natural monopoly but the other divisions forced to face the same competitive
pressures that Netscape and other entrants face.

            -- Jim Johnson New
York City

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
