
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               
                  Mal
Appétit
               
            

            As the
managing editor of a Condé Nast magazine, all I can say is, "Gee, Si, you've
been holding out on us." Entertaining as "Let Si Get This"
was, it bears no relation to my experiences at the company over the past year.
Either those of us who work at the West Coast outposts aren't in on the perks,
or your research was a tad out-of-date.

            -- Victoria von BielBon
Appétit magazineLos Angeles

            
               Negative
Action
            

            In "Blacks
Only," Jacob Weisberg appears to be all over the map. On the one hand, he
correctly diagnoses the central problem with affirmative action, which is that
it causes one group of people (blacks) to be favored at the expense of another
group (whites). Yet at the same time that he admits this is unfair, he proposes
that we retain it.

            How to justify, then, the
fact that a white person who has never practiced discrimination, and who never
had anything to do with the subjugation of blacks, should be placed at a
disadvantage in relation to less-qualified blacks? "Why should whites who did
not themselves discriminate against blacks be punished for what their or
someone else's ancestors did? The answer is that it shouldn't be thought of as
punishment."

            This is
Orwellian logic at its best; it is reminiscent of communist propaganda at its
worst. Despite the fact that, on its face, it is punishment, we shouldn't think
of it that way. Excuse me? Perhaps, extending Weisberg's philosophy a bit
further, we should simply declare that there is perfect equality between blacks
and whites in society, even though there isn't. Why should we ignore the fact
that there is inequality between races in society? The answer is that it should
not be thought of as inequality. Seems to work for me!

            -- Stephen
Konig Roanoke, Va.

            

               Irrational Exuberance
            

            In "Take This Simple
Test," Steven E. Landsburg goes into quite some mathematical detail about
the public's so-called irrationality. But there's no need for woolly notions of
"regret" to explain why someone would rather have $1 million than a shot at $5
million, but would rather have a shot at $5 million than a slightly better shot
at $1 million.

            It's very simple, really--$5
million isn't worth five times as much as $1 million. If I receive $1 million,
I'm rich. If I receive $5 million, I'm rich. So the first choice should be read
as being between the certainty of being rich and a possibility of being rich.
The second choice is a simple mathematical choice--as Landsburg points out,
$500,000 is a lot more welcome than $110,000.

            I'm sure
that if you asked the same questions, but divided all the amounts by a million,
your answers would be very different.

            -- Felix Salmon New
York City

            
               Steven
E. Landsburg responds: I am deluged with e-mail from readers who
want help understanding my column "Take This Simple Test." In the course of
responding, I've found a much better way to explain the paradox.

            In the
original column, your cousins Snip, Snap, and Snurr asked you to choose among
various gifts. Let's put those questions aside. Instead, here are three simpler
questions:

            
               A. I'm
going to give you a Christmas gift. Do you prefer:
            

            1. A duck.

            2. A goose.

            
               B.
There's an 89-percent chance I won't give you anything for Christmas. There's
an 11-percent chance I'll give you a choice of gifts. If I give you a choice of
gifts, do you prefer:
            

            1. A duck.

            2. A goose.

            
               C.
There's an 89-percent chance I'll give you a duck for Christmas. There's an
11-percent chance I'll give you a choice of gifts. If I give you a choice of
gifts do you prefer:
            

            1. A duck.

            2. A
goose.

            I define a rational person
to be a person who gives the same answer to all three questions. Some rational
people prefer ducks to geese, some prefer geese to ducks, but no rational
person switches answers in going from one question to the next.

            Now replace "a duck" with
"$1 million" and replace "a goose" with "a 10/11 shot at $5 million." Then
Questions A, B, and C are identical to the questions of Snurr, Snap, and Snip,
in that order. So a rational person should give the same answers to the
questions of Snurr, Snap, and Snip.

            (To see that these questions
are exactly the same as the Snip-Snap-Snurr questions, keep in mind that an
11-percent chance of a 10/11 shot at $5 million is the same thing as a
10-percent chance at $5 million.)

            Notice
that, contrary to the expectations of several readers, none of this has
anything to do with the fact that $5 million is "worth" less than 5 times $1
million; replace the $5 million with any other amount whatsoever and the
argument still holds.

            
               Harry and
Louise Practice Post-Structuralism
            

            One glaring weakness of
"deconstruction" (a method of literary criticism long favored by the academic
ivory-tower elite) is that it often searches for meaning in a comparison where,
in reality, there is none. However useful in the rarefied halls of academia, it
is conspicuously ineffective in the real world. Robert Shrum's comparison of
the "Harry and Louise" ad campaign with that being conducted by the Global
Climate Information Project ("Harry and Louise Go to Kyoto") is no more than an interesting
academic exercise and a cynical misrepresentation of both the facts of the
global-climate debate and the membership of the National Association of
Manufacturers.

            It is wrong to characterize
the U.N. Map ad campaign as a "use" of populism by big business. The ad
campaign is simply one way in which we are attempting to educate the public on
the effects a treaty in Kyoto would have on the 18 million people who make
things in America. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of NAM members are
small manufacturers. To lump these small companies, many of which are
family-owned businesses with fewer than 500 employees, in with the artificial
moniker of "big business" (itself a populist tool of the left) is a disservice
to the men and women whose efforts form the backbone of one-quarter of our
economy. These small manufacturers would, by the very nature of their size,
feel the devastating impact that mandated carbon-based emission reductions
would have on the U.S. economy to a greater degree than any other group.

            The
AFL-CIO and NAM are united in opposition to a treaty mandating emission
reductions because such a treaty would take a bite out of the budget of every
American family in the form of, among other things, higher costs at the gas
pump, more expensive home heating, and lost jobs. The United States cannot see
its competitiveness and prosperity erode for the benefit of developing nations
that, for whatever reason, will not be required to abide by the strict
impositions of a global-climate treaty. That is a fact that bears repeating
over and over, until reason wins out over the scare tactics being employed by
environmental extremists (and political consultants) in the furtherance of
their own agendas.

            -- Paul
Huard National Association of Manufacturers

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
