
   
   
      
         
            E-Mail to the Editors

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Aug.
28)
            

            
               An Affair
to Not Remember
            

            In
"Adultery and Boredom," Jacob Weisberg cites a poll in which 85
percent of the respondents said that Mayor Giuliani's affair would not affect
their vote. Another 7 percent said the affair made them less likely to vote for
Giuliani. So, are the remaining 8 percent more likely to vote for
Giuliani because of his affair? If so, it could mean that male adulterers are
now a voting bloc that must be courted!

            -- John Raley San
Francisco

            
               Radical
Chic
            

            Paul Berman seems to suggest
in "The Refractory
Ones" that the case of Timothy McVeigh is somehow analogous to the trial of
Sacco-Vanzetti, in that a misunderstood radical faction was descended upon by a
bigoted majority that then executed the sacrificial lambs. While the comparison
between the modern-day "Patriot movement" to which McVeigh belongs and the
turn-of-the-century anarchist movement is worth making, the contrasts, rather
than similarities, are what stand out. For starters, there has been no public
outcry to ban or do away with the Patriots, as there was with the anarchists.
Certainly, there has been no public self-examination to consider the
implications of the movement. Rather, the opposite has occurred. The mass media
in general have covered the rise of the Patriots only spottily, rushing to
report the daily incidents the movement inspires and doing little to examine
its sources. When, after the Oklahoma City disaster, President Clinton asked
for the nation to deal with the "voices of hate" that inspire the Patriots to
action, there was no attempt to actually do so. Rather, every talk-show host on
the radio, it seemed, scurried to proclaim his or her innocence: "Not me! I
didn't do it!"

            The truth is, there are many
of us whose gasoline rhetoric has fueled the Patriots' bonfires of paranoia.
And we still have not stopped throwing it about with glee. Secondly, the
Patriot movement is at the opposite end of the political spectrum. With its
roots in white supremacy and McCarthyism, the movement really represents the
rise of a genuine American-bred fascism--which, as Berman points out, is
precisely what the anarchists had organized to combat. I'd wager that Sacco and
Vanzetti would be disgusted to be included in the company of McVeigh. Finally,
while Sacco and Vanzetti probably were innocent of the murder of a single
policeman, McVeigh has practically confessed to killing 168 people and maiming
500 more. And while the families of those victims have generally cheered his
route to the executioner, the public at large has been strangely mute on
McVeigh's fate. They seem to have been much more preoccupied with a certain
black football player's murder trial.

            Berman's
main point is worth making: Executions exist not for the actual pursuit of
justice but rather for wreaking vengeance. However, he should consider the fact
that this very mentality--an eye for an eye--is a large part of what drives the
Patriot movement, and as McVeigh himself has recently suggested, this is what
drove him to fill a Ryder truck with explosives that he then set off. Sacco and
Vanzetti may have been sacrificial lambs, but McVeigh appears to be reaping the
fruits of his own belief system. It may be a sickening view, but there is
something appropriately symmetrical about it.

            
               --David
Neiwert Seattle

            
               Poll
Position
            

            William
Saletan's comments in "Centrists vs. Progressives" are more definitive than most other
observations about patently obvious things in society. But they don't change
the obsession idea-mongers and contemporary media have with polling. As a
matter of fact, instead of focusing on polling's farcical contributions to an
enlightened society, he conveys the notion that polling is/would be credible
without the manipulations (subtle or otherwise). The universal credibility
problem with polling is that wordsmithing and mathematics don't mix, and never
will.

            -- Tom DeLuca Upper
Arlington, Ohio

            
               Nothing
in Commons
            

            Daniel Akst's "Passive Aggressive," on
the evils of index investing, threatens to mislead Slate's audience of
successful investors and policy wonks. There is no commons problem in index
investing. It is true that markets are efficient because securities research,
and that index investors invest without doing research (or paying others to do
research). But as more people invest without doing research--i.e., as markets
become less efficient--then the returns to research will increase and money
will shift away from indexing. In the commons problem, there is no reason not
to overgraze if your neighbor is overgrazing as well. In a securities market,
if your neighbors overgraze (i.e., engage in index investing at times when the
market is relatively inefficient), you can fleece them.

            This index-investing
question is a subset of what seemed to be a paradox in the efficient-market
hypothesis (securities research is both necessary for market efficiency and a
waste of money) that was worked out 17 years ago in a paper by Sanford J.
Grossman and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "On the Impossibility of Informationally
Efficient Markets," 70 Am. Econ. Rev. 393, 405 (1980), and in more
accessible form in a law review article, "Efficient Markets, Costly
Information, and Securities Research" 60 NYU L. Rev. 761 (1985).

            I bet
Paul Krugman would agree.

            -- Jeff
Gordon Columbia Law SchoolNew York City

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

             

         
      
   
