
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               A Need
for Speed
            

            If we're going to have a
debate, let's at least get the facts right. For starters, in "Speed Trap," Paul Krugman
misspelled my name. I'll get over it. More important, he is just as careless in
depicting the arguments of those of us who think the economy is now capable of
decent growth without reigniting inflation.

            My essay ("The New
Economy: What it Really Means") in Business Week was much more
balanced and modest in its claims than Krugman suggests. I invite

                  Slate
                readers to reread my piece rather than accept Krugman's
caricature of it, then decide for themselves. Business Week has
generally been right about the performance of the economy in recent years--and
right in urging the Federal Reserve not to raise interest rates. If the Fed had
raised rates in order to hold growth down to 2.5 percent over the last 18
months, as Krugman seems to prefer, we would have given up $250 billion in
economic output. The unemployment rate would have been at least a half
percentage point higher, putting more than 750,000 people out of work.

            1997 was a
wonderful year--strong growth, declining inflation, declining unemployment,
rising productivity, and rising real wages. Happy New Year, Professor
Krugman.

            Links:

            "The New
Business Cycle" ( Business Week cover story, March 31, 1997)

            "How Long Can
This Last?" ( Business Week cover story, May 19, 1997)

            "Alan
Greenspan's Brave New World" ( Business Week cover story, July 14,
1997)

            
               --Stephen
B. Shepard
            

            
               Editor in chief,
Business Week

            
               Paul
Krugman replies:
            

            
               First of all, my extreme
apologies for the spelling mistake.
            

            
               As for substance: We now
see just how helpful an Internet magazine can be. By all means read the
original Shepard essay in Business Week (notice that I did include
a link to that essay in my original piece), as well as the earlier articles on
the site, and ask yourself whether they did or did not appear to claim that our
favorable measured growth and inflation performance can be explained by
unmeasured productivity growth. If they did claim or even suggest that,
then Business Week has indeed been saying something very silly. Oh, and
by the way: Reread my
own piece, and ask whether I actually say that growth over the past 18
months should have been held down to 2.5 percent, as Shepard claims I "seem to
prefer."
            

            
               What I do know is that a
number of Business Week readers have contacted me since reading my piece
and told me that the explanation of the speedometer fallacy was new to
them--that they were under the impression, from reading BW , among other
sources, that a hidden productivity boom was not only a possible explanation of
low measured inflation but indeed the leading candidate.
            

            
               I guess
my question is whether Mr. Shepard is willing, even now, to concede that it is
a fallacy to invoke unmeasured productivity as the source of our good numbers.
(And I don't mean a judicious acknowledgment that there may be something to
what I say--we are talking 2+2 = 4 here, with no wiggle room whatsoever.
Extremism in the defense of arithmetic is no vice.) If he is, then I am at
least prepared to consider the possibility that I (and everyone else I know)
have been misinterpreting all those articles. But I would like to have the
point acknowledged.
            

            
               Option
Pass
            

            I thoroughly enjoy

                  Slate
               , but I find Michael Kinsley's assertion of

                  Slate
               's "journalistic integrity" as regards Microsoft ("Readme") to be without
merit.

            Consider the case where a
judge discovers that he is presiding over a case involving a close relative.
The only ethical course of action is to step down and have some other judge
handle the case. Even if the judge tries his best to be fair and unbiased, he
can never be sure of his own motives. In addition, the judge's own reputation
is at risk, as people will not know if the relative in question was found
innocent due to subtle manipulation by the judge.

            

               
                  Slate
                employees receive Microsoft stock options and therefore
have a vested interest in Microsoft beyond their own paycheck. If

                  Slate
                wants to prove its integrity, it should either refuse the
options or stop covering Microsoft altogether.

            -- Robert D.
Graham
            

            
               The
Greatest of Sleaze
            

            In "Dear
Microsoft," Jacob Weisberg seems to assert that lobbyists (and lobbying)
are somehow sleazy.

            The First Amendment to the
Constitution guarantees the right to "petition the Government for a redress of
grievances." That's lobbying . Exercising that right is no more sleazy
than exercising the right to speak or to worship. Clearly, there are sleazy and
unethical ways to go about it, but lobbying itself is vital to our democratic
principles.

            The best
solution to the problem of corporate money in politics is to reduce the role of
government in all our lives. Until that happens, corporations are irresponsible
if they fail to pursue the interests of their shareholders, employees, and
customers by lobbying Beltway bureaucrats.

            -- David C. Klug
Harrisburg, Pa.

            
               You
Dirty Rat
            

            I don't
know whom Sarah Kerr hangs out with ("White Heat"), but
Jimmy Cagney's stock has never slipped at all with my buds. More importantly,
her assertion that the audience is unclear about Cagney's true state of mind at
the end of Angels With Dirty Faces is just plain wrong. The entire heart
of that character was his utter fearlessness at the prospect of dying; Rocky
"goes yellow" only so that his reputation will be sullied among the youthful
wannabe gangsters who idolize him. It is an act of renunciation that ennobles
him in death and is undertaken solely due to the entreaty of his old pal Jerry
Connelly (Pat O'Brien), who knows that asking Rocky to pretend he's a
coward is the hardest favor he's ever sought. For Kerr to imagine anything at
all ambiguous in the ending of this movie not only calls into question her
judgment but forces one to wonder if she's even seen the damned thing.

            -- David Murray Los
Angeles

            
               Javanile
Humor
            

            Andrew Shuman clearly has no
idea what he is talking about when it comes to the question of Java ("Weak Java").

            Java, although this has
clearly escaped Shuman's keen eyesight, is not a programming language at all.
It is in fact a mountainous island in the South Pacific, part of the very
populous and highly authoritarian archipelago nation of Indonesia. It also
happens to be the site of one of the world's most important archeological
discoveries, known as Java Man, and of vast coffee plantations (hence the
common usage of the term java to mean coffee). These simple facts get
lost in Shuman's clutter of technical language. With his preposterous
characterization of the whole Java conflict as a matter of convenience for
personal-computer owners and programmers, Shuman completely obscures the real
struggles of the Javanese people.

            There is, in fact, no
surprise here, since Shuman works and lives in Seattle, home of innumerable
coffee shops and some of the nation's largest defense contractors, who reap
billions annually from arms sales to the repressive regime of President
Suharto. Workers on Javanese coffee plantations suffer endlessly, while
residents of the Emerald City sip unreasonably cheap caffè lattes
(subsidized with blood), ponder the importance of bandwidth, and root for the
pathetic Mariners and Supersonics.

            Please, no
more harmful obfuscation from 
                  Slate
                and Shuman.

            -- Jesse
Hoffnung-Garskof
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
