
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Gaul-ic
Bread
            

            I thoroughly enjoyed reading
"Unmitigated
Gauls," Professor Krugman's interpretation of French elite thinking, but I
would quibble with one point.

            Krugman
mentions in passing that a unified (European) market and a common currency
"will do almost nothing to create jobs." In fact, one way or the other EMU
matters a lot for jobs. If policy-makers stick to EMU's monetary and fiscal
rules the policy stance will be on the tight side, i.e., cyclical unemployment
will go up, or at least will not fall. If, in addition, policy-makers reduce
rigidities (particularly in the labor market), the initial consequence will be
a rise in unemployment, followed by an improvement with a delay of a couple of
years (see New Zealand, the U.K., and the Netherlands, for example). Should
policy-makers ignore EMU rules and take it easy once EMU has started, cyclical
unemployment may fall initially, but at some stage higher inflation and a
depreciating euro would force a course correction, and unemployment would rise
again.

            -- Gunther
Thumann London

            
               Paul
Krugman replies: A common currency per se has got nothing much to do with
employment; the rules of Maastricht, which bear a dubious relationship to the
actual requirements of such a currency, are another matter.

            
               Oxford
Banal-ytica
            

            Although "Why Do the G-7
Bother?" by the anonymous folks at Oxford Analytica was just chock-full of
silly blather about globalization, I was particularly struck by the vacuousness
of this sentence: "The liberalization of trade also effectively prevents
governments from erecting protective barriers to boost the domestic
economy."

            "The
liberalization of trade," by definition, is precisely the lack of protective
barriers like tariffs and import quotas. Although I'm sure it's true that a
lack of protective barriers leads inexorably to a lack of protective barriers,
this is hardly a profound insight. At least I can be thankful that I'm reading
this for free in Slate, rather than paying big bucks for the wisdom of these
international consultants.

            -- Scott
Susin Berkeley, Calif.

            
               The
Schneider Retort
            

            Please tell Jeffrey Goldberg
("News You Can't
Use") to log off. He's obviously spending too much time online. That's the
only explanation I have for his weak attempt at reviewing/satirizing the
cable-news wars. Did this guy ever watch more than a minute or two of the
programs he panned? If he had, he certainly would have noticed that the program
I anchor and edit on Fox News Channel, The Schneider Report , is a
serious news program. We feature extensive coverage of the major issues each
and every day, and devote more time to international news than any of our
evening competitors. You can look it up. Or, better yet, Mr. Goldberg, you
could watch!

            By the
way, if not showing up in gossip columns or fashion magazines makes me, or my
colleagues, "distinctly unfamous," I'll wear that title proudly. I'm just a guy
with 23 years of TV news experience, 10 of them anchoring network programs like
Weekend Today on NBC and Good Morning America news. Who the hell
is Jeffrey Goldberg, anyway?

            -- Mike SchneiderThe
Schneider Report Fox News ChannelNew York City

            
               Prose and
Cons
            

            In "The
Conintern," Jacob Weisberg implies there is a rigid conservative orthodoxy
that squelches dissent in "movement" publications under punishment of
expulsion. He must be reading different publications and attending different
"movement" gatherings than I. My colleagues and I at the Competitive Enterprise
Institute have criticized Newt Gingrich in the pages of the Washington
Times , the Wall Street Journal , and Human Events for years.
Yet we are still invited to Grover Norquist's Wednesday meetings and his
frequent parties. National Review has been scathing in its attacks on
the GOP leadership, yet it has yet to be ostracized. The Wall Street
Journal editorial page complains about "William Jefferson Kasich" and the
budget deal, yet no one is seeking to write Bob Bartley out of the
movement.

            And the
idea that Bob Novak is an enforcer of the party line--the same Bob Novak who
splits with the conservative mainstream on Israel, campaign-finance reform, and
Jude Wanniski--is absurd. Novak is a fine investigative journalist, but he is
no secretary for Weisberg's imagined conservative politburo.

            -- Jonathan H.
Adler Competitive Enterprise InstituteWashington

            
               Lima
'Zines
            

            It's
amusing to see what L.A. or D.C. considers front-page news, but it would be
truly eye-opening to learn what Paris' or Lima's or Jakarta's concerns are. I
hope you will consider widening the scope of "Today's
Papers."

            
               --Nancy Brooke
Mandel New York City

            
               Schlock
to the System
            

            Thanks to David Plotz for his
humorous, balanced, and concise "Assessment" of
Marilyn Manson and the forces working against him. I take issue with one point
in the article--the issue of antecedents.

            Plotz rightly lists Alice
Cooper as a primary enabler of what Manson is doing now. An even better case
can be made, however, for the importance of G.G. Allin and the Murder Junkies
as an influence/antecedent. G.G. Allin created the same kind of talentless,
disgusting, yet strangely compelling schlock that Manson puts out, and combined
it with a stage show that would make Alice Cooper squeamish. The difference
here is image management. Allin had huge contempt for fame. He avoided the
conventional spotlight all he could. He died of a heroin overdose in relative
obscurity.

            Until
recently, Marilyn Manson had worked in obscurity as well, with just a slightly
larger cult following than G.G. Allin. It was only when Manson acquiesced to
the hype machine created by his record label that he started getting rich and
the fundamentalists started getting angry.

            
               --Rich
Armstrong Denver

            
               Rate
Crimes
            

            In your June 25 "Chatterbox," you
attack Newt Gingrich for telling a national radio audience that lower taxes
mean "less time at work and more free time" when supply-siders have for years
been saying that "cutting taxes would spur more , not less work effort,
thereby speeding economic growth." In criticizing Gingrich, you state,
"[E]conomic theory tells us, lower taxes do have contradictory effects--they
prompt us to work harder, because we net more from each hour of labor, and to
goof off because higher total take-home pay means we can satisfy our needs more
easily."

            In fact,
economic theory says no such thing. You have confused lower taxes with lower
tax rates . Lower tax rates have conflicting effects on the work
effort of individuals for the reasons you stated. Some tax cuts, however, do
not raise the reward for work and therefore do not increase work effort. The
best example of this is the $500-per-child tax credit--the centerpiece of the
Republican tax package. Clearly, this tax cut does not "net more from each hour
of labor." Rather it is like winning the lottery--it makes individuals with
children better off (or wealthier) and, therefore, reduces the need to work. In
this regard, Gingrich is correct. Economic theory predicts that the centerpiece
of the Republican tax cut will mean less time at work, which in turn means a
further reduction in tax revenues. This may be good "family" politics but I
believe it is bad economic policy.

            -- Rich
Hart Cincinnati

            
               Throw the
Book at Him
            

            With regard to "My Personal Trade
Deficit," I commend Steven Landsburg's use of personal experience with a
Barnes & Noble bookstore in the next town to effectively explain the
mechanics of trade.

            In the second part of his
article, however, he passes judgment--a more ambitious undertaking. Further
browsing, perhaps in a different section of the bookstore, may be in order. His
conclusions:

            "[F]oolishly excessive trade
surpluses are a greater danger than foolishly excessive trade
deficits . That's because excessive trade deficits are self-limiting: If
you run a trade deficit every year, bankruptcy will eventually force you to
stop. But excessive trade surpluses can go on forever. A perpetual trade
surplus is likely to mean you're either working too hard or consuming too
little; either way, you're not getting enough enjoyment out of life."

            Really? Bankruptcy is not
harmless; the debt is transferred to others (customers, suppliers, taxpayers,
the rest of society), and the damage can (and often does) multiply beyond the
original "foolishness." The crash of 1929 and the depression that followed is
only one dramatic example of such a domino effect.

            The real
kicker is the last line. Enjoyment of life is reduced when one produces more
than one consumes? If Landsburg really has wandered over from the economics
section to the philosophy section of his bookstore, and thought about this, I'd
like to hear his reasons.

            -- Chris
Noble Winchester, Mass.

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
