
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Java
Jibe
            

            I was very disappointed to
read Andrew Shuman's "Weak Java." The question of whether Java is a good platform is an
interesting and complicated one, but Shuman's analysis was alarmingly
one-sided.

            For instance, Shuman
discussed the fact that Java is an interpreted language without bringing up the
fact that many companies (Microsoft included) have developed what are called
just-in-time compilers, which largely fix the slowness problem he discussed. On
the fly, a JIT compiler converts Java bytecodes, normally destined to be
interpreted, into machine codes, which can be run very quickly. Indeed, recent
estimates have suggested that, through the use of things like JIT compilers,
Java will reach speeds of between 70 percent and 80 percent of the speed of a
natively run C program. Not nearly as s-l-o-w as the article suggests.

            Shuman neglected to mention
the other big advantage of Java, which is security. Unlike ActiveX and some of
the other competing technologies, Java applets can be run without fear of the
applet trashing your hard drive. A group of German hackers demonstrated how a
malicious ActiveX component can take over your copy of Quicken and make
financial transactions on your behalf.

            There is
a lot more to say on this issue, and I'm not going to try and outline all of
the important points. But Shuman should have. Or rather, Slate should have
found someone more likely to give a more full and nuanced view of the
issue.

            -- Yaron M. Minsky
Syracuse, N.Y.

            

               Refill
            

            Andrew
Shuman's "Weak
Java" and James Surowiecki's "Culture Wars"
are frightfully irresponsible. Shuman's breezy article largely omits the
implications of the reliability, flexibility, and security provided by Java in
order to emphasize the cost of these benefits in execution speed. While a
strong case can be made that the advantages are well worth the cost, this by
itself does not reflect poorly on Slate. Nor does the failure of Surowiecki's
column to note its own thinly veiled role in the culture war surrounding Java
that it describes. However, that Slate chose to run these poorly constructed
articles is a clear instance of Microsoft editorial influence. Readers offer
attention that brings advertising revenue not for misleading propaganda like
this, but for information presented with the kind of journalistic integrity
that usually characterizes Slate. If such a conflict of interest cannot be
handled gracefully, the subject is best avoided.

            -- Jeff Gold New York
City

            

               Bottomless Mug
            

            Evangelistic movements being
what they are, I have no doubt you'll be swamped with letters responding to
Andrew Shuman's criticism of the Java programming language ("Weak Java"). Here's
another one, though I'm no Java evangelical (I'd much rather program in
CommonLisp, thanks).

            The assertion that Java is
about as hard for a COBOL programmer to learn as C is sent the needle on my BS
detector into the red zone. One of the nice things about Java is that the most
difficult parts of C (indirection and "pointer arithmetic," among other things)
have been left out of the language, while other convenience features
unavailable in C (such as memory management) have been added to it. These
things make it much easier to learn than C. Shuman's harping on "s-l-o-w"
probably says more about the quality of Microsoft's virtual machine than it
does about Java or the Java paradigm. (The virtual machine is the program that
"interprets" or, in some cases, compiles and runs the compact Java bytecodes
that make up a Java program.)

            With the
one-two punch of items critical of Java in Shuman's piece and James
Surowiecki's column, "Culture Wars," I have to close my eyes and clap for
Tinkerbell to believe that Slate remains independent and exercises untrammeled
judgment on what points of view to present on issues directly affecting its
parent corporation.

            -- Steve Miklos East
Norwalk, Conn.

            
               The editors reply: This
sampling of e-mail is civilized compared to the vituperative name-calling cast
down on Shuman by readers who used the link on the article to e-mail him
directly. (But don't feel sorry for him, he asked for it.) At this moment,
Shuman is l-o-a-d-i-n-g his Java word processor and composing a response to his
critics, which will run next week.
            

            
               Milliken
It for All It's Worth
            

            In "Who's Buying Whom?,"
Paul Krugman defends himself against critics who apparently accused him of
selling out to foreign powers and multinational corporations in his July column
supporting trade with China ("The East Is in the Red") by attacking me as a hireling of
protectionist interests directed by textile magnate Roger Milliken. Since I
neither read his article on China nor wrote him a letter, the logic that leads
Krugman to a gratuitous strike at me is unclear.

            What is clear, however, is
that he has either badly missed the mark by neglecting to do his homework, or
is engaged in a willful campaign of misrepresentation. While it is true, as
Krugman says, that the Economic Strategy Institute received early financial
support from Milliken, it is also the case, as Krugman should have known, that
Milliken ceased making contributions over four years ago when ESI, over
Milliken's objections, provided critical support to the passage of NAFTA and
the ratification of the World Trade Organization and free-trade arrangements
concluded in the Uruguay Round. Thus, our support of free trade amounts to more
than pious, theoretical declamations from the groves of academe.

            ESI does not claim
infallibility or even the absence of silly mistakes, but we are not for sale.
We make the best case we can based on the facts as we know them. Moreover, we
do not attack people, only ideas. Krugman says "the currency of academic
success is creativity." Perhaps, but the ad hominem approach is usually the
mark of a weak argument.

            As for
Roger Milliken, I don't always agree with him, but he is an honest and
honorable man from whom Paul Krugman could learn a lot.

            -- Clyde V. Prestowitz
Jr. Economic Strategy Institute

            
               Touché à
la Tonelson
            

            In his response to my
letter of Aug. 14,
Paul Krugman is so determined to nail me as an economic illiterate that he
loses sight of our original disagreements--and some of his own previous work.
The book review of mine that Krugman initially criticized in "The East Is in the Red"
cited "many reasons" for thinking that "consumer markets" in emerging countries
like China, Mexico, and Brazil "are likely to stay small for decades, even if
formal trade barriers come down." I singled out two such reasons: "First,
largely because most of these nations have huge foreign debts to pay off, and
therefore need to discourage consumption by their populations, they are
pursuing export-led growth strategies. Second, if they don't keep wages and
purchasing power low, they will have trouble attracting the foreign investment
they require, both to service debt and to finance growth." I added that China
"has made it abundantly clear that it has no intention of becoming a major
importer; it aims eventually to satisfy most of its own needs."

            Krugman responded in "The
East Is in the Red" by observing that countries attracting enough foreign
investment "both to service debt and to finance growth" must be running trade
deficits. He added that China's record in particular belies my argument because
its roughly balanced global trade indicates that it is not a net capital
importer. Krugman is, of course, right about the relationship between trade
balances and current-account balances, and about China's international
balances. But as I originally stated, numerous forces are responsible for
limiting the consumer imports of this disparate group of countries. Some, like
Mexico (America's most important emerging-market trade partner), are struggling
with huge debt overhangs and therefore must restrict domestic consumption and
earn foreign exchange by focusing on exporting. Some believe that the Japanese
or Taiwanese models of production and export-led development are superior to
consumption-led approaches to economic growth. Some are driven by memories of
domination by the West to seek substantial degrees of economic
self-sufficiency. And some are motivated by combinations of these
considerations.

            China, with major plans to
supply its own needs in industries such as motor vehicles, aerospace, and
semiconductors, is clearly one country striving for self-sufficiency. The
Chinese are also great admirers of key aspects of the Japanese development
model. Indeed, the amassing of some $125 billion in foreign-exchange reserves
has been central to China's success at pursuing export-led growth. The Chinese
have accumulated these reserves by selling their own currency in order to
depress its value--which, of course, keeps export prices low and import prices
high. As a result, the already meager international purchasing power of China's
rock-bottom wages is suppressed even further. As for Krugman's claim that most
U.S. workers have seen real living standards rise over these last twenty-odd
years, it is based on a poor choice of data--the U.S. government's real hourly
compensation figures. This series suffers from two related problems. First, it
includes all workers, from CEOs to janitors. Second, it is an average. As
income inequality in the United States rises--a problem Krugman has written
about eloquently--any economy-wide average will of course deviate increasingly
from the median, which much more accurately describes the situation of the
typical worker.

            The
typical worker's situation can be more accurately gauged by looking at indexes
focusing on median figures for production, nonsupervisory workers--who make up
80 percent of the workforce. Such series include the median weekly earnings
statistics published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and derived from the
Earnings Files of the Current Population Survey. This series, and several
others, amply support my claim that U.S. living standards have been declining
in the last two decades, and refute Krugman's claim that First- and Third World
wages are converging "through a process of leveling up, not leveling down." Nor
do the results change significantly when nonwage benefits are factored in.

            -- Alan Tonelson U.S.
Business and Industrial Council Educational Foundation

            

               Unsolicited Testimony
            

            I'm not
entirely certain that I have the correct e-mail spot simply to report how much
I enjoy Slate. I humbly confess that when I first heard of a magazine that
would be online only, I scoffed. Now, I am converted. I enjoy curling up with
Slate just as I do my more material publications, and there is nothing to
recycle or discard (guiltily) and no "newsprint fingertips." Thank you
especially for "Today's Papers"--lots of time saved there and a nice pithy
overview. Same for "In Other Magazines." And, lewd poetry from Robert Herrick, yet. All in all, the best
of what's new in this cyberworld.

            -- Suzanne
Clarke Phoenix

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
