
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            

               Leftwaffe
            

            Regarding
"The Conintern," by Jacob Weisberg: Now that Michael Kelly has been
forced out of the New 
               Republic for his unflattering coverage of
President Clinton and Vice President Gore, may we expect an article from
Weisberg on the sinister intellectual conformity of the left?

            -- Danielle
CrittendenWomen's Quarterly Washington

            
               Jacob Weisberg
responds: I don't think so. There is PC on the left, no doubt, but this
episode is hardly an illustration of it. The idea that a writer who despised
Ronald Reagan would have been made editor of a leading conservative magazine is
unimaginable. The Michael Kelly of the right wouldn't have had to be fired. He
never would have been hired in the first place.

            
               Tax
Americana
            

            You waste
everyone's time by running pieces by Jodie T. Allen on the economy, taxes, and
the stock market. In "A Brief History of Taxes," the chart she runs with her
diatribe against supply-side economics is worthless, as even Paul Krugman would
advise, because it accounts for neither the efficiency of the market in
discounting changes in tax law throughout the legislative process, nor the
volatility of monetary policy during the last 30 years of a floating dollar.
There are other minor variables at work, including differences that occur
because of taxes on income and taxes on wealth, but I would not trouble Allen
with those. Her attempt to correlate one variable--the date of passage of a tax
cut or increase--with GDP is not serious stuff. And, by the way, at the time it
passed in 1993, we told our clients the Clinton tax increase would do no great
damage to the economy because the other variables were positive.

            -- Jude
Wanniski Polyconomics Inc.Morristown, N.J.

            
               Tax
Return
            

            Jodie T. Allen's "A Brief History of
Taxes" was indeed brief, though perhaps appropriately so, given the very
narrow focus of her argument. What Allen utterly failed to address is the fact
that regardless of their effects on aggregate consumption and investment, tax
hikes are bad--and tax cuts, good--for individual taxpayers. While it is quite
true, as she notes, that Republicans adhere to the questionable belief "that
tax cuts are ipso facto good (and tax hikes are ipso facto bad)"
for the economy and the financial markets, those same Republicans also tend to
believe that wealth is inherently the property of the individual who created
it.

            This is
not a subtle point, and it is certainly not one that Republicans have ever been
shy about expressing. Bob Dole ran his entire '96 presidential race promising a
15-percent income tax cut. The accompanying "It's your money" slogan, while
unconvincing to both voters and pundits, is fundamentally true. It is also
essential to consider it when weighing the merits or ills of a proposed change
in tax rates. Individuals' claims to their wealth and income must of course be
balanced by the need to finance governmental activities, no matter how few and
inconsequential they may be. For that reason, arguments for the complete
elimination of taxes would be absurd, a fact that almost everyone, regardless
of political affiliation, can recognize. Equally lacking in wisdom, however,
are analyses such as Allen's, which only evaluate taxes' macroeconomic
consequences while ignoring completely the effects they have on
individuals.

            -- Brian
Bissonette Alexandria, Va.

            
               The
Sunbeam King
            

            In his article "Al Dunlap: The
Chainsaw Capitalist," David Plotz reveals his ignorance like a hospital
gown reveals one's bum. Consider this quote: "The AMA pitches itself as
America's selfless medical counselor, indifferent to the demands of the
marketplace."

            Regardless of the statement's
validity, it shows that Plotz hasn't the faintest idea of what the marketplace
is. The marketplace is me, and you, and everyone else who wants medical care.
How can ignoring people's medical wishes be considered a good thing?
"Selfless"? It would be the very height of selfishness and arrogance for the
AMA to ignore the marketplace.

            In his next sentence, Plotz
says, "Dunlap, by contrast, is the marketplace." No. He can be at most
one 
               actor in the marketplace. Plotz then goes on to denigrate the
notion of efficiency, as if it were self-evidently bad rather than inarguably
good. Plotz also misuses the concept of the invisible hand, using it to mean
something quite apart from what Adam Smith intended.

            Plotz tries to vilify Dunlap,
but anyone who understands economics sees that Dunlap is actually a good guy,
increasing the efficiency of businesses and creating wealth. About the 11,000
workers fired from Scott Paper, Plotz does the usual hand-wringing because he
has not learned to view the big picture: A society that can meet its tissue
needs with 11,000 fewer people is more efficient; it is a society that has
11,000 people who can now do something more productive. There are only so many
hands in the world to work, and--viewing things in strictly economic
terms--those fired workers are a freed resource, freed by Dunlap. (True, their
lives are temporarily screwed, but businesses do not exist to hand out
paychecks; they exist because they do something useful in an efficient manner.
Were it otherwise, we'd be knee-deep in unwanted buggy whips.)

            If Slate
printed an article dealing with principles and terms from chemistry, you would
pass it by a chemist, wouldn't you? Why then do you let someone who has not the
barest acquaintance with economics spout nonsense?

            -- Bill Muse
            

            
               Doubting
Hamas
            

            First and foremost, I would
like to commend you on your publication. You will go down in history as one of
the first and best attempts to use the Internet to spread intellectual debate
and well-written articles on politics and culture. The most impressive facet of
your publication has been your ability to rise above other media outlets and
provide voices for all political groups and evenhanded coverage of all news
events.

            Sadly,
the Sept. 5 "Today's Papers" decides to editorialize by referring to Hamas
members as "scumbags." Aside from becoming part of the event instead of just
reporting on it, this reflected a poor style and vocabulary choice. Please
don't lower yourselves to tabloid language. You have been an important and
upstanding publication, and I would hate to lose you now.

            
               --Patrick J.
Holt
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
