
   
   
      
         
            ddress your e-mail to the editors to. Please include your address and daytime phone number (for confirmation only).

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Devil
Fish
            

            In response to Daniel Akst's
piece "Passive
Aggressive": Here at Morningstar we spend most of our days thinking about investment
strategies, and rarely does the word "evil" come to mind. Of course, there is
vice in the mutual-fund business. Fund companies' greed-inspired pursuit of
assets occasionally leads them to lie, cheat, and virtually steal from their
shareholders, through deceptive advertising or outrageous fees and expenses.
But index funds rarely commit such sins--they are surely the choirboys of the
industry.

            Thus, I was surprised to see
index funds tarred as "evil" in your article. You allege that greedy index-fund
investors take advantage of noble souls doing their own research and thereby
threaten to erode the quality of information and research that is the
foundation of our efficient stock markets. In fact, this view is almost
completely opposite to the truth. The rise of index funds should be seen as
triumphant proof that our financial markets are robustly efficient. And it will
be impossible for index funds to destroy the efficiency of markets as long as
those markets remain free and ruled by greed.

            You beguile us with the
image of a pastoral commons in which index investors are selfish free riders
grazing on the fruits of hard-working financial analysts. Having talked to
hundreds of mutual fund managers, I'd suggest that this is not the appropriate
vision of the workings of the stock market. Instead, imagine a huge ocean of
information populated by vicious, hungry sharks. These sharks patrol the waters
looking for juicy tidbits to grow fat on. After they have had their fill of the
prey, its carcass falls to the bottom of the sea. There bottom feeders wait
patiently to scavenge the remaining scraps. They don't get fat, but they have a
nice, easy life waiting for their dinner to fall to them. In this metaphor, the
sharks are the active investors, and the indexers are the bottom feeders. The
final crucial detail that ensures that this world and our financial markets
will always function smoothly is that the sharks can become bottom feeders, and
vice versa.

            If this were a true
biological world, competition between the species and the drive for survival
would ensure that there is equilibrium between the sharks and the bottom
feeders. If the lazy bottom feeders become too numerous, there won't be enough
carcasses floating down to the bottom. In this case, the ill-fed bottom feeders
will decide to join the sharks, and will hunt their own kills. In the alternate
case, when sharks swarm the waters, there will be little reward to their
hunting, and some of the sharks will retire to the easy life of bottom
feeding.

            There is
a similar equilibrium in the financial world. Only, in the stock market, the
equilibrating force is unfettered greed. Today, aided by an explosion in
information technology, there are thousands and thousands of active, aggressive
investors pouncing on every nugget of information, thereby making the markets
highly efficient. In this world, it makes eminent sense for some investors to
give up the hunt and be satisfied with the quiet life of indexing. It is true
that the indexers are free-riding on the sharks. But don't cry for the
sharks--they are just as selfish as the bottom feeders. The sharks are free to
hang up their fins any time and pursue the lazy life. And they surely will,
whenever it pays to do so. As the profits from active investing diminish, there
will automatically be fewer active investors and more indexers. And whenever
the profits from an active strategy become evident, a feeding frenzy of sharks
will appear. It is this freedom that investors have--to follow any strategy,
from fundamental analysis to astrology--combined with the powerful drive of
human greed, that guarantees that our financial markets will always be highly
efficient, and that indexing or any other investing strategy will never pose a
threat to market efficiency. As long as at least a few sharks patrol the
waters, we will all be safe.

            
               --Todd Porter mutual
fund analyst, Morningstar

            
               Akst Me
No Questions
            

            Although his criticisms in
"Passive
Aggressive" are right on the mark, Daniel Akst need have no fear of the
free-riding index investors who strive for mediocrity by investing passively.
If 20 percent of new mutual fund money is now going into indexed funds, as
opposed to 3 percent in 1994, we can have some confidence that the indexers are
planting the seeds of their own destruction. As more people drop out of the
competition to outperform, the marginal research and trading value of the
decreasing number of active investors will become significant, and they will
begin to beat the market.

            Take the argument for passive
investing to its extreme: Suppose that tomorrow morning all funds were invested
solely in index funds. By definition, that would be the last trade in the stock
market. That is, no one would be able to react to new information. Clearly,
some investors would break from the pack as new information became public and
others were not reacting. Thus, the number of passive vs. active investors will
always fluctuate around an equilibrium.

            By the
way, the "tragedy of the commons" is not a theoretical construct from a 1960s
environmentalist. It was coined almost 200 years ago (I think perhaps by David
Ricardo), to describe the pre-industrial land-tenure system in Britain, wherein
peasants would destructively graze their livestock on commonly held land.
Furthermore, the traditional response to the observation is not in favor of
"greens, social critics, and other worrywarts who fret over issues such as
population growth," but rather supports the capitalist argument that land tends
to be used more efficiently under private ownership, in that the owner is
interested in supporting the long-term value of the property.

            
               --John Robertson
Graham Vancouver, B.C.

            
               The
Wicked Niche of the East
            

            Paul Krugman's July 17
column, "The East Is
in the Red," uses superficial research and ad hominem attacks to criticize
a recent article of mine on U.S. trade with emerging economies like China.
Rather than join Krugman in the gutter, I will deal with his few substantive
points.

            First, Krugman belittles
concerns about America's huge and growing merchandise trade deficits with China
because the U.S. government figures I cited have kept Hong Kong and the
People's Republic of China separate. Combine them, he claims, and China's big
global merchandise trade surplus shrinks to insignificance.

            What Krugman does not
explain is how, if the macroeconomic forces he emphasizes truly explain China's
trade flows, the PRC can be growing at roughly double-digit rates and running a
global surplus. In fact, at one point he insists that it is an "arithmetical
necessity" for big capital importers like China to run trade deficits.
Evidently the Politburo at MIT needs some math lessons.

            Further, China's trade
balance with the United States was my focus, not China's global balance. And
for 1996, combining the Hong Kong and China figures reduced America's China
deficit only from $39 billion to $35 billion.

            Moreover, the annual export
figures for the PRC are considered by the U.S. government to be understated by
at least $6 billion--the amount of Chinese textiles and apparel fraudulently
shipped to the United States through third countries. Industry estimates place
the figure at some $10 billion. But of course, what could matters like customs
fraud possibly have to do with trade policy?

            Krugman also criticizes my
expectation that emerging economies will continue developing as world-class
exporters but remain small consumer goods markets. After all, he argues,
although countries that produce more than they consume must run trade
surpluses, these surpluses will guarantee high consumption because the
resulting national income increase "has to show up somewhere ." Moreover,
he observes, most emerging economies are running global trade deficits--i.e.,
consuming even more than they produce--precisely because they import
considerable foreign capital.

            Yet many countries become
major importers but not major consumer markets. How? By concentrating their
imports in capital goods, intermediate goods, and industrial inputs--the very
products needed to maintain export-led growth. Such growth may indeed one day
create big consumer markets. But "one day" may be a long time coming.

            For governments in these
countries have aims other than enriching domestic consumers. Indeed, many deny
individuals and businesses broad freedom to consume precisely because their top
priority is building national economic power--especially productive
capacity--over the long haul. As the examples of Japan and South Korea show,
for strategic reasons they are willing to interfere with Krugman's vaunted
market-equilibrating forces for decades, by mandating high savings and
suppressing domestic consumption in other ways, and pushing exports. And when
they do consume, they often focus on purchases whose economic benefits do not
trickle down or abroad--like weapons. Indeed, most of east and southeast Asia
is in the midst of a big, prolonged military buildup.

            Finally, numerous statistics
belie Krugman's claim that real wages inevitably rise with productivity. That's
certainly not the case in the United States. Nor is it the case in Mexico.
There, manufacturing productivity rose by an annual average of 6.6 percent
between 1988 and 1993 (the Salinas years). But just before the 1994 peso
collapse, real hourly wages stood nearly 30 percent below 1990 levels. One main
reason: Some 1 million Mexicans enter the country's workforce every year,
greatly increasing the labor surplus in a land where unemployment and
underemployment were estimated by the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City at a stunning
35 percent in late 1995.

            Indeed, labor surpluses and
falling wages plague most low-income countries outside east Asia. And even
there, anecdotal evidence indicates that once labor costs take off, so does
foreign investment--for much-lower-wage, labor-rich countries like China.

            Finally, Krugman's numbers
on Asian wages catching up to U.S. wages ignore one big factor contributing to
that narrowing: a decline in U.S. wages. Although he calls this trend
Panglossian, few other Americans will.

            I
anxiously await the bucket of mud Krugman is undoubtedly preparing to sling in
response.

            -- Alan Tonelson U.S.
Business and Industrial Council Educational Foundation

            
               Paul
Krugman replies: I'm sorry that Alan Tonelson's offended dignity has
prevented him from actually taking on board the substantive arguments that I
made in my article. Let me try, however, to make four points:

            1) Tonelson seems to think
that the proposition that a country which attracts large capital inflows must
also be running a trade deficit is merely my opinion. It isn't: It is a matter
of sheer accounting--it is, exactly as I said, an "arithmetical necessity." And
I believe that whatever asperity I may have shown in the column is justified by
the astonishing fact that he really doesn't understand that.

            The point--which I thought I
made clearly in the column, but then what do I know?--is that China's trade
surplus, and actual rough balance on current account, shows that the country is
not, in fact, a net recipient of capital. (Capital account plus current account
equals zero; that is a fact, not a theory, whatever the Politburo may say.) Any
attempt to make sense of the country's trade must include an explanation of how
the money brought in by foreign investors goes out again.

            2) Tonelson accuses me of
"superficial research," then says that in his article, "China's trade balance
with the United States was my focus, not China's global balance." I have now
done a little more research, by rereading his review of Jeffrey Garten's The
Big Ten , which was clearly cited as the source of my quotations ( New
York Times Book Review , June 15, Page 30). If there is any mention of
China's trade balance with the United States in there, I can't find it--in
fact, the article seems to say quite clearly that emerging economies will not
offer large markets to anyone. Maybe Tonelson has some other article in
mind?

            Doing a bit more research, I
discover that in my own column I included a long sidebar which acknowledged
that, while the precise numbers are in dispute, China certainly does run a
large bilateral surplus vis-à-vis the United States, and tried to discuss the
economic meaning of that surplus. But maybe Tonelson had stopped reading by
then.

            3) Tonelson's letter makes a
big point of the likelihood that advanced countries will export mainly capital
equipment rather than consumer goods to the emerging economies. Why, exactly,
is this a problem? Is selling tractors and forklifts somehow a less sound
business than selling soft drinks? (What fools the Japanese are, selling us all
those numerically controlled machine tools.) As the saying goes, "Give a man a
fish, and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to fish, and you can sell him
equipment."

            4) Finally, Tonelson denies
that productivity increases lead to higher wages, insisting that the dramatic
convergence in hourly compensation between the United States and the Asian
tigers has been achieved through a fall in the U.S. level. Funny: When I check
out the "real hourly compensation" number in the back of the 1997 Economic
Report of the President (Page 354), a book which I assume Tonelson has on
his desk, I find that it went up about 8 percent between 1975 and 1995.
We could go on at length about whether workers should have received even more,
or what adjustments one might make to that number to move it down (or up) a
bit, but by any calculation I can make, the overwhelming picture is one of
convergence between wages in the tigers and in the West through a process of
leveling up, not leveling down.

            I should
perhaps say that I have nothing personal against Alan Tonelson. I quoted him
only because I often find it hard to convince people that the views of the
faction he represents are as crude and naive as they really are. "Surely,"
people say, "they can't really believe that countries can attract massive
capital inflows and run big trade surpluses at the same time? They must have
some more sophisticated point in mind." The only answer to such
rationalizations is to catch somebody with his hand in the cookie jar. And
whatever Tonelson may say, I caught him red-handed.

            
               The Rape
of the Lockheed
            

            In James
Surowiecki's article "The Lockheed Redemption," he stated that Lockheed was
"currently building the F-117A Stealth fighter and the thoroughly unnecessary
F-22 for the Air Force." Given that the skies are filling up with planes like
the Eurofighter, the Dassault Rafale, the J-10, the JAS Gripen, the MiG-29 and
35, and the Sukoi Su-27 and 35, all of which are comparable or superior to any
U.S. fighter, how can the F-22 be "thoroughly unnecessary"? Those other planes
are being built by countries which are all pushing hard for foreign sales, so
it is not inconceivable that our Air Force might confront some of these
high-tech planes in the future. The question is, will they do it with a
decades-old plane designed to fight the battles of the past, or one designed to
fight the battles of the future?

            -- Brian
Shibayama
            

            
               Don't
Shoot the Messinger
            

            In James Traub's "New York's Loneliest
Liberal," he says: "By the time David Dinkins became mayor in 1989, this
kind of spending had made New York ungovernable. The economy was dead, the
budget was in perpetual crisis, and crime was shooting through the roof.
Dinkins did nothing to reverse the trend."

            This is
an incredibly ignorant statement. Crime went down the last three of Dinkins'
four years, and much of the current drop in crime can be attributed to the
thousands of extra police that Dinkins fought for in Albany. Dinkins balanced
the budget all four years, something that Giuliani has not been able to
accomplish. The current economic turnaround started in 1993, Dinkins' final
year in office.

            -- David White New
York City

            
               A Shot in
the Arm
            

            Funny the
places you find vindication. Steven E. Landsburg seems to be saying in
"Property Is
Theft" that if an anti-theft device benefits citizens other than the
property owner, it should be encouraged. Research indicates that liberal
("shall-issue" concealed carry gun permit laws, not left-wing ideology)
firearms laws result in a reduction of crimes against persons. Since citizens
legally carrying firearms make those areas safer, firearms restrictions are
counterproductive. Thank you for the encouragement.

            -- Fred
Niziol Columbia, Md.

            
               Steven E.
Landsburg replies: Fred Niziol is correct in his facts but mistaken in his
reasoning. Recent research does indicate that liberal firearms laws
reduce crime against persons. But it does not follow that liberal firearms laws
reduce crime against persons who do not carry firearms . Therein lies a
critical distinction.

            Consider three hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1 says that when I buy a gun, I discourage people from becoming
criminals and so reduce crime against my neighbors. In that case, according to
the cost-benefit criterion that economists like to employ, my gun ownership
should be subsidized.

            Hypothesis 2 says that when I
buy a gun, I prevent crimes against myself while having no effect on crimes
against my neighbors; criminals who choose me as a victim end up wasting their
time, but criminals who choose you as a victim are as successful as
ever. In that case, I have ample incentive to arm myself, and there is no
reason to encourage me with a subsidy.

            Hypothesis 3 says that when I
buy a $100 gun, I protect myself from, say, $150 worth of property loss, while
inflicting, say, $75 worth of property loss on my neighbors--because half the
criminals who try unsuccessfully to rob me go on to rob someone else instead.
In that case--again, according to the usual cost-benefit criterion--my gun is a
bad thing; it costs $100 and only reduces total crime by $75. That's an
argument for discouraging gun ownership through taxation.

            I do not know which of these
hypotheses is closest to the truth and am not aware of any research that
settles that question. Therefore I do not know whether gun ownership should be
subsidized, taxed, or neither.

            What's
remarkable about the Lojack research is that it does do a careful job of
distinguishing among the analogues of Hypotheses 1, 2, and 3. That takes a lot
of hard work and ingenuity. It will take harder work and more ingenuity before
we know whether Niziol has jumped to the right or the wrong conclusion.

            
               Brissing
Link
            

            I found
"So Are
the Neanderthals Still Jews?" by Charles Paul Freund to be inappropriate
for a publication from Microsoft. While it may be that Freund was attempting
satire in his review of anti-Semitic origins over the last 2,000 years, it is
just a stonestep away from believing that Freund himself believes many of the
things he chronicles. More importantly, his writing style lends credence to
these blatantly racist and anti-Semitic writings. What purpose or higher
reasoning can Microsoft use to justify such writing?

            
               --Adam Goldstein,
M.D. Chapel Hill, N.C.

            
               Funny,
You Don't Look Neanderthal
            

            I just
finished reading "So Are the Neanderthals Still Jews?" by Charles Paul Freund, and
found it to be in very poor taste. I will assume for argument's sake that the
author is not blatantly anti-Semitic, but is only trying to outline the
theories put forward over the centuries which account for the survival of the
Jewish people in the face of hundreds of years of persecution. This type of
article, even when well meant, just further fuels the fires of anti-Semitism
and is counter-productive to the ongoing development of peace and civilization
on Earth. Your decision to publish such an article dismays me. I would urge you
to remove this article from the Net and avoid this type of journalism in the
future.

            
               --David Koppy
            

            
               Charles
Paul Freund replies : Adam Goldstein thinks my style lends credence to Jews
being space aliens, Neanderthals, horned devils, etc., while David Koppy says
my story impedes Earth's peace and civilization. Thanks anyway, but exposure
(the story) and scorn (the style) are two available antidotes to the heritage
of hatred and dehumanization I described, and which is arguably a bigger
problem than my story. The article's unfathomable purpose was, to quote it, "a
lesson in how the most inane ideas can have the most appalling
consequences."

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
