
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               I Can't
Hear You
            

            This
morning's delivery of "Today's Papers" included an all-too-common error. Scott Shuger
explained that "Senate Republican leaders are feeling their oats over
yesterday's Supreme Court decision upholding Proposition 209 and are suggesting
that Lee and any other future nominees to the post will face a tough new
standard on affirmative action." The Supreme Court did not "uphold" Proposition
209. It simply declined to hear the case. This decision has absolutely no
precedential value, nor does it necessarily tell us anything about the court's
opinion of the measure. The court receives thousands of petitions asking it to
review lower-court decisions every year. On average, it agrees to hear less
than two hundred of them. The court may decline to review a case for any number
of reasons. For instance, the court may refuse to hear a case--even one that
presents an important constitutional question--because it contains procedural
irregularities or because the issue it presents has not yet "percolated"
through the lower courts. Therefore, when journalists present the court's
decision to decline to review a case as "upholding" the lower court's decision,
they mislead and confuse the public. I hope that 
                  Slate
                will be
more careful in presenting the decisions of the Supreme Court to its readership
in the future.

            -- Oona Hathaway law
clerk, Judge Patricia WaldU.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C.
CircuitWashington

            
               Editors' Note: The page
was corrected as soon as we realized our error.
            

            

               Millionerds Maligned
            

            Michael Lewis is congenitally
incapable of being boring, but he comes damn close in his first Millionerds
missive ("T.J. the Barbarian"). In it we see the uncomfortable sight of a
writer not fully engaged with his material: the weak opening, the clichés
("swaggering"?), the much-trodden Upside / Forbes
ASAP / Fortune material, the absence of anything tying T.J. Rodgers to
the series' purported theme--the organizational man. The article feels
overrushed and underthought. It lacks the wisecracking edge and the snappy
repartee of Lewis' best writing.

            Is Lewis
doing this as a result of a lost bet, or has editor Kinsley got pictures of him
naked from TNR days?

            -- Paul
Kedrosky Vancouver, British Columbia

            
               Gulf
Boor
            

            I find
"Pundit
Central" both your most enjoyable and most useful feature. By capsulizing
the inanities that pass for political commentary, you expose the vapidity of
the opinions and put these "opinions" in their proper perspective. I found the
"not ready for wartime" Sam Donaldson quote most telling. Sam's not going to
suit up for service in the Gulf, now or ever. But other people fighting and
dying makes good video. From the safety of a TV studio, Donaldson's ready to
have (someone else) pay any price, face any foe. Keep up the good work,

                  Slate
               .

            -- Art
Cunningham Moreno Valley, Calif.

            
               Auto
Erotica
            

            Jacob
Weisberg's excellent essay, "Car
Talk," on the key to this year's gubernatorial and municipal elections,
redefines the word "autocracy." He did miss the bus, however, on at least one
transportation-related election result. Last week, voters in Seattle passed an
initiative that will expand the city's monorail, a quaint remnant of the 1962
World's Fair, elevating it from its current 90-second-tourist-ride status into
a 40-mile citywide transit system--at the estimated cost of $1 billion. This,
after last year approving a regional transit system of express buses, commuter
trains, and light rail costing nearly $4 billion. If, as Weisberg writes,
public transportation is a violation of nature in the West, Seattleites
obviously want to be violated.

            -- L.C.
Smith Seattle

            
               Nanny
Nanny Boo Boo
            

            David Plotz had it close,
but not quite right, in his "Assessment" of Barry Scheck. Scheck, although supremely
skilled, was overconfident in advising Louise Woodward to go for the "all or
nothing" verdict. By taking away the jury's choice to consider a manslaughter
conviction, Scheck gambled that they shared his ability to operate within a
"narrowed framework." They didn't. Given the aftermath of the O.J. criminal
verdict, he ought to have realized that jurors prefer too much justice (i.e., a
second-degree conviction) to not enough (acquittal).

            Don't get
me wrong, if I were guilty, I'd call Scheck. But for Louise Woodward, he blew
it.

            -- Bill Cozzo
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
