
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Don't
Believe the Hype
            

            Cullen Murphy is so good
that it really stands out when he blows it, as he does in "Too Much of a Good
Thing." Hype derives from hyperbole , and when it came into
use in the '60s, it was used, in much the way overhyped is used today,
to refer to something praised far in excess of its value ("Sergeant
Pepper has been hyped as a masterpiece, but the fact is, most of the songs
on it aren't of the first rank").

            Once the provenance of
hype has been established, you can discard Murphy's elaborate apparatus
for explaining overhyped . That ghastly neologism is just the latest
example of the peculiar American tendency toward tautological idioms. Similar
excrescences include: preplanning and its business familiar, advance
planning (when the heck else are you going to plan something--after the
fact?); and my own special hate, self-confessed (if someone else is
doing your confessing for you, honey, it ain't a confession). Yes, yes, I
understand that self-confessed follows the path laid down by perfectly
acceptable terms like self-professed and self-avowed ; I still
hate it.

            Well, I'm
glad that's straightened out.

            -- Harris
Collingwood New York City

            
               Cullen
Murphy replies: Harris Collingwood's letter is one of many I have received that
would derive hype from hyperbole rather than more circuitously
from the hype derived from hypodermic , and thus from the idea of
stimulation associated with drug use. I stand my ground, though. Yes, at first
glance, this alternative derivation would seem to make sense, because hype
sort of sounds like hyperbole and sort of means hyperbole . It
would also seem to make sense that frosh would be derived from
freshman , since it sort of sounds like freshman and sort of means
freshman . But it isn't.
            

            Hype in the sense of
excessive or false publicity goes back much further than the 1960s
(Collingwood's suggested decade of origin)--to at least the 1920s (per the
Oxford English Dictionary ), which is the same time that hype is
attested to as a verb and noun associated with drug use, and the word is
explicitly linked to hypodermic . The OED , the Dictionary of
American Slang , the Barnhart Dictionary of New English , and the
Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang all make the
hypodermic connection. None of them makes a hyperbole connection.
William Safire in his New Political Dictionary writes: "Investing a
minor occurrence with false importance is called 'hype' or 'media hype,' from
the euphoric kick one gets from an injection of a narcotic with a hypodermic
needle."
            

            
               I asked J.E. Lighter, the
editor of the Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang
(whose volume containing "H" words has just been published), about the
possibility that hype was derived from hyperbole . His immediate
response was, "I very much doubt that." He went on to note that "hyperbole
comes from a rather elevated level of diction for the kinds of people who
begin using the word hype ." He did observe that the existence of the
word hyperbole could well be offering hype a certain
reinforcement. "Once a word comes into circulation," Lighter said, "its
survival is based in part on all of the associations it brings to
mind."
            

            

               ( Frosh , by the way, seems to have come from the German for "frog"--it
was a 19 th -century nickname for members of an entering class of
German university students.)
            

            

               Jingoistic Java Juggernaut
            

            I am very disappointed by
Andrew Shuman's "Weak Java." If you want to look like a propaganda organ of
Microsoft, about the best thing you could do would be to publish an article
about a very hotly contested industry issue, take Microsoft's side, and support
your point with misinformation and untruths.

            The most egregious example
was Shuman's statement that Sun's plan to make Java faster is to make "Java
into an operating system." This is entirely and totally wrong, and anyone
paying any attention to what's going on with Java would know this. I am really
appalled.

            Slate is
certainly free to come out on any side of any issue, but when it comes to an
issue in which Microsoft has a huge financial stake, I think the least we
readers can ask is that you take care to learn the basic facts of the matter
and check that what's in the article is at least remotely plausible.

            -- Daniel
Weinreb Arlington, Mass.

            
               Andrew
Shuman replies: This letter is one of the nicer ones I have received in the
past two weeks. I had two goals for my article: first, to explain what Java is;
and second, to debunk the Java hype. I can only gather by the voluminous
responses to my article that I was successful in touching a few nerves. I would
like to quote myself on two points readers seem to have overlooked: 1) "I work
for Microsoft" and 2) "Java is cool."
            

            
               First off, to all you
speed demons who claim Java will soon be as fast as C/C++ and who rightly point
to some of the work on making Java much faster: You are half-right. There is a
great deal of effort afoot to make Java faster (just-in-time compilation,
native-code generation, etc.). However Java will never be as fast as
straight C/C++; there are too many rich features of the language (garbage
collection, array-and-string bounds checking, dynamically loaded classes) for
it to ever be as fast as raw C/C++. Yes, I agree that the differences will
shrink, but they will still be with us. Furthermore, Java will never work well
on more memory-constrained systems because of the large overhead of these
features. I apologize for having the wrong ratio in how slow current Java
implementations are. It is indeed now only three times as slow as native code,
not 20 times slower as I stated.
            

            
               Second:
Many readers have pointed out how great Java is; I agree! Java makes code
easier to write, but at a cost--and that cost will always be with us.
Java should rightly be compared to Visual Basic and other tools meant for rapid
development of applications. It should not be compared with C/C++, however.
This is the comparison most Java pundits make; therefore, it was the comparison
I chose to highlight. I have not found any examples of truly complicated robust
applications written in Java. The only thing that came close was Corel's office
suite, and it was w-a-y t-o-o s-l-o-w.
            

            

               Monologue
            

            I was
under the impression that the purpose of Slate's dialogues was to allow two
well-informed people with opposing views to duke out a topic at length. Why,
then, in your Promise Keepers "Dialogue," have you chosen two Promise Keepers cheerleaders to
face off on the burning question "Are the Promise Keepers totally wonderful, or
only mostly wonderful?" The last time I checked, 45 percent of Slate voters
were taking the position that the Promise Keepers are not a healthy phenomenon.
Maybe their side should be represented in the discussion.

            -- Melanie
Dexter Emmaus, Pa.

            
               I Ain't
Gonna Work on Marlboro's Farm No More
            

            In
"Smokey and the Bandits," I agree with most of the points, but it
seems to me that Stephen Chapman ignores the fundamental dilemma of the tobacco
farmer. If he's living on 100 acres surrounded by other tobacco farmers, just
how does he change his crop? He needs more land. He can only buy it from other
tobacco farmers, thereby putting them out of business. One way or another many
tobacco farmers are forced out of their livelihood.

            -- Rod Allen Mountain
View, Calif.

            

               Religious Extremists
            

            
Congratulations to Seth Stevenson on "Extreme
Prejudice," a terrific piece on the lunacy associated with "extreme"
activities. The inordinate attention granted to these activities by the
advertising-driven media is merely another symptom of the triumph of form over
substance that characterizes today's America. Participants in this nonsense
have lost their ability to enjoy physical activities just for fun and the
satisfaction derived from a good, hard workout. They feed their resultant
emptiness with manic, life-threatening, competitive pursuits that become
substitutes for their sense of self worth. These sorts of things once seemed to
be restricted to 20-year-old boys and middle-aged dorks going through midlife
crises. Now it seems that the disease has cut a swath through a much broader
sector of the population, and no longer requires testosterone poisoning as a
condition of entry.

            -- Mark Proulx Des
Moines, Wash.

            
               New Media
1, Old Media 0
            

            All of a
sudden the New Republic and The Nation bore me to tears. They sit
on my nightstand until I chuck them. I just figured out that it's Slate's
fault. Every issue is interesting; I read every article. Your links are
wonderful. Most of my bookmarks are Slate links that I would never have thought
to look for otherwise. Thank you.

            -- Ingrid Peters
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
