
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Get Me
to the Church on Time
            

            There are several odd things
in Sanda Kaufman's letter ("E-Mail to the Editors," Oct. 16), but the most striking is her
reference to Israel as "the mother country." If, as she has said, there are 15
million Jews, how many are from Israel and how many in Israel were born there?
The area is the mother country to some people--the Palestinians who were there
before and during the invasion by Europeans and Americans. If they are
embattled, it is like the old days in the West, with the invaders surrounded in
their forts by the Indians to whom the region belonged. We now know that the
Indians were right and that the real terrorists were the invading white
populations.

            However,
the main questions are mixed marriage and religion. To even speak of "mixed
marriage" reveals a certain racism. There is no such thing as a "mixed
marriage," because there is only one human race. A mixed marriage would be with
a dog, or a sheep, or some other species. And as for religions, in our day and
age they should be forgotten except as interesting historical artifacts. The
sooner we are done with all these superstitions, including Judaism, the better
off mankind will be. Why do some people still think we should follow the
ignorant ideas of mostly illiterate sheepherders who lived 2,000 or more years
ago?

            -- Joss Randall
            

            
               Your
Point is Moooooooooooot
            

            In the article "Hamburger Hyper," David
Mastio suggests that Hudson Foods is not at fault in the E. coli spaz. And
while I would agree that the whole incident was overplayed, after finishing the
article I'm left to conclude that Mastio is blaming ... the cattle?!

            Actually, I suppose he is
suggesting that the farmers/ranchers are to blame, since it is during their
stewardship that the bacteria are contracted. Mastio says that 2 percent to 4
percent of U.S. livestock are infected. According to Mastio, "the real problem"
is that the cattle have E. coli to begin with, and that the cattle are fed too
close to slaughter time, causing their stomachs to burst during slaughter.

            Blaming this problem on the
farmer is nothing less than biting the hand that feeds. First, E. coli infects
much more than 2 percent to 4 percent of livestock. So withholding infected
cattle is much easier said than done. But, more importantly, E. coli
contamination occurs when fecal matter comes in contact with meat.
Consequently, the cause of the contamination must occur at slaughter time, not
on the farm.

            I do agree with Mastio's
general premise that Hudson is not fundamentally to blame. The fault lies with
America's appetite for abundant and inexpensive food. Americans in general,
much more than people from other countries, have lost the connection between
food and health. We eat without thought to the consequences and expect the
medical industry to drop us a pill for our ills, many of which are the result
of poor nutrition.

            We have industrialized our
food systems, and continue to do so, something which classic economics says is
not possible, since economies of scale do not easily apply to food production.
Yet we seem to desire cheap and anonymous food. Rather than our food being
handled by the farmer, it passes through the processing and distribution
system, being handled, packed, unpacked, rehandled, packed again, transported,
unpacked and displayed, and on and on. It is a good system for dealing with
deodorant, but it is simply not a good system for dealing with food.

            The
answer, as pointed out in the same Newsweek article Mastio mentions, is
for consumers to rely more on locally produced food, and to be willing to
support farmers and pay more for high quality, safe food.

            -- Jeff Bump Madison,
Wis.

            

               Resistance is Feudal
            

            Regarding Jacob Weisberg's
"Tax Evasion": Of course there is a case against the IRS--it is a
feudal institution that has been continued despite the fact that we are no
longer subjects of the king and thus ought not to be forced to pay for the
privilege of working for a living. That was the lot of serfs, who were nearly
owned by their lords and whose land was owned by their lords.

            What we
ought to do to fund the proper functions of government is to charge contract
and user fees. These would be plenty to support a government that operates
within its proper scope. The fact that you folks find all this bizarre is not
different from Europeans finding private ownership of television or telephone
companies bizarre several years ago.

            -- Tibor R.
Machan
            

            
               What's
Black and White and Read All Over?
            

            Randall Kennedy was very
smooth and subtle as he laid waste to Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom's
America in Black and White in "The Glass Is Not Half
Full." I particularly liked the way he worked the book through the
pessimist/optimist grinder.

            I was amused that the
Thernstroms start off with a few statistics to initiate their optimism in their
"Dialogue" with
Kennedy. This annoyed my liberal heart just enough to want to hear more from
them.

            I would
appreciate at some juncture that they drop the high-tea-and-gloves Victorianism
and come clean as to their political alliances. In a world of Crossfire ,
it is so obvious and boring to have interlocutors priss around their hidden
agendas, weave intellectually dishonest tapestries, and lob decontextualized
softballs back and forth.

            -- Henry Sholar
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
