
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               The Case
Against the Case Against the Case Against Microsoft
            

            In "The Case Against the Case
Against Microsoft," Rick Rule wrote: "[M]ore convenient, seamless access to
the Internet from the desktop will help people to use the Internet. It is hard
to see any anti-competitive danger that justifies denying people these
benefits."

            I
completely disagree with the implication and reasoning here. It is the purpose
of antitrust law to look to the future. Microsoft is giving away Internet
Explorer 4.0 now, but who thinks they would have acted this way if Netscape had
not existed? Would Microsoft have added such rich features if they were not
emulating Netscape? I think that industry watchers know the answer is no. If
Microsoft can eliminate their competitor's viability by flooding the market
with a free product, the long-term result for the common person will be a loss.
The whole point of this area of law is to examine such patterns. If Rule's idea
were right, then companies from other countries, which, for example, flood the
chip market with underpriced products, would simply be acting in the consumer's
interest, even if they are seeking a stranglehold on the market. The challenge
of antitrust law is to grapple with such questions.

            -- Rhett
Savage Portland, Ore.

            
               PC OS
BS
            

            I found Rick Rule's "The Case Against the Case
Against Microsoft" to be an insulting farce. There are numerous misleading
statements that, to me, demonstrate a merely superficial understanding of the
situation. Rule describes Microsoft's rise to prominence as being a result of
an economic phenomenon known as "network externalities." I believe that
although he understands the economic phenomenon, he completely ignores how
Microsoft relates to it.

            Microsoft dominates the PC
operating system market. The next paradigm shift was supposed to be the
emergence of the Internet. Microsoft is leveraging the power it has in the PC
OS market in order to minimize the damage to its core business (the Windows
software). How is this possible? Well, browsers are not full-fledged operating
systems. They were never intended to be the software that gives fundamental
directions to a PC, and I doubt that they ever will be. They still run as
another layer on top of the PC OS, the most dominant of which is Windows 95.
Rule mentions that browser software is already--or in the near future will
be--competing with the OS market, and he interprets that to mean that the OS
and the browser are the same in a functional sense.

            That is false ! The
browser software circumvents OS considerations by having a common interface no
matter what OS you're using. That was the beauty of it (and the nightmare in
Bill Gates' mind, because you don't have to be running Windows software to run
it). You could be using a DEC, a Sparc Workstation, a Mac, or a PC, and
Netscape is still Netscape. It works the same and is compatible with Netscape
running on another system. What Microsoft is trying to do is latch a separate
functionality (Internet functionality) onto its existing OS, and claim it is a
modification of the OS. How intelligent people can buy that argument is beyond
me. As far as I understood it, Windows didn't run on my Mac. Windows didn't run
on a Sparc. Yet now MS IE will run on my non-PC computer? Do the two products
sound even vaguely similar? Rick Rule, you are a fool for buying that argument.
It is this very basic misunderstanding that allows you to delve into
lawyer-speak arguments as to why MS is just a maligned giant.

            Through a
decade of good luck and leveraging its lead in the PC OS market, Microsoft has
unfairly eliminated competition. The only real test that this company has faced
in recent memory is due to the emergence of the Internet, and Microsoft is once
again trying to eliminate this threat unfairly. Shame on you for defending this
unfairness.

            -- Venkatesh
Abboy
            

            
               Shrink
Rap
            

            Larissa MacFarquhar's
"Diagnosis: Totally
Sane," on criticism of the DSM , does a nice job of answering
frequently leveled charges. However, she did neglect to mention a more
interesting controversy within the mental-health community regarding the nature
of diagnosis. The DSM is a categorical model--either ya got it or ya
don't. However, many mental-health professionals argue that a
dimensional model makes more sense and would more closely mirror the
real world. Of course, such a diagnostic system may prove to be more unwieldy
in the end and to annoy insurance companies (who hold frightening sway over all
health-care endeavors), and it is politically unlikely that such a dramatic
shift will occur any time in the near future.

            I must also take exception
with MacFarquhar's use of the term "disease" in referring to mental disorders.
By definition, a disease is an entity that has a known etiology, and as
she noted early in her article, the DSM avoids such issues, choosing to
focus almost exclusively on description. Mental disorders should not be
considered "diseases," though many may have some biological underpinnings.

            
Laypersons should realize that the DSM and its diagnostic categories are
a human construction, created in order to describe the variety of human
emotional and mental disturbances. Such a system provides mental-health
professionals--who, in addition to psychiatrists, include psychologists, social
workers, and a number of other disciplines--with 1) a common language by which
they may communicate with one another and 2) a logical starting point for
therapeutic intervention. Without some guiding framework (even a framework
troubled by more political maneuvering than MacFarquhar reported),
mental-health work would be an intellectual wilderness.

            -- Mike Tabacchi
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
