
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Scenes
From a Marriage
            

            Steven E.
Landsburg's otherwise excellent analysis in "The Marriage
Contract" omits the case where there is a third party involved, i.e., the
kids. If Tom and Gerri would each individually be better off with a divorce,
but their kid Terri would be worse off to a greater degree than the sum of the
benefits to Tom and Gerri, and may not be involved in the negotiations,
wouldn't it be safe to say that the covenant marriage is clearly superior in
maximizing total well-being?

            -- Andrew
Brecher Washington

            
               Soul
Man
            

            In "Plain Folk," an otherwise
fine review of The Anthology of American Folk Music , Luc Sante states:
"[I]t is just as surprising to find out that such bluesmen as Hutchinson and
Richard 'Rabbit' Brown were white."

            This was a
surprise to me, because I was sure that among the very few biographical details
known about Brown was the fact that he was black. I've checked several sources
and had this confirmed (and seen nothing to the contrary). There is nothing to
this effect in the liner notes. I therefore wonder what the basis for Sante's
statement may have been.

            -- Tom Freeland
            

            
               The
Cook, the Thief ...
            

            Although it's hard to
disagree with James Surowiecki's roasting of Wade Cook in "The Book on
Cook," Surowiecki's assertion that the equity stock option market is
"simply a big casino" that "contribute[s] nothing to the smooth functioning of
capital markets" is both wrong and silly. Equity options, just like commodity
and currency futures, can and often do serve a hedging function. Consider, for
example, someone who owns shares of IBM at $100 and has a $20 paper profit on
the stock. If that investor were willing to pay extra for the security of
limited downside, she could buy put options with a strike price of $98, which
would lock in her profit on the shares at $18, less whatever the options cost.
Hardly the act of a speculator in a casino.

            Equity
options themselves aren't the problem--they have legitimate uses--and without
the ability to lock in positions that equity options offer, certain folks might
not be in the equity market in the first place. People like Wade Cook are the
problem. I wish Surowiecki had made that distinction.

            -- Joe Osha New York
City

            
               To Di
For
            

            The very insinuation that
Hillary Rodham Clinton could possibly have anything to learn from Princess
Diana was intriguing enough to make me click on Margaret Carlson's "Hillary and Di."
Though I had hoped for something more interesting than spin control for women
in a man's world, I was impressed with the breathtakingly casual lack of
fairness to the first lady that created the intriguing premise.

            Carlson contends that Diana
was more successful for her causes than Hillary has been for hers, even though
Diana was clearly less committed to her charity work than to her jet-setting
lifestyle. Carlson writes that "[l]and mines made it onto the world's agenda
because Diana put them there," implying that Diana was a success, and that
"there are still 47 million people with no health insurance," implying that
Hillary is a failure.

            Apparently Carlson is
unfamiliar with the old saying about apples and oranges. All Diana had to do to
succeed, in Carlson's mind, was to get people talking. The first lady, on the
other hand, had to actually make an unprecedented change in American public
policy before she could measure up. If we use the same standard for both,
Hillary was a great success (more people talked about health care than are
talking about land mines) and, at best, the jury is still out on Diana (though
I imagine land mines will go on killing people for decades to come).

            I'm afraid
that Carlson has been infected with the same virus, epidemic since Diana's
death, that makes people recast all criteria for a good and successful life in
terms that only Diana can meet. No matter that another woman might have done
more good than Diana: She doesn't stand a chance--unless she, too, has the
public relations windfall of a spectacular and tragic death. That's quite a
legacy for the late princess.

            -- Shane
Ham Washington

            
               The
Searchers
            

            In "Where the Sidewalk
Ends," David Plotz reviewed CitySearch and several other online guides to a
variety of American cities. He commended our arts and entertainment coverage,
but concluded that "something is missing ... namely, the city." A more
comprehensive review of the online city guides might have led Plotz to the
community section of CitySearch7 San Francisco, where he might have found the city he
was looking for.

            He said
that the local guides "ignore politics," although we list and describe the work
of over 300 activist organizations in the Bay Area and 200 municipal agencies.
The charge that our guide is "limited to capsule reviews and short,
cheerleading columns about yuppiedom" is unfair. We write about, and for, an
audience that reflects the vast sociological spectrum that is part and parcel
of San Francisco life. Plotz concludes that online guides perceive of cities
solely as "place[s] of consumption," but at CitySearch7 San Francisco we can't
just gobble up our city--we have to live in it too.

            -- Marc Vogl,
politics and activism editorCitySearch7 San Francisco

            

               Contact
            

            Regarding Stephen Harrigan's
"Endless
Summer," on plot holes in Contact , please allow me to nit-pick your
nit-picking. You remark on the implausibility of Matthew McConaughey eating
Cracker Jack in the Costa Rican jungle; that whole sequence takes place in
Arecibo, Puerto Rico, which, when I last checked, was a commonwealth of the
United States. One can safely assume that they import certain rare delicacies
from the mainland.

            You wonder at how, after the
destruction of the extremely expensive machine, another one is built on
Hokkaido; the entire premise--spelled out in the film--was that two were built
at the same time, one as a backup. Nor does John Hurt's millionaire eccentric
float around on "his own custom-made Mir." He is actually on Mir, where, he
says, the Russians are happy to rent him space. Finally, you express shock that
the alien Jodie Foster meets speaks English. The whole point is that upon her
arrival they read her memories. Or didn't you find it odd that an alien
intelligence appeared to her in the form of her father?

            Now, why
didn't you complain about something really important, like how fake the
computer displays were? I mean, everyone knows that in real life computers
don't have 3-D displays and make cool noises. Those pesky movies.

            -- Michael
Tritter New York City

            
               Stephen Harrigan
replies: As to the Puerto Rico vs. Costa Rica issue, I am gravely wrong. I
apologize to the readers of Slate , the makers of Contact , the
manufacturer of Cracker Jack, and the citizens of the territories and
commonwealths of the United States.
            

            
               G.I.
Jane
            

            I feel the need to bring to
your attention a major, major flaw in "One Woman's
War," Sarah Kerr's review of G.I. Jane . Toward the end of this
review, Kerr makes one of the most absurd statements I have ever read. It left
me wondering if she is mentally competent, let alone capable of intelligently
reviewing a film.

            Here's what she said, after
disclosing that she recently saw Demi Moore on a talk show looking more
feminine, like an "innocent, wistful pixie," than her on-screen character in
G.I. Jane : "She did not seem to be a person likely to say 'suck my
dick.' It's tempting to conclude from this that she's empty at the core, trying
on different personas to hide her lack of a self."

            Hello, Ms. Kerr, are you
familiar with the term "acting"? That's what Demi Moore does for a living, and
that's what she was doing in G.I. Jane . Why should it be a surprise that
an actor appears different in real life from an on-screen persona? Do you
expect Sigourney Weaver to tote around an Uzi in real life, looking for aliens
to shoot? If you saw Patrick Stewart on a talk show, and he wasn't wearing his
Star Trek uniform, would you assume that he was "empty at the core"?

            Someone
with such a clear lack of understanding of the distinction between acting and
being should perhaps not be writing movie reviews.

            
               --James
Flood Baltimore

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
