
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Quoth
the Maven
            

            Apropos of free speech and
responsible journalism, what do we say about journalists quoting people without
checking to see if the quotation is accurate? Neither Jacob Weisberg, in
"The Conintern," nor David Brock in the "Dialogue" on right-wing journalism, checked to see if I tried to
intimidate Tucker Carlson or prevent him from criticizing Grover Norquist,
although they both condemned me for it. Had I said it, I would have condemned
myself, but I didn't say it. I had a conversation with Carlson before his
article was published (I offered to help, he asked questions and I answered
them). I said some positive things about Grover and some critical things, but I
certainly didn't suggest a "line" that Tucker should follow.

            When the nasty remarks from
Weisberg and Brock surfaced here, I was concerned that Tucker might have
misunderstood something I said and taken it as an attempt to intimidate him, so
I checked it with him, just to make sure my failing memory isn't even worse
than I think it is. He remembers it as I do.

            For the
record, the one journalist who did have the professionalism to check was Howard
Kurtz.

            -- Michael A. Ledeen
American Enterprise InstituteWashington

            
               Jacob Weisberg
replies: Tucker Carlson tells me he most definitely does not remember the
conversation as Michael Ledeen does. Carlson says he has contemporaneous typed
notes of the conversation, and that Ledeen used exactly the words Carlson
attributed to him.

            
               The
Revolution Will Not Be Criticized
            

            Slate is, of course, quite
correct in Franklin Foer's "But Is It Art Criticism?" description of "the Stalinist
aesthetics of the Weekly Standard ." How often have I, the author of
nearly 20 literary reviews for the Standard , cursed as the jackbooted
minions of editors Kristol, Podhoretz, and Barnes pounded on my door in the
dead of night, delivering the latest Politburo ukase on the proper
interpretation of 20 th -century literature.

            But though I may grumble
under my breath, I know my duty to the Revolution. Once, indeed, on the
occasion of my appointment as a contributing editor for literary matters, I was
taken, blindfolded, to John Podhoretz's secret dacha , where the Great
Leader sits at a plain pine table smoking American cigarettes and planning the
glorious overthrow of the reactionaries at the New Republic and New
York Review of Books .

            "Comrade," he said to me,
"our Five Year Plan for the People's Aesthetics proceeds on schedule. We have
reclaimed as revolutionary heroes George Orwell and Lionel Trilling. We have
exposed the counterrevolutionary machinations of Richard Ford and Amy Tan. But
still Wendy Wasserstein eludes us. The Revolution can never be secure until all
know her crimes."

            "Yes,
Comrade Leader," I replied, and every writer for the Standard has since
devoted every waking hour to this glorious task. Your June 28 report on our
success is gratefully received.

            -- J. Bottum
               First
Things New York City

            
               Standard
Deviation
            

            The Weekly Standard
is Stalinist for preferring a conservative view of the world in Franklin Foer's
"But Is It Art
Criticism?" The Republicans are the Comintern for trying to have some party
discipline in Jacob Weisberg's "The
Conintern."

            First, as Orwell first
discussed, such use makes the terms meaningless. If the Weekly Standard
is Stalinist, then what word is used for describing the government of the
Soviet Union during the 1930s?

            Second, it shows a shrill
desperation on the part of some reviewers. One could say that the Weekly
Standard is narrow-minded, or parochial, or old-fashioned, or many other
things. (I myself find their reviews helpful, if a tad predictable.) To call it
"Stalinist" is simply to smear it, and to smear a whole school of thought. The
Republicans may be the Stupid Party, but surely every organization is entitled
to seek certain goals and to expect its members to pursue those goals.

            Third, the conservatives and
anti-Communist liberals of the '30s--and the '40s and '50s--were indeed
combating real, literal Stalinists. The anti-Communists were indeed in a
struggle with the Comintern.

            To blur
those distinctions is to distort history far more than a mildly conservative
magazine, or a lukewarm "conservative" party, is likely to do. It also lowers
the standards of literacy and fairness and open-mindedness Slate seems to
aspire to.

            -- James E.
Tynen Pittsburgh

            

               Pro-Magnon
            

            Seth Stevenson's excellent
"Apologies" covered
most of the big ones, from Tyson to the aborigines.

            I am
disappointed that he missed perhaps the granddaddy of them all, one that once
again broke into the front pages this last week. I refer to the apology that
the human race owes the Neanderthals, whom we apparently wiped the European
floor with around 100,000 years ago.

            -- Arkie Koehl San
Francisco

            
               Children
of the Horn
            

            I don't
normally do this sort of thing, but I am concerned by your summary, in David
Plotz's "In Other
Magazines," of my U.S. News piece on attachment disorder. To
characterize it as being about "[o]utwardly normal" children who are
"anti-social monsters" is to miss a central question raised by the piece, which
is whether adopted children are diagnosed with attachment disorder
indiscriminately by people who often don't know what they're doing. It is to
further miss the concern that the language these therapists use (and you
borrow) is dangerously extreme.

            
               --Miriam
Horn
               U.S. News & World Report New York City

            
               Land of
the (Sluggishly) Rising Sun
            

            Jodie T. Allen's "NAFTA Math" is
right on, except when she remarks that Japan "continues to enjoy" much higher
growth than the United States. Japanese growth was considerably below that of
the United States in 1993-94, and about the same in 1995. It's true that Japan
grew faster last year as it emerged from recession, but in 1997 it looks as if
the United States will again post faster growth.

            Japan's
tendency to poor-mouth its economy isn't entirely a plot to divert attention
from its trade surplus--there's actually an element of truth to it.

            -- Peter LandersFar
Eastern Economic Review Tokyo

            
               We Hold
These Truths
            

            John Patrick Diggins is
living in a world of phantoms when he uses the myth of Lincoln as a hammer to
smash the myth of Thomas Jefferson's record on individual liberty and civil
rights in "Nothing to Declare," his review of Pauline Maier's American
Scripture .

            By now we all know that
Jefferson was a slaveholder, and that he protected slavery as an institution in
order to include the South in the revolution against England and the formation
of the United States. We also know that he viewed blacks as inherently inferior
to whites, and advocated their return to Africa. To call these views racist is
fair enough in our day and age, but it hardly takes into account the liberal
moderation by which Jefferson would have been judged on these issues in his own
time. To actually see blacks as one's literal equal was one of the rarest of
virtues in his time. I don't know of many, or perhaps any, whites who advocated
such a view. Perhaps Sally Hemings was as close as Jefferson dared to come on
this issue.

            Diggins forgets, in his
discompassionate and deluded rewriting of history, that Lincoln was no NAACP
poster boy himself. He publicly declared on many occasions that blacks would
never be the functional equals of whites in intelligence, ability, creativity,
or social and economic skill, but that they must nevertheless be given their
freedom and some basic legal rights. He was never an advocate of integration of
the races, and felt that they would always be separate and unequal as a matter
of society. He also at times sympathized with the notion of American blacks
returning to Africa. So how, exactly, does Diggins find Lincoln to be such a
sterling moral example, fit to shame Jefferson?

            Jefferson
made a huge leap forward in human and civil rights merely by so powerfully
advocating them as a legal basis for political agreements between men. It was a
huge step forward, but neither perfect in conception or in deed, as the
preservation of slavery proves. Lincoln's accomplishment was another huge step
forward, but likewise imperfect. He freed the slaves, but had no intention of
making them equal. Yet the direction of both men is clear and unmistakable, and
was brought to an even higher plane of vision and deed by Martin Luther King
Jr. and many others in the modern civil rights movement. To condemn Jefferson
for his failings, you must also condemn Lincoln, but to condemn both is to
throw out the progressive historic tradition by which the present civil rights
movement gains its legitimacy. How will we be judged in 100 or 200 years, when
I would hope our ideals and deeds have advanced beyond their present poor
state? I would hope more compassionately and with greater understanding of the
unique fabric of our times, and the humility to appreciate the giant steps made
by those in the past, than such liberal mythologists as Diggins.

            -- Conrad
Goehausen San Rafael, Calif.

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
