
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               The
Pondering Jew
            

            In his
"Dialogue"
with Eric Liu, Elliott Abrams writes, "For any serious Jew, 'being Jewish'
isn't an ethnic or 'ethnocultural' identity at all, it's a religion." I believe
this to be a demonstrably false premise. Of all the major religions, Judaism is
the only one which insists upon a genetic test, i.e., that anyone whose mother
is Jewish is automatically a Jew, and for some sects that the mother of the
presumptive must be Jewish. Undeniably, membership in the Jewish community has
been, in large part, defined by one's genes. Thus, it seems to me that the deep
concern about the population of world Jewry is first and foremost a fear that
one's gene pool might disappear, and has very little to do with religion. That
atheistic Jews very often have the same fear lends credence to this point. The
history of the 20 th century certainly justifies this fear, but the
fact that even Liu accepts Abrams' false premise shows how confused many are on
this subject.

            -- Peter Thom
            

            
               Snide
Order
            

            If Scott Shuger is going to
include snide comments in parentheses in "Today's Papers,"
shouldn't that be reflected in the name of the section? For example: "Today's
Papers (and our snide comments)." I love the comments, and they expose the
major media's frequent indulgence in propaganda under the pretext of reporting
news. But if part of your summarizing is commenting on the occasional lapse in
the journalistic ethics of those you are summarizing, then isn't it unethical
of 
                  Slate
                not to mention that your summaries are
editorialized?

            I have been a reader of

                  Slate
                since its inception, and I usually find the articles and
other pieces:

            highly informative

            well thought-out and
articulated

            very funny

            highly pretentious

            two or more of the above.

            Keep up
the good work.

            -- Rangarathnam
Gopu Redmond, Wash.

            
               The
Strange Case of Michael Isikoff
            

            Michael
Isikoff's review of Christopher Ruddy's Vincent Foster book ("The Strange Case of
Christopher Ruddy") is very revealing--namely that Isikoff wrote the review
without reading the book. Laughable.

            -- Michael
Lamont Eugene, Ore.

            
               Die
'Soft
            

            Whenever
you write an article about your parent company or a firm that has a financial
stake in your operation, I think you should have the courtesy to 1) keep your
comments neutral and 2) make an explicit reference to the connection. I find it
a bit strange that you seem so comfortable pronouncing dismissively on
Microsoft's legal battles.

            -- Graeme
McIntyre
            

            
               The
Thumb of all Fears
            

            In his "E-Mail to the Editors,"
Roger Ebert wrote, "Just remember: If it weren't for the Mac, there wouldn't
be any Windows for 
                  Slate
                Explorer to run on.
Ingrates!"

            I believe
it was Xerox who pioneered the concept and developed the technology. I don't
hear too many acknowledgments from the folks at Mac. The accolades go to those
who make the technology accessible.

            -- Ron Leung
            

            
               Bursting
the Biobabble Bubble
            

            Paul Krugman's critique of
bionomics ("The Power
of Biobabble") may be justified. In my humble opinion, however, it does a
disservice to the advancement of economic science, which I believe should move
away from excessive focus on the concepts of scarcity, trade, and money that
the founding fathers worked with. Instead, recognize man as a biological
entity, and recognize economic processes and phenomena as those resulting from
man's interaction with the environment.

            This would lead, for
instance, to closer attention to relationships between savings and investment
and the human life cycle (rather than abstract analysis on the incentives to
defer current consumption). It would also look at many artifacts such as
mansions, cathedrals, etc., as elements in the competitive propagation of genes
to future generations through better nesting, clan identification, etc.

            This kind
of analysis is probably much more called for than evolution. There is a lot
more to learn about current economic phenomena before exploring evolution,
which in a biological context is long-term. Also, it is likely this kind of
analysis will not support the same free-market agenda that bionomics pursues,
but then the purpose of sound science is the search for the truth, not the
support of a pre-defined agenda.

            -- Paul Kailor
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
