
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Full of
Boulogne
            

            The current installment of
the e-mail novel "Reply All" speaks of the Bois de Boulogne as "north of Paris." With
other former inhabitants of the Boulevard Suchet, which runs along the Bois, I
have always walked west into the Bois, which lies on the western edge of the
city.

            Please
pass this correction on to the author of the segment, along with my
appreciation for the writing that is being done in this intriguing format.

            -- Kevin A.
Demetroff Fort Wayne, Ind.

            
               Miffed in
Little Rock
            

            Mark Hosenball's dissection
of Ambrose Evans-Pierce's brand of "journalism" ("What Ambrose
Knows") was accurate--to a point. Evans-Pierce's articles are full of
hooey, though sickeningly fascinating to read. But Hosenball's references to
Arkansas as "Dogpatch" and a place with a political culture akin to Honduras or
Haiti was beyond the pale and was just poor writing. What research determined
that our law enforcement is "corrupt and inefficient"? For a man so critical of
Evans-Pierce's bizarre stories about deep, dark Arkansas, how could he fall
into the same fool's trap of "snobbery or sloth" he accuses Evans-Pierce of in
his writing?

            Arkansas
is not a Jurassic Park of politics, law enforcement, or culture--a fact
that Hosenball would be aware of if he had spent any time in this state or done
any additional research for his article. We are no more incestuous or
interconnected than New York or Chicago. For a poor Southern state, Arkansas
has a proud heritage of progressive politics running from Senate Majority
Leader Joe T. Robinson; to the first elected female senator, Hattie Caraway, in
the 1930s; to Senators J. William Fulbright, David Pryor, and Dale Bumpers;
through Governor and President Clinton. I would trade our crime rate and our
quality of life with almost any other place in our nation, as would the
thousands of émigrés we get every year. Though we have always been poor in our
natural resources, we are rich in the quality of people that we produce. I
would expect a student of American politics to be aware of this fact.
Hosenball's tone of unsubstantiated snobbery toward my state, though attacking
a figure I hold in humorous contempt, is itself the "journalism of fools."

            -- Collins Devon
Cockrell Little Rock, Ark.

            
               
                  Slate received
several letters mourning the end of Mark Alan Stamaty's cartoon series
"Doodlennium":
            

            

               Doodlehead
            

            I just wanted to thank you
for allowing Mark Alan Stamaty a forum for his hilarious--and often
insightful--cartoon about a (slightly) warped world. While it challenged
Twin Peaks in obscure plot turns, it was ever entertaining, and the
first spot I'd stop at on your site. OK, OK, I get the magazine really
for the articles, but I always look at the pictures first.

            While I
hope there's a follow-up planned, I realize the wise artist knows when to walk
away. (While the audience is clapping for more.) Thanks again for enduring what
must have been a trying cartoon to publish.

            -- Patrick
O'Brien
            

            
               Crying
Fowl
            

            The
Hendroids won???!!!! What kind of postmodernist crap is this? There'd better be
a sequel!!!!

            -- Robert
Consoli
            

            
               How
Ironic
            

            

               
                  Slate
                is a fine magazine, except for a bit of overwriting that's
become annoyingly frequent. I'm referring to "paradox," which is used wrongly
in three separate instances in your Dec. 13 issue. The word serves well in
describing the curious concept of a logical impossibility. ("This sentence is
false.") The word looks pretentious and silly, however, when it is used as a
synonym for "conflict," "irony," or "contradiction."

            -- Martha
Marone Lake Oswego, Ore.

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
