
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               I Kept
My Promise, Don't Keep Your Distance
            

            Re: "Dialogue" on the Promise Keepers, between Marci McDonald and Ron
Stodghill.

            Could you
really not find a single writer who has a problem with the Promise Keepers? Not
one with any qualms, or even complicated questions about a right-wing-funded
mass organization of fundamentalist Christian men who want to wear the pants at
home? Next time, instead of hiring two bored journalists to pooh-pooh
feminists, how about one bored journalist and one person who actually believes
that equality for women is a meaningful concept. Although you wouldn't know it
from the PK publicity mill, there are quite a few of us out here.

            -- Katha Pollitt New
York City

            
               Gimme
Shelter
            

            The "examples" included in
Robert McIntyre's "Tax Shelters: The Video Game" incorporate some highly dubious
rate-of-return calculations. Anybody with a fundamental understanding of
finance can tell you that return analysis in the absence of accompanying risk
analysis is incomplete. That's why investing in stocks (usually) pays better
than buying T bills--one outcome includes an element of unpredictability, while
the other is relatively certain.

            McIntyre, however, presents
examples in which leveraged buying of equities generates large rates of return,
and then proceeds to throw those numbers into his analysis without any
discussion of the leverage and resultant risk involved. That's preposterous--he
may as well have used an example with $200,000 in gambling winnings from Vegas.
The point is that it's the degree of leverage, not the tax shelters, generating
the large and highly volatile rates of return in McIntyre's examples.

            In reality, it's practically
impossible to buy entirely on margin anyway, which is what McIntyre is
describing--you'd need to deposit additional funds with your broker, which
would then be included in any rate-of-return calculation. I don't dispute the
fact that tax shelters affect rates of return, but McIntyre's decision to use
an implausible example in order to come up with some big return numbers
(ooh--evil tax shelters!) reveals his own strong bias toward income
redistribution.

            

               
                  Slate
                could have put someone with a reasonable grasp of
elementary finance and a balanced viewpoint in charge of writing a tax piece.
Too bad it chose to use McIntyre instead.

            -- Joseph Osha New
York City

            
               Noble
Nobels?
            

            Todd Porter, in his article
"Ph.D., Model
Thyself," draws his main conclusion by misunderstanding a basic tenet of
economic theory. His article describes profit maximization as if it were the
central behavioral assumption of economics. It isn't. Utility maximization is.
While they sound similar, the two principles are extremely different. A Profit
Maximizer maximizes the amount of money it has. A Utility Maximizer wants to
acquire many things, including cash, but also such things as trips to the
beach, time to watch TV, adorable grandkids, and (probably most important in
this case) professional prestige.

            Porter
tries to both make the point that profit maximization doesn't explain all human
behavior (of course it doesn't, and no economist thinks it does), and that the
Nobel Prize-winning economists were not greedy enough for Porter's own tastes.
Things would be simpler if only Black, Scholes, and Merton had been in it for
the money: "plain old greed should be adequate to explain nearly everything in
finance, because finance is about making money." OK. But associate professors
studying financial markets aren't in them, only theorizing about them. Their
choice of career should have been the first sign that they have interest in
things other than money. In which case, aiming for a Nobel Prize is the kind of
behavior any good economist would expect.

            -- Doug
Smith Cambridge, Mass.

            
               The
Week/The Shill?
            

            No doubt I
am not alone in wondering if anyone from 
                  Slate
               's ownership talked
to William Saletan before releasing "The Week/The Spin," which covered the Justice Department's
antitrust actions aimed at Microsoft. Have we a conflict of interest here? How
much of the evidence against Microsoft (anecdotal or otherwise) that is
reported in the papers won't make it into any of the stories in

                  Slate
               ? Is online self-censorship any different from the
old-fashioned print variety? How will we know if these suspicions are
unfounded?

            
               --Bob
Barde Berkeley, Calif.

            

               Nattering Naders of Negativity
            

            There must be something
soothing and redemptive about publishing Ralph Nader's "The Microsoft Menace"
shortly after getting slammed in InfoWeek for slamming Java. Just wish
it didn't remind me of public radio's recurrent flirtation with conservative
commentators whenever Congress reconsiders its funding.

            That's
the problem with perceptions. One seemingly sponsor-serving article, and any
number of future self-flagellations are written off by a cynical, jaded public.
Where do these people get their diet of opinion, anyway?

            -- Paul
Nicolette Pemberton, N.J.

            
               Nader
Redux
            

            In the "Links" section
following Ralph Nader's piece ("The Microsoft Menace") on why he is concerned about
Microsoft's business practices, you mention how one might meet "other Microsoft
bashers" at his Nov. 13-14 conference in Washington. I find this not-so-subtle
characterization of Nader as just another "Microsoft basher" off base.

            Whether you agree with him or
not, Nader has been a constant advocate for the American consumer for more than
30 years now, well before Microsoft came into existence. While some would love
to attribute his current courageous (albeit quixotic) stance as some kind of
personal vendetta against Microsoft, the diversity of his actions in the past
make it plain that his concerns lie with the anti-competitive and monopolistic
practices of this or any other company, and not with the company itself (or
Bill Gates).

            I believe
Nader has very good reasons why we should all be concerned about Microsoft's
attempts to corner the future of computing, and to belittle him with the
"Microsoft basher" label is inappropriate.

            -- Peter Benson
Robbinsdale, Minn.

            
               Yet More
Nader
            

            Microsoft does engage in
some anti-competitive practices, such as not allowing resellers to disclose
contract terms, and the Department of Justice is doing a fair job of policing
such activity. But Microsoft bashers such as James Love and Ralph Nader
("The Microsoft
Menace") just don't get it. Any honest observer must ask a fundamental
question: What if the software business is a natural monopoly?

            A natural monopoly means
that due to the nature of the product and market, the industry will be
dominated by a single player. Roll the clock back 15 years and start over. IBM
may dominate the market with OS/2; Macintosh with the Mac OS; even a Novell or
a Unix vendor could come out on top. But any honest observer must ask the
question: Is the market structured so that one company is likely to have a huge
market share? Economics tells us most likely, yes.

            On the supply side, for any
application, software--unlike industrial goods--is subject to "increasing
returns." This simply means that the costs of producing an application always
go down as the number sold goes up. Intuitively, consider a market of 100
buyers evenly shared between Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, and AmiPro. Each
company must spread out its costs over 33 buyers. If AmiPro dropped out of the
market, then Word and WordPerfect could spread their costs out over 50 buyers,
and if WordPerfect dropped out, then Word can spread its costs out over all 100
buyers. This result obtains because the cost of producing another unit of
software is, for all practical purposes, zero. This doesn't necessarily mean
that costs will go down--the extra costs may be taken up by hiring more
programmers, doing basic research, or even (gasp) in extra profits. But the
point is that Microsoft can get a large market share without engaging in any
wrongful behavior. Indeed its actions are generally consistent with consumers
doing better.

            On the demand side, software
is subject to "positive network externalities." This means that users get an
extra benefit when others are using the same software. For many years, I used
AmiPro because I liked the interface and features better, but I eventually gave
it up and switched to MS Word. Why? Because all my colleagues were using MS
Word, and messily converting files back and forth just never worked that well.
Many people think that there is something illegitimate about this type of cost,
but remember, this is a real cost. As consumers, we may not be better off with
only one word processor that uses a single file format. But then again, we may
be, and it would seem the marketplace has rendered some sort of decision.

            These
considerations should give pause to those attacking Microsoft. Taking down
Microsoft may simply mean exchanging one dominant firm with another. The only
other intellectually honest approach is to advocate wholesale government
regulation, a strategy that most agree would be a spectacular failure (and is a
whole 'nother story).

            -- Brian McDaniel
executive editor, Harvard Journal of Law and Technology Cambridge,
Mass.

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
