
   
   
      
         
            Gates Crashing

            
               Subject: Don't
Condescend to the WTO Protesters

            
               Re: "" (Dec. 1)

            
               From: 
               Richard Perry
            

            
               Date: Wed Dec 1

            It's not just interesting that the major media
coverage of WTO/Seattle, this piece included, has been dismissive and
condescending--it's telling. The New York Times ' front-page piece, which
Today's Papers quotes, refers to the protesters' "sentiments"; the smug
"Brainless in Seattle" headline in "TP" betrays a similar willful
ostrich-pose.

            The protesters' main victory lies in making the WTO
front-page news in the first place. The WTO is a non-democratic (unless
you want to stretch the definition of "democratic" to absurd proportions)
organization with great power to affect, well, everyone . It is
symptomatic of the decay of accountability and legitimacy in ostensibly
democratic, people-centered government.

            This is a major issue, and it's not going to get
play if a few loud activists don't make noise and force corporate media to at
least take note, even as they reel out the tired Friedman-esque line that a
global economy is both inevitable and the best of all possible worlds, so get
used to it, take your medicine, shut up and get back to work. Guys in black
masks smashing Starbucks windows make easy targets, sure. It's a lot harder to
actually look beneath the surface and think through the present and potential
effects of the incredibly complex--and in many ways dangerous--phenomenon of
globalization.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject: Don't Pick
on Skip Gates

            
               Re: "" (Dec. 1)

            
               From: 
               Gary Imhoff
            

            
               Date: Wed Dec 1

            Yes and no to both Gerald Early's and David
Nicolson's reviews. Yes, the book as a whole is insufferably smug (with Cornel
West at the head of the smirking line) and politically correct. Yes, its
choices are trendy and will date it badly and quickly. In this, it is very much
like another Microsoft product, the new Encarta Dictionary . The
dictionary and its style guide would make Mrs. Grundy proud. They cite as
"objectionable" three times as many words as any other dictionary, damning
every word that any small political group anywhere has ever criticized. (The
style guide suggests not using "homosexual," although it gives no usable
alternative; it labels "cancer patient" as offensive, and recommends "patient
with cancer" as the proper phrasing.)

            However, the personal criticism of Henry Louis
Gates is, in my opinion, overdone. Gates wants to, and has, succeeded in his
profession. That isn't a bad thing. He has done so by hard work, by doing a lot
of worthy editing and literary criticism. He wants to read and know everything,
much like Diderot, to whom Early compares him. That's admirable, not a
weakness. Sheath the claws.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject:
Plagiarized Obits

            
               Re: "" (Nov.
23)

            
               From: 
               Ken Hobson
            

            
               Date: Mon Nov
29

            Regarding Scott Shuger's comment on plagiarized
New York Times obituaries: When I worked for the New Bedford Standard
Times in 1964 it was common to lift obits from the Providence
Journal word for word.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject: Re:
Plagiarized Obits

            
               Re: "" (Nov.
23)

            
               From: 
               Richard Riley
            

            
               Date: Mon Nov
29

            Re: the Washington Post and New York
Times obituaries of the same person containing an identical paragraph:
Doesn't that probably just mean that the paragraph came from a wire service
that both papers subscribe to (probably the Associated Press)? If so, that's
not plagiarism--while I don't know this, my guess is that agreements between
newspapers and the AP or other wire services let the papers do pretty much
whatever they want with the wire copy. The episode involving a Baltimore
Sun music critic, on the other hand, does sound more like plagiarism, so I
don't see that the cases are alike.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject: How Big Is
the Windows Source Code? Don't Ask Microsoft

            
               Re: ""

            
               From: 
               dan kloke
            

            
               Date: Wed Dec 1

            Aaaargh! Explainer was humming along just great,
hitting the nails on the head, until the last sentence: "And a browser's source
code is only a fraction of the size of that of an operating system."

            Ewww. That is only true if you accept the Microsoft
premise that welding a graphical user interface (GUI) onto an operating system
leaves you with a bigger, better operating system (OS)--a proposal which is
not universally accepted by the computer programming community at large.
A browser's source is small because it uses the functions of the GUI. In
UNIX/Linux, the OS isn't tightly bound to a GUI, hence Linux's greater
configurability for specific tasks, as well as its potential for more than one
GUI. This is the real problem with Windows: It's much more than an operating
system, it's an OS (DOS or NT) inextricably meshed with a GUI (MS-Windows).
Most of the "size" of the Windows basic installation software are details for
add-on services to the OS, many of which go unused.

            An OS is not a GUI, and a GUI is not an OS, even
when their coding is intertwined. The size of the OS, in the context of code
(source or object), is the size essential to execute files. For Windows, that
amounts to a DOS layer (the minimum required for complete, if not pretty,
control), about 400k of object code on disk. In Linux, it's a kernel with
enough support to maintain a command console, something around 120k. (Remember:
Both of these OS's can boot from floppies!)

            Browsers, as mentioned, don't have to be very big
either if they have a rich set of GUI features to draw from. It's the dressy
Windows GUI that takes up all the space on your disk. Yes you have it, yes you
installed it "with" the OS--but the GUI isn't the OS! Even at Microsoft, the
GUI and the OS are coded by separate, different teams of programmers.

            Deftly and flawlessly unraveling the (deliberately
convoluted) intricacies of the Microsoft situation may be too much for the
valiant 
                  Slate
                crew, already caught in the middle (twixt truth and
fealty) as they are. The OS/GUI distinction is among those at the core of the
government's antitrust case. I hate to be nit-picky, but this distinction is
the nit ! If you don't get how important the distinction is, would you at
least credit the vehemence with which the computer software community argues
this issue? The article's closing sentence manages to gloss it right over.

            (To reply, click here .)

         
      
   
