
   
   
      
         
            No. 347: "Chillin' "

            
               Complete this
expression of amazement from Dr. Francis Collins of the National Institutes of
Health, "I don't often pick up a scientific paper and find myself getting
chills, as I did when I saw _______________."
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to news_quiz@hotmail.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 346)--"Solid Goldberg":
            

            

               
                  While introducing President Clinton at a Beverly Hills dinner
Tuesday, Whoopi Goldberg recalled a disturbing question one of her
granddaughters recently asked. "This was kind of chilling, because it wasn't
even like I could say, 'No, no, it's not going to happen.' " What was the
question?
               
            

            "Hey,
Grandma, how the fuck did you fool Mike Nichols so badly?"-- Larry
Amoros
            

            "Are
you going to let Andy Dick baby-sit for us again?"-- Adam Bonin
            

            "Are
rampaging anarchists ever going to ransack our neighborhood
Starbucks?"-- Peter Carlin
            

            "Could
Bruce Vilanch write even more musical numbers into next year's
Oscars?"-- Matt Sullivan ( Tim Carvell and Larry Amoros had
similar answers.)

            
"Gramma, the kids at school say that one day, the Academy of Motion Picture
Arts and Sciences is going to come to your home and demand the return of the
Oscar (TM) you won for Ghost , citing the poor quality of your
performances in Eddie , The Associate , Boys on the Side
and, to be perfectly honest here, Ghost . Is that true?"-- Tim
Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Retribution in Lieu of an Actual Wrap-Up
            

            Because

                  Slate
               's worthless e-mail provider is displaying its
characteristic incompetence (surely not treachery--that would suggest paranoia
on my part and determination and skill on theirs--not likely), I received no
reader responses to today's quiz, except a few that slipped through enemy
lines, and those using a back channel I'd rather not discuss. (I can
say that my neighbors are pretty annoyed at the pebbles inadvertently flung at
their windows.) However, I have been given the usual meaningless reassurances
that this problem will be corrected shortly. Complaints can be sent directly to
Critical Path. But not by e-mail.

            
               Gold Rush to
Judgment Answer
            

            The granddaughter asked if she might get killed at
school.

            Presumably this was an inquiry into the
possibilities of gun violence and not a request for the sweet release that
death can bring from irksome relatives.

            Whoopi told this moving personal anecdote at an
event marking the sixth anniversary of the Brady Bill. In his after-dinner
remarks, President Clinton said: "Screw it. Go on and shoot each other if you
want to. What the hell do I care? I'm a lame duck. With a big butt." No, no, of
course he didn't. That's just the rum cake talking. If there was rum cake. How
should I know? I wasn't there. Unlike Dweezil Zappa and Gregory Peck. What the
president said was, "No one believes America is as safe as it should be or can
be. Or as tidy, I am not adding."

            "We should not ... be
speechless when our children say, 'Am I going to make it to Christmas?' " said
Goldberg. "We should give them an honest answer: not if you keep asking these
phony-baloney movie-of-the-week questions," she untidily failed to add.

            
               Ought To Biography
Extra
            

            Participants were asked
for the title of a much needed but unwritten autobiography of any national
political figure.

            "Seven Years in
Tibetia , by George W. Bush."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "I've Finally Made Up
My Mind To Run , by Mario Cuomo."--David Salzman
            

            "George W.'s Yes, I
Can: My Dad Said! "-- Larry Amoros
            

            "Boris Yeltsin's The
Good Old Days , a memoir of the 3.7 ailment-free afternoons."-- Mary
Fee
            

            "Teddy Kennedy's
Shoulda, Woulda, Coulda ."-- Jennifer Rubin
            

            
"Tuesdays With Malcolm (The Rest of the Week With Mom, Because Dad Was off
Hanging Out With His 'Motorcycle Club') , by Steve Forbes."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            
               Adam Bonin's David
Foster Wallace collection
            

            
               Infinite Jest , by
Pat Buchanan

            
               Brief Interviews With
Hideous Men , by Ken Starr

            
               Girl With Curious
Hair , by Hillary Clinton

            
               The Broom of the
System , by Alan Greenspan

            
               A
Supposedly Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again , by William J. Clinton

            Click
for more books.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Exasperation with Critical Path,

                  Slate
               's worthless e-mail provider.

         
      
   
