
   
   
      
         
            A Novel Predicament

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               An old and trusted friend, "Jane," who lives in
Los Angeles and works in television suggested I send her the manuscript of a
novel I wrote because she had a friend who knows an agent who was looking for
works by women about women. I sent the manuscript and waited for a response.
Jane reported to me that her friend loved the book. Months passed without
further information. This week, Jane told me that the woman she gave my book to
turns out to be a psycho, and she doubts whether this woman even had an agent
in mind when she requested my manuscript. She apparently had a crush on Jane,
who says she has since cut off all contact with her.
            

            
               My problem is that I
want my manuscript back, and while Jane apologized profusely for the way things
went, she refuses to retrieve it for me, saying that the woman would
misconstrue this as an overture. I hesitate to contact the woman myself,
because I don't want to get in the middle of a weird situation. I also get the
impression that Jane thinks that her being upset supersedes any responsibility
she has for getting my book back.
            

            

               --Bruised and Confused in the Big Apple
            

            Dear Bruise,

            Guess what? You've been
had. Ditto for Jane. As for getting your manuscript back, it's pretty clear
that Jane isn't going to ask, and you don't want to, so let's try Prudie's
standby: a lawyer letter. Surely you have a friend who is an attorney who would
write a formal letter to Psycho With a Crush requesting the return of the
manuscript. That way, Psycho WAC will not have any information about how to
reach you, merely the address of a law firm. Even nut cases (usually) pay
attention to letters from lawyers. This is your best shot. Whether you choose
to continue your friendship with Jane or not is another issue, but Prudie
wonders why you would let your one and only copy of a manuscript out of your
hands. Let's hope this experience has advanced your education from Psycho to
Kinko.

            
--Prudie, hopefully

            
               
                  Dear
Pru,
               
            

            
               This is kind of a
different problem from what I've seen in your column, but here goes: I am not
yet 30 and continue to move up in my rather buttoned-up company, where most of
the male executives are married to, shall we say, plain women. The girl I am
seeing now, like the one before her, has--and this isn't politically correct--a
major pair of hooters. You might say this is my "type." She is very well
spoken, has a good job, and is not a bimbo by any stretch of the imagination.
She just has these ... well, anyway, they're attention-getting. What is the
best way to deal with this?
            

            

               --Junior Exec
            

            Dear Junior,

            You and your breasted
American girlfriend--to be politically correct--need not feel there is anything
wrong with her centerfold figure. Prudie would suggest, however, since you are
on your way up the corporate ladder in a "buttoned-up industry" that your
ladyfriend not dress them up so that undue attention is directed their way.
Conservative clothing at business-related functions ought to put you both at
ease.

            
--Prudie, modestly

            

               
                  Prudie,
               
            

            
               When a person, in
the process of seeking your advice, reveals rather personal foibles, should you
not be alerted to the probability that such a person is quite apt to be a
whacko, weirdo, misfit, or plain loser? Then again, such a person could be a
bright Yale student who is demonstrably adept at putting on advice columnists.
I guess my question really is: How can you tell whether a letter is sincere or
fraudulent?
            

            

               --R.E.L., Shelbume, Vt.
            

            Dear R.E.,

            You can't tell, though
some things have the ring of truth, and others don't. Let's call it instinct.
Prudie feels sure you would agree that whackos, weirdoes, misfits, or losers
have need of advice--as do bright Yale students. So what's the problem?

            
--Prudie, problematically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I need to address
your answer to the "grocery grazer" question. "" should have spoken to
the store manager about the stealing. We are trained to handle cases of this
sort in the following way: We would put a person within sight of the customer
who's stealing without actually confronting her. If she hesitates for anything,
we would then ask her if she needed any help ... again, letting her know she is
being watched without accusing her of anything. Also, the security cameras
would be "watching" the whole time, as well. This procedure would be repeated
whenever she is in the store. This is designed to make her a little
uncomfortable about stealing from us while at the same time keeping a paying
customer in the store. We cannot take any action without seeing the stealing
ourselves. If we didn't do it this way, we would have more lawsuits than we
could handle--and lose a bunch of customers besides. Neither of these things is
good for business. Thank you for listening to me.
            

            
               --Sincerely,
            

            

               W.D.W.
            

            Dear W.D.,

            Prudie and countless
readers who had something to say about this thank you for the information about
how store people want to deal with this problem. Many people wrote to say they
believe the woman should have been reported, and a few pointed out the hygiene
aspect: that scoops are there for a reason--hands carry germs. If enough
customers become familiar with the way stores deal with grocery grazers,
perhaps these pilferers can be "encouraged" to cut it out.

            --Prudie, gratefully

         
      
   
