
   
   
      
         
            The Season for Giving

            Now
that the bustle of the holiday season is officially underway, it appears that
the residents of Tabloidland have been getting ... busy, if you know what we
mean. There's been a serious explosion of ardor in the pages of the tabs, with
celebrities of all stripes doing their very best bunny rabbit imitations.

            
Tabloid staple Celine Dion, for one, "plans to make love like there's no
tomorrow," according to the National Enquirer . With her
husband-manager Rene Angelil's cancer in remission, Dion is taking a
much-needed career hiatus to focus on getting pregnant--a plan that supposedly
includes spending time "puttering around the kitchen because it makes her feel
maternal." Although the Enquirer concedes that Angelil's treatment may
have affected his fertility, a "joyful" Dion says she'll give it the old
college try: "Rene and I are lovers like we've never been before, and we plan
to spend all our free time in bed!" she's quoted as saying.

            Also
reportedly spending a lot of free time in bed is "sassy" Latin talk show queen
Cristina Saralegui. The Globe says that Saralegui's second husband,
musician Marcos Avila, is "an adventurer in love" who "awaken[ed] her to the
joys of sex." Saralegui waxes poetic about her husband's "marvelously sensual
and virile" nature and is particularly wowed by his toe-sucking prowess. "For a
woman who grew up in a convent school to have someone suck your toes is an
amazing sexual experience," Saralegui explains. (Keeping Tabs didn't go to
convent school, but we'll take her word for it.) And the picture of domestic
bliss she paints? Positively charming. "When we get home, exhausted from
taping, once I take off my false eyelashes and we crawl into bed, Marcos says,
'Give me some lovin'--and I do!"

            Is
there something in the water? The National Enquirer reports that as
Renée Zellweger and Jim Carrey checked in for a romantic weekend at the
Stonepine Resort in Carmel Valley, Calif., she was giggling as he whispered in
her ear. "They rented two rooms, but occupied just one--and hardly ever left
it," smirks the Enquirer . While Keeping Tabs was particularly fond of
the Enquirer headline announcing that Cameron Diaz "Likes Loud Sex &
Hates Matt Dillon," she was duly impressed that the Globe 's prurient
interests managed to extend even to the great beyond. They report that the late
Bette Davis relieved her frustrations during the shooting of the 1944 film
Mr. Skeffington by romping in the proverbial hay with director Vincent
Sherman. "She'd be fine for five days then would tighten up again," Sherman
explains. "We'd have another evening together."

            The
only tabloid types not scoring this week, it seems, are those on higher
moral ground. Avowing their virginity are tennis player Anna Kournikova ("I do
not let anyone even have a peek into my bed") and singer Enrique Iglesias,
who's said to be waiting for the right woman. ("Good for you, Enrique," coos
the Globe 's Charlene Tilton.) In a story titled "Richard Simmons' Sad
Lonely Life," the Globe reports that the flamboyant exercise guru
prefers food to sex, which he says is "overrated." Meanwhile Lola Falana, now a
devoted Christian who spends much of her time at a Carmelite monastery in Las
Vegas, tells the Globe she's been celibate for years.

            When
they're not having constant sex or actively refraining from it, celebs seem to
be busy entertaining flirtatious, schoolgirl crushes on one another. We're not
sure if Jim Carrey knows it, but the Globe says that Renée Zellweger has
a "huge infatuation" with Paul McCartney, while the Star reports that
Britney Spears has a "major crush" on Britain's Prince William and even tried
to ply him with "provocative photos showing off her famous curves." (But then
again, she really is a schoolgirl, so maybe that's all right.)

            
Perhaps the strangest mutual admiration society is that between President Bill
Clinton and the famously curvy queen of soul, Aretha Franklin. The Star
says that the two traded saucy mash notes behind the scenes at this year's
White House Correspondents' Dinner--ferried between them, no less, by "a young,
red-headed intern." Hillary Clinton has reportedly long been "suspicious" about
her husband's "fixation" on Franklin and once had to elbow him in the stomach
"to get him to stop staring at her unbelievable cleavage" during a White House
concert. It's apparently all in the cleavage. According to the Globe ,
Mrs. Clinton's recent display of her own décolletage was actually a
pronouncement about the state of her marriage: That revealing new wardrobe and
snazzy haircut are a dead giveaway that "it's just a matter of time" before she
divorces the president. "Whenever women really change their hairstyle
dramatically," the Globe explains, "they're maybe looking to change
their romantic life, too. Watch out!"

            Finally, the Globe
says that both Jennifer Love Hewitt and George Michael are crushed out
on "swivel-hipped" Ricky Martin. The Enquirer concurs, reporting that
Michael is "smitten" with the Latin heartthrob, and is "particularly taken with
his smile." Meanwhile the Star --which also labels Martin
"swivel-hipped"--investigates the possibility that the singer might be gay with
all the meticulousness of a Supreme Court proceeding. On one hand, there is the
incriminating fact that Martin "wouldn't do anything to his five-bedroom,
all-white Miami Beach pad without the advice of his decorator"; on the other,
singer Alejandra Guzmán insists that Martin's "moves are as great as his
kisses," and dancer Adriana de Biega claims that her night of lovemaking with
Martin was "pure magic." Keeping Tabs can only wonder if there was toe-sucking
involved.

         
      
   
