
   
   
      
         
            No. 345: "Riotous Assembly With Cheese"

            
               Cheering
demonstrators gathered outside a Seattle McDonald's Monday. Why?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Monday's Question (No.
344)--"Futurific":
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              "If I'm president, it won't happen
for a long time. If I'm not, it will happen immediately." Who said this about
what?
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Alan
Keyes; the Apocalypse."-- Mary Anne Townsend ( Michael C Doyle and
Floyd Elliot had similar answers.)

            
"George W. Bush; the Southern states seceding from the Union."-- Marshall
Efron
            

            "Pat
Buchanan; the Mexican-Canadian military alliance that will leave America
humbled and enslaved."-- Floyd Elliot
            

            "Jimmy
Carter; return of hostages from Iran."--Dan Dickinson
            

            "Al
Gore, explaining just when he plans to set off those sarin gas capsules he's
carefully hidden around the country during his eight years as vice president.
Do what he says, people! He's got nothing to lose!"-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Many responses cast Donald Trump not as a genuine
womanizer, able to exploit his transient sexual partners on his own merits, but
as a pseudo-womanizer whose consorts see him as a sort of moon-faced
paycheck.

            But perhaps his sexual
boasting, while delightfully buffoonish, is a minor crime. Rigorous
self-awareness is rarely found in bed where people will tell you just about any
damn thing. It is a setting that conspires against self-knowledge: the soft
lights, the kind words, the shape-flattering diaphanous teddy that, frankly,
wouldn't hurt Trump's whole look. But despite the generous spiritedness of News
Quiz participants, Trump remains the perfect Molière fool, supremely confident
of his splendor, supremely unaware that to everyone else he's a cartoon, Le
Bourgeois Gentilhomme with a bad haircut. But big where it counts--in the
wallet.

            
               When Fatuity Turns
to Madness Answer
            

            Donald Trump said this about the collapse of the
stock market.

            Apparently, the ongoing
bull market can sustain itself for one more year, right up until the
presidential election, at which time, if Trump wins, prosperity continues, but
if he loses, the bottom drops out. In making this prediction to New York
Times columnist Maureen Dowd, Trump declined to release details of either
the economic theory or the satanic pact that would make this scenario
possible.

            
               
                  Talk
Magazine Deathwatch Extra
            

            Which of the following
are actual Tina Brown rationalizations for her magazine's slide into darkness
(quoted by New York Times writer Alex Kuczynski), and which are amusing
digs at a debased editorial philosophy built around fawning over celebrity?

            1. "It takes time for a magazine to establish its
identity."

            2. "Tough for a print magazine to vie with
Internet's ability to deliver the crass and shallow."

            3. "All Gwyneth All The Time format less popular
than Harvey Weinstein promised."

            4. "It's taken time to organize our approach to
Hollywood."

            5. "Still shifting from old editorial policy of
uncritical worship of Hollywood celebrities to new policy of enthusiastic
groveling before Hollywood celebrities."

            6. "I should not be absorbed in reading six drafts
of an article, which is what I have been doing, which has been my dilemma."

            7. "I should send an assistant out to buy me one of
those dictionary things and then get someone to look up 'dilemma' for me."

            8. "Gwyneth wouldn't pose with the donkey."

            9. "When I saw the success of the first issue, it
was a crazy wonderful thing, but I knew our staff was too small."

            10. "We need to make
news and break news about Gwyneth Paltrow, and that means looking for stories
with a lot of journalistic calories. By which I do not mean that Gwyneth
Paltrow is fat. She's that other thing. Thin."

            
               Answers
            

            1, 4, 6, 9, and the
first sentence of 10 minus the words "about Gwyneth Paltrow" are true
Tinaisms.

            
               Ongoing Autobio
Extra
            

            Participants are
invited--heck, encouraged; prodded even--to submit the title of a much-needed
but as yet unwritten autobiography of any national political figure lacking
this essential election-year tool. Answers to run Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Trump the pseudo-womanizer; Clinton the real
thing.

         
      
   
