
   
   
      
         
            No. 346: "Solid Goldberg"

            
               While introducing
President Clinton at a Beverly Hills dinner Tuesday, Whoopi Goldberg recalled a
disturbing question one of her granddaughters recently asked. "This was kind of
chilling, because it wasn't even like I could say, 'No, no, it's not going to
happen.' " What was the question?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
345)--"Riotous Assembly With Cheese":
            

            

               Cheering demonstrators gathered outside a Seattle McDonald's Monday.
Why?
            

            "They
discovered that two buns and a piece of string make an excellent gas
mask."-- Charlie Glassenberg ( Sean Fitzpatrick and Barb
Leyne had similar answers.)

            "Mayor
McCheese recanted his support for NAFTA."-- Steve Bodow (similarly,
Tom Reynolds and Marc Germain )

            "In
defiance of the Justice Department, debut of Windows 2000 Happy
Meals."-- John Leary
            

            
"McLattes!"-- Francis Heaney
            

            "I
throw rocks through the window of a different McDonald's every week. Nobody
comes to cheer me."-- Dave Gaffen
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Tech Talk
and Apology in Lieu of Actual Wrap-Up
            

            Many News Quiz responses
were rejected by 
                  Slate
               's e-mail server. Sorry about the
frustration and hassle and, though it is in no way connected with

                  Slate
                or its parent company, the outcome of yesterday's voting in
the Kuwaiti parliament.

            
               Global Answer
            

            Demonstrators at a McDonald's, five blocks from the
convention hall where the World Trade Organization meeting was scheduled,
denounced bioengineered food. The crowd cheered farmer José Bové who earlier in
the year drove his tractor through a McD in his native France. "We don't want
to eat any more of that kind of food," he declared. "Except for the fries,
which are actually pretty good," he did not add.

            The protests forced the postponement of the opening
ceremony as thousands of people castigated the WTO for being, in the words of
the New York Times , "a handmaiden of corporate interests whose rulings
undermine health, labor and environmental protections around the world."

            Seattle's Mayor Paul Schell declared a state of
emergency, put the city under a curfew, and called in the National Guard. A
small group of masked protesters did damage property, but the vast majority of
the demonstrators were peaceful. Police in riot gear responded with what the
Times called "tear gas, pepper spray and rubber pellets."

            "Rubber pellets"--are
they anything like rubber bullets?

            
               Ann Gavaghan's World of
McDonald's Rioting Extra:
            

            We experienced riots in
McDonald's here in Taipei, Taiwan (the land the United Nations forgot), earlier
this year when Hello Kitty collectible toys were made available to the public.
Young women (who are, for some reason they are unable to articulate, the
primary consumers of Hello Kitty products) would line up around the block in
order to get their hands on the dolls. I, however, am partial to Hello Kitty's
rival, the penguin Bad Badtz-maru, who wants to be boss of everything.

            
               New Age vs. Age Old
Extra
            

            Below, uses for various
herbs in a pamphlet touting the Woman's Book of Healing Herbs
( WBHH ) and in Joy of Cooking ( JoC ). Mellowed out and
natural, or thick and creamy--you must choose. Whose house would you rather be
invited to? Which book would make the better holiday gift? ( Cool mumbo jumbo
courtesy of Dawn Aberg .)

            Cinnamon

            
               WBHH : Wards off bacterial infection.

            
               JoC : One
teaspoon in Pfeffernusse recipe. Fun to eat, fun to say, fun to rub on whatever
part of you is infected.

            Sage

            
               WBHH : "Reduces or eliminates night
sweats."

            
               JoC : "The best
known and loved of all American seasonings for … pork and sausages, and for
duck, goose and rabbit." Mmmm: nice heavy meal and then a nice sweaty nap.

            Peppermint

            
               WBHH : Relives gas and may even boost mental
alertness.

            
               JoC : Used in mint
sauce, "the usual accompaniment to roast lamb." If only the lamb had been a
little more mentally alert, of course, all this unpleasantness could have been
avoided.

            Cloves

            
               WBHH : Good medicine if you're bothered by
athlete's foot.

            
               JoC : Somehow,
I've lost the will to discuss baked ham.

            Echinacea

            
               WBHH : "saved my family's vacation."

            
               JoC : Not
mentioned, but ask yourself this, is a family vacation really something you
want to save?

            Ginger

            
               WBHH : "Herbal all-star for motion sickness
or nausea."

            
               JoC : Ingredient
in a Parkin, "a not-too-sweet Guy Fawkes Day cake." I'm damn well not inviting
someone to my Guy Fawkes Day party who's just going to vomit all over
everything.

            Parsley

            
               WBHH : "See why it's earned a reputation for
making black and blue marks disappear."

            
               JoC : What the
hell is going on over there? Should someone call the cops? Now I can't even
think about my fish sauce.

            
               Ongoing Autobio
Extra
            

            Participants are still
invited to submit the title of a much needed but as yet unwritten autobiography
of any national political figure lacking this essential election-year tool.
Answers to run Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Our inadequate e-mail provider did not pass along
enough responses to allow for our usual scientific survey. (Curiously, it did
forward several promising invitations to make big money at home with hot teen
sluts.)

         
      
   
