
   
   
      
         
            Mirror, Mirror on the Web

            At
long last, there's a cure for the intractable problem of the "undecided" voter.
Thanks to a new site called the American Presidential Candidate Selector , the Web can
actually tell you who you should vote for. Simply type in your opinions on a
range of issues, and the site tells you which candidate agrees with you
most.

            The
Candidate Selector is one of several Web tools offered by SelectSmart.com , a company
that produces Web sites to help with all sorts of complicated decisions (its
slogan is, "Before You Decide"). In addition to the Presidential Candidate
Selector, the company offers a Lawn Grass Selector, a Pet Selector, a Hair
Products Selector, and a Contraception Selector. Gary Bauer will be matched
with your pro-life, creationist views the same way Leave-In Conditioning Spray
will be recommended for your dry, frizzy hair.

            Here's
how the Candidate Selector works: The site asks your positions on 17 issues,
from abortion to defense spending to free trade, and also asks you to choose
whether you feel "strongly" or "somewhat strongly" about each of those stands.
You can also answer "no preference" to any of the questions. When you're done,
the program spits out a list of all the presidential candidates, ranked and
scored in order of how closely their platforms match your views.

            The
tool claims moderate accuracy. According to a poll on the site, 41 percent of
users found that the candidate for whom they intend to vote appeared at the top
of their list. Another 19 percent found their top candidate in second place.
The poll doesn't ask the far more interesting question of how many users might
change their votes because of the SelectSmart.com results.

            I
asked a few colleagues with disparate political views to test-drive the
Selector. They ended up with funhouse-mirror versions of their actual
preferences--accurate in some places, comically distorted in others. The
selector placed Bill Bradley and Al Gore, first and second, respectively, on ""
Timothy Noah's list--wrong order, he says, but not bad. Timothy's list got less
accurate as it continued: It placed Socialist David McReynolds, the Natural Law
Party's John Hagelin, and Warren Beatty (who is not even a candidate) before
Timothy's real-life third choice, John McCain. He observes that "the only
accurate score is for Alan Keyes, who I would indeed rank dead last."
Meanwhile, the site told Tucker Carlson, who writes for the conservative
Weekly Standard , to vote for Orrin Hatch--"the candidate for whom I have
the most contempt," Tucker says--while awarding John McCain ninth place, behind
Hatch, George W. Bush, Harry Browne, Alan Keyes, Steve Forbes, Gary Bauer,
Howard Phillips, and Pat Buchanan. "Do they have a drunk guy doing the
rankings?" Tucker asks.

            Curt
Anderson, the site's designer, sounded sober on the phone, but he has certainly
crafted some sloppy questions. One asks users about whether they advocate
teaching evolution or creationism in schools. This is not exactly an issue for
the next president, but in any case, giving it the same weight as such topics
as health care or taxes seems preposterous. Even when Anderson does hit on
major issues--crime prevention, environmental protection, foreign policy--his
phrasing is without nuance and sometimes without sense. For example, the
Selector asks, "Would you prefer your candidate promise to protect or reform
(or even abolish) Social Security?" This question is impossible to answer from
the choices provided. The distinction between protecting and reforming Social
Security is anything but clear: Some candidates such as Steve Forbes suggest
that the best way to protect Social Security is to reform it , while even
those candidates who advocate preserving the current system--such as Bush and
Gore--advocate some significant changes . "Reform" could mean any number of
things, from minor tweaks (the addition of individual savings accounts) to more
radical fixes (replacing Social Security taxes with privately managed
individual accounts). Even if the site asked the question more precisely--say,
by asking users if they prefer government-managed savings or private
savings--it would reduce an issue of agonizing actuarial detail to a flippant
one-liner.

            The
options for answers are just as clumsy as the questions. The "somewhat" button
is ambiguous--if I tell the Selector that I am "somewhat" pro-choice, I might
be saying that I want a candidate who is generally pro-choice but who opposes
partial-birth abortions. Or I might simply be expressing that abortion is a
less urgent issue for me than others. Indeed, the site doesn't allow you to
designate which issues are most important to you. You may care about gun
control far more than you do about anything else, but unless you leave the
other 16 questions blank, your candidate list won't reflect your
priorities.

            The
biggest problem with the Presidential Selector, though, is that it reflects an
utterly unrealistic sense of how people choose candidates. It undermines itself
with its own idealism: Anderson boasts that his Candidate Selector screens out
superficial factors such as advertising, hype, and image, and allows voters to
base their choices solely on the issues. But few people make up their minds on
the basis of positions alone. The site does not try to measure intangibles like
integrity, experience, passion, and electability that do--and should--matter to
voters.

            Right
now, the site is most helpful to the minor candidates, whom it gives the same
weight as the major players. It helps them find voters--Orrin Hatch's Web site
now links to the Candidate Selector, and Libertarian Harry Browne says that a
number of people who found themselves matched to him have become followers.

            If the questions and
answers were formulated more precisely, the site could make for a fascinating
exercise. It would allow you to see how closely you line up with the candidate
for whom you intend to vote, and thereby tell you whether your attraction is
based on a congruence of views or a more ephemeral sense of goodwill. The
technology might usefully be applied in local races, in which it's hard to sort
out the platform of every potential state senator, judge, school board
official, and city council member. But for now, the Candidate Selector is no
more than a terrific party game--the election-year equivalent of having your
palm read.

         
      
   
