
   
   
      
         
            Lessons of the WTO Summit

            The
Indian press has grown a little smug since the collapse of the Seattle trade
talks and the victory of the Indian representative in the Miss World
competition in London this weekend. The Hindu said Sunday that the "big revelation" of the World Trade
Organization conference was that, perhaps for the first time, developing
countries insisted on being heard. It also noted "an incredibly sloppy
organisation in one of the wealthiest cities in the world's richest country,"
which it said "bordered on the ludicrous. Ministers of some of the smaller
developing countries were denied entry to halls where closed talks between the
larger countries were on. When they did manage to get past security they found
no chairs for them. And senior government delegates complained that as the
negotiations stretched early into Friday morning, there was no drinking water
available either." The ambassador of one small developing country told the
Hindu , "Seattle was a lesson in humility to a group of developed
countries which thinks it owns the WTO."

            In an
editorial Monday about the crowning of Yukta Mookhey, 20, a
zoology graduate from Mumbai, as Miss World 1999, the Times of India said it
was not her achievement alone. "That India produces such beauty--physical and
intellectual--is entirely due to the fantastic genetic pool it draws upon and
the cross fertilisation of ideas it swears by," the paper said. "While taking
to modernity with great gusto, we have made this otherwise terrifying monster
in our own image. While other civilisations, with their 'insect origins,'
fumble with such ideas as the timeless and ethereal qualities of a woman's
beauty, our beginnings attest to these ideals from time immemorial. … The
Indian achievement is a combination of lightness and gravitas, of bridging the
gap between the highbrow and the middlebrow, and rediscovering for itself the
inextricable link between the body, mind and soul." The paper contains much
more in this self-congratulatory vein.

            The
Financial Times of
London called the collapse of the WTO talks a "disaster" and a "calamity" for
which the United States and the European Union were mostly to blame. "The WTO
is not some alien monster, but their own creation," the FT said Monday
in an editorial. "They must now save it from the consequences of their
cowardice and folly." Otherwise, the rule of law in world trade would be
replaced by the law of the jungle. Papers around the world struggled to
identify the lessons of Seattle. Le Monde of Paris called it a victory for "a new idea"--that
"the world is not for sale." The protesters in Seattle, it said in an
editorial, were pleading for "a new world order, one of an open world but of a
world which isn't, under any circumstances, reduced to mere merchandise."

            
Writing Monday in the National Post of Canada, David Frum said that the demonstrations were symptoms of an "ever-worsening
global problem-shortage." He wrote, "With peace and prosperity blanketing ever
larger stretches of the globe--with nuclear weapons being decommissioned and
Unionists and Nationalists entering into government together in Northern
Ireland--we are in danger of reaching a state of affairs where there is nothing
left to protest." An editorial in Australia's Sydney Morning Herald Monday said it was the failure
among WTO member states to put the common good above vested interests, and not
the street demonstrations, that caused the collapse of the conference. "To
ignore this in favour of viewing the resulting impasse as a victory of the
forces of light (ordinary people or at least their self-appointed
representatives) over the forces of darkness (that is, proponents of free
trade) is to create a false, misleading, and ultimately harmful dichotomy," the
paper said.

            The
Jerusalem Post said
the Seattle riots proved "that the prediction of the end of history was
premature." An editorial in Sunday's paper said, "The ideological struggles of
the twentieth century may have culminated over the past decade with the
unquestionable triumph of capitalism over socialism, but that has not meant
that strong--and strongly felt--differences of opinion over what our capitalist
future will look like do not abound." In Japan, Asahi
Shimbun said Sunday that the failure of the talks had damaged the
credibility of the WTO and given the United States "a black eye." The paper
said it is clear that one of the organization's greatest challenges is to
convince the public of the advantages of freer trade but that the conference
could not have come at a worse time: "Washington lacked leadership in painting
a future for the WTO, and its conference was void of passion and vision."

            Following the death after
an attempted robbery in Monaco of billionaire Syrian-born banker Edmond J.
Safra, the Jerusalem Post Sunday praised his work for Israeli Sephardim through the International
Sephardi Education Foundation, of which he was the chief benefactor. Leon Levy,
president of the American Sephardi Federation, described Safra as "devoted to
Jewish life in the world." Safra's largess also included chairs at the
universities of Harvard and Pennsylvania, synagogues, hospitals, the New York
Holocaust Museum, and the Institute for Sephardic Studies at Yeshiva University
in New York City. Three years ago, he donated Albert Einstein's earliest
manuscript on the theory of relativity to the Israel Museum in Jerusalem.

         
      
   
