
   
   
      
         
             Wiener Whining at Super 8

            It is a well-known fact that the Shopping Avenger
keeps a special place in his heart for the downtrodden and the outcast,
including, but not limited to, the poor, the indigent, the day traders, and the
blind. When the Shopping Avenger sees the forces of rampant capitalism
manhandling an unfortunate soul, he will fly to the rescue straightaway, unless
he's busy leading anarchists into battle on the streets of Seattle, or
napping.

            But there is one group whose persecution will
instantaneously get the Shopping Avenger into superhero mode, and that is:
wiener dogs.

            The Shopping Avenger loves wiener dogs. The
Shopping Avenger loves all animals, but he especially loves animals that have
no discernible legs.

            So when Ms. Gale Hogsten of South Carolina wrote to
complain that the Super 8 motel chain abused her wiener dog, along with the
rest of her family, the Shopping Avenger donned his codpiece and cape and
superhero tights--though not necessarily in that order--and launched himself
into battle. Super 8 is a major motel chain--it is two better than Motel 6--but
the Shopping Avenger showed no fear.

            But first, the Shopping Avenger will let Gale
Hogsten tell the story.

            "As Hurricane Floyd was coming our way, I booked a
room near Atlanta, so we could get the heck out of here," the aggrieved Ms.
Hogsten writes. "What Super 8 did was to call Hurricane Floyd a 'special
event,' hence they were able to charge any damn price they wanted to. Our
family got the regular rate of $48 the first night, however others in the hotel
started getting ripped off, being charged $75 the second night and up to $125
the third night. Nothing like the feeling of being homeless and being screwed
in the process." The Shopping Avenger endorses the previous statement
wholeheartedly.

            "Like most people, I was traveling with a pet and
when I read about this particular Super 8, it did say (still does) that small
animals are allowed. We have a wiener dog, a corgi, and a cat. Somehow the
idiot at the desk heard we had animals and decided to charge us an extra 10
bucks. What are you going to do, not pay?"

            Not pay, indeed.

            "Plus," Hogsten writes,
"they never gave us any maid service for three days."

            The Shopping Avenger made contact with Hogsten via e-mail
and learned that her wiener dog, whose name is Rusty, was traumatized by these
events, though not as much as Hogsten was traumatized by these events. "What
pissed me off personally was charging 10 bucks for the wiener dog," she stated,
emphatically.

            The Shopping Avenger right away made contact with
the Super 8 executive offices. Super 8, it turns out, is owned by the Cendant
Corp., which owns every hotel and motel room in America and is therefore the
sort of unfeeling monopoly that would rob people fleeing a hurricane. Except
that the executive who was assigned the difficult task of dealing with the
Shopping Avenger, one Jennifer Nemeth, did a provisionally satisfactory job of
making the Shopping Avenger happy.

            "I hear you," she said by way of introduction. "We
heard that some of our franchises were doing this sort of thing, and we get
angry when we hear about them doing it." Nemeth maintained that Super 8 does
not discriminate against short-legged dogs. "We get a lot of letters saying,
'Thanks for letting us bring Fluffy,' that sort of thing."

            Fluffy? Who ever heard of a wiener dog named Fluffy?
But that's not the point.

            Nemeth promised to
investigate the motel in question. She promised to apologize, on behalf of
Super 8, to Rusty the wiener dog, and she promised free nights at a Super 8 of
Hogsten's choice. Wait till next episode to learn if Super 8 keeps its
promises.

            Now let us contrast the open attitude of Super 8 with that
of, oh, U-Haul, the Shopping Avenger's bête noire . The Shopping Avenger
is quite positive that, as long as he is reachable via e-mail at
Shoppingavenger@slate.com, each month will bring him 10 or 20 or 30 complaints
about U-Haul. (Little-known fact: "U-Haul," spelled backward in Aramaic, is
"Ponzi.")

            The Shopping Avenger's new favorite U-Haul story
comes from one William Brangham, who states: "I've resisted writing because you
no doubt have received thousands of complaints about this company and I
thought, 'Why pile on?' But after reading the other complaints you've received
about U-Haul, I think it's fair to say that I've got the topper--U-Haul almost
killed me."

            Do tell, Mr. Brangham.

            "My girlfriend was moving from New York to Vermont.
When we picked the truck up (they did honor the reservation) a man brought the
vehicle out, parked it out front, and then reached behind the front seat and
brought out a bottle of fluid. He opened the hood, poured some of it somewhere
in the engine, closed the hood, put the bottle back, and handed me the keys. I
asked him what he'd done, and he said, 'Oh, just topping up some stuff.'"

            If you're thinking "Yikes," you're right.

            Brangham continues: "My girlfriend was in the
driver's seat and she literally couldn't move the wheel six inches in either
direction. I got in there and could do little more. ... Then we realized the
fluid that had been topped off was power steering fluid. There was a pool of it
gathering on the street. I went behind the seat to find five empty bottles of
fluid, plus one with about half a cup left. It sure seemed like U-Haul
knowingly rented me a faulty truck."

            But it gets worse. Brangham called U-Haul "customer
service," which, in the Shopping Avenger's estimation, is probably a guy named
Joe in a phone booth. After waiting a considerable period of time, a U-Haul
mechanic showed up, taped up a leaky hose, and left. "It's dark, but we still
have one stop across the river in Hoboken. ... I'm driving the truck. In the
middle of the Holland Tunnel, doing about 30 mph, the steering wheel
drastically stiffens. It's now so hard to steer this huge truck that I have to
put my foot up on the dash or on the door to tug the wheel in the direction I
need it to go. I'm 6'3" and 195 lbs. and it took every ounce of strength I had
to stop from smashing into oncoming traffic in the tunnel. If my
five-foot-something, 115-lbs. girlfriend had been driving, there's absolutely
no way she could have controlled the truck."

            Horrible, yes? It gets still worse. "I bought power
steering fluid like it was cheap beer, topped off, and away we went." He topped
off every few miles. The next day, they drove the truck to a U-Haul center.
"Upon arrival, they keep us waiting for an hour and a half because 'the
mechanic's not in yet like we told him.' When he finally arrives, he proceeds
to tell us incessant stories about how drunk he got the night before and how
his hangover is killing him."

            The mechanic eventually inspected the truck.
"You've got a busted hose," he told them. Mr. Brangham writes: "The first
U-Haul mechanic had patched the hole on the hose with electrical tape.
Apparently, this is a very foolish thing to do. ... Even in his groggy state,
[the second mechanic] couldn't believe a fellow mechanic would pull such a
stunt."

            Suffice it to say that Mr. Brangham and his
girlfriend made it to Vermont and asked for a refund because U-Haul nearly
killed them. But, he reports, U-Haul didn't even offer an apology.

            Any of you loyal deputy
Avengers out there have a U-Haul story that can top this one? You know where to write.

            In the previous episode, the Shopping Avenger promised to
explain to the reader why Southwest Airlines is the Shopping Avenger's favorite
company, and now the Shopping Avenger will keep his promise:

            1) Very tasty peanuts.

            2) Southwest tries, at least most of the time, to
keep its customers happy. This is in marked contrast to every other airline
ever flown by Shopping Avenger, but particularly Northwest Airlines, for which
Shopping Avenger has very hard feelings at the moment, for reasons that will be
explained in the next episode.

            Southwest does have its drawbacks. The Shopping
Avenger, when he was just a boy Avenger, worked one summer at a Bob's Big Boy.
The Shopping Avenger learned very quickly that Bob's Big Boy is a restaurant
for people who don't know how to eat in restaurants. The same holds true for
Southwest: It is an airline for people who don't know proper airline etiquette.
On his last Southwest flight, from Baltimore to Phoenix, the seat next to the
Shopping Avenger was filled by a gentleman whose first words were, "Bring on
the $2 Heinekens."

            The Shopping Avenger had a very long flight.

            But this, of course, is
not Southwest's fault, except insofar as Southwest makes its seats so cheap
that even drunken assholes can fly across this great country of ours.

            Recently, the Shopping Avenger went to bat for one of his
loyal readers, a certain Miss M., who had an actual, valid complaint about
Southwest. M.'s luggage, , was left sitting for an hour in the rain--on the
tarmac. When she got to her destination, she discovered that her clothing was
ruined. She got very little satisfaction when she approached Southwest through
the normal channels, so she turned to the Shopping Avenger for justice.

            After some initial backing-and-forthing, in which
Southwest made noises that sounded very much like the noises made by such
airlines as Northwest when they do something wrong, Southwest came around and
offered M. two $400 travel vouchers. M. considered this a satisfactory
resolution, and thus so did the Shopping Avenger, who is nothing if not loyal
to the wishes of his readers. Southwest knows how to make people happy, which
is very unusual in American business today.

            Next month: Why U-Haul
is a key part of Satan's plan for world domination.

            
               Got a consumer
score you want settled? Send e-mail to shoppingavenger@slate.com .
                  
               
            

         
      
   
