
   
   
      
         
            The Great Panda Debate

            
               Subject: Plotz the
Panda Poacher

            
               From: THesse

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Wed Dec 1

            You are a poor excuse for a human being. While I
understand (and respect) the meaning of the 1 st Amendment, I think
you take it to an unacceptable level. You see, my 9-year-old daughter read your
"article" and could not fathom how (or why) a supposed intelligent adult could
possibly say those things. It upset her greatly. She has never seen a panda in
person, and while they are not the liveliest animals, I know her eyes would
light up and her smile would be from ear to ear at being able to view one for
herself. I believe you need to grow up and start looking at the positive things
in the world. You have got to be the saddest thing I have ever encountered.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject: Fluffiness
Is Fur Deep

            
               From: 
               Jerry Munson
            

            
               Re:
""

            
               Date: Wed
Dec 1

            Good for you, David! Humans have the most annoying
tendency to ascribe cutesy attributes to wild creatures. Animals, even the
fluffy ones, really don't care if the whole human race lives or dies. They'd
press the nuclear launch button if it got them a chunk of meat or a herring for
a reward. They're not good or evil, they are just mindless slaves to instinct
and the food chain. By all means enjoy them, just stop once in a while to
explain to your kids that the Care Bears and Flipper aren't the real thing.

            Get real, folks. You've all got people in your
lives who need your attention a whole lot more than pandas do. And the
difference is, they'd appreciate it.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject: Plotz's
Rosebud

            
               From: Tearful

            
               Re:
""

            
               Date: Wed Dec 1

            Admit it, Plotz, you still harbor resentment from
when your mommy threw your teddy bear out, at age16.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject: The WTO
and Hobson's Choice

            
               From: 
               Itrucks
            

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Mon Dec 6

            One wonders where the moral problem is here. Does
it lie with the developing countries who tolerate less than ideal environmental
standards and child/forced/sweatshop labor, the multinational companies that
take advantage of those conditions, or the consumers who happily buy the
merchandise despite its questionable origin?

            My college son developed a problem for an ethics
class that revolved around a wrenchingly poor "fictional" country that proposed
to enable slavery in return for economic development. The country would allow
corporations to buy citizens for labor as long as they provided decent housing,
food and medical treatment. In return, the country would enforce the property
rights with the nation's police power. Since famine was endemic in this
country, it is probable that the slaves would have a higher standard of living
than would be available to them in the "free" sector. The corporation would
have the advantage of a stable workforce that could be trained and experienced
with no threat of the employee jumping to the competitor.

            Would your company take such a deal? Would you buy
products produced under such a system?

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject:
AmeriCorps--Let Charities Call the Shots

            
               From:

               Leslie Lenkowsky
            

            
               Re: "

            
               Date: Mon
Dec 6

            Both Doug Bandow and Harris Wofford are friends.
And I both serve on the Board of the Corporation on National Service and have
been a critic of government involvement with non-profits for longer than I care
to remember. So, what side should I take in this interesting dialogue?

            To Doug, I'd say that most of the largest
non-profits have long since signed on to the Federal gravy train. About a third
of their revenues (on average) now come from the US Treasury (or its state
equivalents), along with lots of strings that significantly compromise their
independence. And I have not run across any of them that would prefer an end to
these arrangements. One now even finds conservatives and libertarians proposing
to expand them under the headings of "charitable choice" and "school
vouchers."

            So, the real issue is not whether AmeriCorps
somehow violates the integrity of the nation's voluntary associations, but
whether it offers any advantages over our current ways of doing so. I think it
does. On balance, I'd rather offer to the nation's charities people to do their
bidding than grants to do government's bidding. That's probably cheaper
too.

            To Harris, I would say that large numbers of
AmeriCorps participants do not a successful program make. Nor do the records of
their "accomplishments," which the Corporation scrupulously collects, since
such studies do not usually reveal if these results might have occurred anyway
(i.e., through other sources of volunteers) or how valuable or long-lasting
they are. And while Harris is undoubtedly sincere in saying the Corporation
tries to be the "junior partner" in its relationship with its grantees, long
experience watching non-profits pursue government support makes me more than a
little skeptical.

            I think AmeriCorps is valuable because it offers
people--especially our nation's young people--an opportunity to devote an
intensive period of their lives to giving something back to their society and
learning the civic skills upon which our voluntary tradition relies. Even with
volunteering at record levels (56 percent of Americans say they are so engaged,
according to the latest Gallup survey), I think we have to take steps to ensure
that the spirit upon which it (and much else that's worthwhile) depends is
transmitted from generation to generation. AmeriCorps is one way of doing this
(and by no means the only one) and can be redesigned so that both Doug and
Harris would feel more comfortable that charities, not government, are really
calling the shots.

            (To reply, click
here .) 

            
               Subject:
Aussies Ain't Gents

            
               From: 
               Robert Thomson
            

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Mon Dec 6

            As the Robert Thomson mentioned in your
McLaughlin tidbit, I would like to make clear that I am not a "courtly
Brit" but an uncouth Australian. Under normal circumstances, being referred to
as an "honorable gentleman" would be considered flattery but, where I come
from, it's an insult.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            [ Robert Thomson is the
American editor of the Financial Times.]

         
      
   
