
   
   
      
         
            Devolution Day

            "Hand
of history touches Ulster" was the Guardian of London's main headline Friday, echoing a
remark by British Prime Minister Tony Blair that "the hand of history is at
last lifting the burden of terror and violence and shaping the future of the
people of Northern Ireland." Newspapers on both sides of the Irish Sea agreed
that the meeting in Belfast Thursday of the first ever all-inclusive Northern
Irish government was a momentous event. They called it Devolution Day, and they
labeled it historic. Among mainstream newspapers, only the Daily Telegraph of London,
which has always been skeptical about the peace process, led with the headline
"Blair: Extremists could still wreck new Ulster dawn." The Guardian
noted in its lead story that the signs that things have changed "for ever" with
the transfer of power from London to the executive in Belfast came in small
ways. "An anti-abortion group picketed Parliament Buildings, evidence that
politics were coming home at last," it said.

            The
Times of
London said in an editorial that the peace process would not have been possible
"without an extraordinary transformation of Irish politics, economics, society
and culture" during the past two decades. Cursed by emigration since the potato
famine of the 1840s, "Ireland ached to present itself as Europe's 'victim,'
with the English invariably cast as the villain of the piece. The complete
story was never this simple: but the image had adhesive quality." But "[o]ver
20 years both the underlying facts and popular perception have altered
dramatically" through a process of "economic modernisation, social liberalism,
reconciliation with the north, and an outreach to the wider world," the paper
said. "Brendan Behan wrote with confidence five decades ago that 'other people
have a nationality, the Irish have a psychosis.' Mr Behan has proved a better
playwright than a political prophet."

            A
much-used photograph in the British press was of Sinn Fein President Gerry
Adams with a camera to his eye, snapping the media at the opening ceremony for
the new executive. The tabloid Daily Mirror surrounded this with the smiling faces of the
leading participants in the peace settlement under the headline
"Smile! We've Just Made History." For once, Britain's biggest-selling tabloid,
Rupert Murdoch's Sun , cleared its front page of celebrity scandal to make way
for a huge headline: "Peace: Let's All Pray It Lasts." "In one way or another,
the British and the Irish have been at war for centuries," the paper said in a
front-page editorial. "Until yesterday. Yesterday, peace was given a
chance."

            
Writing in the Irish
Times of Dublin Friday, Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern said: "In Ireland, North and South, we can now say with
certainty, it is the people who are sovereign. We have, all of us,
nationalists, unionists, republicans and loyalists, gained from this
certainty." Praising the contributions of "some extraordinary people, including
President Bill Clinton and Senator George Mitchell," Ahern said that if anybody
tried "to wreck the agreement through violence, we will confront them. … [A]s
we have shown in recent weeks and months, we can overcome all of the obstacles
to achieving a lasting peace." The prime minister was pictured on the paper's
front page signing away Ireland's territorial claims to the
north.

            The
Irish
Independent fronted a photograph of Queen Elizabeth II and Irish
President Mary McAleese celebrating Devolution Day with a private lunch at
Buckingham Palace. It said plans were afoot for the queen to visit Dublin early
next year to cement the new relationship between Britain and Ireland. This will
be the first ever visit to the republic by a British monarch. The paper also
quoted the Irish Nobel Prize-winning poet Seamus Heaney welcoming the agreement
with a quotation from the epic Anglo-Saxon poem "Beowulf": "A light appeared
and the whole place became brightened the way the sky does when heaven's candle
is shining brightly."

            In
Northern Ireland, the Protestant Belfast Telegraph
said in an editorial that it would be hard to exaggerate the significance of
this day, which will be included among the greatest events of Irish history. It
stressed the importance of the contributions "of American governments--and
President Clinton in particular--repaying their debt to millions of Irish
immigrants by an unremitting commitment to the peace process." The Irish News , a Roman
Catholic paper based in Belfast, led with
the Irish Republican Army's appointment of a go-between to discuss arms
decommissioning with an independent body headed by Canadian Gen. John de
Chastelain. The IRA's statement did not name its representative, made no
promise to give up its weapons, and expressed concern at Northern Ireland First
Minister David Trimble's insistence on next February as the deadline for
disarmament to begin. According to the Times of London, the mediator is
widely thought to be Padraig Wilson, a former head of IRA inmates in the Maze
prison in Belfast. The Times said that, according to one new security
assessment, the IRA possesses at least 1,000 rifles, 500 handguns, 50 heavy
machine guns, and 2,600 kilograms of Semtex high explosive.

            On the
World Trade Organization conference in Seattle, Le Monde of Paris led Friday
with divisions in the European camp over its negotiating stance toward the
United States. It said five members of the European Union--France, Britain,
Italy, Denmark, and Belgium--have accused the European Commission of going
beyond its mandate by proposing a compromise that would allow discussion of
genetically modified foods. This is something to which France in particular is
vehemently opposed.

            The Guardian of
London's reporter John Vidal infiltrated one of the closed working party
meetings of the WTO because it issued him with the wrong accreditation--a blue
delegate's pass instead of a green press badge. He gives an amusing front-page
account of the opening of a debate in the "Singapore
Group" on whether the WTO should include investments and competition in the
next round of negotiations. "In theory the Guardian is now an official
delegate to the talks, can deliver speeches, introduce policies, and make
political trade-offs," he explains. The issue pits the rich countries against
the poor ones, and no progress is made. "The pace, after 40 minutes, is
telling," he writes. "Several countries are visibly suffering. The Congo
Democratic Republic delegates are pretending to be asleep. Ireland is reclining
alarmingly. The only sign of life is a Latin American delegation where the
minister could well be in love with his adviser. Her eyes flash. They lean
together and cannot stop whispering."

         
      
   
