
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=350300619-12101999><SPAN class=350300619-12101999>Lazy Susan</SPAN></SPAN>

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Pokémon: The First Movie
                (Warner Bros.). Critics
pounce on Pikachu and his pals: "God-awful. Bad storytelling. Retrograde
animation ... dark, ominous and pretentious" (Jeff Giles, Newsweek ) …
"an unoriginal warming over of a skimpy Japanese production … an innocuous, if
lengthy, commercial" (Michael O'Sullivan, the Washington Post ) … "its
efforts to preach nonviolence while exploiting it are both patronizing and
hypocritical" (Jack Mathews, the Daily News ) … "idiotic" (Roger Ebert,
the Chicago Sun-Times ). Many reviewers admit that they're powerless to
influence the target audience and predict (correctly) that the film will be a
huge hit no matter what they say. (If you need help making sense of Pokémon,
click to read David Plotz's assessment of the craze in

                  Slate
               .)

            

               
                  Anywhere But Here
                (20 th Century Fox Film Corp.). Susan
Sarandon and Natalie Portman star as an immature mother and her responsible
daughter who reverse roles when the mom decides to move to Beverly Hills and
pursue the life she has always wanted. It's a "touching but melancholy
variation on a tune we've heard many times" (Jeff Giles, Newsweek ), and
reviewers seem a bit tired of the tune. The film is "simpatico enough to make
the less-than-cutting-edge nature" of the work enjoyable (Jay Carr, the
Boston Globe ), but "it's unfortunate that what we are given is so
standardized and generic" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). (Click
here to read a review of the best-selling novel by Mona
Simpson the film is based on and to read 
                  Slate
               's "Chatterbox" on
a real-life character from the book.)

            

               
                  The Messenger: The Story of Joan of Arc
                (Columbia Pictures).The
umpteenth retelling of the Joan of Arc story gets a mere one or two swords, er,
stars: "The movie is a mess: a gassy costume epic with nobody at the center"
(Roger Ebert, the Chicago Sun Times ). The supporting cast may be
delightful, with John Malkovich and Dustin Hoffman catching critics' eyes, but
Milla Jovovich--who at the time the film was made was married to its director,
Luc ( La Femme Nikita ) Besson--is not quite up to the task of playing a
nuanced and thoughtful Joan. (Click here to visit a gallery of Jovovich photos.)

            

               
                  Light It Up
                (20 th Century Fox Film Corp.).Weak reviews
for this film about a group of urban high-schoolers who take a security guard
hostage after an accidental shooting; they end up becoming heroes when they
demand improvements to their run-down school as conditions of the negotiations.
Singer Usher Raymond earns praise as the leader of the group, but the rest of
the cast goes largely unnoticed. The film achieves "not much more than the
level of a passable TV movie" (Jay Carr, the Boston Globe ) and "never
quite catches fire" (Robert Koehler, Daily Variety ). (Click here for more info on Usher
and here to
visit the official site.)

            

               Book 
            

            

               
                  Gore Vidal: A Biography
               ,by Fred Kaplan (Doubleday).
"At least one writer will be happy with Fred Kaplan's new book: Gore Vidal,"
writes William Deresiewicz in the New York Times Book Review . It's a
common note sounded in reviews of this exhaustive authorized biography--namely
that Kaplan simply reports Vidal's version of events without question. Some
wonder if this is a result of having a living subject--"Kaplan doesn't push,
doesn't ask discomfiting questions" (Richard Dyer, the Boston
Globe )--and note that Vidal "seems to have been able to exert his
considerable charm, guile, and authority over his biographer" (Martin Rubin,
the Washington Times ). Several also mention that Kaplan has been beaten
to the punch by Vidal himself, who released his own memoir, Palimpsest ,
just three years ago. (Click here to read the first chapter.)

         
      
   
