
   
   
      
         
            Exorcising Arnold

            
               Movies

            

            

               
                  End of Days
                (Universal Pictures). Arnold
Schwarzenegger's apocalyptic action thriller gets spanked by the critics. The
plot: The devil has come to Earth to mate at the stroke of midnight (Eastern
Standard Time) as the millennium turns over, and Arnold must stop him or the
world will end. Critics call it preposterous and filled with baffling
inconsistencies, or as Roger Ebert writes, "[m]ovies like this are particularly
vulnerable to logic" (the Chicago Sun-Times ). Words such as "ridiculous"
and "absurd" pepper the reviews: It's "fire-and-brimstone bunk, a tired
compendium of involuntary crucifixions, grim messages carved into human flesh,
fly buzzings, ominous choral chants on the soundtrack and at least one head
twisting" (Desson Howe, the Washington Post ). (Click here to find out how religious leaders persuaded the
filmmakers to change the story's ending.)

            

               
                  Toy Story 2
                (Buena Vista Pictures). A rare verdict on
the sequel to Toy Story : It's better than the original. Why? 1) The
animation has improved noticeably in the four years since the first one came
out, with more detailed surfaces and more nuanced facial expressions. 2) The
plot is a winner: A toy must chose between eternal life in a collectibles
museum and the more dangerous life at home with his beloved owner, who may
abandon him as he grows up. 3) It is a vivid reminder of the "love, pity and
guilt that a child feels for a favorite toy" that many adults have probably not
thought about in quite a while (Roger Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ).
(Visit the film's official site.)

            

               
                  Flawless
                (MGM). Writer-director Joel Schumacher's
( Batman Forever ) tale of a gruff, homophobic ex-cop (Robert De Niro) who
ends up bonding with his drag queen neighbor (Philip Seymour Hoffman)
exasperates the critics. "Flawless is so awful it just might put an end
to Hollywood's hypocritical infatuation with men in drag as symbols of its own
supposedly liberated sexual attitudes" (Stephen Holden, the New York
Times ). Critics call it corny, predictable, and packed with gay
stereotypes. USA Today 's Mike Clark looks at the film's chilly reception
and points out that "one suspects that this atypically 'little' Schumacher
movie might get better reviews if it were a starless, low-budget indie that
could catch viewers by surprise" and adds that "though formulaic, [it] plays
better than other equally contrived genre hybrids." (Click here to visit an unofficial De Niro fan page.)

            
               Books

            

            

               
                  Tupperware: The Promise of Plastic in 1950s America
               , by Alison J.
Clarke (Smithsonian Institution Press). British design historian Clarke
delivers a "heavily academic cultural critique of Tupperware" (Rachel Hartigan,
the Washington Post ), but all the critics can talk about is the story of
how Brownie Wise, a struggling single mother, turned the languishing line of
plastic containers into a booming success via one simple idea: the Tupperware
Party. Inventor Earl Tupper came up with the idea, but it wasn't until he
handed over control of sales to Wise (the first woman ever to appear on the
cover of Business Week ) that the company took off. The book tells how
these parties helped women isolated in 1950s suburbs gain a social network, as
well as providing them with an acceptable way of earning income. When critics
do get around to talking about the quality of the book, they praise its "wit
and erudition" (Laura Shapiro, Newsweek ). (The Tupperware Corp.'s home page
includes information on its products as well as how to give a Tupperware
party.)

            

               
                  Women
               , by Annie Leibovitz and Susan Sontag (Random House).
Leibovitz's book of photographs (which includes the works in her current show
of the same title at the Corcoran Gallery in Washington) is described by
critics as both slickly commercial and annoyingly didactic. The idea of the
book, as Susan Sontag explains in her opening essay, is to demonstrate the
amazing diversity of women. But as Peter Stevenson notes in the New York
Observer , the point "feels a bit tired by now," and Sontag's preface fails
in its attempt to "wrest Ms. Leibovitz's photographs back from the magazine
pages where they help sell movie stars and BMW's." Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
departs from the critical pack, declaring that "this mesmerizing book shows
women in such astonishing variety that no cliché or generalization about the
sex will ever again suffice" (the New York Times ). (View a collection of
the photographs here.)

            

               Art
            

            "Norman Rockwell:
Pictures for the American People" (High Museum of Art, Atlanta).
Rockwell's transformation from lowbrow illustrator to classic American artist
is now complete: A documentary on his life and works has aired on public
television, a traveling exhibition of his work is making stops at Washington's
Corcoran and New York's Guggenheim and, what's more, his work is being
tentatively embraced by postmodern critics. Michael Kimmelman glows in the
New York Times , "[m]useums are full of pictures by old masters like Hals
and Greuze and Boilly that, like Rockwell's pictures, show everyday scenes. On
top of which there is Rockwell's subterranean complexity: the buried allusions
he made to Michelangelo's Isaiah … or to Mondrian's grids." Forbes runs
an article on the exhibition titled "America's Vermeer?" that revels in the
irony of a sentimental illustrator, so long contemptuously dismissed by
critics, being installed in the American artistic pantheon. (The Norman Rockwell Museum's
Web page lists future dates and locations for the traveling exhibit.)

         
      
   
