
   
   
      
         
            Got MLK?

            

               A Russian diplomat was accused of spying on the U.S. The
low-level embassy official was allegedly caught monitoring a listening device
planted inside the State Department. Though diplomatic immunity prevents him
from being prosecuted, he was ordered to leave the country within 10 days. One
week ago, Russian authorities expelled an American diplomat for spying. The
Kremlin deemed it "an eye for an eye " approach reminiscent of the Cold War. But
the U.S. said the timing was coincidental and that the diplomat's actions posed
a serious threat to national security.

            

               A jury determined that there was a conspiracy to kill Martin Luther
King Jr. The King family had filed a wrongful-death suit against
Memphis cafe owner Loyd Jowers, who said six years ago that he hired King's
assassin on behalf of many others. The King family's attorneys argued that the
FBI, CIA, mafia, and media conspired to kill King because of his political
views. Observers debated whether the decision vindicated James Earl Ray, who
was convicted of the assassination, or implicated him in a larger plot. The
King family's spin: This is the first step toward correcting the history books. Law enforcement's spin: The
theory's so ludicrous no one else will buy it.

            

               NASA failed to communicate with the Mars Polar Lander. The
$165 million craft and its two $29 million probes have not been heard from
since they descended to the planet's south pole Friday. Scientists said the
prospects for the mission--which had aimed to gather information on the Martian
climate and determine whether it ever sustained life--were
dim. In September, NASA lost the $125 million Mars Climate Orbiter.
Observers said the latest loss would yield a "t otal reassessment " of NASA's programs and delay future
missions. Congressional critics' spin: If they can't do it right, let's cut the
agency's budget. NASA's spin: Inadequate funding is what caused this in the first
place.

            

               The White House is threatening more lawsuits against
gun-makers. The class-action suits, which would be brought by local
public-housing authorities and coordinated by the Clinton administration, would
demand reimbursement for security and other costs of handgun violence. The
White House said it would drop the lawsuits if gun-makers accepted safety
provisions demanded by 29 cities currently suing the industry. Gun controllers'
spin: Since Congress wouldn't act, a lawsuit is the next best thing. The gun
lobby's spin: The lawsuits are baseless and won't hold up in court. Newspapers'
spin: They'll never get that far , since gun-makers can't withstand the
federal onslaught.

            

               Cuba is demanding the return of a 6-year-old boy. Elián
González was one of three people who survived the sinking of a 17-foot aluminum
boat carrying Cuban refugees to the United States. His mother perished in the
shipwreck. Thousands of Cubans have demonstrated, and Fidel Castro has
threatened retribution if González is not returned to his father in Cuba. After
insisting that Gonzalez's fate would be decided in Florida courts, the Clinton
administration now says it will follow the wishes of the father.
Cuban-Americans' spin: Clinton is capitulating to Castro . The Clinton administration's spin:
No, we're putting the child's and father's needs first . Cuban-Americans' counterspin: How do we
know what the father wants when Castro is speaking for him ? The consensus: The sooner
González is out of the spotlight, the better.

            

               Republican presidential candidates held their second debate in a
week. The Arizona date was hastily scheduled in response to a request
from George W. Bush, who missed the first three debates. Pundits deemed it a
"courteous" and "chummy" affair, with "policy agreements … much more conspicuous than disputes." Analysts differed as to
whether Bush's subdued performance was or tepid and formulaic; but they agreed
that this cautious approach would keep him ahead. Some pundits said John McCain
needs to be more aggressive in differentiating himself from Bush; others said
McCain needs to remain subtle to avoid drawing fire for his temper.
(
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg the candidate's performances in
Arizona, and "" rounds up the opinions on last week's debate.)

            

               A maintenance company was convicted of mishandling hazardous material
linked to the ValuJet crash. SabreTech, a Florida contractor, was
found guilty on nine of 24 counts related to the 1996 accident that killed 110
people. Two employees were acquitted of lying on repair records. The company,
which is out of business but not bankrupt, could be fined $2.25 million.
SabreTech called the acquittals a vindication of its view that the crash "was a
tragedy. It wasn't a crime." Victims' families debated whether the convictions
showed that 1) "corporations cannot put the almighty dollar before safety "; or 2) they can do just that.

            

               The World Trade Organization's Seattle meeting ended with no new
accord. Previous WTO rules will remain in effect since negotiators
failed to agree on how to reduce trade barriers further. The meetings were
disrupted by protests, which resulted in more than 500 arrests and sometimes
violent clashes with police. Seattle's police chief announced that he would
resign and "takes full responsibility for the riots." Clinton critics
called the talks "an
embarrassment" and accused the administration of failing to make a clear
case for free trade. Protesters hailed it as a victory
for their movement, which they claimed had turned public opinion against
the WTO. But delegates chalked up the collapse to "the complexity and novelty
of the issues, [which] strained the capacity of delegations to make decisions."
(In "," William Saletan dissects the debate between the WTO's critics and
defenders, and in "," Paul Krugman argues that the WTO's opponents have it all
wrong. "" sums up analysts' reactions to the hubbub.)

            

               Florida State will play Virginia Tech for the national collegiate
football championship. For the second year, a computer ranking system,
instead of coaches' and sportswriters' polls, determined the matchup. Both
teams are undefeated. Florida State is seeded 1 st , and Virginia Tech
is 2 nd , in all major rankings. The rosy spin: The computer method is
working . The gloomy spin: Playoffs would be better.

            
               Four students were
shot at an Oklahoma middle school. A 7 th -grade male student
apparently used a gun purchased by his father to open fire on students outside
Fort Gibson School just before the start of classes. All four victims are
expected to survive. The suspected shooter was described as a well-liked honor
student with no disciplinary record. When asked why he did it, he reportedly
said, "I'm crazy." The police spin: The crime was random, not
"a hate
thing ." Parents' spin: That's all the more frightening.

         
      
   
