
   
   
      
         
            Family Matters

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               How does one "get
over" a spouse's affair? How long does it take for the hurt to lessen?
            

            

               --Susan From Bethlehem
            

            Dear Sus,

            As with bleeding,
healing takes different amounts of time for different people. Alas, some people
bleed to death. Prudie wishes you peace of mind, wherever you may find it. Give
yourself some time to see how things play out and see how you're feeling about
things ... well, about him. If you can't get over it, get out of it.

            
--Prudie, understandingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am having an
ongoing ordeal over whether my 12-year-old daughter should refer to her
stepfather as "Dad," "Stepdad," or by his first name. I've been remarried for
six years to my present husband, and he insists that my daughter should refer
to him as either "Dad" or "Mr. Giles" when addressing him. My daughter calls my
husband by his first name, which infuriates him because he believes it is
disrespectful. My daughter insists he doesn't deserve to be called "Dad" and
now only makes reference to "him" when mentioning her stepfather to friends or
relatives. Please advise about what would be the most appropriate way to handle
the situation.
            

            

               --Mrs. Giles
            

            Dear Mrs,

            "Mr. Giles" sounds like
a real beaut. The form of address, you understand, is merely the battleground
for the simmering war between them. Your daughter won't call him "Dad," which
he wants; and he won't permit a first-name address (which is perfectly
acceptable), which is what she wants. And for whatever it's worth, Prudie has
never heard of anyone saying, "Stepdad, please pass the salt," so forget that
one. Someone, maybe a family counselor, needs to deal with the alienation the
youngster feels and the hostility harbored by your husband. If you can find a
way to deal with and improve their relationship, what she calls him will become
a moot point. Reading between the lines, it may be that the child's biological
father and your husband's own offspring-situation are part of the equation.

            
--Prudie, worriedly

            
               
                  Dear
P.,
               
            

            
               Tell me if I'm overreacting. I was having lunch
with Danielle, who works in hospital billings, in the cafeteria. Just in
passing, I mentioned that I never received a thank-you note for my (small)
wedding gift. Danielle insisted I was wrong and to prove it took me to her
office where she pulled out this "book of friends." In it she had a page for
each of her friends, and on my page was listed what I gave her and the date she
wrote a thank-you note! What was troubling was not so much that, but the other
entries--including, "how friend responded to death of (her) father," i.e.,
flowers, card, etc.
            

            
               I think her
accountant's mind has gone too far. I mean, you can't measure everything, and
keeping a ledger on your friends is odd. I told her this, and she said that in
the Jewish tradition they believe "all your actions are inscribed in the book,"
and she is doing just that. What do you think?
            

            

               --Unsure
            

            Dear Un,

            Prudie thinks this woman
is one sandwich shy of a picnic. What she is referring to is God's accounting,
not hers. The poor dear must have been reading Marvel comics in school when
they talked about this. It is true that the humanistic Jewish view holds that
the substance of one's life is created by good deeds, but a ledger toting up
flowers and cards does not figure in. Her misunderstanding reminds Prudie of
the policeman who asked a driver what gear she was in at the moment her car hit
another. "Gucci sweats and Reeboks," she said.

            
--Prudie, rationally

            

               
                  Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am a 20-year-old
female, and I have been married for six years and have a 5-year-old son with my
husband. He works a lot, and our marriage hasn't been on track for about 5
months now, and we seem to be more like roommates than a married couple. I
don't know if he's cheating on me, but he has been acting strangely. He's been
coming home at 6 a.m. when he gets out of work at 1:30 in the morning. He tells
me it's because he goes to have coffee with his boss after they close the store
where he works. I don't know whether my marriage is over and whether to talk to
him about all this and ask if we can work things out. One thing I do know is
that if my husband is cheating, I wouldn't be able to stay with him.
            

            

               --Confused
            

            Dear Con,

            My dear, if your husband really is drinking coffee
from 1:30 to 6 a.m. he would need to wear Depends. If you suspect he is taking
an after-work breather with someone other than his employer, you could call the
man and ask. He may, however, not level with you. In any case, girlfriend or
pool parlor, you must get the problem out in the open.

            When you state your age,
and the age of your child, it sounds like you are in Romeo and Juliet
territory. If this is not a typo, you are far too young to be dealing with all
the factors you mention. Confront your husband with both your suspicions and
your awareness that things have gone off track. See where the conversation
goes. If he has a million complaints, consider counseling (if he's willing) or
separate maintenance. You cannot live like this and needn't tolerate his
in-your-face behavior.

            --Prudie, proactively

         
      
   
