
   
   
      
         
            Gas Pains<STRONG> </STRONG>

            

               Protests continued at the World Trade Organization meeting in
Seattle. After Tuesday and Wednesday's violent clashes, in which
police made more than 500 arrests and used tear gas and rubber bullets to
disperse demonstrators, hundreds of people gathered peacefully outside the city
jail and called for the protesters' release. Seattleites debated whether the
police: 1) were ill-prepared, outnumbered, and too accommodating of
demonstrations; 2) overreacted by using riot tactics on peaceful protesters; or 3)
were stuck in a "Catch-22." The gloomy spin: Sensational demonstrations are
obscuring substantive issues and embarrassing the United States. The rosy spin:
We're showing the world democracy in
action. (In "," William Saletan explains how the WTO went from complete
unknown to boogeyman, and in "," Paul Krugman argues that the WTO's opponents
have it all wrong.)

            

               Dozens of bodies may be buried in mass graves in Mexico. After
receiving a tip from a former Mexican police officer, U.S. and Mexican law
enforcement agents began excavating the sites near Ciudad Juarez, just south of
El Paso, Texas. The graves are thought to contain at least 100 Mexican and
American victims of drug-related violence in the early 1990s. The rosy spins:
1) This will likely solve some of Mexico's "most gruesome
crimes"; and 2) it heralds a new
era of cooperation in international law enforcement. The dismal spin:
Poor law enforcement is what allowed these crimes to happen
in the first place.

            

               Government investigators penetrated security at eight major U.S.
airports. Department of Transportation officials posed as airport
employees and gained access to secure areas, including aircraft, in 117 out of
173 attempts. The Washington Post said the study showed that breaching airport
security was "a breeze" and cited a DOT official who called the FAA's oversight
of safety inadequate. The FAA downplayed the report, saying it has addressed
the concerns and that passengers "[do] not need to be alarmed."

            

               Northern Ireland's new coalition government took power. Under an
agreement reached last weekend, a 12-member Cabinet with equal representation
for Protestant and Catholic constituencies received governing authority from
the British Parliament on Thursday. The pro-British Ulster Unionists dropped
their requirement that the Irish Republican Army disarm before a government
could be formed. Two of the Cabinet's members did not attend the first meeting.
The pessimistic spin: This experiment in compromise faces "a bumpy ride." The
optimistic spin: It's still the best chance yet
for lasting peace. ("" examines the historic new government.)

            

               Some Gulf War veterans exhibit signs of brain damage. Researchers found
subnormal levels of a key chemical in the brains of 22 vets with "Gulf War
syndrome." Newspapers said the new research: 1) "showed that scientists were
narrowing in on chemical exposure --from pesticides …
nerve gas, or an experimental drug given to troops--as the cause of the
illness"; 2) undermines a Clinton administration report suggesting the
complaints resulted from battlefield stress; and 3) could guarantee these
veterans better coverage for treatment. But skeptics cautioned that the
research was inconclusive and was based on a very small sample.

            

               George W. Bush proposed a $483 billion tax cut. It would
reduce tax rates at every income level, double the credit for children, and
eliminate estate taxes. The Bush camp said the cuts' focus on middle- and
lower-income families 
underscored the compassion in Bush's conservatism. But Democrats said the
plan was the same old hat, benefiting the rich, threatening to worsen the
national debt, and jeopardizing Social Security and Medicare. Republican
opponents called it "something only the timid could love--simply more political
expediency."

            

               Hsing-Hsing the panda died. Keepers at Washington, D.C.'s National Zoo
euthanized Hsing-Hsing after deciding that kidney disease was causing him
agonizing pain. He was the surviving male of the pair of pandas that was given
to the United States by Chinese leader Mao Tse-tung after President Nixon's
historic 1972 visit. His body will be preserved and displayed at the
Smithsonian Museum of Natural History early next year. Hsing-Hsing's keepers
declared that they were mourning the death of an old
friend. The Washington Post said that Hsing-Hsing's almost human
personality should lessen the "sense of apartness that causes us to treat so
many animals as a commodity, or a nuisance--in either case as 'things' to be
killed or driven away." (
                  Slate
               's David Plotz good riddance to the
slothful, boring bear.)

            

               The National Academy of Sciences recommended formation of a federal
medical-mistake-prevention program. Medical mishaps kill between
44,000 and 98,000 Americans per year--more than breast cancer, car accidents,
or AIDS--and cost an estimated $9 billion annually. The NAS concluded that a
government program that tracked and disseminated information on these errors
would reduce patient risk. The medical community emphasized that "the number
one cause of medical mistakes is not incompetence but confusion." The virtually
unanimous spin: "
There's no controversy here. … It's an ideal opportunity to increase
quality and decrease costs."

            
               The United States
and Cuba are battling over a 5-year-old boy. Elián González was one of
three people who survived the sinking of a 17-foot aluminum boat that was
carrying 13 Cuban refugees to the United States. The Cuban government says
González should be returned to his Cuban father, claiming that his mother, who
perished in the shipwreck, had kidnapped him. The United States says the boy
will be allowed to gain American citizenship after a year in the country.
Cuba's spin: America's lax immigration policy for Cuban citizens promotes this
kind of tragedy. America's spin: No, it's Cuban oppression that makes people
want to flee.

            

               Fewer American households are made up of married couples with
children. A University of Chicago study found that this type of
household declined from 45 percent to 26 percent of the total between 1972 and
1998. Fifty-one percent of children now live with their two parents, down from
73 percent in 1972. The changes were attributed to: 1) increased cohabitation;
2) later marriages; 3) greater acceptance of divorce; and 4) aging baby boomers
with "empty nests." Newspapers said the statistics signaled the decline of
marriage and "traditional" families. But researchers said that Americans are
increasingly recognizing that these "modern" households can work.

         
      
   
