
   
   
      
         
             Does Crime Pay?

            Criminals, by and large, must be
risk-lovers--otherwise they'd be car-wash attendants instead of criminals.
Lottery players, by and large, must be risk-lovers--otherwise they'd buy
Treasury bonds instead of lottery tickets. You might be tempted to conclude
that criminals and lottery players are often the same people. That's probably
the wrong conclusion. After all, risk-lovers enjoy having all their eggs in one
basket, which suggests they should pursue either crime or the lottery, but not
both.

            Still, if you want to understand what attracts
people to crime, it pays to understand what attracts people to risky activities
more generally, so it pays to understand what attracts people to the
lottery.

            Lotteries are attractive when they offer big prizes
or (relatively) good odds. If you're running a lottery and you're going to pay
out $10 million, you can offer a single $10 million jackpot or you can offer 10
prizes of $1 million each. Which is more appealing to the players? Usually, the
former. For the most part, lottery players prefer a small chance of a big
payout to a bigger chance of a smaller payout. That's because the people who
prefer a bigger chance of a smaller payout are buying certificates of deposit,
not lottery tickets. So if you want to make the lottery more attractive, it's
better to double the size of the jackpot than to double the number of
winners.

            (More precisely,
doubling the number of winners makes the lottery more attractive to the sort of
person who never buys lottery tickets anyway, while doubling the jackpot makes
it more attractive to the sort of person who might actually be tempted to
play.)

            Now let's apply the same reasoning to criminal deterrence.
For the most part, criminals prefer a small chance of a big punishment to a big
chance of a small punishment. That's because the people who prefer a big chance
of a small punishment go into punishing careers like construction work or coal
mining instead of crime. So if you want to make crime less attractive to
criminals, it's better to double the odds of conviction than to double the
severity of the punishment.

            Add 10 percent to the
length of the average jail sentence and crime will fall. Add 10 percent to the
conviction rate instead and crime will fall even further. Like any risk-lovers,
criminals are out to beat the odds, so they get particularly demoralized when
the odds turn against them.

            So much for the theory; now to the facts. What's true of
the lottery should be true at the racetrack. And gambling consultant Maury
Wolff confirms that if you're designing a complicated bet like a trifecta, the
way to generate the most action per dollar's worth of prize money (and hence
the most profit for the track) is to offer very large prizes at very long odds.
Why, then, do the tracks continue to offer bets with much smaller payoffs?
According to Wolff, it's because big prize winners take their money and go home
while small prize winners plow their winnings back into the next race. That
sets up an interesting trade-off for the track owner: One big prize maximizes
profit on the current race, while several small prizes maximize the action on
the next race. Interesting as that trade-off may be, it's largely irrelevant to
the main point, which is that players like big prizes and long odds. (On
another interesting tangent, Wolff asked me whether there's something
inherently corrupt about a system where the proceeds from state lotteries are
used to fund school systems that then have an incentive to produce the kind of
students who will go out and play the lottery.)

            With regard to crime,
let's consider the most spectacular of all crimes, murder. Here the expert is
Professor Isaac Ehrlich, who, in the mid-'70s, pioneered the use of
sophisticated statistical techniques to measure deterrent effects of conviction
and punishment. Together with Professor Zhiqiang Liu, Ehrlich has recently
revisited the subject, refuting his most vocal critics and offering new
evidence in support of his original conclusion: Increase the number of
convictions by 1 percent and (to a very rough approximation) the murder rate
falls by about 1 percent. Increase the number of executions by 1 percent (which
amounts to increasing the severity of the average punishment) and (again to a
very rough approximation) the murder rate falls by about half a percent. (These
numbers are based on evidence from the 1940s and 1950s. Capital punishment
studies tend to focus on decades with more executions and hence more data.) As
the theory predicts, convictions matter more than punishments.

            That's not to say that punishments don't matter. Executions
may be a less-effective deterrent than convictions, but they are nevertheless
an extremely powerful deterrent; according to Ehrlich's numbers, one additional
execution in 1950 could well have prevented over 20 murders.

            I am grateful to Ehrlich for that amazingly strong
result, because I use it to illustrate three points that I'm always eager to
drive home to my students. First, incentives matter, even to murderers. Second,
economic theory predicts that some incentives matter more than others, and the
data confirm the theory: Executions prevent murders, but convictions prevent
even more murders. And finally, if you want to give policy advice, it's not
enough to know your numbers. You've also got to know your values. Isaac
Ehrlich, the man who proved to the satisfaction of the economics profession
that capital punishment works, is a passionate opponent of capital
punishment.

         
      
   
