
   
   
      
         
            No. 348: "Whose Deal?"

            
               "These are the big
cards we still have to play. Beyond that, I think that, frankly, the likelihood
of success is quite small." Who said this about what desperate effort to save
what precarious venture?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 347)--"Chillin' ":
            

            

               Complete this expression of amazement from Dr. Francis Collins of the
National Institutes of Health, "I don't often pick up a scientific paper and
find myself getting chills, as I did when I saw _______________."
            

            
"Matilda Krim's semi-nude 'Page Three Girl' photo spread."-- Larry
Amoros
            

            "Pat
Buchanan's EEG."-- Dan Dickinson
            

            
"Booty Call ."-- Colleen Werthmann
            

            "Two
lab animals copulating frenziedly, unaware of the death that awaited
them."-- Michael Gerber
            

            "The
Mailer Daemon from Critical Path."-- Andrew Staples
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            To thoughtful quiz
participants (thoughtful in the sense of "acutely thinking," not in the sense
of "considerately sending a Hanukkah gift to the quiz wrangler whose shirt size
is 15/34 and whose liquor size is one liter), chills can be induced by both
fear and joy, particularly erotic joy. That the first sort of chill is easily
transmuted to the second may explain why scary movies are popular date-night
entertainment: To be scared is a short step from being sexually aroused. (Hold
me!) This theory goes a long way to explain vampire movies, which are both; and
Meryl Streep movies about inspirational music teachers, which are neither. It
may also be that any intense emotion can be transformed into any other, which
is why the best part of breakin' up can indeed be makin' up, and why a
passionate quarrel can culminate in a yet more passionate reconciliation. It
may also explain the expression "scared stiff" (in the sense of tumescent, not
in the sense of immobilized by drunken overindulgence in a gift bottle of
bourbon that one never received). Happy Hanukkah, everybody!

            
               Golly Genome
Answer
            

            "I don't often pick up a scientific paper and find
myself getting chills, as I did when I saw this whole chromosomal
landscape ."

            Dr. Collins was reacting to an account of the first
sequencing of a human chromosome, No. 22, described in the current issue of
Nature magazine.

            An international consortium of university centers
took 10 years to achieve this milestone in the human genome project, whose goal
is to decipher all human DNA by 2005. Although it is the second smallest of the
23 pairs of human chromosomes, No. 22 contains 43 million units of DNA, of
which researchers have decoded 33.5 million. The team has identified 535 genes
of the 1,000 or so thought to be on No. 22. The total number of human genes is
estimated at between 60,000 and 120,000.

            The genome sequence is
posted at www.genome.ou.edu/Chr22.html.

            
               Left Over Ought To Be
Biographies Extra
            

            Last week, participants were asked for the title of
a much-needed but unwritten autobiography of any national political figure.
Unfortunately, a series of foul-ups from Shining Path, 
                  Slate
               's
worthless e-mail provider, prevented many replies from getting through. Near as
I can tell, e-mail service to the quiz remains shaky, but many amusing
responses about President Carter and that attack rabbit are just now trickling
in, so look for those tomorrow. In the meantime, a few more campaign bios:

            

               "Being There: The autobiography of George W. Bush ."-- Morris
Jackson
               

               "Faith of My Political Handlers , also by George W."-- Morris
Jackson
               

               "Daddy, Dearest , by Steve Forbes."-- Morris Jackson
               

               "Bill Clinton, ghostwritten by Marion Barry, titled, Bitch Set Me
Up! "-- Michael J. Basial
               

               "David Copperfield , by Joseph Biden."-- Zick Rubin
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Sex, death, and unreliable e-mail service: Aren't
those Woody Allen's big themes?

         
      
   
