
   
   
      
         
            Hope for Northern Ireland

            "The
Future Starts Here" was the Irish Independent 's front-page headline Monday as
papers on both sides of the Irish Sea were full of cautious optimism about the
future of Northern Ireland. David Trimble, the province's designated first
minister in a devolved government, was warmly praised in both Britain and the
Irish Republic for having won the agreement Saturday of 58 percent of his
Ulster Unionist Party to share power with republican Sinn Fein, its traditional
enemy. The Irish Times , another Dublin newspaper, said in an editorial headlined "The courage of Mr Trimble" that "[t]he
Belfast Agreement may yet resonate in the collective memory of our children as
a great imaginative departure and a creative compromise between traditionally
antagonistic forces." The Irish Times went on, "Nationalists have
swallowed the bitter truth that there will be no united Ireland in the
foreseeable future and if it comes, it will only happen with the consent of a
majority in Northern Ireland. Unionists have had to accept, in the new
cross-Border structures, the legitimate aspirations of nationalists to build a
closer relationship with the Republic. The Government of Ireland Act of 1920 is
to be repealed and the people of this State have agreed to relinquish the
territorial claim to unity. A fundamental change in those mind-sets that froze
into place at the turn of the century is under way." The Irish News , a Roman
Catholic paper based in Belfast, said in an editorial,
"It was, by any standards, a testing weekend for Unionists and nationalists,
and many difficulties still lie ahead, but the political process and a better
future remain on course."

            In
Britain Monday, the Independent of London praised the "heroism" of Trimble and
the "superhuman patience" of former U.S. Sen. George Mitchell, who brokered the
troubled Good Friday agreement. The Guardian said that,
starting Monday, an historic step would be taken every day this week,
culminating Thursday in self-government for Ulster. "This should be a great
week for Northern Ireland--and for making that possible David Trimble and his
party should be congratulated," it concluded. The Times of London said
that the peace process had reached "first base" but that "whether it advances
further now rests exclusively with Sinn Fein and the IRA." The Daily Telegraph
remained the most skeptical of the British papers. In an editorial headlined "Trimble's still in trouble," it
doubted if the IRA would surrender its weapons before next May as promised (if
the IRA doesn't, Trimble has said that he will resign as first minister and
thus destroy the power-sharing executive). "[I]t is almost impossible to see
what benefit Sinn Fein/IRA would gain from junking the threat of violence," it
said. "[A]fter all, terror has helped to win them office in part of the United
Kingdom."

            On the
eve of the World Trade Organization conference in Seattle, papers around the
world were apprehensive about its outcome. In London, the Financial Times said, "Failure,
or a feeble political fudge, would leave the global trade system dangerously
adrift." Bill Clinton, perhaps alone, has the skills needed to provide success,
it said. "His presence [in Seattle], and his efforts to clinch China's WTO
entry, suggest he has a strong personal commitment to the global trade system,"
the FT said in an editorial. "This week, he has an exceptional opportunity
to prove it--and to bequeath a lasting legacy." The Times of London, in
an editorial headed "Chance in a Millennium," said the thousands of people
protesting in Seattle against globalization will "do serious harm if they give
the negotiators inside excuses to shirk the tough decisions." The paper said,
"The real fear of the protestors is not that the trade talks will fail but that
they will succeed, for protectionism is a powerful force behind which shelter
not only state monopolies, inefficient industries and cossetted farmers but
backward-looking and xenophobic ideologies."

            
Leading Die Welt
of Germany Monday was a report that a research team in Cambridge, England, has
decoded the complete genetic makeup of a human chromosome. Le Monde of Paris, which also
reported the development on its front page, said the magazine Nature is
due to publish the composition of Chromosome 22 this Thursday, marking the
first time that the hugely complex chemical structure of a complete human
chromosome has been revealed. "The genetic code in the chromosome is thought to
contain vital information on several hereditary conditions, including
schizophrenia and deafness," the Sunday Telegraph of London
said. It added, "The 22 nd chromosome is also a key immune system
regulator."

            
Commenting on this weekend's general election defeat in New Zealand of National
Party Prime Minister Jenny Shipley by Labor Party leader Helen Clark, the
Sydney Morning
Herald of Australia noted Monday that "the first country to give women the vote, in
1893, has ended the century with an election involving two women leading the
major parties and with its first elected female prime minister." Nevertheless,
the paper called Clark's victory speech "cautious and dour" and lacking in
vision.

            
Sunday's Ha'aretz of Israel reported that members of New Zealand's
indigenous Maori community are claiming descent from the 10 lost tribes of
Israel. The paper said a first group of several dozens Maoris is expected in
Israel soon "in order to renew their ties with the Jewish people. … The Maoris
believe they are descendants of the tribe of Ephraim, who made their way to the
South Pacific islands 3,000 years ago and see a certain similarity between
their religion and Judaism."

            In
Japan, Asahi Shimbun reported Sunday that one of the three workers
responsible for the country's worst ever nuclear accident, which took place
this Sept. 30, has been in critical condition since his heart temporarily
stopped beating last Saturday. Hisashi Ouchi, 35, was exposed to huge amounts
of radiation when he and two colleagues at the Tokaimura uranium processing
plant illegally mixed a large quantity of uranium solution in a stainless steel
container. The mixture triggered a nuclear chain reaction at the plant.
According to doctors quoted by Asahi Shimbun , Ouchi lost a great deal of
blood from his intestines, and his skin has been failing to reproduce
itself.

            On Monday the same paper
reported the death at age 97 of Elizabeth Gray Vining, an
American teacher from Philadelphia who served as Emperor Akihito's tutor for
four years from 1946 while he was still crown prince of Japan. "Besides
teaching English to the future emperor, Vining also passed on democratic
ideals, such as freedom and respect for the individual," the paper said. As a
Quaker, she also held strong pacifist convictions, and she was the only
foreigner invited to the wedding of the crown prince to Michiko Shoda in April
1959.

         
      
   
