
   
   
      
         
            Citizen Bandwidth

            How fast can you read this?
How fast will your computer keyboard accept the characters you type? How fast
does water flow out of your kitchen faucet? The answers depend on
bandwidth . Simply put, bandwidth is a measurement of how much, how
quickly. The speed at which your brain absorbs words (words per minute), your
computer accepts keystrokes (characters per second), or your faucet squirts
water (gallons per minute) can be described in terms of bandwidth.

            The rate
at which computers can send and receive information is expressed in bandwidth,
too, as bits per second . Surveys tell us that most readers connect to

                  Slate
                with 28.8 modems, which, under optimal conditions, deliver
a bandwidth of 28,800 bits of data per second. What's a bit? A bit is
the smallest unit of data, either a zero or a one. For example, eight bits
represent a single letter in the alphabet: The eight-letter word "alphabet"
contains 64 bits.

            The average 
                  Slate
                article--and I just happen
to have one right here, "Booker Snooker"--contains about 800,000 bits of text,
images, and formatting information. It takes about 30 seconds to download via a
28.8 modem. (Let's do the math: Eight hundred thousand bits divided by 28,800
bits per second equals 27.8 seconds.)

            Software
developers like me lust for more bandwidth, and so do civilians like you who
only use computers. We all want 
                  Slate
                and ESPN Sportszone and
Amazon.com to download faster to our computers. Bandwidth! Bandwidth!
Bandwidth! the masses cry. But ever since mankind first took serious notice
of bandwidth--ever since the invention of Morse code , that is--there
hasn't been enough of it. An average telegrapher can communicate at 20 to 40
words per minute. That's about 16 to 32 bits per second. If your computer
operated at Morse code's bandwidth, it would take between a half-day and a full
day to download a page from 
                  Slate
               .

            
The bandwidth bottleneck bugs me because we've
seen dramatic increases in performance on almost every other computer front. A
1985 processor (386) ran at 12 MHz. A 1997 Pentium II processor runs at 300
MHz--about 20 times faster. Over that same time, the storage capacity of the
average computer has grown by a factor of 250. But usable bandwidth for the
home user has increased only about threefold.

            Have the
bandwidth guys been taking long lunches, or what? Actually, they've been doing
a great job--it's the rotten telephone companies that have been lollygagging.
Everybody has heard about Moore's Law , named after an Intel founder,
which holds that the power of CPUs doubles every 18 months. There's a
corresponding bandwidth law, named after its discoverer, right-wing
techno-utopian George Gilder , which states that bandwidth triples every
12 months. And it has been tripling every 12 months for the last decade
or so.

            The phone companies haven't piped this wonderful bandwidth
into most homes yet because they're fairly happy with the quaint technology of
copper wire they've installed over the last century. Copper-wire telephone
connections have enough bandwidth to transmit voices, but not enough for
gluttons like me. Click for an explanation of "Shannon's Limit ," which
tells you why the bandwidth of conventional telephone connections will never
exceed 56,000 bits per second.

            If you're
lucky, your friendly neighborhood telephone monopoly provides ISDN
service in your town. ISDN stands for "integrated services digital network,"
and the technology moves data to computers at 128,000 bits per second. That's
five times faster than a regular modem, which means you can download the
average 
                  Slate
                page in about six seconds. The service isn't cheap.
In Seattle, the phone company charges about $100 for ISDN installation and
about $65 a month for flat-rate access. The ISDN modem itself will set you back
about $200. ISDN is the most popular alternative to conventional modems:

                  Slate
               's Washington, D.C., offices connect to the Web and the
Redmond mothership through ISDN.

            
The best bandwidth is free bandwidth. For most
people, that means a T1 connection at work or school. (In New York City,
some Net-savvy landlords are outfitting apartment buildings with T1 service. I
wish those landlords would buy my building in Seattle.) Like ISDN, T1 breaks
the 56,000-bits-per-second barrier by going 100-percent digital , that
is, by transmitting ones and zeros instead of the up-and-down waves of an
analog signal. For a more detailed explanation of how ISDN, T1, and
other ultrafast technologies work, click .

            T1
transmits data at 1.5 million bits per second, delivering 
                  Slate
               
articles in about half a second. Of course, your mileage may vary depending on
how many users are connected to your T1 line, how busy the Internet or

                  Slate
               's Web site might be at the moment, and how clogged your
local-area network might be. You can only move so much data through the
pipe at a time.

            But you want faster. Some phone companies are offering test
trials of a new technology, ADSL , or "asymmetric digital subscription
line." Right now, ADSL is ridiculously expensive--more than $1,000 for the
modem alone. But it's also ridiculously fast. Connection speeds are around 8
million bits per second from the Internet to you and about 800,000 bits per
second from you to the Internet. It would take only one-tenth of one second to
download a 
                  Slate
                article via ADSL.

            If ISDN or
ADSL haven't come to your block and you want to punish the phone companies for
their intransigence, try the DirecPC satellite service from Hughes
Electronics. The first question you should ask yourself is, "Are you man enough
for DirecPC's 400,000-bits-per-second bandwidth?" The company's Web site sets
down these specific restrictions, among others: You must have 1) an
"[u]nobstructed line of site to the South from your home [or] office" and 2)
"[n]o tolerance for waiting." DirecPC beams the Internet from Hughes'
satellites to personal dishes and then into users' computers. Please allow two
seconds for 
                  Slate
                pages to download. DirecPC is a bad choice for
those who want to transmit data, because it uplinks on conventional phone lines
at a paltry 28,800 bits per second. Another bandwidth initiative, Broadcast
PC , will exploit the unused bandwidth in broadcast television signals to
beam content. This one-way connection will offer speeds up to 150,000 bits per
second.

            
The bandwidth to end all bandwidth comes to you
from another despicable monopoly , your local cable guy. The cleverly
named Silicon Valley start up @Home promises 30 million bits per second of
bandwidth through cable-TV lines . Theoretically, @Home can deliver a

                  Slate
                page in 0.0266 seconds. The company has forged alliances
with several cable companies such as Comcast (full disclosure: Microsoft
recently invested $1 billion in Comcast) and Cox to provide service. Analysts
say cable-modem service will be ubiquitous by the turn of the century.

            Sounds
like nirvana, right? The big gotcha is that 30 million bits per second is
faster than the Internet connects to itself. Many Web sites connect to the
Internet through T1 lines, which, you recall, have a bandwidth of 1.5 million
bits per second. Because your Internet connection is no faster than your
slowest link, you won't see a Web page in 0.0266 seconds unless it is stored on
the @Home computer. 
                  Slate
                throws a fire hose at this problem and
connects to the Internet through a DS3 line, which has a bandwidth of 45
million bits per second.

            If Gilder's Law is correct, bandwidth will soon be cheaper
than air. But will the bandwidth explosion be undermined by Shuman's
Law ? Shuman's Law holds that you can count on talented twentysomething
software developers (like Shuman) to write big, stinking pieces of software
that will swallow all your expanding computer resources--your processor, your
hard disk, your memory, and your bandwidth --resulting in no net
performance gains. Already, talented twentysomething software developers are
laying plans to choke the cable-enhanced Internet with full-motion video
( one feature-length movie contains almost 17 gigabytes of data, or 136
billion bits ), virtual-reality games, assorted business applications, XXX
live smut, and Webzines about politics and culture.

            Actually, I think that the
young software developers will be swamped by a bandwidth tsunami and that we're
entering the "age of experience " on the Web predicted by Peter Cochrane,
top research geek at BT Networks and Systems. Soon, the Web will transmit what
Cochrane calls "full expertise." If a picture is worth 1,000 words, he writes,
and a moving picture is worth 1,000,000 words, then an "interactive
pictographic world" of a supercharged Web is worth 1,000,000,000 words.
Bandwidth permitting, anything that can be done in meatspace will be doable in
virtual space. I just hope that by the time I'm scheduled for remote
double-bypass surgery, the Web no longer transmits "404 Site Not Found"
errors.

         
      
   
