
   
   
      
         
            Invisible Ink

            Last weekend, the print
media got cold feet and spiked the story. Television dipped its pinkie toe in,
yanked it out as if scalded, and then plunged back in. Meanwhile, the half-told
tale unfolded in all its seamy glory on the Web, where everyone went to read
about it and post their comments in newsgroups. Not until Wednesday morning did
the big dailies finally report what everyone was talking about: the president's
alleged affair with a White House intern.

            It starts
late Saturday night, when Web-newsie Matt Drudge files this breathless report on his
site. "At the last
minute, at 6 p.m. on Saturday evening, Newsweek magazine killed a story
that was destined to shake official Washington to its foundation: A White House
intern carried on a sexual affair with the President of the United States!"
Drudge explains that "reporter Michael Isikoff developed the story of his
career, only to have it spiked by top Newsweek suits hours before
publication."

            From here the story spreads with speed. At 2:23 a.m. Sunday
morning, someone posts the Drudge item in the
alt.current-events.clinton.whitewater newsgroup. Other newsgroupers, though
they know only what Drudge tells them, repost the item. By 1 p.m. Sunday,
alt.impeach.clinton is in on it. Following suit: alt.politics.clinton and
talk.politics.misc. Many of them buy Drudge's account ("I'd settle for a
president who doesn't f**k interns in the White House"). Bickering ensues ("Do
right-wing morons really believe what they read in the Drudge report?"). Some
don't trust Drudge ("Gosh, that Drudge, such a pillar of journalistic
integrity. Snicker!"). But the story's out there. Soon enough, talk turns to
the intern's high-level security clearance and the chance that she might
blackmail the president.

             

            The
scandal moves to television Sunday morning. Weekly Standard Editor
William Kristol strategically inserts it in a discussion of the Paula Jones
case during the round-table section of ABC's This Week With Sam and Cokie. It is approximately 12:45 p.m. EST,
about a half-day after the Drudge eruption. Other "incidents" of Clinton
philandering may surface, Kristol says, and "the media is going to be an issue
here." He continues, "The story in Washington this morning is that
Newsweek magazine was going to go with a big story based on
tape-recorded conversations, which a woman who was a summer intern at the White
House, an intern of Leon Panetta's--"

            
Kristol is cut off by fellow commentator George
Stephanopoulos, who knows where Kristol is coming from and where he is going.
Before Kristol can explain why the intern is in the news or identify Matt
Drudge as the source of his scoop, Stephanopoulos says, "And Bill, where did it
come from? The Drudge 
               Report . You know, we've all seen how
discredited--"

            Now
Stephanopoulos is cut off as Kristol battles for control. Co-host Sam Donaldson
comes up with the ball and concludes, "I'm not an apologist for
Newsweek , but if their editors decided they didn't have it cold enough
to go with, I don't think that we can here ... how could we say Newsweek
was wrong to kill it?" Co-host Cokie Roberts ends the discussion by changing
topics.

            By 8 p.m., CNBC's Equal
Time joins the fray. They agree that "Michael Isikoff is an extraordinarily
fine investigative reporter," and that the Newsweek brass must have got
cold feet. Drudge's page is referred to as a "gossip report."

            Monday
brings more postings on various Web sites: The Drudge Report updates the
story--and the story behind the story. Drudge names Monica Lewinsky as
Clinton's alleged paramour. 
                  Slate
                mentions the
Kristol-Stephanopoulos-Donaldson exchange in "Pundit
Central" and the alleged spiking of the Newsweek story in "In Other Magazines." The
Webzine the Underground makes it the day's feature story. CNBC's
Rivera
Live airs a few choice rumors about the scandal. By Tuesday, Matt Drudge
speaks his piece on CBS Radio's Mary Matalin Show and keeps filing on the Web. Tuesday
night, Drudge writes that federal investigators possess taped phone
conversations that substantiate the rumors of a presidential affair.

            
And from the print media? Not a peep until
Wednesday morning. The Washington Post and Los Angeles Times withhold the story from their first editions
but include it on Page One of the home-delivery editions. (The two dailies
don't trace the story back to the Drudge Report .) CNN goes to Defcon1,
with constant updates, and so do the wire services. The other TV networks
follow, as do the big news Web sites--CNN Interactive, MSNBC, and ABCnews.com.

            Would the story have broken
if not for the Web? Probably. Did the Web give the story additional velocity?
Definitely. The ethics cops who patrol newspaper and magazine newsrooms can't
control the rumors and unsubstantiated stories that people post to the Web. And
they can't undo whatever quick-tongued network-TV guests like Bill Kristol say
in 10 seconds. If the Web prints it and television goes with it, print must
follow.

         
      
   
