
   
   
      
         
            Bound in Chains

            In November 1994, an e-mail
letter began to circulate on the Internet detailing the dangers of a vicious,
hard-drive-eating computer virus called "Good Times." Recipients were urged to
forward the e-mail to their friends. Computer authorities promptly debunked the
letter--the virus did not exist. Soon, a revamped "Good Times" message appeared
on the Net, warning of an "n th -complexity infinite binary loop"--a
device as fictional as it is impressive-sounding. Even though this note was
debunked, it continued to propagate as well-intentioned computer users
forwarded it to their friends and colleagues. Netizens translated it into other
languages and it appeared around the world. It was read over a radio broadcast
in Malta. Eventually a parody arrived--it, too, was widely circulated.
According to the "Good Times FAQ" Web page, "It's no longer accurate to speak
of 'comebacks' and 'outbreaks' of Good Times. It's just there--part of the
landscape, like kudzu and dandelions."

            Of
course, chain letters like the "Good Times" e-mail predate the Internet. In the
19 th century, "prayer chains" encouraged the faithful to pray for
someone in need and extend the chain. A well-known postal chain, the St. Jude
letter, claims a 1903 inception date. It promises luck to those who forward it
and calamity to those who don't. The U.S. Postal Service estimates that the
chain has circled the globe at least nine times. Prayer chains also thrive on
the telephone, as callers dial friends and acquaintances and ask them to pray
for someone in need--and then ask them to make the same request of their
friends and acquaintances.

            The St. Jude letter is a "mind virus," says Oliver
Goodenough of Vermont Law School. Goodenough and Richard Dawkins, the noted
Darwinist, have written about the survival techniques of the St. Jude letter
and other chain mail for the scientific journal Nature . In their view,
these information parasites seek to infect host brains. The most "fit" mind
virus is the one that is forwarded ("replicated") to prospective infectees.
Less fit letters are not forwarded, and so die. Some potential hosts are
inoculated against chain-mail viruses by excessive exposure--they simply ignore
the letters.

            In the old days, there were
measurable costs to extending the chain--time-consuming hand-copying or
expensive photocopying or the price of postage. But thanks to virtually free
e-mail, the velocity of chain mail has accelerated on the Net, and successful
chains now billow into huge, tumorous entities in a matter of weeks.

            The "Good Times" e-mail cribs
its evolutionary strategy from the old postal chains: "A Utah man received this
letter and threw it away. Nine days later he died." By invoking fear and
disaster, the "Good Times" e-mail finds a soft spot to infect: Anxiety about a
hard-disk crash is never far from computer users' minds.

            Greed is
almost as good a parasitic strategy as fear. The ubiquitous "Make Money Fast"
e-mail recasts the classic pyramid scheme as e-scam: Send $5 to the names on
the list, add your own name to the bottom, and reap your windfall later. The
"MMF Hall of Humiliation" Web site traces the "Make Money Fast" chains to their
origins and lists addresses and phones of the alleged originators, requesting
that you spam them.

            
Pitted against the evolutionary strategies of
fear and greed, we find a genre of chain e-mail that employs compassion. Surely
you've received the "Jessica Mydek" letter, birthed on America Online. It
reads:

            LITTLE JESSICA MYDEK IS
SEVEN YEARS OLD AND IS SUFFERING FROM AN ACUTE AND VERY

            RARE CASE OF CEREBRAL
CARCINOMA. THIS CONDITION CAUSES SEVERE MALIGNANT BRAIN

            TUMORS AND IS A TERMINAL
ILLNESS. THE DOCTORS HAVE GIVEN HER SIX MONTHS TO LIVE.

            AS PART OF HER DYING WISH,
SHE WANTED TO START A CHAIN LETTER TO INFORM PEOPLE

            OF THIS CONDITION AND TO
SEND PEOPLE THE MESSAGE TO LIVE LIFE TO THE FULLEST AND

            ENJOY EVERY MOMENT, A CHANCE
THAT SHE WILL NEVER HAVE. FURTHERMORE, THE

            AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY AND
SEVERAL CORPORATE SPONSORS HAVE AGREED TO DONATE

            THREE CENTS TOWARD
CONTINUING CANCER RESEARCH FOR EVERY NEW PERSON THAT GETS

            FORWARDED THIS MESSAGE.
PLEASE GIVE JESSICA AND ALL CANCER VICTIMS A CHANCE.

            It is a
beautiful vision. A dying girl spreads a noble message across the world. All
readers need to do to fill cancer-research coffers is click a button. The one
problem, of course, is that Jessica Mydek is as fictitious as an
n th -complexity infinite binary loop. The American Cancer Society
disavows any involvement with the letter.

            The "Jessica Mydek" e-mail succeeds because it promises the
replicator instant karma. So does the "Save NPR" letter, which claims that
public broadcasting is in peril. Its modest request is that recipients put
their names at the bottom of the list and forward it to friends. Eventually,
the letter states, the e-mail petition will be collected and presented to
Congress and the president. Never mind, of course, that public broadcasting
isn't under attack, that NPR receives little of its support directly from
Congress, and that NPR spokespeople say the letter is useless.

            Web sites
that campaign against chain mail complain that junk e-mail wastes Internet
bandwidth, reduces productivity, and exploits human emotions. But let's not
forget the upside to the chains. They make you feel as if the click of your
mouse has saved your neighbor's hard drive, healed sickly Jessica Mydek, and
rescued poor little NPR. Jessica Mydek may not be real, but the emotion
showered on her is, and the millions of e-mails containing her name suggest
that the impulse to do good on the Net could be harnessed.

            
Craig Shergold was a genuine Jessica Mydek, a
7-year-old with cancer. In 1989 he began a conventional postal chain letter
asking that greeting cards be mailed to Atlanta's Children's Wish
Foundation--his goal was to break the Guinness World Record. He did it in two
years, receiving 16 million cards, and his cancer went into permanent
remission.

            Then the chain moved to the
Internet, and people continued to send cards, even though Craig asked them not
to. By 1993 he was clearing 300,000 cards a week and stopped counting at 60
million total cards. The foundation needed a donated warehouse and 40 full-time
staff to handle the mail, which it simply recycled.

            Last month I got a chain
e-mail requesting greeting cards for Craig Shergold. I forwarded it to 10
friends.

         
      
   
