
   
   
      
         
            Braver New World

            Are we in Aldous Huxley's
Brave New World already?

            I suppose that many people
who watched the TV version of Huxley's novel (NBC; April 19, 1998) must have
asked themselves this question. Huxley visualized a society in which the
population--except for the few masters--is kept under control, not by fear of
punishment but through the "reinforcement of desirable behavior by rewards" and
the "non-violent manipulation of the environment and of the thoughts and
feelings of individual men, women and children." In the novel everyone has free
access to an unlimited supply of a drug--soma--that induces a feeling of
happiness. People are constantly brainwashed with the thought that they deserve
to be happy. Sex is readily available without complications. Babies are
produced in vats. There is no love between individuals, no families, no
devotion to anyone or anything to compete with devotion to the State.

            All this
brings up thoughts of Prozac and Viagra, the "sexual revolution," the constant
bombardment of product advertising, and the political imposition of "spin" on
every issue. Hence the question "Are we there already?"

            When Huxley wrote his book, published in 1932, he placed
the Brave New World in the 25 th century. But in 1958 he wrote a
little book called Brave New World Revisited , in which he expressed the
thought that we were getting there much sooner than he had earlier imagined,
and that, indeed, we would be far into it by the end of the 20 th
century. He advised his readers to read that book "against a background of
thoughts about the Hungarian uprising [of 1956] and its repression."

            Two forces
led Huxley to advance the date at which his society would arrive. They were
population and technology. He foresaw that the world's population would
increase enormously by the end of this century. He thought that the great
increase in population would cause economic misery around the world, creating
the need for a dictatorship to maintain order and control future population
growth. Technological change would require the concentration of production in
the hands of huge institutions, controlled either by Big Business or by Big
Government. Within these institutions, the technology would require workers to
perform more and more as robots. But the main contribution of "advancing"
technology to Huxley's world was the facility it provided for manipulating the
minds of the population. Television would greatly enhance the ability of the
authorities to bring their message constantly into every home. Little
newspapers and magazines with dissenting opinions could not survive
economically. The population would be constantly immersed in soap operas and
sports on television, effectively diverted from any thinking about society.
Mind-altering drugs would be increasingly available, cheap, and without
dangerous side effects.

            
In 1958 Huxley saw all this already happening
or just around the corner. What he would say today we cannot know. He died in
1963. But it seems to me that the main lesson, or at least one of the main
lessons, from Huxley's 1958 essay is how wrong a brilliant mind can be.

            He was
right about the growth of population. But that growth did not produce an
economic crisis, with incomes declining and government control needed to
maintain order. World per capita income is higher than ever and still rising.
In what were the two most populous poor countries, China and India, the
improvement in the economic conditions of life has been especially noticeable.
This improvement of economic conditions was not brought about by an increase of
centralized control. Government control of economies is diminishing everywhere.
The greatest economic crisis since Huxley wrote occurred in the most controlled
state, the Soviet Union, and led to the dismantling of controls.

            Moreover, technological change did not lead to a
centralization of production in a few giant institutions. The trend has been
the reverse. Improved information technology has facilitated the efficient
interaction of independent units through the market without central control.
And technology has not changed workers into robots. On the contrary, technology
has created mechanical robots and calls upon human beings to do what robots
cannot do.

            The
centralized manipulation of human minds through modern media that Huxley
predicted and feared is not happening either. He did not foresee cable
television, let alone the Internet. People have access to more varied sources
of information than ever before. Moreover, television is turning out to be an
ineffective medium for influencing human emotions. Huxley describes the rousing
effect that Hitler could have on a hundred thousand Germans listening to him in
person in moonlight in an amphitheater. If he had delivered the same speeches
on television to millions of people sitting at home in groups of two or
three--eating popcorn, getting up to go to the bathroom, and channel-surfing
with their remote control--the effect would have been very small. Certainly TV
exposure of our great authorities has not increased respect for them or our
willingness to follow their lead. And the effect of advertising, which
concerned Huxley greatly as an instrument that a dictator might use, has turned
out to be trivial. We may buy red or black cars rather than green or brown ones
because of television, but we don't buy cars because of television.

            
The use of mind-altering drugs has probably
increased as Huxley foresaw, although probably not to the extent that he
foresaw. He thought that the use of these drugs would make the population
indifferent and willing to accept control by political leaders. But first there
would have to be seizure of control by some group that was not indifferent.
Today, we neither have such a group nor the atmosphere for its emergence. Of
course, we do have people who want to be in office, but once in office they
don't want to be in control. Anyway, what causes indifference to politics today
is not drugs but politics, which seems less and less relevant to our lives.

            There is
a trick in Huxley's argument that makes it difficult to refute. Unlike the
people in the Gulag Archipelago , the masses in Huxley's world do not
know they are not free. They have been drugged and brainwashed into thinking
that they are doing exactly what they want, not what some dictator wants them
to do. So, if we say that we are free, how can we prove that we have not been
programmed to say that by a Master who is manipulating us into thinking that?
Perhaps he put soma into our drinking water.

            There is, however, an answer to that. The masters of the
Brave New World would not allow a movie version of Brave New World to be
shown on television. The movie reveals what such a society could be like and
what a horror it would be. The heroes of the movie are a man and woman who
escape the system with their baby and are going to live like a traditional
family. As long as Brave New World is shown on television we will know
we are not in it.

            I describe the Brave New
World as a horror, and Huxley thought of it as that also. He was writing a
warning, not a prescription. There may be people who do not look upon it as
horrible. It is a society in which every want is fulfilled. But, as Professor
Frank H. Knight used to say, what people want is not only to have their wants
fulfilled but also to have better wants. People in the Brave New World
satisfy the wants they have but are prevented from having some good wants, like
want for love and family, and deprived of the opportunity to reach for new and
better wants.

         
      
   
