
   
   
      
         
            Apology Not Accepted

            Mercury Center, the interactive
online site of the San Jose Mercury News , is buzzing with anger at a new
target-- Mercury News Executive Editor Jerry Ceppos. The subject was the
newspaper's controversial series of last August, "Dark Alliance,"
which alleged that the CIA had promoted the sale of crack cocaine to Americans
as part of the U.S. government's support of the Nicaraguan Contras in the
1980s.

            Sunday,
Ceppos wrote that the series had been irresponsibly written and
edited, and that it had failed to prove any wrongdoing on the part of the CIA.
Online scandal-mongers immediately labeled Ceppos a turncoat. The reporter who
wrote the series, Gary Webb, called the column "nauseating," and Rep. Maxine
Waters, D-Calif., said that it shed "nothing new" on the debate over the
credibility of the allegations. Meanwhile, the mainstream media and the CIA
heralded the end of an irresponsible story.

            The Internet is being blamed--and praised--for allowing
this story to gain so much stature. Despite being dissed and then shot down by
such standard-bearers as the New York Times , the Los Angeles
Times , and the Washington Post , the Mercury News allegations
spread like cocaine had in the 1980s, causing national leaders to scurry around
with concern. Two months after "Dark Alliance" appeared, CIA
Director John Deutch made a rare public appearance in South Central Los
Angeles to answer the charges of an angry mob.

            The Web enabled "Dark
Alliance" to bypass the mainstream media and enter the forefront of national
debate. The Mercury News began touting its upcoming series on Internet
newsgroups weeks before it was completed. The electronic version was published
simultaneously with the print version, with the added features of hypertext
links to cited documents, audio tracks from wiretaps and hearings, and an image
(which was later removed) of the official stamp of the CIA, superimposed on a
crack smoker. Within days of the story's appearance, more than 2,500 other Web
sites had linked directly to Mercury Center, causing 100,000 additional hits a
day for weeks afterward.

            For
example, Final Call Online, the Nation of Islam's journal, linked to the
piece with a short commentary titled "The CIA Drug Pipeline: How the U.S.
Government spread cocaine in the Black ghetto." ParaScope, one of
several online journals rich in conspiracy-theorizing, attached this headline:
"CIA's Contras Linked to Crack Trade." The Webzine Salon headlined its
interview with Webb "Your worst fears are true--the CIA did help smuggle drugs
into American ghettos, says an investigative reporter." Robert Parry, co-author
of a 1985 AP news story that first reported that some groups of Contras had
engaged in drug trafficking, is now the editor of an online news magazine, the
Consortium,
and has been promoting the story. Although the Consortium charges for
access, Parry's editorial in The
Nation, endorsing Webb's story, is available at no charge.

            
But it was the chat groups that really whipped
people into a frenzy. Although Usenet newsgroups--a hotbed of discussion on the
topic--may be accessed by members only, the topic spawned independent forums
with such titles as "The CIA-Crack Connection" and "Black Experience: CIA and LA's Drug Connection." These sites were
filled with stinging indictments of the government and the mainstream media as
well as gleeful cheers for the Web. One reader in the Mercury
Center's Reader Forum (the original responses to the series are all still
available) wrote: "We have to raise hell! ... The power of the Web cannot be
underestimated." The overwhelming majority of chat-room participants seem to
accept the premise of "Dark Alliance," and to spend their time arguing over the
connections to other perceived conspiracies like the JFK assassination or that
more recent fave, Arkansas land dealings. One reader submitted this helpful
tip: "If you enjoy this conspiracy, you may want to visit the Squirrel
Conspiracy Home Page."

            The
contagious hyperbole of the Internet clearly had an impact on the life of "Dark
Alliance." As one Web surfer noted: "The outrage of the freshly exposed readers
is refreshing to see." Gary Webb himself joined the fray on the Mercury
Center's Reader Forum, and was clearly energized by his online fans. His first
posting, dated Aug. 19, reads thus: "Since I've been living with this story for
so long, it ceased to shock me long ago. I'm glad to see it still has some
punch." This was mild compared with his Sept. 1 attack on a lone Web surfer who
raised questions about "proof" of CIA involvement: "That's like saying there's
no proof of General Motors' involvement in making Chevrolet," Webb raged. "I
also heard a great line while I was doing a radio show in Florida yesterday:
Now we know what CIA really stands for--Crack In America."

            The feedback on the Web and on radio talk shows fed each
other, creating an alternative media alliance that shouted down the objections
of the mainstream press and catapulted the series to national prominence. Anger
at the mainstream media overwhelms anger at the government in many of these
forums. "How long will Koppel and co. dance away from this one?" asked one
Internet chatter. Black-oriented radio-show hosts repeatedly plugged the
Mercury News Web site in their broadcasts, and it became, in the words
of Richard Prince of the National Association of Black Journalists, "the buzz
of Black America." From there, political leaders like Sen. Barbara Boxer and
the NAACP's Kweisi Mfume began calling for investigations, and the mainstream
press was forced to write metastories with headlines like this one, from the
Oct. 21 New York Times : "Though Evidence is Thin, Tale of CIA and Drugs
Has Life Of Its Own." Other news sites and respected political organizations
like the NAACP began to link to the series.

            The
widespread attention merely fueled the "us vs. them" sentiment of most Internet
discussions on the topic. When Ceppos wrote his apologetic column, he was
merely saying what "they" had been saying all along. "Granted, there may be
inconsistencies, there may be fallacies, but why not take up the banner of
truth and march on?" argues one Webhead. The impact of the Internet has been
twofold: Not only has it allowed the series to leapfrog the mainstream press,
but it has also made the mainstream press as much the enemy as the CIA. The
fact that Ceppos has defected to the dark side merely fuels the fire.

         
      
   
