
   
   
      
         
            Searching for Roots We Never Had

            In the summer, people come
to New England--Vermont, Cape Cod, Martha's Vineyard, Maine--for the natural
amenities, the water, the mountains, the clear, fresh, cool air, the blue
skies. But they also come, I think, in search of their roots. They want not
only to find but also to identify with the America of 200 years ago. They want
to sit on the porch of the local country store and drink coffee and eat
blueberry muffins. They want to browse through the flea market searching for
some memento that connects with, let us say, 1830. If they are near the sea
they want to eat lobsters by the peck. Some of the men will grow little beards,
to be shaved off after Labor Day.

            Some of
the summer people have been coming to the same small town for so many years,
even for more than one generation, that they are part of the local scene and do
have roots there. I am thinking of the more occasional visitors. Very few have
roots in small-town New England. Some may have Boston roots. More have New York
and New Jersey roots. And most have roots two or three generations back in
Lithuania or Ireland or Sicily. But they like to think of themselves as having
a family connection with early America.

            These small New England towns are part of the origins of
the political, economic, and social world we all live in. But so are
Philadelphia and Charlottesville, Va. The summer people coming to these small
towns are not tourists looking for a civics lesson. They are, it seems to me,
seeking and imagining a more personal, familial connection. That is what I mean
by "roots."

            I don't
deride this at all. On the contrary, I think it is wonderful that people here
should become so Americanized, so naturalized, that they come to admire and
seek to identify with a history in which their families had no part. It is a
testament to openness and democracy in America that so many of us want this
connection and succeed in achieving it. I don't know this, but I doubt that
this absorption occurs elsewhere in the world. Would a person whose family had
lived in France or Japan for three generations come to identify himself with
the French or the Japanese culture of 200 years ago as if his family had been a
part of it? I don't think so, unless the person was exceptionally rich or
distinguished and so transcended national boundaries.

            
The search for roots is a common phenomenon.
People want to see where they came from in order to understand and appreciate
themselves better. The Irish like to go back to the Old Sod and see the
conditions in which their grandparents lived and perhaps meet relatives they
had not known before. The same seems to be true of Italians and probably
others. But the New England phenomenon is the adoption of roots that are not
really there.

            Why do
people seek ersatz roots to identify with? Perhaps because the world changes so
rapidly that for many people, the real roots no longer exist. Once on a trip to
Detroit, where I was born, I tried to visit the scenes of my boyhood. Nothing
remained that had any possible connection with me. The scene of my mother's
childhood, Brownsville, in Brooklyn, is now light-years distant from the
culture in which she grew up.

            Finding real roots is especially difficult for Jews of
eastern European origin. The shtetl in Belarus that my father left to
come to America as a boy, over 100 years ago, certainly bears no traces of my
origins--if it still exists. Hitler was quite thorough in cutting us off at the
roots. Some American Jews do go back to visit the larger eastern European
cities in which Jews once lived. But the occasion is one for mourning a
separation, not for celebrating a connection. Many Jews find a trace of their
roots in Israel. They can look at those stony fields and think that members of
their families lived and worked there. But that was a long, long time ago, and
the connection grows faint.

            So we--and now I do not speak
only of Jews--come to small New England towns to find our roots and imagine an
old family connection. I understand that the "natives," the year-round
residents, do not want to adopt the visitors into their families--and may even
resent them. But they are courteous. For one thing, they are all in the
business of selling roots. And maybe in the long winter nights the "natives"
may realize that they are not really natives either, that there were Native
Americans here before them who have now been cut off from their roots.

         
      
   
