
   
   
      
         
            Getting Buggy Wit It 

            There I was, late one night
in the Microsoft software factory, furiously exterminating some of the skankier
bugs from my areas of Outlook 97, our e-mail program. My skill at writing
software, I believe, is God-given. My legendary success at squashing bugs, I
believe, is the result of my tendency to write buggy code. So it was no
surprise when one of the dozens of software testers employed by the Outlook 97
team sent me urgent e-mail. He had discovered a giant bug in my area and was
insistent I inspect it.

            The first
thing you do when a tester brings you a bug is reproduce it. In this case,
reproduction would be easy. Step 1: Create an appointment in Outlook's
calendar. Step 2: Add a conference room to the appointment. So far so good.
Step 3: Change the date of the appointment to the year 4500. Step 4: Switch to
the meeting planner page. Step 5 ...

            Istopped reading the tester's e-mail and wrote back.
Although it was a bad bug, I felt confident I could ignore it for, oh, 2,000
years or so. But Shuman, the crowds chant, doesn't that mean you willingly
shipped buggy software? That you deliberately added to the torment of millions
of computer users who can't get their software to work? Why shouldn't
Outlook 97 be able to handle appointments in specified conference rooms in
future millenniums?

            Well,
folks, I've got news for you: Nothing is perfect, and software is no exception.
Today's robust software products from Microsoft, Lotus, Borland, Corel, and all
the rest are too damn complex to be perfect. How complex are they? Microsoft's
Windows 95 operating system contains more than 10 million lines of code, or
instructions. Compare that with the 6 million parts in a Boeing 747, 3 million
of which are fasteners such as rivets. Fasteners are wonderful, but they don't
interact much with one another. The difficult thing about writing software is
that all 10 million parts of Windows 95 are tightly coupled. Pop a rivet on
your 747, and you're still likely to make your destination. But bollix up one
line of code in Windows 95, and users' computer screens will turn screaming
blue and crash.

            
What are bugs, anyway? And what makes them more
insidious than a few blown rivets? Bugs are errors, somewhat analogous to typos
or factual errors in newspaper articles, but the difference is that a typo is
almost never enough to spoil an entire edition of a newspaper, whereas a tiny
error in a software program can scuttle it. Take the year 2000 bug for example.
The Y2K bug arises because past programmers expressed years with two digits
rather than four, so that the year 1915 is written as 15. Thus to the computer,
the year 2015 looks the same as the year 1915. (Click to find out why
programmers deliberately created the Y2K bug, and why that wasn't such a crazy
thing to do.) The Y2K bug is a very bad bug; the one tiny decision about how to
express dates can bring a whole program to a screeching halt.

            Bugs fall
into two major categories: crashing and functional. Crashing bugs are so
naughty that they cause programs to stop functioning. Usually, this results in
friendly warnings--such as "Illegal Operation" for Windows users or the lovely
picture of a bomb for Macintosh users. The other type of bug is a functional
bug--e.g., the Y2K bug--which is subtler in nature. Functional bugs cause
programs to fail or to give erroneous results. The number of either kind of bug
is proportional to the size of the program.

            But, as Shuman can tell you, it's easy to write bugs into
simple, short programs, like one designed to find a single word in a sentence.
Actually, it's not that simple an operation. You must write perfectly logical
statements in a language that the computer can understand. If you were to write
this program in C, a popular programming language, it would take three lines of
code to tell the program to look at the beginning of the word and the beginning
of each sentence. Next, you'd instruct the computer to match each character in
the word you are searching for to the corresponding characters in the sentence.
If the letters are the same, you continue. This would take five lines of code.
Then you would have to confirm you have gone through all the letters in the
word successfully. Chalk up two more lines. Then you'd need to see if there are
any letters in the sentence left to compare. Two lines of code. Lastly, you
would have to inform the user of your program what happened. Another three
lines--15 lines of code to find one word! Shuman is exhausted just thinking
about it, and he hasn't even started creating bugs! Dropping one essential
instruction or writing the lines of code in the wrong order could spell
destruction for my little program. (For all the gory details on how I actually
wrote this program in C, click .)

            Civilians
assume software companies spend most of their time writing software. Wrong!
They spend most of their time testing software! After developers write a
few lines of code, we test it for bugs and sit down with our testers to imagine
all the ways the program will be used. Good testers make gnarly demands on the
code, inventing disaster scenarios worthy of Hollywood. (My favorite tester
routinely yanked the power cord out of the computer during Outlook operations
to see how the program handled loss of power.) Testers run the software on
different PCs--how will it work on a Hewlett Packard computer vs. a Packard
Bell? They print with old printers. They enter thousands of lines of text into
small fields. One tester placed most of the text of the King James Bible into
an e-mail message, sent it to himself, and then replied to the e-mail. Outlook
choked at this point, demanding a day of rest. God was watching. Here at

                  Slate
                we rarely tug on the power cord to test our code, but we do
test the site on a variety of browsers.

            
At the beginning of a software project, code is
buggy, because we're still getting different parts of the program to cooperate.
A line of code that tells the program how to print may clash with the code that
tells the program how to draw the screen. As testers hunt bugs, developers
conspire with the marketing department to add features to the product, which
breeds more potential bugs. Adding new features to a stable program can be
dangerous. Developers can create bugs faster than testers can capture them, and
testers can capture them faster than developers can kill them, so the only way
to finish a product is to stop adding features and start paying attention to
the bugs.

            
Preventing developers from adding features is not as easy as it sounds. They
love to build things--not to fix things. One way to deter them is to break
their arms with a baseball bat. Given infinite time, developers would prefer to
add feature upon feature and never release their product. But marketing people
are the worst offenders when it comes to wanting to add new features,
generating loud choruses of "NO" even from otherwise enthusiastic
developers.

            Agood tester is like the Roach Motel, corralling bugs and
ensnaring them. "Look what I caught!" the tester meows as he drops the vermin
on the developer's doorstep. Testers are as vain about finding bugs as I am
about squashing them, hence the excessive pride of my tester who uncovered the
year 4500 bug.

            Having
found a bug, it's not easy to find what caused it. Where is the bad assumption
that got us into trouble? Some bugs are hell to track down. One crashing bug in
Outlook would reproduce only on a Gateway computer equipped with a Matrox video
card. Eventually, we tracked the bug down to one single line of code that
failed because it assumed all graphics cards are created equal. They are
not.

            
Bug fixing is time consuming. Developers must
review every line of code, one at a time. They often deploy programs called
"debuggers," which allow them to peer into the innards of the software as it
runs. As developers kill the bugs, they incorporate the solutions into a daily
"build" of the program and test the build to make certain the solutions don't
cause additional bugs. Outlook 97 went through several thousand builds before
it was released, each build bringing us infinitesimally closer to
perfection.

            As we
approach perfection, though, the law of diminishing returns kicks in. Are the
existing bugs fatal defects, or can we live with them? We developers have a
name for bugs we can live with: "known issues." By the time Outlook 97 was
released in November 1997, I suspect I was intimate with every one of its known
issues. I also suspect that 99 percent of all bugs reported by users to
software companies have already been noted and prioritized for fixing by some
late-night team of code warriors.

            The worst bug is a "show stopper" bug, the bug that will
croak the entire program. When a show stopper is discovered, we drop everything
and find a fix. But we make the absolutely smallest necessary change to kill
the bug so that the other parts of the system can continue to work, oblivious
to the chaos around them.

            Developers
seek a balance between "it's done" and "it's perfect" when writing software.
But it's difficult to know when to stop. You are always only a few late nights
away from perfection. Where refining a 747 is, shall we say, somewhat involved,
software writing is powered on caffeine and little more. In fact, one
enterprising young developer strung out on Mountain Dew eventually fixed the
year 4500 bug in Outlook 98, making it safe for everyone making appointments in
the next several millenniums.

            
               If you
missed our links in the article, click to read about why programmers created
the Y2K bug and for a "simple" program in C.
            

         
      
   
