
   
   
      
         
            Dirty Linen

            Fashion mogul Tommy Hilfiger
is in the news--make that "in the newsgroups." For some months now, the
Internet has been abuzz with rumors that Hilfiger made racist remarks in two
separate television appearances.

            According
to various postings on the Net, Hilfiger confessed on Oprah that if he
had been able to predict the success of his clothing among "Chinamen and
niggers," he would "never have made it so nice." A shocked Winfrey allegedly
cut to a commercial; when the show continued, she had changed out of her
now-tainted Hilfiger outfit, and the designer was gone.

            The second story has Hilfiger and Ralph Lauren appearing on
CNN's Style With Elsa Klensch . Complimented on his success in selling
his goods in the East, Lauren thanked his Asian customers. Enter Hilfiger,
voicing his preference that Asians--"these people"--not wear his clothes. A
spotty paraphrase of the allegations appeared in a Nov. 13, 1996, article in
the Philippine newspaper Isyu . Titled "Eat Your Clothes, Mr. Racist
Designer," the piece has been excerpted on the Official
Philippine Anti-Tommy Hilfiger site. The writer tiptoes around the charges,
but is markedly less tentative when expressing her outrage. "I am shocked," she
fulminates. "If [Hilfiger] really did insult my people, you can bet I will do
every single thing I can in my power to make sure that his label never makes it
here."

            Forums
ranging from soc.culture.african.american to talk.rumors and Streetsound have been thick
with anti-Tommy talk of late. When rumors of the designer's alleged racist
outbursts filtered into the mainstream media, they were debunked by Time magazine, USA Today, and the Washington Post. But that didn't stem for a boycott of his
products. Nor did the official response of the Hilfiger Corp. Claiming to have
become aware of the brouhaha only recently, the company has posted a memo on
various anti-Tommy sites detailing the "simple and incontrovertible facts":
Hilfiger has never been on Oprah . Hilfiger has never been on
Style . Far from wanting to limit his appeal, Hilfiger is on record about
wanting to cross ethnic lines to appeal to everyone everywhere.

            
This isn't the first time a fashion designer
has been so vilified: Liz Claiborne was the subject of a virtually identical
story, promoted by Spike Lee in a 1992 interview. (An earlier myth had her
admitting publicly--again on Oprah --to connections with the church of
Satan.) Corporate collisions with racial paranoia have become quite common. In
the late 1980s, purported connections with the Ku Klux Klan so damaged the
reputation of athletic-wear manufacturer Troop (whose name was rumored to be a
Ku Klux Klan acronym for "To Rule Over Oppressed People") that it was forced
into bankruptcy. Talk of the inclusion of sterility-inducing ingredients
targeting black men hobbled both Church's Fried Chicken (1989) and the soft
drink Tropical Fantasy (early 1990s). Kentucky Fried Chicken and a host of
tobacco companies, including Brown & Williamson, R.J. Reynolds, and Philip
Morris, were the subjects of similar Klan/sterility-related canards. Shoe
manufacturers Reebok, Converse, Nike, and Puma were accused of supporting
apartheid in South Africa. The corporate-conspiracy paradigm was easily
extended to include Uncle Sam: AIDS was purportedly a U.S.-government-sponsored
tool for black genocide, as was crack. When the San
Jose Mercury News recently published its findings linking the CIA and
Contra drug-runners, the rumors flared anew.

            Tommy
Hilfiger entered fashion circles in the mid-1980s. A Lauren clone (read:
"khakis") at the outset, he identified an underserved fashion niche--urban
black America, which was drawn to Lauren's WASPy abstractions but alienated by
their overstated inaccessibility. Hilfiger saw potential for symbiosis between
hip-hop and the Hamptons. The result: He still does the khakis and the yacht
shots and the polo ponies (and the red-white-and-blue-stripe designs that some
liken to the Confederate flag), but he mixes them up with punch-bright colors
and exploded logos.

            Hilfiger knew he had struck gold when he noticed black kids
mixing the preppy look with sports gear on the street. As he told Vanity
Fair in 1996, "I saw this and I said, 'Oh my God. What a great
opportunity.' " The fashion formula worked in both directions: Black urban kids
craved the preppy look; white suburban kids wanted to be homeboys. Hilfiger's
creations gained credibility when hip-hop artists like Grand Puba (then of
Brand Nubian) started wearing them. Tapping his friend and Def Jam Music Group
head Russell Simmons for contacts, the designer pursued the rap crowd
aggressively. Snoop Doggy Dogg wore Hilfiger on Saturday Night Live in
1994. The Fugees, TLC, and Doctor Dre have all donned the free threads Tommy
has sent their way. The Hilfiger name was featured in the rap lyrics of Q-Tip
and Grand Puba. And the corporation has thrived. Its shares have risen
sevenfold since it went public in 1992; its sales are expected to rise 40
percent in FY '97 and a further 30 percent in FY '98.

            Who, then,
is behind the Tommy tales? As with most contemporary conspiracy stories, the
source of this one remains elusive. Urban folk legends are invariably ascribed
to a "friend" or, better still, a "friend of a friend" (a "FOAF," to use
folklorist Jan Harold Brunvand's acronym), who is close enough to stabilize the
urban legend but distant enough to escape genuine scrutiny. Predictably,
therefore, the Isyu writer takes no responsibility for her information;
some versions of the first inflammatory Oprah-related posting--by
"Geoff"--thank "a friend from Texas" for the information; a newsgroup
respondent claims to have "heard ... from someone" that irate Filipinos had
razed a Hilfiger factory. Less visible in the Hilfiger threads is the fact that
Hong Kong textile baron and businessman Silas Chou owns 35 percent of the
Hilfiger Corp. Hilfiger himself owns 22.5 percent.

            
In theory, the Web should be as good at
eradicating legends as it is at cultivating them, but in practice, denials are
quickly buried by new messages and updates. A week ago, Hilfiger's official
response clogged newsgroup indexes. Today, it has been swamped by even newer
anti-Tommy postings and returning favorites.

            Why
Tommy? In her pathology of rumor in African-American culture, I Heard It
Through the Grapevine , Patricia A. Turner suggests that symbolically potent
products like athletic gear and flashy clothes--products that tote high price
tags but are of dubious utility--invite hostile theorizing. Aware that they are
paying a premium for the label rather than the quality, minority consumers are
bound to feel exploited. Dissociation with the producer of the offending
temptation--a $400 jacket, say--becomes a coping mechanism, and rumor and
conspiracy theories are only a step away. "Yo I think White America Is messing
up our mind whit all of this bullshit," claims one protester in a newsgroup.
"They ... are laughing at us saying if we make it thsese [ sic ] stupid
ass Niggaz Will Buy it."

            As was the case with Reebok, Hilfiger's pursuit of the
minority market has exposed him to a backlash (it's probably no accident that
Lauren, whose turf he invaded, was cast as the good guy in the Klensch
Style story). And damage control will prove a challenge. Newsgroupies
were questioning the authenticity of Hilfiger's official response soon after it
appeared on the Net. How many times can you kill the phoenix? It's a tough
job--any takers?

         
      
   
