
   
   
      
         
            

             

            
               (posted Thursday, Sept.
10, 1998)
            

            
               To: House Judiciary
Committee, the Honorable Henry Hyde, Chairman
            

            Our office has been charged
by the attorney general with the grave responsibility of determining if there
has been any criminal wrongdoing by the president of the United States or those
acting at his direction.

            The most serious of the
issues we have examined is the alleged cover-up of the sexual affair between a
White House intern, Monica Lewinsky, then 21, and the president of the United
States--a man old enough to be her father--in or near the Oval Office between
November 1995 and December 1997. This case is not about sex but about
possible criminal conduct by President Bill Clinton in violation of his oath of
office and the laws of this nation, including perjury, subornation of perjury,
and obstruction of justice.

            A review
of the relevant criminal violations is in order for a proper judgment to be
rendered by your committee.

            I.
PERJURY

            The details of the illicit
sexual contacts between President Clinton and Ms. Lewinsky contradict the
president's sworn testimony in Jones vs. Clinton and before the grand
jury, despite the president's claims that his statements were "legally
accurate." Herein are highlights of our findings (see Appendix XX for a
complete list and descriptions of sexual acts, including oral copulation,
mutual masturbation, and lewd and lascivious conduct with a cylindrical smoking
device in violation of D.C. criminal code statute 531.6b).

            According to the testimony of
Ms. Lewinsky, the first of 49 sexual contacts between the president and herself
began Nov. 15, 1995 (Lewinsky testimony, Part I, Pages 12-18). Lewinsky
testified that as an intern in the West Wing she was summoned to deliver food
to the president and was so observed entering the Oval Office at 11:59 p.m. by
members of the uniformed Secret Service detail (Officer Lewis Fox testimony,
Pages 5-12).

            "Pizza, Mr. President?"
Monica Lewinsky cooed, hoisting a large box of Domino's above her stylish dark
tresses, according to the testimony of Lewinsky and Officer Fox. The
raven-haired beauty, her voluptuous curves thrusting against the tight fabric
of a low-cut white dress, stood outside the door of the Oval Office near
midnight, a come-hither look in her flashing, dark eyes. "I'd love some," the
president drawled, his eyes widening with desire, "but let me finish up here
talking about highway appropriations with Sen. Lott." He winked broadly, then
gave her a wide, rakish smile that lit her soul with excitement. She was alone
at last with the president! (Lewinsky I, Pages 27-42).

            Lewinsky has stated that ever
since arriving in June 1995, the brilliant young intern, known both for her
shapely body and a powerful intelligence that would make her an asset in any
high-paying corporate PR job (contact: Plato Cacheris, [202] 555-9432), looked
for ways to attract the attention of Bill Clinton. He was tall, charismatic,
with piercing blue eyes that made Monica weak inside--and, best of all, he was
the most powerful man on Earth! Now he put down the phone and looked at
her--and the pizza--with undisguised hunger. "You look as hot as that pie,
darlin'," he said, glancing at the cleavage of her firm, young breasts, while
her breath quickened with expectation. "I've seen you around before, haven't I?
What's your name again?"

            "Monica," she said, her voice
husky with longing. "Monica Lewinsky" (Exhibit A, "Lewinsky diary," Page
45).

            "Well, Monica honey, I think
it's snack time," the president said with a sexy growl in his voice. [...] He
guided her into an adjoining study, holding a slice of pizza in his free hand,
and said, in the warm, caring way she'd always admired, "I need someone like
you in times like these."

            With an unleashed passion
that took her breath away, he suddenly grabbed, through her sheer dress, the
firm yet pliant flesh of her buttocks, causing Monica to shiver with
excitement, and then urgently kissed her, his tongue teasing hers, Lewinsky
stated to the grand jury. "You really turn me on, Monica," he said in a hoarse,
breathless whisper. "A chief of state has needs, sweetie pie, just like any
other man," he added, putting his hand gently on the back of Monica's luxuriant
dark hair, guiding her down to his fiery loins. Her face beamed with adoration
as she explored his body, her tongue licking him slowly as she moved ever
closer to his sword of love (Lewinsky, Pages 12-24; see also Linda Tripp
tape transcripts, Pages 11-34).

            She enveloped his throbbing
manhood, and the muscles in his thighs contracted while he moaned softly with
pleasure, Lewinsky testified. "You're fantastic, Monica baby," he gasped. "I
wish Hillary knew how to treat me like you do." [...] Suddenly, the president
of the United States exploded in shuddering bursts of joy. After they hugged
each other, Monica aglow in her newfound love, the president whispered to her,
"You're special to me, Monica, but let's keep this our little secret" (Lewinsky
diary, Page 52; Tripp tapes, Page 35). He reached for the still-warm pizza with
a satisfied smirk. "Seems like I'm always hungry, Monica," he said. She
understood exactly how he felt.

             

            FBI analysis of the DNA found
on a cocktail dress owned by Ms. Lewinsky corroborates another key sexual
encounter and thus contradicts the president's sworn deposition on Jan. 17 that
he could not recall meeting alone with Ms. Lewinsky (cf, "FBI lab findings,
Aug. 10, 1998, re 'love juice' " Pages 5-9; Clinton deposition, Pages 52, 92,
et al.).

            Item: On Easter Sunday, April
7, 1996, the president returned from church after services eulogizing Commerce
Secretary Ron Brown. White House phone logs for that date show that he placed a
phone call to the Lewinsky residence at 11:20 a.m. He apparently felt the
familiar longing that only the beautiful and vivacious Monica Lewinsky could
satisfy (Lewinsky testimony, Part II, Page 161). He would do (or say) anything
to have her, even if it meant breaking the law--or a young woman's heart
(testimony of Dick Morris, Page 32; Lewinsky II, Page 191.) That morning,
wondering if he really loved her, she was lounging in her black silk pajamas,
her ripe breasts exposed, waiting for his call. "Monica, I want you with me all
the time," he told her, and that's all she needed to hear. [...] She was
wearing a sexy blue cocktail dress when she was ushered into the Oval Office
alone (testimony of Confidential Informant No. 12, code named "Manolo"), and
the president gazed at her with a wild, hungry passion (Lewinsky diary, Page
136).

            "Honey, I want to see all of
you ... naked," he begged. [...]

            Climbing on a desk in the
secluded study, she wriggled her luscious hips, and slowly began peeling off
her dress, shaking her huge breasts free so he could see--and touch--them in
all their alabaster glory. She trembled as he caressed her, and she moved with
new, intense passion as she saw him arouse himself, his face distorted in a
mask of sheer lust. "Oh, my God, Monica, you turn me on more than any woman
I've ever known," he exclaimed in between rapid pants of excitement. "I want to
marry you after I leave the White House and leave Hillary far, far behind."
With that, Monica exultantly threw the dress down at his feet as the president
groaned in ecstasy and release, leaving traces of his love on her dress, a
memento of the passion they shared together (Tripp tapes, Pages 124-192; Tripp
testimony, Pages 36-43; Lewinsky I, Page 67).

            Monica never imagined that
the dress she treasured would someday be used to help convince publishers that
her exclusive story of their steamy love affair, complete with shocking new
details, was well worth $10 million or more, foreign rights included.

             

            In his Jan. 17, 1998,
deposition, the president said he couldn't recall the specifics of most gifts
Lewinsky gave him, and yet he strongly denied receiving a silver cigar box from
Lewinsky (Clinton deposition, Page 54). But a reported sexual encounter between
Ms. Lewinsky and Mr. Clinton challenges the president's veracity under oath on
this matter. Our office has received compelling evidence that Lewinsky not only
gave the president the box, but Ms. Lewinsky conspired with the president to
use at least one (1) cigar from the box to perform a lewd and lascivious act in
violation of a Washington, D.C., criminal statute (Lewinsky testimony I, Pages
121-184; Exhibit C, Nieman-Marcus receipt, Oct. 1, 1996 ; The Drudge
Report , Aug. 22, 1998; D.C. statute 531.6b).

            Item: On Oct. 16, 1996,
Lewinsky visited the president at the White House, according to White House
visitor logs and Lewinsky's sworn statements, where she asked the president if
he would ever be willing to declare their romance to the world. In response,
the president handed her a velvet box with a silver ring inside. "Our love is
important to me," he told her. Her heart filled with an overpowering love for
him, but she was puzzled when he leered, "It matches the silver of the cigar
box." He reached into the silver humidor and took out a clear-wrapped El Tempo,
and gave her a big grin. "You can't commit adultery with a cigar, right?"
(Lewinsky I, Pages 155-170).

            She wondered again whether he
cared for her as a person, or just as a sex object to service his sickest
desires. She was shocked to realize that it didn't matter, really, as long as
she got to be with him now--and forever (Lewinsky diary, Pages 92-93). "Hand me
that cigar, big boy," she said, hoisting up her skirt, wallowing in all the
depravity he taught her, "and let's see if we can light your fire!" Soon she
was squirming on top of the blue carpet's presidential seal, moaning, "Oh, Mr.
President!" while his cauldron of lust came to a boil--and then overflowed,
Lewinsky stated (Lewinsky I, Pages 175-179). They were both plunged into a
crazed maelstrom of feverish ecstasy, and afterward he asked her a special
favor. "Darlin', if you're ever called to testify about our relationship, don't
ever lie."

            "I promise, Mr.
President."

            He added with a cackle, "But
just don't volunteer any extra information!" He was so brazen sometimes, she
couldn't help but love him (Lewinsky I, Pages 180-186; Tripp tapes, Pages
211-212).

            
               The
criminal pattern of subornation of perjury and obstruction of justice (see
Sections II and III, below) was built on this bedrock of lies and sexual
misconduct. We hope your committee will take appropriate action in response to
the enclosed material.
            

            More Flytrap
...

         
      
   
