
   
   
      
         
            The Postman's Knock

            And none will hear the
postman's knockWithout a quickening of the heart. For who can bear to feel
himself forgotten?-- W.H. Auden
            

            How archaic that now sounds,
technologically! And how true it is, psychologically!

            No one
hears the postman's knock any more. I can't remember that I ever heard it. At
home, I get my mail from a clerk at the desk six floors below my apartment. At
my office, I either find my mail on a shelf or have it placed on my desk by my
helper. In either case I don't hear the postman's knock or ever see him.

            But the mail--now derisively called "snail mail"--is not
the primary means of mediated communication; that is, communication at a
distance beyond face-to-face contact. First, there is the telephone, today
generally equipped with "voice mail," which allows you to retrieve messages
left in your absence. Now, increasingly, there is e-mail, opening up a whole
new world of instantaneous written communication.

            Along with
this technological change have come some changes of attitude. We no longer are
in the position evoked by Auden, passively awaiting a connection with the
outside world through the postman. Now we increasingly seek the connection. We
go to a clerk and ask for our mail; we call our answering service to see if
there have been any phone calls; we log on to our computer to search for
messages.

            
With the proliferation of means of
communication has come a degradation of the messages. In my youth, ordinary
mail was the standard means of communication among people who knew each other,
even those who knew each other very well, such as parents and children.
Long-distance telephone was reserved for the announcement of births or deaths.
Today, I send or receive hardly any personal post office mail, except when
printed matter, such as a newspaper clipping, is enclosed. There is one person
with whom I have a fairly regular postal mail correspondence, and that is
because we are both trying to make a literary exercise of our writing to each
other and he, alas, does not have e-mail.

            Whatever
personal communication there is in the mail I receive at home is buried in a
mountain of solicitations for contributions from people or institutions I
barely know. My usual response to receiving my packet of mail is not Auden's
"quickening of the heart." It is more likely to be "ugh!" At my office, my mail
consists almost exclusively of policy memorandums and pamphlets from
institutions to whom I am but one name on an enormous mailing list. This mail
makes me confront the feeling that I ought to study it all and the realistic
knowledge that I ought to throw it out. Not much "quickening of the heart"
there.

            There is plenty of junk in my e-mail also. When I log on in
the morning, I am sure to find a couple of messages offering me pornographic
videos with one click of the mouse, and at least one message from someone ready
to tell me how to earn $1,000 an hour working from home. But still, the ratio
of personal communication to garbage is higher than for snail mail.

            The proportion of personal
communication is highest on the telephone. But even there, when the bell rings
and I pick up the receiver I am likely to hear someone asking, "How are you
today, Herbert?"--a sure sign of a stranger trying to sell me something.

            The odds
against getting a "quickening of the heart" by any of these media are high. But
despite the odds, I find it worthwhile to try to make the connection. We have
been warned at the apartment building where I live not to disturb the desk
clerk by asking for mail before 11:00 a.m. But I am there at the desk at 11:01.
In my office, two or three times a day I look into the room where the mail is
shelved. I call my home phone from the office at least once a day to see if any
messages have been left. From home, I call my office three or four times a day.
(One of the saddest and most common responses is the operator saying, "Herbert
Stein, no new messages.") Even more frequently than that I log on to one of my
three computers, hoping to see the little message on the screen, "You have
mail."

            
Why am I so eager for the connection? It is not
that I expect anything "practical." I am not going to get a letter offering me
a six figure advance for the publication of a volume of my personal essays. No,
it is as Auden says. I cannot bear to feel forgotten. I seek from the mail or
telephone or e-mail some sign of being remembered--and not just as a nine digit
Social Security number or a 16 digit credit card number.

            The
contents of the communication don't matter. It can be a postcard saying, "I am
in Mexico. It is hot here." It can be a phone call asking, "How are you?" It
can be an e-mail message forwarding one of those slightly funny jokes that
circulate around the Internet. What counts is the connection--the feeling of
not being forgotten. Even if the message comes from someone you are sure has
not forgotten you--one of your children, for example--it is a comfort to be
reminded. It is also a comfort if the message comes from a total stranger, as
long as the message is for you specifically and personally and not for a name
on a mailing list.

            Possibly, I am more avid in pursuit of such connections
than the average person. I know people who don't go down for their mail until
afternoon, who have no telephone answering service, and who, even if they have
an e-mail account, don't log on to see their messages for days at a time. But
still, in one degree or another the feeling described by Auden, of not wanting
to be forgotten, must be nearly universal. Whole industries rest on that
feeling--the greeting card industry and the florist industry, for example.
AT&T knows how important it is. That is why it implores you to reach out
and touch someone.

            In the Jewish tradition, the
dead live on in the memory of their survivors. Something like that is true for
the living also. The living are most alive when they feel that they are
remembered. That is why I go for my snail mail, call for my telephone messages,
and log on to my e-mail--several times each day.

         
      
   
