
   
   
      
         
            The Conspiracy Commerce Department

            By David
Plotz

            When it comes to Clinton
scandals, it's usually the right-wingers who spout conspiracy theories. But now
the administration is engaging in a little conspiracy-mongering of its own with
its 331-page report, "The Communication Stream of Conspiracy Commerce."
Publicized by newspapers last week, the report posits a right-wing media
conspiracy to spread, well, conspiracy theories.

            According
to the Clinton administration, this is how the Stream of Conspiracy courses its
way through the media: "Well-funded right-wing think tanks and individuals"
subsidize fringe media such as the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review and the
Western Journalism Center, which publish outlandish charges against Clinton.
(These two outfits are especially intrigued by White House Deputy Counsel
Vincent Foster's suicide--or rather, "suicide"--hinting that Foster was
murdered; that his suicide note was forged; and that he died in a White House
parking lot.) These stories are "bounced all over the world" on the Internet
and reprinted in British newspapers before they filter up to conservative
American publications such as the Washington Times , the New York
Post , and the Wall Street Journal editorial page. The news generated
by their appearance prompts congressional investigations; congressional
investigations lead to articles in mainstream newspapers; and voilà , we
have a manufactured scandal!

            Conservative journalists have joyfully ridiculed
"Conspiracy Commerce." The Washington Times compared the report to
Nixon's enemies lists. A Wall Street Journal editorial writer alleged a
counterconspiracy: that the White House is trying to suppress reporting about
Clinton scandals. (These conspiracies are stacking up like Russian nesting
dolls: Right-wingers advance conspiracy theories about Whitewater; the
administration shoots back with a conspiracy theory about the right-wingers'
conspiracy theories; now the Journal counters with a conspiracy theory
about the administration's conspiracy theory about right-wingers' conspiracy
theories. Whew!)

            The administration's charge
that the Internet has become a conduit and multiplier of Clinton tall tales
poses a tricky question about the Web: Is the free flow of information always a
good thing? The Internet is a marvelous instrument for educating large numbers
of people very quickly, but it is also a marvelous instrument for deceiving
large numbers of people very quickly. Remember the Flight 800 "friendly-fire"
theory? That particular unsubstantiated rumor is still circulating on the
Internet, months after it was shot down.

            So what to
make of "Conspiracy Commerce"? Is it another friendly-fire theory? Is the
Internet nourishing and promoting anti-Clinton conspiracies? Is there a
right-wing plot to spread baseless rumor and innuendo around the online
world?

            
Consider this example, cited in the "Conspiracy
Commerce" report: the right-wing charge that Vince Foster's "suicide note" was
forged. This little drama began on Oct. 25, 1995, when three handwriting
experts held a news conference to announce that the note was a forgery. The
experts were paid by James Dale Davidson, a full-time investment-newsletter
publisher and part-time Clinton-hater.

            Even
before the news conference started, the Usenet discussion group devoted to
Whitewater (alt.current-events.clinton.whitewater) was buzzing about it. The
Usenet group examines every rumor of Clinton scandal--both the possible and the
absurd. More than 100,000 messages have been posted to the group during the
last two years, all of which can be viewed at this archive, maintained by some diligent soul at Dartmouth
College.

            The news conference made great copy for the right-fringe
media. On the afternoon of Oct. 25, Christopher Ruddy filed a story about it,
"Experts: Foster Note Fake," in the Pittsburgh
Tribune-Review . Richard Mellon Scaife, who owns the Tribune-Review
and a fortune of $800 million, is dubbed the "Wizard of Oz behind the Foster
conspiracy industry" in the White House report. Scaife certainly does seem
obsessed. Although the Tribune-Review is a small suburban daily (lots of
zoning and high-school sports), Scaife employs Ruddy as a full-time Vince
Foster reporter. The Tribune-Review posted the forgery story in its
online archive of Ruddy's work.

            The London
Telegraph also promoted the forgery theory, with a story headlined,
"Vince Foster Suicide Note Forged, Say Experts." The Telegraph is the
only newspaper that matches Ruddy's Foster-mania. Its principal scandal
reporter, Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, has published lots of stories on the
suicide. All of them are stored on the Telegraph 's snazzy Web site.

            
The forgery story churned its way into the
Washington Times on Oct. 26. A few days later, the Times printed
an op-ed criticizing the liberal media for ignoring the Davidson news
conference. (Although AP and Reuters filed small stories about the news
conference, only a few newspapers--none of them big, mainstream
dailies--carried the dispatches.) The online Times offers a daily
"Whitewater, Etc." update, as well as flashbacks to Whitewater coverage from a
year and two years ago. It also maintains a link to the Telegraph in its
"media links" section.

            The
forgery story spread from the Times , Tribune-Review , and
Telegraph to the rest of the Whitewater Web. Soon, the Western
Journalism Center republished Ruddy's story in its newsletter,
Dispatches ("Experts say Foster 'suicide' note forged"). The WJC, which
is also funded by Scaife, sponsors investigative reporting for right-wing
causes. (You may recognize the name from the full-page ads the WJC buys in the
Washington Post and New York Times to reprint Ruddy's articles.)
The WJC placed the Ruddy story on its "Foster Scoops" page.
The "scoops" are mostly recycled articles by Ruddy and Evans-Pritchard. The WJC
site also sells Ruddy's book, The Foster Investigation , and a video,
The Death of Vince Foster: What Really Happened? (Incidentally, the
WJC page, which
links to the Washington Times site, boasts some of the most intrusive
music of any site on the Web.)

            The right-wing press critics at Accuracy in Media hyped the
forgery theory as well, wondering why big media skipped the story ("Experts Say
Foster's Suicide Note Was a Forgery"). The site also maintains an online
archive packed with Whitewater columns. The Washington Weekly , a Web
magazine devoted to right-wing politics, also promoted the forgery claim. The
Weekly had first suggested that the note was a fabrication in September
1994, a year before the press conference. The Weekly 's articles are now
stored in its "Whitewater Scandal Page," but you must subscribe to view
them.

            The
forgery controversy eventually reached the Web's noncommercial fringes. Almost
every story about the forgery resides on Nick's Whitewater Archives, an encyclopedic compendium of
Whitewater dirt, Foster-murder intrigue, Travelgate accusations, Mena airstrip
revelations, and the INSLAW case. The site republishes articles from the
Times , Accuracy in Media, the Tribune-Review , the Washington
Weekly , the Telegraph , and other publications. Another Web site
alleges that the Foster suicide note was forged, and includes a picture of the note plus links to the full
text of the handwriting analysts' study. Yet another offers a
comprehensive index of Whitewater links.

            
J. Orlin Grabbe, the most prolific conspiracist
on the Web, has written a 51-part (and counting) Foster exposé. (Grabbe's
conspiracy-theory net is so wide that it encompasses Clinton's alleged cocaine
habit, the "bombing" of Ron Brown's plane, Foster's espionage history, the
machinations of Bert Lance, and the bribery of Mike Wallace.) Another site presents a
massive compilation of Clinton scandals--from Flight 800 to the "Whitewater Body
Count." An even
stranger page explores the Grand Unified Mena
airport/drug-dealing/arms-dealing/Clinton/murder theory.

            There may be a Web
conspiracy against Clinton, but it isn't very organized or very efficient. In
the case of the forged-note story, the allegation originated with Scaife's
Tribune-Review and the Telegraph . From there, it progressed to
the conservative Washington Times and the editorial page of the Wall
Street Journal . Only then did it find a home on the Internet, where it
festers to this day. But this Rivulet of Conspiracy has never merged into the
mainstream of the Washington Post , Los Angeles Times , and New
York Times . All of which proves that the adminstration is almost as
paranoid as the Whitewater Webheads.

         
      
   
