
   
   
      
         
            Surfing Through China 

            Day One

            Day Two

            Day Three

            Day Four

            Nobody
invited me to tag along on the 1,000-person entourage. I didn't spend my Friday
afternoon ogling ancient terra cotta warriors or my Sunday gallivanting around
Beijing's Forbidden City. But inspired by the grand tradition of foreign
correspondent hackery, I won't be stopped from reporting on Clinton's trip to
China. Here's the first of a series of Internet dispatches--on Internet
coverage--of the China story.

            
               Day One
            

            The
weekend's attention was fixed on Clinton's controversial official welcome in
Tiananmen Square. While the Web address www.tiananmensquare.com has not yet
been claimed, other sites chronicle the massacre with bloody
photos and interactive tours. Coverage of the event by the People's Daily, the Chinese Communist Party's voice, stresses
"bilateral" cooperation without delving into Tiananmen's human rights issues:
"To accelerate their move toward the goal of establishing a constructive
strategic partnership between the two countries, they [Clinton and Jiang]
decided that they would refrain from targeting their strategic nuclear weapons
against each other." Whew!

            Clinton roused Peking University with a speech advocating
human rights and did a Q
& A with its students. The university's Web
site is a bit of a disappointment, being more obsessed with the school's
1998 centennial than with the real world.

            Who's ever
heard of human rights? Well, the Chinese Embassy has--there's a whole page of links to government
propaganda on the subject, including a diatribe titled "A Look at
the U.S. Human Rights Record."

            
Anumber of human rights organizations paint the
real, less rosy picture. Human Rights in China, a New York-based group started
by Chinese academics, offers a comprehensive site with links to a site for Wang Dan,
the Tiananmen Square activist who was released from a long stint in prison only
this spring. The site links to his speeches and the petition that helped set
him free, as well as to his June 4 statement on the ninth anniversary of the
Tiananmen Square massacre. For a daily critique of China's media coverage, turn
to the independent media
watchdog section of Inside China Today .

            The Washington Post
wins big with its comprehensive China trip Web links page. The World Bank, the CIA, and other China
sources are just one click away. The page also features a condensed history of
Beijing (disguised as a "Beijing Tour"), links to China's music, and a reader
forum. The New York Times catalogs
its articles (and requires that you register) and hosts a discussion.
USA Today posts top China stories, many of them from the Associated
Press.

            More as
the president continues surfing China.

            
               Day Two
            

            As the president does
Shanghai on the second day of the Clinton Surfwatch, we plow into a huge rice
paddy of local propaganda. An overview of
Shanghai skims all the city's tourist sites, including the classical
pavilions at the Yuyuan Garden--a stop on the Clinton itinerary. Another brief
summary emphasizes that Shanghai (a k a the New York of
China) is the country's biggest manufacturing base, responsible for one-eighth
of China's total annual industrial output. The Shanghai Daily gloats that "China is the second largest trade partner of the
United States, whereas the US is only China's fourth largest partner."
            

            Excerpts from Clinton's entertaining radio talk show
include not only policy pronouncements but also the Chinese view of Clinton's
figure ("[Y]ou seem to have a very nice figure, Mr. President"). And Clinton
makes his unofficial call for the World Cup: Brazil. Another of the president's
Tuesday mileposts was the Shanghai Library, which he hopes will cooperate more
closely with U.S. libraries. Progress won't be immediate. The digital branch is all
in Chinese. And though we can't hack our way into the Shanghai stock market
(also the site of a Clinton guest appearance), we can still get investing advice and
an overview.

            After all that surfing, it's
time for snacks, namely, some Shanghai specialties. Vegetarians take shelter, for the
156 tantalizing possibilities include mostly pork, chicken, and seafood.
Randomly we settle on Jin Jiang Roast Duct [ sic ]. "Kill and depilate
[ sic ] the duck," the instructions begin. No thanks, we'll order the
Crystal Pig's Stomachic [ sic ] Pieces Soup, which, as you
will read, makes fewer demands on us.

            Tomorrow
it's back to the serious stuff. We'll pay a call on the exiled Dalai Lama and
get the scoop on Tibet.

            
               Day Three
            

            As Hong Kong is treated to a
first-anniversary-of-hand-over bash Wednesday, another independence issue still
rankles in the halls of China: Tibet. (For a quick Tibet refresher, check the Washington Post .)
Despite a conciliatory exchange between Presidents Clinton and Jiang in Beijing last
Saturday, no easy resolutions are in the offing. A May article in the China
Daily , revealingly titled "Dalai
Lama's motives unmasked," takes the combative stance that has been wrapped
up in appeasement during the Clinton tour.

            For the West, Tibet is
unquestionably a trendy cause. Several international organizations lobby
through their extensive Web sites. Which one you choose to visit depends on
whether you want to Free
Tibet or Save
Tibet. We recommend the latter, since its site has an up-to-date news
database on Clinton's trip, a Clinton itinerary, and a Tibet event schedule.
Most important, the Dalai Lama
sticks up for himself from his exile in Dharamsala in North India. Good
surfing there--the well-organized official site comprehensively explains the
government-in-exile's situation.

            What's so great about Tibet?
Well, take a spin through the spectacular photo
gallery (courtesy Inside China Today ) of furry yaks, isolated desert
tents, and the Dalai Lama's summer home ... too bad he isn't there to enjoy
it.

            Stay
tuned for tomorrow's wrap-up whirl through Hong Kong.

            
               Day Four
            

            We're back with Clinton for
the China tour's grand finale--Hong Kong. Surfing through this glittering
financial superstar is all about funky, colorful graphics, markedly different
from the mainland China Web experience. Even the Hong Kong government sports a
surprisingly fun Web site, which mingles facts and stats with blinking visuals.
Two chunky pie graphs evaluate how the Hong Kong officialdom is handling the
Year 2000 problem. (Is a "37% non-compliance rate" good news or bad?)

            High on Clinton's Hong Kong
agenda is a meeting with Tung Chee-Hwa, Hong Kong's chief executive. Here's his
pre-hand over prognosis, which includes a pledge to maintain Hong
Kong's accustomed freedoms and to operate under a one-country, two-systems
scenario. But the Hong Kong Journalists' Association disputes his success; its
"campaign for open government" notes that 69 percent of surveyed
HKJA members believe the pre-hand-over government was more open than the
current one. Corroborating evidence is offered by a new Washington Post
article, which reports that an important documentary by a
Hong Kong journalist about fighting in northern China has been kept off the
airwaves.
            

            OK, OK ... surf's up and
over. Craving some real fireworks--not to mention independence--we catch a cab
to the slick, just-opened Hong Kong International Airport at Chek Lap Kok. Since the
airport is just beginning service, expect delays in loading (the Web site). But
before you can say dim sum, we're back in the States to celebrate July 4--just
as if we'd never left.

         
      
   
