
   
   
      
         
            The Cult, the Comet, and the Web

            The Heaven's Gate mass
suicide promises to be the first great Internet mystery. When the members of
the UFO/computer cult "shed their containers," they left behind a trove of
clues on the Internet about their work, their suicide, and the Hale-Bopp comet.
Here's an introduction.

            Early news reports link the
Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., group to a loopy, apocalyptic Web site called Heaven's Gate. (Warning: This
site and most others described below have been overwhelmed with traffic since
news of the suicide broke. Don't be surprised if you're denied access.)
According to the Heaven's Gate introductory page, the Hale-Bopp comet heralds
the imminent arrival of an alien spacecraft "from the Evolutionary Level Above
Human (the Kingdom of Heaven)": The UFO may be traveling in the comet's wake.
(For more on the Internet controversy about the Hale-Bopp UFO, click .)

            The spacecraft is coming to
transport "us" (whoever "us" might be) back to the "Kingdom of Heaven." This
ascension will constitute " 'graduation' from the human evolutionary level. We
are happily prepared to leave 'this world' and go with Ti's crew."

            The Heaven's Gate Web site
chronicles, if opaquely, the purported history of the group. A message from the
group's leader--the "Statement by an E.T. Presently Incarnate"--relates that he
and his female partner ("Do" and "Ti") are actually genderless aliens from the
Kingdom of Heaven. They and their "crew of students" arrived on earth "in
staged spacecraft (UFO) crashes." In the early 1970s, the leaders became human
by taking over the bodies of a middle-aged man and middle-aged woman. Before
becoming human, they presumably looked like this "member of the
Kingdom of Heaven." He/She/It is a dead ringer for the stereotypical
Unsolved Mysteries alien--big baby eyes, bulging alien forehead, tiny
ears, silver skin.

            Heaven's Gate warns
explicitly that the authors and their associates are considering suicide.
"Our
Position Against Suicide," which ought to be titled "Our Position in Favor
of Suicide," hints darkly that "the powers that control the world" could
torture or imprison the group "as occurred at both Ruby Ridge and Waco." It
praises the legendary mass suicide of Jews at Masada as a "more dignified"
method of escape. "We have thoroughly discussed this topic (of the willful exit
of the body under such conditions), and have mentally prepared ourselves for
this possibility." Not that suicide is anything to worry about: The spacecraft
would still transport them to the Kingdom of Heaven. When they leave, the rest
of us are in big trouble: According to the transcript
of a video called Last Chance to Evacuate Planet Earth Before It's
Recycled , "[T]he planet is about to be recycled, refurbished, started over.
That doesn't mean it's going to be destroyed. ... But it does mean that it is
going to be spaded under."

            The site makes a weak
attempt to enlist new members for the voyage to the Kingdom of Heaven. The
introductory page invites readers to study the Heaven's Gate site and tells
them that "you may even find your 'boarding pass' to leave with us." MSNBC and
other news services have reported that Heaven's Gate members trolled Internet
chatrooms to find potential recruits.

            But the suicides were more
than just UFO cultists. They were also computer entrepreneurs. They ran
Higher Source, a
Web-design firm in Rancho Santa Fe. In retrospect, it's easy to see something
sinister in the Higher Source site. It is decorated with the same astral images
that appear on the Heaven's Gate site, including several prominent pictures of
comets. The site brags about Higher Source's "crew-minded effort," and mentions
that the "individuals at the core of our group have worked closely together for
over 20 years." (Heaven's Gate hints that the cult was founded in 1975.)

            But the site makes clear
that what the Higher Source designers did is no different from what other Web
designers do. They programmed in Java, C++, and Visual Basic, used Shockwave,
QuickTime, and AVI, and claimed familiarity with Unix and Novell Netware. Their
choice of customers was more ecumenical than cultish. They designed Christian
sites (Keep the Faith
sells Christian music) and low-culture sites (Pre-Madonna hypes an early
Madonna record). They did snooty culture--the San Diego Polo Club, a topiary company, and a firm
that specializes in fancy
British car parts. These sites betray no trace of Heaven's Gate's
weirdness. They are, if anything, banal.

            The suicides will strand
Higher Source's clients, but the firm has certainly delivered on one promise it
made them: to promote "Strategies to Increase Web Traffic." As strategies for
increasing Web traffic go, a mass suicide can't be beat.

         
      
   
