
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Britain Vanishes</SPAN>

            

               
                  Economist , Nov. 6
            

            The
cover story celebrates the 10 th anniversary
of the fall of the Berlin Wall. Twenty-seven countries have sprouted out of the
former Soviet bloc, and ethnicity has replaced ideology as Europe's primary
source of friction. Despite the growing pains of economic reform, including
income contraction and worsening public health, a "free-market consensus" has
emerged in the ex-Communist countries. ... A survey argues
that Britain is dematerializing. Power is being passed upward to the European
Union and downward to new parliaments in Scotland and Wales.
... A column claims that America has gone too far in its war
against "the new evil empire"--tobacco. Anti-smoking billboards clog the
streets, and smokers are ostracized.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Nov. 22
            

            The
cover story claims that the Reform Party is kaput.
After Ross Perot's 1992 run, the mainstream parties assimilated his
deficit-reduction platform. Campaign-finance reform was also co-opted. Without
a cogent contrarian platform, a protest party is doomed. ... A
piece declares John McCain the victor in last week's
Republican debate. His congeniality made him look presidential next to the
loony Alan Keyes. The piece also argues that George W. Bush's draft-dodging,
triangulating, and poll-tracking allow his Republican opponents to tar him as
Clintonian. (Read 
                  Slate
               's of the debates.)

            
               
                  
                     
                        New
                     
York Times Magazine, Nov. 7
            

            A
cover package on Eastern European dissidents, 10 years after revolution. A
profile of Adam Michnik traces how Solidarity's key strategist steered Poland
through "a reasonable revolution." Michnik forged the
worker-intellectual-church alliance that peacefully overturned Poland's
Communist regime. As the "conscience of the new Poland" and the editor of a
successful newspaper, Michnik rationalizes economic growing pains as "the
inevitable cost of joining the West" and advocates reconciliation with former
Communists. ... In an interview, Solidarity leader Lech Walesa
faults the West for not doing enough to rebuild Poland's economy and complains
that ex-Communists have prospered. ... An article argues that Americans
are pessimistic, despite plummeting crime and unemployment rates, because the
ideologically entrenched will not accept that the country can thrive without
religion in the classroom or a paleoliberal in the White House.

            

               
                  American 
                  Prospect , Nov. 23
            

            The
liberal policy magazine switches from a quarterly to a glossy biweekly. An
article predicts that George W. Bush will not be the next president. The
affable, backslapping governor is too much like Bill Clinton. Voters
disillusioned with the current president will elect the anti-Clinton--perhaps
John McCain. ... A piece argues that a Bush presidency would
dramatically alter constitutional law. The Republican jurists who are on deck
for Supreme Court nominations--J. Michael Luttig, Emilio M. Garza--are
ultraconservative. A rightward tilt in the Rehnquist court could jeopardize
abortion rights and the separation between church and state. ... An
essay argues that television has reversed childhood and adulthood. Shows such
as Dawson's Creek feature teens who act like adults, while shows such as
Ally McBeal portray adulthood as "an extended adolescence."

            
               
                  Time ,
Nov. 8
            

            The
first of five special issues about the 21 st century imagines health
and environment in the future. An item speculates that sex "will be more for recreation than
procreation," because parents will choose to clone themselves or genetically
engineer "designer babies." ... A piece predicts that microscopic sensors in everything from
toilets to toothbrushes will provide "automated checkups" and enable physicians
to consult with patients through the Web. ... An exclusive report
reveals that controversial feminist Naomi Wolf is advising the Gore campaign on
how to win the women's vote. Wolf, whose $15,000 per month retainer was just
cut to $5,000, urged Gore to condemn President Clinton for his sexual foibles
and to become an "alpha male." ... An article reports that five tits-and-action TV shows are
following in the profitable footsteps of Pamela Anderson Lee's V.I.P.,
including Relic Hunter , starring Tia Carrere as a female Indiana Jones,
and Amazon, featuring former model Carol Alt as a babe in the
jungle.

            
               
                  Newsweek ,
Nov. 8
            

            The
cover story journeys to "HMO hell." HMOs are raising their
rates, and businesses are trimming health benefits. Sixty percent of Americans
are "frustrated and angry" with the health-care system, and 70 percent favor
federal intervention. A patients' bill of rights might soothe them, though it
would do nothing for the nation's 44 million uninsured. ... An
accompanying survey ranks the 100 biggest health plans: Fallon
Community comes out on top. ... A piece cites new evidence that Sigmund Freud was right about
dreams expressing unconscious desires. Neurological studies find that areas of
the brain associated with visual imagery and emotion are particularly active
during dream states.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report , Nov. 8
            

            The
cover story forecasts a space arms race. The availability of
high-quality satellite imagery has prompted the Pentagon to develop a plan to
dominate space, a scheme that includes the deployment of space-based lasers.
Some senators want to create a fifth military service: the American Space
Force. ... A piece ponders the fate of the millions of Palestinian
refugees living in Lebanese and Jordanian camps. Israel is unlikely to welcome
their return, but permanently settling them in Lebanon and Jordan could cost
billions and derail the peace talks. ... An article says it is harder for women to control their weight
because hormones predispose adolescent girls toward weight gain and women store
more fat than men.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker , Nov. 8
            

            "Talk
of the Town" publishes George W. Bush's Yale report card. The candidate had a C
average. His lowest grades were in American politics, astronomy, economics,
international relations, and sociology. ... An article describes the
pleasures of sleeping with your baby. Parenting books warn that co-sleeping
endangers an infant and makes it more difficult for a baby to learn
independence. The author argues, based on his own experience as a dad, that
co-sleeping creates a deep bond between parent and child. (For

                  Slate
               'stake, see Robert Wright's ".") ... A piece marvels
at the coming wave of young, democracy-minded Iranians. The population has
doubled since the 1979 revolution, and in 10 years Iranians under 30 will
constitute the majority of voters. Frustrated young Iranians challenge the
mullahs to allow more democracy, and the men sport goatees to identify
themselves with reform.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard , Nov. 8
            

            The
cover story applauds C-SPAN for its populist programming. The
network has become "an intellectual counterculture." Brian Lamb's objective
interviewing style is a pleasant contrast to cable's screaming matches.
C-SPAN's factual focus and lack of visual razzle-dazzle are a welcome relief
from postmodern infotainment programs. ... The editorial tells the Republican leadership to stop handcuffing
the payment of U.N. dues to pro-life codicils. Otherwise, Republicans are in
danger of appearing isolationist.

            
               
                  The
Nation , Nov. 15
            

            An
editorial penned by Angela Davis, June Jordan, and Alice
Walker pleads for the life of Mumia Abu-Jamal. They write that the man
convicted of murdering a police officer: "ennobles the rest of us to deepen,
enlarge, and improve our political opposition to a state gone mad." ...
The cover story condemns suppression of minority voting through
selective and unwarranted prosecution of voter fraud. In a 1994 investigation
of absentee ballot forgery, authorities questioned nearly 1,000 Alabamians in
predominantly black counties. Numerous blacks have been prosecuted, but only
one white person has been--and she was charged with helping an African-American
to vote.

         
      
   
