
   
   
      
         
            Racist Neighbors; Gingrich Family Values
            

            Katharine,

            Good questions all.

            I had a similar reaction to the quotes from the guy's neighbors and
acquaintances. Although there were some of the garden-variety "He seemed like
such a nice guy," more were along the lines of: "Oh yeah, Buford, he's a really
virulent racist." I don't count among any of my acquaintances people who openly
espouse hatred for entire races or ethnicities. If someone I cared about did, I
think I would try to change his or her mind, and if that didn't work, they'd be
off my list.

            Please understand: I'm not saying that my world is typical. As a member of
the urban media elite, I live in a kind of protected bubble. I also know that
bigotry runs deep and weird in almost all of us, and of course I've been around
people whose ignorance and insensitivities have made me uncomfortable or
angry.

            But still: Is it the common American experience to know someone reasonably
well who's a race-hater? Do people often say, "My friend believes in the
intrinsic inferiority of the lower orders, but he's a really fun guy"? This
isn't to suggest that there's any obligation--as you say about the mental
health profession--to intervene against people who hold racist beliefs. I'm
more fascinated by the process through which people explain these things to
themselves.

            One more tidbit for the day: The supermarket tabloid the Star is
reporting that Newt Gingrich, who recently filed for divorce from his second
wife, has been conducting an affair for at least three years with Callista
Bisek, a congressional staffer 23 years his junior. A priceless moment in the
New York Post's account: "Congressional sources said Bisek, a 5-foot-8
blonde, was not responsible for the breakup. 'His marriage was a mess
beforehand,' one Republican source said." Thanks for telling us now--whatever
happened to family values?

            Assuming this stuff is true, can you fathom the chutzpah of a guy who led
the charge against Bill Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky--at one point
saying the relationship showed that the president is a misogynist--while he was
carrying on in a very similar fashion himself? God, I miss Gingrich.

            Best,
Jim

         
      
   
