
   
   
      
         
            Pigeon Killers and Hate Groups
            

            Dear Katharine,

            Someone is poisoning birds in Central Park. "Between Tuesday morning and
yesterday afternoon, 30 pigeons, 10 sparrows, one grackle and two ducks were
found dead in the park," the New York Times reports this morning. (I did
not know that grackles were native to Central Park; I don't think I could pick
a grackle out of a lineup.) Park commissioner Henry Stern--himself a bit of a
loon--admits that until autopsies are performed, they can't be certain of the
cause of death, but everyone agrees that fowl play is likely. Evidently there
have been signs of such bird murder since 1997. The Times continues with
the information that "Killing the ducks, sparrows and grackle would be a
violation of the Federal Migratory Bird Act." Reading between the lines, one
can infer that poisoning a pigeon is not a federal offense. I guess Tom Lehrer
would be pleased.

            If the pigeon killer is still at large, thank heavens there's a real culprit
for the mass shooting in Los Angeles. There's something oddly reassuring about
having a suspect in custody, and having him be an avowed racist to boot. So
many of these shootings end up with the guy killing himself, which makes the
entire incident impossible to grasp. Here is Buford Furrow, a suspect very easy
to grasp: a longtime affiliate of the Aryan Nations who is obsessed with guns
and mass murder and who eventually tips over from theory into practice.

            About the only part of it I don't get are the peculiar reports about his
getaway strategy. On the run in Los Angeles, Furrow abandons his van and
carjacks a Toyota. That all makes sense. Then he supposedly kills a mail
carrier? Why? The Toyota is found abandoned "in the parking lot of the 7-Star
Suites Hotel," according to today's Los Angeles Times . Then, we're told,
Furrow hailed a cab in the San Fernando Valley and took it to Las Vegas, an
$800 fare. Since when can you hail a cab in L.A.? I guess it's easier if you're
armed.

            The best detail I've encountered is from the Los Angeles Times , which
traced a crucial piece of Furrow's AR-15 assault rifle to Bushmaster Firearms
in Maine. Of course it's a coincidence, but the president of that company is a
former state finance chair for GOP presidential hopeful George W. Bush. I'd
like to see this shooting become an issue in the Republican primaries. Which of
the GOP presidential candidates is willing to say that there is a deplorable,
violent movement of hate in American society, and that anyone affiliated with
that movement is unwelcome in the Republican Party? Which ones are willing to
say that taking an anti-crime stance means finding a way to either stamp out
these groups or isolate them so completely that they can't try to kill more
innocent people?

            Ever yours,
Jim

         
      
   
