
   
   
      
         
            Who's Afraid of The Blair Witch Project?

            Chatterbox has a terrible confession to make: He went to see The Blair
Witch Project yesterday and, despite trying very, very hard to be
scared, wasn't. What's puzzling is that Chatterbox scares very easily. Loud,
sudden noises make him jump. The sight of blood makes him blanch. A staircase
creak in a dark old house makes him shiver. Mrs. Chatterbox is always saying
that Chatterbox is preposterously easy prey for Hollywood's cheapest effects.
This raises the troubling question: Is Chatterbox too much of a philistine to
be scared by the tonier, more abstract terrors served up in The Blair Witch
Project ? Is Chatterbox incapable of Art House Fright?

            This possibility occurred to Chatterbox a few months ago when he rented the
classic French thriller The Wages of Fear , which has for its can't-lose
premise the transport by truck of highly explosive material through bumpy
jungle roads. Chatterbox (and, it must be said, Mrs. Chatterbox) lost patience
with the extremely tedious exposition leading up to the Big Event and shut it
off. (This even though the film starred a young, extremely suave Yves Montand.)
Chatterbox dimly recalls admiring the novels of Charles Brockden Brown, whose depiction of supernatural
events occurring in broad daylight somewhat resembles the
terror-of-everyday-life technique behind The Blair Witch Project , when
he read them in college. But Chatterbox doesn't particularly recall being
scared by them.

            Chatterbox really thought he was going to like The Blair Witch
Project . For the first half-hour or so, he marveled at the film's deft,
improvisational style. The three student filmmakers depicted in the movie, who
present themselves in home videos and snippets of their planned black-and-white
"documentary," seemed like real people. (The college they go to, according to
Time magazine--Chatterbox missed any reference to
it in the actual movie--is Montgomery College, situated about eight blocks from
Chatterbox's house.) "Aha!" Chatterbox told himself. "Ever so gradually, the
ordinariness of the film's events will give way to terror, making everyday life
seem absolutely terrifying!" Chatterbox looked forward to being spooked by what

Culturebox termed "the nameless evil just beyond the video camera's little
pool of light." Chatterbox was still looking forward to this thrill an hour
into the film as he gazed upon various pagan-looking piles of rocks and bales
of twigs. Ten minutes before the movie ended, Chatterbox realized that the
terror just wasn't going to happen, and his feelings of pleasurable
anticipation quickly gave way to feelings of inadequacy.

            Perhaps, Chatterbox thought, he was probing the wrong medium. He logged onto
the Blair Witch Web
site. But it required a plug-in that Chatterbox didn't have on his desktop,
and he lost patience. One parody site called Blair Bitch Project and
another called The Blair Witch Ate My Balls were also disappointments. Finally,
Chatterbox looked up some real folklore from Burkittsville, Md., where The
Blair Witch Project is set. There's a legend about a place called "Spook
Hill," where ghosts supposedly help push your car to the summit, and one about
Confederate soldiers dumped in a well, and one about a mythical beast called
the Snallygaster--part reptile, part bird, part octopus, with "huge jaws" and
"razor sharp teeth." These didn't scare Chatterbox either.

         
      
   
