
   
   
      
         
            Armbands, But No Arms Banned

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with the surrender to the FBI of the suspect in the
L.A. Jewish community center shootings, a development that off-leads at the
New York Times and USA Today and
is fronted, (below the fold) at the Washington Post . The NYT leads instead with Kansas'
decision to stop requiring the teaching of evolution as part of the state's
science curriculum. The decision also deletes most classroom references to the
big bang theory. One likely result observed by the Times : Kansas
students will be unprepared for college admissions tests and college science
courses. The story is carried inside at the WP . USAT leads with
the tornado that hit Salt Lake City yesterday, killing one person (as far as
anyone can tell, the first tornado death in the state) and injuring 100. The
tornado is also fronted at the LAT and is the top non-local story at the
WP , which leads with the worsening drought in Maryland and Virginia.

            The L.A. shooting coverage reports that the subject of a nationwide manhunt,
Buford Furrow, materialized yesterday morning unarmed at the FBI's offices in
Las Vegas, and surrendered, telling agents he was the shooter (in fact, say the
papers, he confessed to murdering children at the center, but none of those
shot there have died) and that his purpose in committing the crime was to issue
"a wake-up call" for America to start killing Jews. By the day's end, Furrow
was brought back to Los Angeles where today, sources say, he will be charged
with attempted murder in the community center shootings and first degree murder
in the death of a U.S. letter carrier about an hour later.

            The papers report that Furrow is speaking freely to the cops, particularly
helpful to them in the murder case for which there are no witnesses. The
coverage includes the de rigueur interviews with shocked neighbors,
and depicts Furrow as a neo-Nazi racist, who has been involved with each of the
three most dangerous white hate groups. (The LAT front features a 1995
picture of Furrow in a Nazi-style uniform.) And also as a troubled loser, who
after his prior arrest for pulling a knife on staffers at a mental hospital in
Washington state, where he lived, told cops he often thought of killing others
and himself. The WP and LAT report that several times he cut
himself with a knife, once, says the Post almost severing a finger.

            The NYT says Furrow's arsenal included an Uzi assault pistol. The
LAT says the police won't confirm this. (One wonders how a rabid
anti-Semite justifies or trusts using an Uzi, an Israeli weapon.) The
LAT runs a separate story inside reporting that one of Furrow's weapons
was an AR-15 assault rifle, apparently purchased piecemeal and
custom-assembled. The central part of the weapon was manufactured, says the
paper, by a company in Maine presided over by a man who had been the state
finance chairman for George W. Bush before his day job became an issue. The
AR-15 possession wasn't legal, because Furrow is a convicted felon, but easier
to do prior to the Brady Bill, the paper notes. The story also says that Furrow
told authorities when arrested previously that in his glove compartment, he
always carried a 9mm Taurus pistol, a gun featured in an unrelated Wall Street Journal front-pager yesterday.

            The NYT lead editorial about the shooting makes a pitch for Congress
to do something serious about gun control. The LAT lead editorial says
that the event shows that hate crime laws are justified, that the criminal
justice system should keep better tabs on people like Furrow, and they should
be getting better access to psychiatric help. One mystery the coverage doesn't
make much progress on is: How did Furrow come to target the day care center?
USAT fascinates with the news that a tour guide at the Museum of
Tolerance in Los Angeles says Furrow visited there several weeks ago and
attracted the attention of security personnel  but disappeared before he could
be questioned.

            
               USAT fronts word that so far this year, 19 children have
died in hot cars. Papers should avoid inflicting this sort of information
on the reader sans context. For instance, how many children have been killed in
car crashes this year, or shot? The story doesn't say.

            The WP runs a Reuters dispatch relating the latest in a series of
goofball comments by Prince Philip. While on a factory tour near Edinburgh, PP
saw a poorly wired fuse box and said, "It looks as though it was put in by an
Indian."

            Note to editors: Enough with the automatic full-three-name treatment of
heinous criminals. That's a convention from Wanted posters that you should
adopt only if you also agree to run only front-and-profile pictures of
them.

            The NYT's Richard Berke, picking up on and crediting a column by
Arianna Huffington in yesterday's LAT , reports that Warren Beatty is considering running for president. Beatty, a
longtime liberal Democrat, is unhappy about the failure of campaign finance
reform and tells the Times he's talked to people instrumental in
previous Jesse Jackson campaigns. Oddly, the story doesn't mention
Bulworth , nor does it mention a Beatty campaign's epidemic bimbonic
plague possibilities.

         
      
   
