
   
   
      
         
            A Clinton Pastor Prays and Tells

            Chatterbox jumped to an unfair conclusion last week when he said that the
following remark by White House spokesman Joe Lockhart was a dig at Jesse
Jackson: "At least one of [the ministers Clinton has consulted about his
marital infidelity] has not made a secret of the fact that he's talked to the
president." (See "
More on the Clintons and Psychotherapy.") A reader has informed Chatterbox
that J. Philip Wogaman, pastor of the Foundry United Methodist Church in
Washington, has written a whole book about ministering to Clinton during
Flytrap called From the Eye of the Storm . It was published in
January to coincide with the impeachment hoopla. Chatterbox can't bring himself
to take a look at this book, but here's a snippet from Wogaman's own rather
Uriah Heep-esque description of it on Amazon.com:

            

               
                  The book's subtitle is, "A Pastor to the President Speaks Out," but I
hasten to say that it does not betray pastoral confidences. [Oh, Philip,
you're such a tease!] I also want it understood that book royalties go to
charities because I do not believe it is right to profit by this national
tragedy. I hope it will help readers understand the deeper implications of the
presidential impeachment controversy ... I have sometimes felt I truly was in
the "eye of the storm." The book draws upon that experience, although it does
not invade private pastoral conversations. I have taken up issues related to
love and sex, repentance and forgiveness, and the relationship between personal
character and public responsibility in political leaders.
               

            

            Clearly, Jesse Jackson is nowhere near being the biggest and most
sanctimonious self-promoter among Clinton's inner circle of ministers/marriage
counselors. Incidentally, one advantage Clinton would enjoy if he were seeing a
secular psychotherapist would be a professional code of ethics that would come
down much harder on anyone who pulled this sort of stunt. A more cynical
possibility that Chatterbox can't bring himself to believe is that Clinton
actually encouraged Wogaman to write this book to help keep his poll
numbers up.

         
      
   
