
   
   
      
         
            Speak Roughly to Your Little Boy

            Culturebox took a certain amount of heat from you, dear readers, for her

paean last week to the electronic baby sitter--television, that is--and for
calling children "annoying little buggers." Your most common reaction: "This is
precisely the defeatist type of attitude that could eventually bring the
beloved American civilization down." Your second most common reaction: "Maybe
Judith Shulevich [ sic ] and people like her who think of children as
'annoying little buggers' should think about sterilization." Those who didn't
advocate voluntary tubal ligation (I hope that was what you were advocating)
thought religion was in order.

            Culturebox will appeal to history, that defense of scoundrels, to argue that
television seems a pretty harmless way to distract children, at least when you
compare it to the alternatives. Here are a few of the methods of
child-restraint practiced by our forefathers and foremothers--many of whom were
patriotic, religious, and of high moral character: swaddling their children,
depriving them of food (it was thought to keep babies quiet), tying them to
chairs, and beating them severely. If infants persisted in bawling or shitting
or generally irking, it could be assumed they were changelings--spawns of the
devil--in which case they were turned out of doors or killed. Children were
routinely told horrifying tales about gruesome creatures lurking nearby, ready
to devour them if they so much as left their beds. A popular technique for
moral edification was taking a child to a public execution.

            The tender empathy for children's every need and want that we take for
granted is little over a century old--about the same age as psychoanalysis and
the notion of child-care expertise. It is due for revision. A return to
exorcism may be excessive, but there is plenty of evidence that children are
hardier than previously thought (see, for instance, this essay
by Judith Rich Harris, or read her book The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn Out the Way They
Do ). Besides, in the immortal words of my mother, parents are people,
too. Without that acknowledgement, we may all be doomed to live life in the
manner of this Culturebox reader--who lost my sympathy, I'm sorry to say, as
soon as he called me Judy :

            
               Judy, bringing up kids is supposed to be very, very hard. You
aren't supposed to have free time. Your head should not rest worry-free on your
pillow every night. Your kid should not understand how hard you work or the
sacrifices you make for her. You gave up your entitlement to these things when
you brought another little human into the world who relies 100 percent on you
for her livelihood and education. If you're put out by bringing up kids, it's
because you're selfish, or lazy, or immature, or made a big mistake when you
weren't prepared to handle the consequences. Go spend every waking hour with
your kids, and bitch about your hectic life in eighteen years.
            

            
               Ahab I am: Culturebox has met Chatterbox--has put him up in her
home!--and can vouch for the likelihood of his 
sanguine reaction to The Blair Witch Project . Chatterbox is a man
blessed with an enviably cheerful temperament. Not for him the excesses of
Gothic supernaturalism or ridiculous stories of ghosts, stick figures, and
things that go bump in the night. Culturebox is admittedly, as Edgar Allan Poe
once wrote, "nervous--very, very dreadfully nervous." Whereas Chatterbox seems
to share the blissfully indifferent sensibilities of the Polynesian islander
Queequeg, celebrated thusly by Herman Melville in Moby Dick : "Savages
are strange beings; at times you do not know exactly how to take them. At first
they are overawing; their calm self-collectedness of simplicity seems a
Socratic wisdom ... [Queequeg] seemed entirely at his ease; preserving the
utmost serenity; content with his own companionship; always equal to himself.
Surely this was a touch of fine philosophy; though no doubt he had never heard
there was such a thing as that."

         
      
   
