
   
   
      
         
            The Final Word on Deep Throat (So Far)

            Today is the 25th anniversary of Richard Nixon's resignation
speech. (To watch Nixon saying, "Therefore, I shall resign the presidency
effective at noon tomorrow," click here. You can hear it
over and over by clicking repeatedly.) Chatterbox decided to celebrate Nixon
Resignation Day by phoning W. Mark Felt, the former FBI official whom Richard
Nixon and Nora Ephron and various other people believe to have been Deep
Throat. Chatterbox, strongly influenced by a 1992 James Mann piece in the
Atlantic Monthly (which is finally online; click here to read it) has himself been fairly pro-Felt lately, and
subscribes to Mann's thesis that if it wasn't Felt, it was someone else at the
FBI. (See "
Deep Throat: The Game Is Afoot"; "
Another Bulletin From the Deep Throat Desk"; "
Deep Throat Revealed (One Last Time)"; and "
Deep Throat Revealed (Again).")

            Earlier today, when Chatterbox first attempted to phone Felt (now an
octogenarian living in California with his daughter Joan), he got an answering
machine. "If you'd like to leave a message for Joan, Rob, Nick, or Deep
Throat," it said, "you may do so after the beep." Naturally, Chatterbox got a
little excited when he heard this. But when Chatterbox phoned back a little
later, Joan Felt said it was a gag message that she had put on her phone last
night after having a bottle of wine with some friends, and that this morning
she'd thought better of it and taken it off. Joan said she really has no idea
whether her father is Deep Throat, but that he's told her he isn't. "He hasn't
revealed it to anybody if it's true," she said. Hmm, Chatterbox
thought . A non-denial denial from the daughter.
            

            Then Mark Felt came on the line. Chatterbox schmoozed Felt a bit. Does he
get asked a lot by reporters whether he's Deep Throat?

            Yes. A couple of times so far this week.

            Are you Deep Throat?

            
               
                  The answer to that is yes and no. I'm the person that they're
talking about. [Chatterbox was initially tantalized by this, but quickly
realized Felt meant "I'm the Mark Felt who worked at the FBI in 1972."] I
was involved very deeply in all that ... went on. But I'm not guilty of
disclosure, leaking it to the press, or anything like that.
               
            

            Did Felt arrange to leak to Woodward through an intermediary? "No." Does
Felt agree with Mann that the leaker was someone from the FBI? Felt hasn't read
the Mann piece, "but I don't think so. It's just not logical ... The nature of
the information that the paper was printing would have to have come from more
than one source."

            Chatterbox, trying not to plead, asked Felt if there were any other reason,
aside from Felt's actually not being Deep Throat , that might impel him
to deny he was Deep Throat.

            No, Felt said. There wasn't.

            The conversation seemed to be winding down. Chatterbox asked Felt whether it
was annoying to be asked over and over again by various people whether he was
Deep Throat. "It gets to be very provoking," he said. Does he find it
irritating ? "Yes."

            Chatterbox switched to the general topic of tension between the FBI and the
White House at the time of J. Edgar Hoover's death, which occurred one month
before the Watergate break-in (and, according to Mann, is why the FBI helped
Woodward nail Nixon). "I don't think there was any serious tension," Felt said.
Did he want the top job? "I certainly wouldn't have objected" to getting the
No. 1 position, Felt said. Was he disappointed when he didn't get it? "I
can't say that I was." Didn't the White House interfere with the FBI
investigation of Watergate? "I don't have any recollection of any specifics
like that," he said--perhaps displaying an old man's poor memory (the White
House interference is now a matter of public record), or perhaps displaying a
George Smiley-like implacability. (Felt is, after all, a former member of the
G-man elite.)

            Well, what about Nixon's assertions on the White House tapes that Felt was
leaking? What about Nixon's anti-Semitic comments about Felt? Felt said he
wasn't aware of either. Chatterbox read Felt the exchange in which Nixon and
H.R. Haldeman, his chief of staff, discussed their belief that Felt was
leaking, and in which Nixon said, regarding Felt's high position at the FBI,
"Christ, put a Jew in there?" (Click 
here, and scroll down to the boldface type, to read it.) Chatterbox asked
Felt whether he'd like to comment.

            "No." Felt indicated he was starting to lose his patience with
Chatterbox:

            
               
                  In talking with you and in talking with various people on the
press and so forth, it's really very annoying.
               
            

            Let's just say you were Deep Throat. Would that really be so
terrible?

            
               
                  It would be terrible. This would completely undermine the
reputation that you might have as a loyal, logical employee of the FBI. It just
wouldn't fit at all.
               
            

            But a lot of people think Deep Throat is a hero for getting the truth out
about Nixon and Watergate.

            
               
                  That's not my view at all. It would be contrary to my
responsibility as a loyal employee of the FBI to leak
information.
               
            

            In other words, there is a potential reason, other than not
being Deep Throat, that might impel Felt to say he wasn't Deep
Throat: the perceived dishonor such a revelation might bring Felt as a "loyal
employee of the FBI."

            
               A Postscript : On Nov. 1, 1980, Richard Nixon, "after avoiding
testifying in twenty other courtrooms over the last six years [writes Robert
Sam Anson in Exile: The Unquiet Oblivion of Richard M. Nixon ] was on the
stand in a criminal case." The defendants were W. Mark Felt and Edward S.
Miller, former chief of the FBI's intelligence division, accused of conspiring
to violate the civil rights of members of the Weather Underground when they
authorized warrantless break-ins of the radicals' homes (the Weatherfolk were
suspected of planting bombs in public buildings) in 1972 and 1973.

            Nixon thought Felt was Deep Throat. But Nixon was extremely eager to testify
on Felt and Miller's behalf, even though he hadn't been subpoenaed. Having
successfully and rather strenuously dodged prosecution himself, Nixon had
volunteered to walk into a courtroom and testify to help someone he
believed had triggered his own downfall. Felt and Miller's lawyers had turned
Nixon down because they'd worried that Nixon's reputation would only hurt Felt
and Miller with the largely black jury. The prosecution, however, "had been
delighted to have him," Anson writes. So Nixon appeared as a prosecution
witness. While Nixon took the oath, Black Panthers and former antiwar activists
shouted, "Thief!" and "Liar!" called him a "war criminal," and were expelled by
federal marshals from the courtroom. (This according to the third volume of
Stephen Ambrose's Nixon biography, Nixon: Ruin and Recovery .)

            On the stand, Nixon said that he thought the warrantless break-ins were
perfectly legal. (Although he wasn't asked under oath whether he'd known of or
approved them, he'd said earlier that he hadn't.) The president, Nixon said,
had power to authorize such break-ins, and so did the FBI, which was an arm of
the executive branch. Nixon said there had been "hard evidence" linking the
Weather Underground to foreign governments. Nixon said he himself had approved
similar break-ins under the 1970 "Houston Plan," which he said was also legal.
Nixon gave an impromptu lecture about a president's heavy burden during
wartime. "I hope that neither President Carter or Governor Reagan, if he should
be president, has to do what I had to do, what Franklin Roosevelt had to do,
[here the judge interrupted and told the prosecutor to ask his next question,
but Nixon went on] what President Truman had to do, that is, write letters to
people whose sons have been killed in war." Possibly in part because of the
jury's distaste for Nixon, Felt, and Miller were found guilty and sentenced to
pay $5,000 and $3,500, respectively. After Ronald Reagan, who was elected
president a few days later, assumed the presidency, he pardoned the two
men.

            It is almost too irresistible to wonder: Did Nixon serve up his sympathetic
testimony because he knew it would alienate the jury and give Deep
Throat what he, Nixon, deemed his just deserts? We know that Nixon was a
revenge buff who was capable of extraordinarily Machiavellian behavior. We also
know that Nixon sincerely believed that warrantless break-ins of the sort that
Felt and Miller (and, under different circumstances, Nixon himself) had
authorized were a necessary line of defense against radicals and troublemakers
(many of whom did indeed prove to be violent).

            Which Nixon testified at Felt's trial--the Nixon wanting to give Deep Throat
a little payback or the Nixon who wanted to stand firm against The Punks?
Perhaps both.

         
      
   
