
   
   
      
         
            Looking Backward
            

            I'm going to sidestep your question of whether the information revolution
has changed the nature of the "good life," and point out that your description
of Bell as a "conservative in culture" clarifies some of what seemed so cloudy
in The Coming of Post-Industrial Society . Bell's fleeting discussion of
the "sixties" cultural events--so in the foreground of American life circa
1973--is somewhat startling with hindsight. After all, the '60s was the decade
standing between the last hurrah of an industrial age (the '50s), and the
ascendance of a service-centered economy in the '70s (with all the doubts that
came along with it--like Japanese manufacturing eroding the foundation of the
American economy; an assessment that reflected suspicion of an economy's
ability to thrive on building services rather than things). As an early
indicator of what the post-industrial world might look like (Woodstock 1999?),
the '60s would have been a good decade for Bell to examine in this book. Yet
he's far more interested in, say, 1860, and the goings-on inside Karl's head,
than what was happening on some upstate New York farm. Your description of
Bell's cultural conservatism makes me wonder whether his decision to ignore the
cultural effects of post-industrial society had to do with his personal
distaste for the "counterculture" hippie freaknik thing I've seen in old
newsreels.

            It's an unfortunate omission because it's precisely this cultural
"information revolution" that has changed our world and defined our
post-industrial society--the same information revolution that allowed amplified
music to be synchronized with lights using "feedback" (i.e. information about
the system) to produce a psychedelic experience. Or the information embedded on
plastic films that allowed 8-track tapes to alter the way one experienced a day
on the beach. The entire '60s thing was a product of an information
revolution--one that initially empowered everyday people to personalize their
media diet, eroding the principle of mass experiences through media, and
enhancing tribal impulses to identify with your clique. By not discussing these
aspects of the "post-industrial society," Bell left us with a book whose value
is more for what it says about the 19th century than about the
21st . Bell's basically best on Marx, and if that's of interest to
you in 1999, then you'll enjoy reading The Coming of Post-Industrial
Society .

            Jim--I'm told by Judith that this is to be our last installment on this
book. It's been lovely corresponding with you. I hope you've been writing your
messages from the beach ... Next time around, we'll see if we can discern how
the information revolution may have "changed the nature of the good life," as
you put it, for better or worse.

         
      
   
