
   
   
      
         
            The San Francisco Examiner Death Watch
            

            Hi Jim:

            I, too, am enjoying the "We Are the World" eclipse coverage. This from
Reuters: "Druids danced, Muslims prayed, Hindus bathed, and
Europeans stopped work and took to the streets as an eerie twilight followed by
darkness covered their capitals at about noon."

            Just as we Americans expected: Those Europeans will use any occasion as an
excuse to stop working. They probably all went right home and took naps
afterwards, too. If the eclipse had happened here, of course, we would have
just taken our cell phones and other gadgets outside and kept right on
multitasking.

            But since you're tired of all this technology talk, nature boy, back to my
original obsession of the week--the morbid San Francisco Examiner death
watch. Here's one more reason to frown at the prospect of losing the city's
other daily. Today's Examiner carries a front-page investigative piece
that's the latest installment in their ongoing coverage of an FBI probe into
city contracting abuses, involving real estate development. At the center of
the action is Charlie Walker, a local truck driver and longtime friend and
supporter of Mayor Willie Brown, who is seeking re-election.

            Incidentally, in a troubling sign of the times for journalism, Charlie
Walker refuses to be interviewed by the Examiner unless they agree to
pay him $250,000 if he's misquoted. He's clearly ever the smart business
man.

            Anyway, today's Examiner piece reveals that the FBI has now expanded
to investigate various potential developments on the San Francisco waterfront.
What's so hysterical about this piece of gritty city reporting, the kind of
thing that makes true-blue newspaper types bluster with civic pride, is that on
the very same day, the Wall Street Journal carries a puff piece about
the development of the self-same waterfront: "In San Francisco, Great Views and
a Ferry."

            In the Examiner story, port director Doug Wong appears scheduling a
hearing about one of Charlie Walker's crony's development projects, which is
apparently now under investigation. In the Wall Street Journal , the same
official Doug Wong demures that port administrators offices won't be housed in
the newly renovated Ferry Building, because the real estate is just too
valuable ($60 per square foot), and they'll settle for lesser waterfront views
down the road ($46 per square foot). How modest.

            While the local paper chases a story involving the Mayor, the FBI, and the
waterfront, the Wall Street Journal finds in the same waterfront a tale
of a city re-inventing itself through heroic redevelopment. It's
tragicomic.

            KM

         
      
   
