
   
   
      
         
            A Blair Witch Bitch

            No self-respecting cultural critic could resist a potshot at Time and
Newsweek for putting The Blair Witch Project on their
covers--even though it is the best movie showing at the moment. So here
goes: The media are right to hype this movie, but they're hyping it for the
wrong reasons. They're playing it as a breakthrough-in-marketing
story--small-time filmmakers hit on 
big-time strategy--when it's actually the oldest marketing story in the
history of culture: scaring and delighting audiences and making oneself rich
and famous by pushing back the boundaries of what is commonly thought of as
realistic.

            This would be a fairly obvious thought to have if you saw the movie, as I
did, in the eastern Catskills, a few miles away from the outlandish
Moorish-style mansion, called Olana, built by the richest and most famous (in
his day) of the Hudson River School of painters, Frederick Edwin Church
(1826-1900). On the one hand, Church was as much of a marketing genius as the
Blair Witch distributors are said to be. His best-known painting is a
giant canvas of the Ecuadorian mountains called Heart of the Andes
(1859) , which he displayed as if it were a theater of the real unto
itself. He had it framed by heavy curtains, surrounded by semicircular benches,
and lit by gaslight, so people could sit and stare at it at night, as if in
attendance at a play. He charged a quarter per visitor and handed out opera
glasses or special metal tubes, so viewers could pick out this detail and that
one. This was a whole new way to exhibit art, and it made him not only the most
notorious artist in America--the Steven Spielberg of his generation--but also
the first mere artist who could afford to build a mansion on what was then the
superritzy Hudson.

            The painting that makes Church worth remembering, though, came two years
earlier, when he took the most overrepresented theme in American art to date,
Niagara Falls, and convinced everybody they'd never seen it before. In
retrospect, Church's style doesn't seem realistic at all, at least as we tend
to mean the word today. He left out the factories and hotels that lined the
banks of the tourist trap, as well as the thousands of visitors who
rubbernecked there every year. But his painting felt more real than what had
come before it, because it was bigger and wider and more maniacally detailed,
and because every brushstroke contributed to the general sense of the water's
ferocious power as it rushed to the edge. Coming as it did not long after the
invention of photography, Niagara Falls exploited that reigning
convention of "the real" to communicate a sense of what lay beyond reality--the
divine forces just under the surface of things, there for America to harness on
its way to its Manifest Destiny.

            
               The Blair Witch Project is more Niagara Falls than
Heart of the Andes . The reason it's so scary is that it feels so real,
even though, being a work of  supernaturalism, it breaks all the rules of
so-called reality. The reason it feels so real is because it uses the latest
signifier of realism--home video--and not just because it's the style of the
moment (the reason most music video makers employ the technique) but because
it's the best way to get across the filmmakers' Gothic vision of the world just
outside your door--the nameless evil just beyond the video camera's little pool
of light. Oddly, as visions go, it's not depressing in the least. What's
depressing is critics who celebrate a movie like this for its commercial,
rather than its aesthetic, triumphs. 

         
      
   
