
   
   
      
         
            Shootings Now Automatic, Camp

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with a gunman's automatic weapon attack on a day
camp in L.A.'s San Fernando Valley, which wounded an adult, a teen-ager, and
three small children. The story off-leads the New York Times ,
Washington Post , and USA Today .
Big pictures of police leading children to post-attack safety adorn the fronts.
The NYT and WP run versions of the same striking photo, a
quintessential L.A. news helicopter POV depicting a chain of kids holding hands
on their way to safety, recalling an icon of pre-Uzi school days--a string of
paper dolls. USAT leads with the nations' governors warning both the
White House and Congress not to cut domestic spending. The WP lead is
that with party control of the House of Representatives at stake in the next
election, fund-raising for congressional races is off to an early and record
start. The NYT runs a similar piece inside, leading instead with a story
it has paid more prominent attention to than any one else--the on-the-ground
situation in postwar Kosovo. Today's effort claims that recently, U.N.
peacekeeping forces have made strides in containing the KLA and in establishing
civil administration, especially by paying judges and other bureaucrats who've
gone months without. The thin line being tightroped by the U.N. explains the
paper, is to assert its sole administrative authority without turning the KLA
into an opponent.

            In their shootings stories, both the LAT and the WP make the
near-ritual "it could have been worse" point--in this case because many of the
children ordinarily at the center were off on a field trip. The papers frame
the episode with all the other mass shootings that have made news in the past
year or so, and report that President Clinton, the governor of California, and
the mayor of L.A. did the same. The LAT lead editorial tries to apply
the emotion of the moment to the cause of tighter gun control, but the effort
is stalked by a lack of tighter prose control. The paper claims that "all of
Los Angeles became family" through following the incident. And then wraps up
wondering, "Will it take the shooting of innocents in every congressional
district before national lawmakers" do something?--as if all those shootings
hadn't already happened.

            As of press time last night, the white male middle-aged shooting suspect
remained at large, and the authorities released his name and said he was a
resident of Washington state. Because the day camp was in a Jewish community
center, the FBI is investigating whether or not the shooting was technically a
hate crime. The WP says that as yet there is no evidence supporting
this. The LAT , taking advantage of its time-zone-based later close,
reports that there is: In a van linked to the shooter, police found a book
written by a former member of the American Nazi Party. Both the Times
report that there was also a very large amount of ammunition found in the
vehicle--3,000 to 4,000 rounds, the LAT says.

            Citing KING-TV in Seattle, the NYT says that the suspect was arrested
for a knife assault last November and was also a suspect in the theft of
ammunition from Fort Lewis. Citing the Tacoma 
               News-Tribune , the
LAT says he pleaded guilty in the knife case. The LAT notes that
also in the van was a U.S. Army Ranger handbook. Nobody notes that Fort Lewis
is an Army Ranger base.

            The LAT and NYT top-front India's shoot-down of a Pakistani
plane, resulting in the deaths of 16 aircrewmen. The WP puts this
inside. The shooter was a jet fighter and the bogey was an unarmed
reconnaissance propeller plane. The Indians claim the craft was on a mission in
Indian airspace. The Pakistanis claim that it was on a routine training flight
in Pakistani airspace. The coverage stresses that this episode is bound to
ratchet up friction between the two countries, who've already had a ground war
earlier this summer.

            The papers report that according to the Department of Education, expulsions
for bringing a gun to school dropped by about a third in 1997-98 compared to
the year before that. In the coverage, this result is treated as confirmation
that despite sensational campus shootings, in fact the risk of school violence
is on the decline. But there is hardly any discussion of the idea that it may
just mean students are getting better at not getting caught packing. For
instance, this possibility is not even mentioned in the NYT piece until
the ninth paragraph of a 12-paragraph story.

            The WP reports that the nation's largest association of black lawyers
has complained about Chief Justice William Rehnquist's singing of "Dixie" at a
judicial conference, something he's done more than once. The story was reported
in yesterday's USAT , which added an observation based on its own
reporting--that in his 28 years on the Court, Rehnquist has never hired a black
law clerk.

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature describes the
rise of foreign hand-gun manufacturers importing to the U.S. (a topic done well
earlier in the summer by the WP ) via a look at the Brazilian company
Taurus. One quote from a company official speaks volumes. At one point, he
says, the firm tried to branch out from guns into motorcycle helmets, but was
soon hit with a $100,000 legal judgment paid to the family of a young man who
died in an accident while wearing a Taurus model. "Product-liability law for
helmets in the U.S.," he says, "is just crazy."

            In his WP column, also appearing at the top of the LAT op-ed
page, George Will takes out after George W. Bush. Will picks over the interview
Bush gave to Talk , seeing it as suggesting that Bush "has a seriousness
deficit." In Will's mind, most seriously non-serious seems to be that Bush used
the f-word on the record with a reporter.

            The NYT and USAT report that the Navy is coming close to
resuming its former formal relationship with the Tailhook Association. By way
of reassuring that his outfit has really changed, Tailhook's president tells
the Times , "We've had color coordination seminars for the wives. ...
We're really trying to improve our image a bit."

         
      
   
