
   
   
      
         
            Media Morbidity Report
            

            Hi Jim:

            I will graciously forgive your East Coast obsessions if you will indulge me
in the San Francisco media sport du jour--writing your own obituary.

            You see: things have been a little morbid over the weekend in the San
Francisco dailies, since Friday, when Hearst announced the purchase of the
San Francisco Chronicle and put a "for sale" sign on the San
Francisco Examiner . By most accounts putting the Examiner on the
block is just a cynical move to assuage the concerns of the Justice Department
before Hearst closes the afternoon paper and turns the city into one more
one-daily town.

            The Good Housekeeping et al. takeover of the Chronicle and the
presumed sickness-unto-death of the Examiner has touched off an orgy of
retrospectives in both papers, complete with fond remembrances of the way
things were in the good old days. (Rest in peace, Herb Caen, sniff.)

            In the case of the Examiner , it's weirdly uncomfortable to read its
coverage, sort of like listening to an elderly relative talk obsessively about
his own imminent death.

            (Incidentally, Nixon is relegated to Page A2 in today's San Francisco
Chronicle , while a story about "pruneburgers"--those would be your basic
hamburgers with prunes on top--being tried out in California high school
cafeterias gets Page 1 treatment. It's complete with quotes from a California
prune-industry trade group exalting, "In our taste test, the students really
liked them." You don't say? This is the other not-on-the-Web pleasure of
reading the papers in the dead-tree format: seeing just how strongly the
editors feel that fibrous school lunch menu innovations, as promoted by local
industry, clearly rank above the 25th anniversary of the resignation
of the president among their readers' concerns.)

            All this grim navel-gazing here in San Francisco (not to mention all that
fiber) is enough to make a West Coast reader reach first for the New York
Times on Monday morning only to discover that her own profession is in
decline. Jim, I regret to inform you that magazines ain't what they use to be,
according to Alex Kuczynski's "At Magazines, the Art of Stirring Debates Seems
Lost." The Internet is predictably trotted out as one of the myriad of causes
of the glossies' decline. Ironic for the two of us, since as magazine writers,
we both cover the Web.

            Overall, it's a nicely argued and sourced piece, but it makes me wonder: Is
it worse to be a magazine writer if magazines have lost clout or a newspaper
reporter who writes about magazines if magazines have lost clout?

            It's enough to make you want to write your own obituary and go back to
bed.

            Navel-gazingly yours,
Katharine

            P.S.: Just so you know who you're dealing with, I'll admit right now: I
never read the Washington Post , although I am a fan of Media Grok.

         
      
   
