
   
   
      
         
            The Empress' New Clothes

            The other day I put my hand
on two full, ankle-length skirts at the back of my closet, one tweed and one
black velvet, with the idea of finally getting rid of them. After two decades
of nonwear, they seemed overripe for removal. But then, in a sudden fit of
prescience, I stayed my hand. I thought, like many others have lately, of Eva
Perón.

            What
brought her to mind was the advance hype for the movie, starring Madonna, of
the musical Evita , because a lot of that hype is about clothes. Madonna,
like Evita before her, conveys personal power through bodily presence. Garb
matters a great deal to her, as it did to Evita, and it matters twice as much
when they are brought together. Given the movie's period flavor, this means
that the modes of the late 1940s and early 1950s are in for a determined
revival.

            Ididn't see Evita on Broadway, but I did see a
recent exhibition in Paris featuring Perón's wardrobe in original magazine
photographs dating from her rise. These shots, from both American and French
publications, concentrated on Evita's patronage of Christian Dior, fashion's
Man of the Hour in the late 1940s, inventor of the "New Look" and savior of the
war-wounded French couture. Evita's and Dior's moments of prominence were
simultaneous, and they did make a stunning duo--her daringly potent public
beauty, his daringly rich and ultrafeminine fashions. The alliance was short,
1950 marking the pinnacle for each. Evita was dead in 1952, Dior in 1957. Both,
however, proved enduringly compelling after death.

            Dior
arrived on the Paris fashion scene after World War II, just in time to do away
with the enforced practicality of women's wartime clothing--usually refurbished
old clothes, or military uniform--and to revive Romance. The designs of the war
years had been stamped with a certain gallant jauntiness and comic quirkiness,
expressed in restricted amounts of fabric. Dior's new insistence on elegance
for women was an inspired move toward a whole world of pleasure and languor
that had been suspended and nearly forgotten.

            
Whittled waists and prominent breasts were
shaped by exquisitely cut and fitted jackets that curved over flaring hips,
while sleek coils of hair supported delicately feathered hats. Crisply
radiating pleats and sumptuously layered folds of fabric were deftly
manipulated into sweeping skirts, draped shawls, billowing bows--a universe of
precious textiles, often embroidered or sequined, to spread out from the
hourglass torso. When skirts did not sweep, they molded the figure to well
below the knee; dashing cuffs, collars, and stoles did the sweeping. Feet
emerged at the bottom, delicately shod. Coats swung out like the mantles of
Venetian nobleman.

            The whole
effect evoked the French Second Empire of a century earlier, the lush, moneyed
social world presided over by the Empress Eugénie. Dior was clearly creating
himself in the image of Charles Frederick Worth, the father of haute

               couture , dressmaker to the empress and her court, and to the whole
affluent world. Dior was proposing to make empresses out of an emerging
international clientele, and to re-establish France's pre-eminence as the
source of serious fashion, just as the empress had done. Perón was the ideal
client, an upstart with huge drive, deep pockets, and great beauty--as Eugénie
had been in her time.

            There has been a great deal of cant in the past 30 years to
the effect that Dior's era forced helpless women into a posture of submission
with its fussily constructed garments, cumbersome skirts, cinched waists, and
rigid hairstyles, crippling their feet in high heels and imprisoning their
hands in white gloves. It looks as though we're now meant to forget that quaint
line of thought, and to regard such fancy trappings as appropriate to the
ruthless fight for political ascendancy. Call it the Dictatorial Mode.

            The
historic models for that notion are the Renaissance queens--Elizabeth I of
England and Catherine de' Medici of France. Plotting with or against their
statesman, courting the populace, negotiating treaties, or ordering executions,
those formidable rulers never failed to appear ostentatiously clad in vast
padded and jewel-encrusted dresses, their torsos boxed in whalebone, their hair
glued into smooth rolls upholding pearls and plumes.

            
Submissiveness clearly had no part in such
dazzling feminine armor, which not only fails to hamper but actively enlarges
female power. Modern women, weary of expressing strength of mind and body via
sports clothes and messy hair, may be ready to look again at Dior, to see how
he helped create Evita's remarkable triumphs and to ponder how similar effects
could enhance theirs. The Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art
certainly thinks that we're ready, at least in New York. The institute is
mounting an exhibition of Christian Dior's work, to coincide with the opening
of the movie and demonstrate the superiority of Dior's vision by displaying the
actual clothes. After all, Madonna wore reconstructions in the film, and they
won't really look like the real thing.

            One
reason for this is that Madonna's pregnancy during shooting required her Dior
finery to mask her thickening midsection, whereas photos of Evita in the
clothes show that her slimness and tiny waist--maintained both by will and by
deteriorating health--were a strong focus of her visual appeal. In the early
stages of her career, Evita was fleshier and raunchier and blended better with
Madonna's present persona.

            Pregnancy aside, what Madonna has that Evita didn't is
visible muscles and strong shoulders. The postwar Romantic look involved
sloping shoulders, a very straight spine, delicate bones, and no muscles
whatsoever. In fact, the sicker and physically weaker Evita became, the more
the fashions became her. Her dominating will was all the fiercer, her grip on
the people, too. The whole point of the fashion was the tension between the
force of female personality and the delicacy of the feminine body.

            In fact,
the sloping shoulder was the noticeable feature of the new clothes of the Dior
era, coming as it did immediately in the wake of the Joan Crawford/Rosalind
Russell period and its vigorous shoulder padding. Garbo's characteristic
hunched posture of the mid-1930s was wholly obsolete. We had fallen under the
spell of Grace Kelly and Audrey Hepburn, whose shoulders curved with easy
finesse, and whose heads sat high atop swanlike necks, just waiting for
crowns.

            
A straight spine is something Evita did have
that Madonna and most others now either lack or choose not to show off. Ever
since we gave up posture for fitness, big square shoulders with a tendency to
hunch are no longer a disgrace but the appropriate sign of strength, especially
if worn with strong biceps. A hint of hulk is apparently not unwelcome in the
modern woman's image, and a slightly humped back, spinal curve, and
forward-thrusting neck go well with that. They look very good on Madonna, not
to mention Demi Moore; they add a thrilling touch of masculinity to female
chic. But they don't go so well with Dior.

            Modern women love to be
thin, but they also want their strength to look physical, not just emotional or
mental, in the Romantic vein. The Dior style went with the kind of physical
force that is masked like a ballerina's. In classical ballet, a woman's
greatest feats of bodily discipline and endurance must look effortless, and her
elasticity, miraculous. The emphasis is on expressive power--on imaginative and
spiritual range. Her body's mechanical power is just as great or greater, but
it's there to support the interpretation, not to show itself off. That's for
gymnasts.

            It's possible that women
would still rather look like gymnasts than ballerinas. The Madonna/Evita/Dior
combination may generate only token changes in fashion, with small details
making the period allusions (hairstyles and makeup, hats and gloves, collars
and cuffs) on top of the present basic shapes. We may not be ready to hide the
female body's true strength, to celebrate feminine charm with luxury and high
artifice. Women may have to get more used to their real power in the world
before they can afford to look as if they practiced the discipline of elegance,
not that of the gym. But, in case we do arrive at that point, I'm straightening
my back and keeping my long, full skirts.

         
      
   
