
   
   
      
         
            A Loss for Words

            For a recent piece in the
New York Times Magazine , Lois Gould went to see the latest ready-to-wear
fashion collections--not as a reporter, but as a guest. She then wrote about
reporters and runways together as a tout ensemble , accessorized by
camera crews, designers, clients, and others present. A novelist and feminist,
Gould has the stance of a resolute outsider; her mother was a fashion designer,
and Gould has built her identity on having none of it. She approaches the
undertaking in the spirit of satire--the serious writer's favored mode since
the Middle Ages for dealing with fashion--and, since fashion now has no
existence without its spin doctors, Gould included them as part of her
target.

            She
quoted one of a group of reporters: "Can't we call it something--so it souds
new?" And another: "If I can stick to information, I won't have to say I hate
it." She overheard equivocal efforts to "call it something," so that " 'I like
the concept' usually meant ugly"; and that when "Miyake had baggy prison garb,
the word on that was 'intellectual' "; or that "if it looks like an old pinup
of Rita Hayworth in a nightie, it's a return to femininity." And so the news
media, Gould marveled sardonically, "manage to explain it all." But while
journalists feel they must sneer at the "same old" character of the handsome
wearable designs, clients and buyers greet them with applause.

            Gould was discovering an unfortunate dilemma in the
profession of fashion journalism: Since writers don't feel allowed to come
right out and say they "hate it"--a collection, an item--or to praise what is
really praiseworthy but not new enough, their writing tends to develop an
oblique, distorted character. It's often clear they hate something, if only the
horrid jostle and pressure of covering the shows; or, maybe, it's dislike of
their own contorted rhetoric that's rubbing off on what they say about the
clothes. It gives the phrases that "explain" the garments an over-the-top
quality that only adds absurdity to an art already taking big aesthetic risks.
("The master of clean, Calvin Klein pairs thongs and a strapless dress with
symmetrical slashes in silver, lending an Eastern flavor to his minimalist
ethic"-- Vogue .) Since this prose is often all the public gets, along
with a few minimally informative photos, the long-term effect is to keep
fashion looking much sillier than it actually is.

            The effect
is compounded by the steady pressure on the public consciousness of ad copy,
which consistently overpraises fashion goods and so debases their real
aesthetic value. Of course, hysterical praise has always been lavished on
finery by folk in the business ("It looks terrific, it's fabulous, it's
YOU")--and not just in this century, but back through the two previous ones. In
Fanny Burney's Evelina , published in 1778, there is an early scene at a
London fabric shop:

            
               I
thought I would never have chosen a silk, for they produced so many, I knew not
which to fix upon, and they recommended them all so strongly, that I fancy they
thought I only wanted persuasion to buy everything they showed me. And indeed
they took so much trouble, that I was almost ashamed I could not.
            

            At the accessory shop, the country girl is surprised to be
served by men:

            
               And such men! so
finical, so affected! They seemed to understand every part of a woman's dress
better than we do ourselves: and they recommended caps and ribands with an air
of so much importance, that I wished to ask them how long they had left off
wearing them!
            

            Nothing the matter with
buying lovely new things; it's the invasive verbal hype that interferes with
personal judgment and turns the happy effort into an embarrassing burden.

            Credit for most good writing
about clothing during the same three-century period must go to the poets and
novelists. Tolstoy's rendering of Anna Karenina's magic in her black ball gown,
or of Princess Betsy's décolletage at the theater, stand out as examples, along
with Henry James' magnificent glancing allusions to the emotional power
generated by a rustle, a ribbon, the drawing on of a pair of gloves.

            Lately,
however, there is less and less of this in literature. Fashion journalists and
sensational fictioneers like Danielle Steele have co-opted the field, and other
writers are scared off. Fashion now seems like a club with a private jargon
that leaves no room for the play of sensitive literary exposition. And good
critical writing about clothing hardly exists at all. There is no tradition of
clothes criticism that includes serious analysis, or even of costume criticism
among theater, ballet, and opera critics, who do have an august writerly
heritage. This fact may be what makes the fashion journalist hate her job--the
painful sense that real work cannot be done in this genre, that it would be
better, more honorable, to be writing about something else.

            There are heartening exceptions. One is Amy Spindler of the
New York Times , who seems to take clothes seriously without excess or
apology, deploying a quick imagination and an interest in detail that give her
writing a fine attentive sting. (A Versace show "opened with razor-sharp
bias-cut asymmetrical navy dresses, stern except for a frill at the hem and a
swatch of black lace that masked eyes.") There was Kennedy Fraser, late of
The New Yorker , whose witty essays on fashion published in that magazine
during the 1970s have since, happily, been collected. Holly Brubach, who
succeeded Fraser at The 
               New Yorker , kept the standard high during
her time there. A big exception is the fashion journalism of France, where a
noticeable respect for fashion has been a standard common attitude since the
17 th century. Fashion is as acceptable in France as any imaginative
work, and criticism about it has certainly flourished there. Denis Diderot has
much to say about dress in the theater, and Honoré de Balzac wrote an incisive
treatise on neckties, among his many essays on elegance. Stéphane Mallarmé
actually did a bit of fashion reporting in the 1870s, some under the name of
"Mlle. Satin." (One good current French critic is Laurence Benaïm, whose
thoughful pieces appear regularly in Le Monde .)

            But
fashion has been without honor in the English-speaking world for so long that
we are afraid to take it seriously--solemnly, yes, as we take so many things,
but not with ordinary seriousness. When we are not in raptures, or disapproving
in the name of female realities, we are likely to wax sociological and
psychological about fashion, to weigh it down with quasiscientific meaning--out
of some ancient fear, perhaps, of its obvious debt to Eros.

            
Lois Gould was writing about ready-to-wear
fashion, which tends to be dealt with all the more hysterically (see Robert
Altman's film Prêt-a-Porter ) for there being huge amounts of money at
stake in the success or failure of its collections. These clothes are designed
for large-scale factory production, and the chief customer is a bulk buyer.
Journalists feel responsible for protecting a serious financial investment each
season. Trying to summon and express good judgment may be next to
impossible--even good judgment about what will sell.

            And so we
still have the haute couture with its extreme apparitions twice a year,
an enterprise frequently announced as dead but repeatedly revived as a
well-publicized modern game. Haute couture was invented in the 1850s to
serve private clients privately. The press was only grudgingly allowed into its
by-invitation-only showings nearly half a century after famous Paris
couturiers first began holding sway over the clothing of the world's
elegant women. Reporters had to sneak into Ascot and Longchamps or modish
restaurants and theaters, or crash chic garden parties to see what was being
worn by whom. They could sketch or describe new fashions as accurately as their
spying talents permitted.

            In the present climate, it's the reporters and
camerapersons who create the public event. The clothes seem aimed only at the
news media, made only for models who exist only to be transmuted into media
projections (verbal and pictorial), cooked up to be consumed by a public who
not only won't wear the clothes but will never see them being actually worn.
The prose and the images form the entire experience.

            The couture client is, in
fact, still private. The show is only partly for the distant world served by
the camera and the commentator; the rest is for her and her like, seated in the
front row. For the private client, there are still masterpieces of rare
delicacy and breathtaking beauty or exquisitely simple practicality, all made
possible by the materials and hand-workmanship available to couture houses, and
conceived by designers modifying their ideas to suit each client's taste and
figure. For the media, however, the designer uses the same resources for
explosions of bizarre novelty or to indulge his wildest fantasies--not all of
them benign--about women, clothes, and the world. Money is not the point here;
prestige is. Writers could find true scope for their interpretive talents if
they could gain true prestige from meeting the challenge.

            These elements of each
couture show--exquisite clothes for the super-rich, unbelievable costumes for
the supermodels--together make up a vision of hope and glory, a kind of poetry
about the possible beauty of possible women. Oscar Wilde, another great writer
on fashion, said, "All art must be useless." Couture demands writers who will
do its uselessness justice.

         
      
   
