
   
   
      
         
            Rest in Paz

            There is simply to the
influence the poet Octavio Paz enjoyed in Mexico. I lived in Mexico City from
the fall of 1989 through the following spring. Those were heady days for Paz.
For years, he had challenged the uncritical left-wing rhetoric that dominated
Mexico's intellectual life, and now Eastern Europe's abandonment of communism
was proving him correct. President Carlos Salinas de Gortari was renegotiating
the national debt, getting foreigners to invest again, and in general becoming
an international darling (this was four years before he would be unmasked as a
criminal and thrown out of the country). Paz was one of his biggest fans.

            I
remember a TV commercial that seemed to appear every three seconds. (At this
point there was still for all practical purposes one network, owned by Emilio
Azcárraga, a Mexican Rupert Murdoch with whom Paz was rumored to be friendly.)
The commercial advertised an exhibit at the contemporary art museum. The show
was of, basically, things Octavio Paz found interesting. I looked in the day
before I left Mexico and was fascinated and appalled. The first thing you saw
was a gallery of pre-Colombian artifacts that had sparked his imagination.
There followed a room hung exclusively with colonial-era portraits of Sor Juana
Inés de la Cruz, the 17 th century poet whose life Paz told in a
superb 1982 biography. And so it went, with room after room displaying whatever
caught Paz's fancy. A nook devoted to playful gewgaws by Marcel Duchamp, whom
Paz adored. A painting given to Paz by Jasper Johns. But the most amazing
feature of the exhibit was in the lobby: Dozens of TV monitors were stacked to
create a giant image of the great man's head as he discoursed on this and that.
The whole thing looked like a homage to some ancient emperor. It was a creepy,
discouraging display.

            An ironic one, too, given Paz's record as a critic of
Mexico's addiction to patriarchal power. All his life, he had seen the
temptations up close, and many times he had resisted. His grandfather, a
publisher, was allied with the turn of the century dictator whose highhanded
rule provoked the Mexican revolution. Late in life he switched sides and took
up the doomed cause of liberal democracy. Paz's father worked in turn with the
anarchist peasant guerrilla leader Emiliano Zapata, who wanted Mexico to return
to its pre-Hispanic, agricultural roots. When that cause, too, failed and,
after a decade of blood-spilling, the country ended up with a Byzantine
coalition of interests presided over by a strongman, the Paz family went into
exile in Los Angeles. So before he was even a teen-ager, Paz had experience in
liberalism, anarchism, revolution--not to mention the loneliness of the Mexican
kid in inhospitable America.

            Enthralled
by Marx and socialism (even in later years, when foes called him conservative,
Paz would insist he was a socialist at heart), the young Paz went to fight
Franco in Spain. But it was the idea of instantaneous action by the people that
he loved, not the Spanish Communists, with their rigid principles and ugly
totalitarian tendencies. He went to Paris and hung out with Surrealists,
deepening his sense that a writer's job is to reveal what society tries to
repress. Like many well-connected, artistically inclined Mexicans, he got into
cushy work that supplied living expenses and food for the imagination:
diplomacy.

            It was while working as a diplomat in Paris that he wrote
the book he'll be remembered by. In The Labyrinth of Solitude: Life and
Thought in Mexico , Paz drew on his reading of Freud, Marx, and Nietzsche to
explore the Mexican cult of death, the phenomenon of the macho, and explosive
rituals such as the fiesta. His conclusion: Mexican customs were a kind of
mask, a defensive camouflage worn to hide the country's unresolved past. "The
whole history of Mexico, from the Conquest to the Revolution, can be regarded
as a search for our own selves, which have been deformed or disguised by alien
institutions," he wrote. The Revolutionary Institutional Party that took power
after the revolution had promised Mexico a new beginning. But instead of
providing Mexicans with an idea they could organize a modern community around,
it was a touchy compromise that preserved backward attitudes toward power
leftover from the Aztecs and colonial Spain:

            The patriarch protects, is
good, powerful, wise. The macho is the terrible man, the chingon , the
father who has left, who has abandoned a wife and children. The image of
Mexican authority is inspired by these two extremes: Señor Presidente and
Caudillo.

            Much of
The Labyrinth now feels dated. It's infused with a mournful 1950s-era
Existentialism, and Paz's French influence pushes him into abstraction. In
places, his indictment of certain aspects of the Mexican character is so
harsh--he accuses his fellow countrymen of pathological passivity and a love of
lying--that it verges on masochism. But the book single-handedly invented the
way people think about modern Mexico, and it has a tough truthfulness that's
still palpable today. Never academic, it proceeds from a simple, urgent
question: "What are we, and how can we fulfill our obligations to ourselves as
we are?" This is a poet's or a philosopher's approach to history that could
fruitfully be applied to any country in the world. (Click to see, for example,
how he applies it, with not very flattering results, to the United States.)

            Paz cemented his reputation for integrity in 1968, when the
Mexican government murdered hundreds of students, and he resigned his post as
ambassador to India in protest. But gradually, it has to be admitted, he came
to suffer a mild case of the very power sickness he had diagnosed. He set up a
magazine, Vuelta , to pursue intellectual inquiry free of the Mexican
left's more overblown rhetoric. The magazine was and is serious and fresh and
distinguished. But Paz's omnipresence was sometimes unhealthy. From high up on
his throne, he conducted feuds with those--Carlos Fuentes was one--who
disagreed with him. For decades, too much of what was published in Mexico was
written either in argument with him or to court his favor.

            That said,
Paz could not have remained on top if he had not remained relevant. Some shrewd
inner compass and an unholy supply of curiosity saved him from becoming a relic
of the past or an embattled opponent of the present. I won't argue for his
poetry, which, while frequently beautiful, is never quite as beautiful to me as
his prose. That is gentle and clear, yet so packed with suggestive ideas that
it is almost painful to read. While other writers struggled with Paz's
definition of the Mexican condition, he wrote about Chinese calligraphy,
Japanese haiku, the Marquis de Sade ("an enemy of love," yet paradoxically, a
generous man), or obstacles to democracy in India (he always thought there were
useful parallels between Mexico's and India's struggles to set up a legitimate
government). In his life Paz made himself invulnerable, but in his writing he
kept his eyes, ears, and heart open. "A writer should be a guerrilla fighter,
should bear solitude and know that he is a marginal being," he once told an
interviewer. He never gave up this ideal of marginality, even as he climbed to
the top of the pyramid. He was a singular case, both admirable and disturbing:
the perennial guerrilla fighter who also became king.

            
               If you
missed the links within this article, click to read about Kerr's thoughts on .
Or, read applied to North Americans.
            

         
      
   
