
   
   
      
         
            Second-Class Symphonies

            Hollywood composers have
usually found it easier to earn money than respect. In the rarefied world of
concert music, film composers were always thought of as versatile and skilled,
but with nothing crucial to say. Those who had started out writing for the
concert stage, as most in the studio heyday had, were assumed to have
sacrificed their art to mammon. The likes of Erich Korngold ( The Adventures
of Robin Hood , Anthony Adverse ) and Bernard Herrmann ( Citizen
Kane , Psycho ) never stopped pressing their noses to the windows of
the concert hall, bitter at the unwritten dictum, "No movie hacks need
apply."

            All that
has changed in recent years, and the first four releases of the Nonesuch Film
Series amount to a certificate of intellectual chic. The scores of East of
Eden , Spartacus , Jules and Jim , Dodes'kaden , and a
host of other classic films, whose music we have heard mostly squeezed stingily
out of tinny television speakers, have been sumptuously rerecorded. To hear
them this way--loud, full, warm, and three-dimensional--feels rather like
watching the movie characters walk off the screen and into the "real" world in
Woody Allen's Purple Rose of Cairo .

            Uncharacteristically, the generally visionary Nonesuch is
scrambling to catch a trend with this one. More typically, the label has
outclassed the competition. Two of the featured composers--France's Georges
Delerue and Japan's Toru Takemitsu--come from the artier world of foreign film,
and even the two Hollywood scorers, Leonard Rosenman and Alex North, wrote
music with a stronger bite than the bloated tone poems full of sopping strings
that had become the studio standard by the 1940s. For his first film, A
Streetcar Named Desire (1951), North wrote Hollywood's first jazz
soundtrack, the musical embodiment of New Orleans' moist, hot nights. Rosenman
even dipped into the 12-tone techniques revered by the very high priests of
modernism who thought his profession was debased.

            Takemitsu
was the only one of the four to have been a member in good standing of the
avant-garde, partly because he wrote for the cinema , rather than the
movies, and partly because his film music was so abstract and his concert works
so cinematic. A long (15-minute) excerpt from his score for Rikyu braids
together fitful phrases of European Renaissance string music, ominous Asian
pluckings, and electronic reverberations into a tapestry that is more hazily
eerie than narrative. At the same time, water courses through many of his
concert pieces (which have titles like "Rain Tree Sketch" and "Towards the
Sea"), and Takemitsu was a master at painting rain, waves, and rivulets in
sound.

            
The Delerue CD is a box of bittersweets: two-
or three-minute cues that deftly evoke a mood or a quick pang, and then move
on. From Jules and Jim there are the plucked, fragrant melodies that
stop brilliantly short of cloying, the spasm of frantic neo-Baroque fiddling
from Day for Night , and the tangy sounds of an out-of-tune barroom
upright from Shoot the Piano Player . In these eclectic sketches--which
capture an image but have no emotional arc of their own--the irony of this
project comes into focus: the contradiction of championing film music by
cleaving it from film.

            Those who
agitate loudest to get the soundtrack recognized as the great modern genre--the
conductor John Mauceri, for example--betray a prejudice toward music that is
independent, nonreferential, and pure. "Once you take away the picture,"
Mauceri has said, "the inherent ambiguity of the music takes over." Strip the
battle scene from a cue written for a battle scene, and you get not mere
descriptive battle music but an abstract shard of symphony. The tension between
descriptive and abstract forms of music goes back to controversies of
19 th -century Germany. In one corner, Brahms and his acolytes held
that music's highest aspiration should be internal perfection and
self-sufficiency. Opposing them, behind Wagner and Liszt, were those for whom
music was a lubricant for literature, art, or drama--just one component of a
synthetic artistic experience.

            These recordings would like it both ways. The cream of film
scorers, they imply, are consummate collaborators, able to fuse notes and
images so that each inflames the other. But the very act of issuing them on CD
suggests they should be able to stand alone. If Wagner's operas can be
excerpted for concert performance, and Stravinsky's ballet scores have a life
of their own, why can't the soundtrack jettison its celluloid ballast and
soar?

            Because it
doesn't work that way. Take North's celebrated score for A Streetcar Named
Desire : The score's brilliance lies in the way the languorous New Orleans
jazz, redolent of sin, plumes out of the dive up the street from the
Kowalskis', curls along the block, and squeezes itself through a radio. As we
watch, we can never be sure whether the characters are hearing the same music
we are, and as the music seeps into the lives of Stanley, Stella, and Blanche,
it does what jazz and the movies have always done best: It makes the squalid
glamorous. But surround the soundtrack with silence and mount it in a frame of
its own, and you have a stylish, silky knockoff of Duke Ellington's "Creole"
style: a Hollywood makeover of a Northeastern version of raucous New Orleans
jazz.

            
In a sense, the Nonesuch film-music series is
like the Cloisters, the hodgepodge of medieval sculpture rescued from crumbling
monasteries and churches all over France and patched together in New York
City's Fort Tryon Park. There is something perverse about the Cloisters' demand
that the essential quality of a work of art remain intact, even when it is
dropped into an alien habitat. Like the Cloisters, these discs contain
ravishingly crafted bits and pieces extracted from their intended setting;
restored, reassembled, and asked to keep right on glowing exactly as they did
before.

         
      
   
