
   
   
      
         
            Black Was Beautiful

            I walked through Manhattan's
East Village the other day to see what people were wearing at the center of
bohemia these days. I was immediately struck by the benign, pastel tonality of
the clothed population; there seemed to be a large consensual flight from the
color black, that famous hue of communal refusal. Instead, everybody was
offhandedly wearing an assortment of garments in pale colors, as if
deliberately refusing the high-impact, self-aware look that black gear now
gives to modern urban life. It seems that the bohemian spirit has gone beyond
the old war against palatable daylight hypocrisy waged in the costume of stark
dark truth. Once upon a time, colorful clothing was the sign of unspeakable
naiveté or ridiculous ostentation, to be shunned in favor of black by all
properly bemused and detached critics of society. Now, it's clearly lost its
enemy status. With black so standard and so obvious, color--especially mild,
muted, faded thrift-shop color--is no longer uncool.

            When I
was a bohemian college student in New York, only black was acutely cool,
because it was so hard to find. Standard inexpensive clothes in
stores--sweaters and skirts, let's say--came in dark blue, dark green, and
maybe brown or maroon, the traditional colors of country sportswear favored by
the Ivy League, and in tweedy mixtures or pale versions of the same. Socks,
too. All this was excruciatingly uncool, hopelessly demeaning. You could get a
black dress or black suit for lots of money, but that was only occasionally
permissible and mostly not possible; and there were no thrift shops full of
interesting castoffs. Satisfactory rebel black had to be tracked down in places
that specialized in dancers' gear, for example (where you could find black
tights and turtlenecks), or made at home during vacations. I remember
concocting many a funereal top and bottom and the occasional black cape on my
sympathetic mother's sewing machine. On a tight budget, it required real effort
to oppose the multicolored, tacky assumptions of ordinary life in those
days.

            In high Victorian times, advanced feminine elegance was
defined by a range of brilliant hues, and non-fashionable clothing mostly by
dull black. Black was worn by mourners and the clergy, by civil and domestic
servants, and by the poor as Sunday best. The old social hierarchies
disintegrated after World War I, and boring non-fashion could become
revolutionary high fashion. Only then could Chanel daringly use dull black
textiles, until then associated with widows' weeds and maids' uniforms, for
plain but costly little dresses that made the contrived, bright, or pallid garb
of the belle époque look foolish.

            
Fashionable women discovered that simply cut garments in plain black fabric
were as flattering to them as evening clothes were to men. Women's fashion
hasn't been the same since, and the feminine appeal of muted black clothes,
later extended to menswear for women, has kept its mainstream power. That power
was echoed in the rebellious bohemian version, which inevitably became a
sizable fashion market itself and took over a large part of expensive chic. For
that very reason, perhaps, current urban opposition to the whole
image-conscious mainstream is veering over to what used to look like farm
clothes: the faded green-and-yellow-checkered shirts and the
orange-washed-out-to-coral sweatshirts of poor and artless rural life.

            
It's hard to believe that bohemian black is
gone for good, because its prestige is so great. Suggesting, as it did, the
remote look of both the unworldly priesthood and the potent monastic orders,
black garb was often the anti-fashion choice of dandies and intellectuals, of
Hamlet the anxious prince, Byron the smoldering poet, and Baudelaire the
austere, afflicted critic. Black was also chosen by women who took their cues
from those men, by austere, anxious, or smoldering femmes fatales , such
as George Sand, who felt alone among their smugly blooming sex. Many intense,
solitary, and impassioned heroines of fiction and history, wearing black
dresses in illustrative art, helped set the tone for hosts of modern
temptresses in black. Intelligent, unquiet black and sexy black have come
together in modern women's fashion; a black dress feels both safe and
dangerous. Chanel, a child of poverty, was very clever to allow for the sense
of alienation in her chic black scheme.

            It was
Baldessare Castiglione (in The Book of the Courtier , finished 1516,
published 1528) who first recommended black costume as a means of conveying
personal distinction and a certain noble reticence. He offered this advice to
both sexes at a time when elaborate clothes in rich colors were prevalent among
the mighty; and many of them took it. Much Renaissance and Baroque portraiture
displays its successful effect, which has repeatedly inspired high and low
practical elegance ever since. Modern black sweaters and black leather jackets,
black tuxedoes and all degrees of black décolletage are ultimately descended
from those great examples, offered by Titian, Velázquez, Rembrandt, et al., of
the extra impact delivered by any human face that appears above a black-clad
body. Great photography, indebted to Rembrandt and his successors, continues to
make the point.

            Now everybody can do it, and the fashion business has
apparently concluded that everybody will want to do it forever. Designers'
attempts to eradicate the public's devotion to black clothes, whether by
self-styled bohemians in SoHo, business and media people uptown, or wealthy
fashion folk around the globe, have succeeded only in fixing it more.
Transparent black and rugged black, fitted or flowing or bunchy black, black
velvet and satin, black spandex and plastic, never seem to go away. Striking
green, yellow, and purple may appear, and sober brown and navy, too, giving the
impression for a few minutes that modish black is over; but it never is--it's
just waiting.

            So far, that is. Given the
accumulated cultural force of its myriad uses in history, you might predict
that the future of black clothing would be at least as long as its past. Since
modern black can be both high and low or right and left, it seems too versatile
to lose. But all that might fall away. Up to now, the black printed type on the
page has also looked as indispensable as the adaptable dress of modern thought,
but we can't predict thought-fashion for the coming centuries. Maybe the
anti-fashion people now wearing pale blue and muted rose are dressing to match
the new dawn they assume will flood the future and ultimately wash away the
ink-stamped past.

         
      
   
