
   
   
      
         
            Poor Us

            Economist Juliet Schor is
among a handful of academics to have achieved the widely held and rarely
admitted to dream of the professoriate: reaching a popular audience with work
that also passes muster technically. Success as a pop academic requires
operating on two levels--that is, making distinctly different arguments for pop
readers and academic readers. Schor's pop argument is: We spend too much on
stuff we don't need. Her academic argument is: For complicated sociological
reasons (which I'll explain in a minute), American spending patterns have
changed in ways we need to take notice of.

            Usually
in the pop-academic genre, the pop side will be interesting and the academic
side dutiful and obscure. In the case of The Overspent American , the
reverse is the case.

            Intellectuals have never warmed to American consumer
culture. Bashing it is a tradition that begins with the advent of a national
consumer market in the early decades of the 20 th century (reread
Babbitt if you don't believe me). The idea that a country founded upon
high-flown principles has come to care more about fame, money, and accumulating
stuff than about the principles has long been galling to those who hold the
principles dear. So when Schor scoldingly writes, for example, "In 1995 alone,
Americans spent $7.6 billion on residential lawn care, much of it
environmentally destructive," it doesn't feel like a fresh thought. Even if you
accept that lawns and cars and credit card debt and designer logos are
pernicious, to attack them seems, as a writing project, a little easy. The main
point of Schor's previous book, The Overworked American (which can be
adduced from the title), was less familiar than her main point here.

            But
Schor's sociological theory is fascinating. It involves a change in most
consumers' reference groups. A reference group (the term was invented in 1942
by a psychologist named Herbert Hyman) is the set of people with whom you
compare yourself in order to appraise how you're doing. Your level of
aspiration and contentment varies not according to some absolute standard but
according to your choice of reference group. Change your reference group, and
you'll find that you're suddenly feeling much better (or worse) about your
situation.

            
The reference group is one of the most widely
used concepts in social science and also in market research. The first person
to apply it to the field of consumer spending was James Duesenberry, the
Harvard economist, who wrote a book in 1949 arguing that for most people, the
reference group is made up of neighbors. Hence "keeping up with the
Joneses"--we buy whatever it takes to have what our neighbors have.

            Schor
believes that for most consumers, neighbors have been replaced as the primary
reference group by a much broader and better-off panoply of co-workers,
acquaintances, and characters presented by the media. Prime-time television is
full of supposedly ordinary, typical families who live in fancier circumstances
than anyone at the median income could afford. The entry of mothers into the
work force has exposed them to people across a much wider income range than
obtains in the neighborhood. In a survey Schor conducted at a big corporation
(sounds as if it is Southwestern Bell, although in keeping with academic
convention, she doesn't give its real name), only 2 percent of the people
responding said neighbors were their primary reference group.

            Switching reference groups has pushed Americans' spending
habits hugely upward. Schor has come up with the slightly wacky statistic that
each hour of television a person watches per week will generate $208 a year in
spending. Between 1979 and 1995, she says, the average person's spending,
adjusted for inflation, increased between 30 percent and 70 percent.

            The idea
that the reference-group calculations that underlie consumption habits have
changed makes sense. If this is a problem, then what do we do about it? Schor's
theory leads inescapably to one answer: Find another reference group for the
average consumer.

            
So far so good. But then we come to the
reference group Schor proposes as an alternative. Schor calls them
"downshifters," people who have scaled back the desperate work-and-spend cycle
and are much happier as a result. She claims, somewhat implausibly, that 19
percent of Americans, not counting retirees, voluntarily downshifted between
1990 and 1996. In the chapter she devotes to anecdotal portraiture of
downshifters, though, they don't come across as being very appealing. One was
laid off. Another is living on unemployment insurance. Another "found herself
perilously close to the rock bottom." Another is "trusting that, somehow, it is
going to work." Is this the reference group that launched a thousand ships?

            Schor
celebrates downshifters--people defined by not spending--because she views
consumerism as evil. To her way of thinking no nonessential spending, no desire
to possess things, can ever be innocent or morally neutral. Instead, all taste,
all aesthetic judgment, all pleasure taken in things, must be a matter of what
economists call "positionality." It is merely a way of signaling status, even
if we've deluded ourselves into thinking it's not. There isn't much room in
Schor's schema for even the interesting curlicues of spending culture, such as
the joy in finding a bargain or personal variances in taste (e.g., "uptown" vs.
"downtown")--let alone the idea that a possession could bring its buyer simple
pleasure. If, to use two of Schor's examples, you don't want to put aluminum
siding on your house or garb yourself in polyester, the only possible reason is
that you don't want people to think you're a Bubba.

            Schor's right--it is depressing when people get into the
grip of an all-engulfing need to establish their identity by buying stuff,
especially if it's stuff they can't afford. It is also the case that
newspapers, magazines, radio, and television are so financially dependent on
consumer advertising that they're unlikely to lead the charge against this
problem.

            Still, the
solution Schor proposes seems almost as forced and obsessive as overspending
itself. Why can't buying things be a pleasurable sideshow to the main events of
life? Why does it have to screw everything else up?

            
Let me propose another reference group that the
culturati might glorify in the (perhaps vain) hope of curbing spending-mania:
happily functioning people. Membership in this group would be defined in a
possession-neutral way. A person would belong by virtue of doing something she
loved and believed in, and by being enmeshed in a web of community, family, and
friends. A self-appraisal (and remember, the entire purpose of a reference
group is to serve as a yardstick for self-appraisal) would entail evaluating
the richness of relationships and the satisfactions of accomplishments, rather
than the cataloging of possessions. Buying a new tie would be fun, not an
obsessive, central, tail-wagging-the-dog-of-life activity. If you can afford
it, great. If not, no big deal.

            It would also have been nice
to see Schor wrestle with the contradiction between her point and the Keynesian
tradition of treating higher incomes and more spending as the royal road to the
good society. Ever since the 1930s, American liberal economists have celebrated
consumerism--not because they find it culturally attractive, but because it
offers the promise of marrying the cherished liberal goal of income
redistribution to overall economic prosperity. Put money in ordinary people's
pockets, and as they spend it the assembly lines will hum and unemployment will
fall.

            This is the economic school
to which Schor belongs. She has a brief epilogue in which she admits that her
anti-consumerism conflicts with it but does it in a way that demonstrates that
she hasn't resolved the problem. "I have always believed there is great merit
in the Keynesian view," she says stiffly, and then goes on to admit that
downshifting might cause a slowdown in productivity growth--which, from an
economist's point of view, is pretty close to the ultimate horror. A great book
on her subject, rather than a good one, might have found a way to propose an
economic ideal that would not lead as inexorably into a social nightmare as
Schor's seems to.

         
      
   
