
   
   
      
         
            Bra Story

            The bra is a keener pleasure
for being optional. Thirty years ago, many items once necessary to female
life--bras and girdles, hats and gloves, formal hairstyles and conventional
makeup--were banished to the torture chamber of the patriarchy. One by one they
have all come back, licensed frivolities rather than slavish concessions to the
male beholder. Since they are subject to women's freedom of choice, many women
never make use of them, and that, too, has its own excitement.

            Of all
the old appurtenances, the bra was the only one that never really disappeared,
since some women can't do without it. In fact, developments in bra construction
and embellishment speeded up when not wearing them became a natural right
instead of a questionable perversion and wearing them became a sensual
experience instead of a social duty. Now there are tough sports bras for active
women, cleverly minimizing bras for the very abundant, and scores of
confections with no function but to delight, whether on bodies or in pictures.
The Wonderbra was a popular sensation a couple of years ago, and Madonna in her
Gaultier monstrosities was a showbiz sensation four years before that. It's
clear that breasts well emphasized by artfully designed bras are thrilling to
all sexes and ages, and there's nothing wrong with that. The Victoria's Secret
catalogue makes a fine successor to the one from Frederick's of Hollywood.

            This year we can also relish the flat-chested puberty look
of what used to be called a "training bra" and is now being worn as part of the
dress. Designers are enclosing nearly nonexistent breasts in the familiar
bra-shape, then sliding a dress around it (attached with little rings), or over
it (so it shows through), or below it (sewn on, sometimes in a different
material). The more the bra seems like underwear, the sexier it is; when it's
more like a bikini top, the effect is simple modishness. In any case, though,
the idea is never to thrust actual breasts into actual prominence. It's a
reference only, a delicate allusion to that deeply satisfying modern icon, the
brassiere-clad bosom with its distinctively engineered shape.

            The
fetishism of female underwear dates, in its current incarnation, to the second
half of the last century, before bras existed and when the prevailing
excitement was all about underpants. For hundreds of years, women had worn only
petticoats. The arrival of white, frilly panties caused a stir, especially
since many were "open drawers"--that is, pants made as two separate knee-length
legs, hung on a single drawstring around the waist but with no fore-and-aft
crotch seam. The wicked Parisian cancan dates from this steamy epoch.

            
In those days a great divide separated
underwear from outerwear, so a glimpse of petticoat frill was a thrill. But
even more so were the lines of the figure created by the invisible corset
(think Seurat), along with the knowledge of invisible underpants caressing
secret places with every rustling step.

            The bra
is an early 20 th century invention, born of a new ideal for the
female body newly engaged in sports and gainful employment. This ideal had two
elements, one forthrightly celebrating female anatomy in all its strength and
elasticity, the other more covertly emphasizing a woman's sensual pleasure in
her physical self and in being touched by others. The corseted shapeliness of
earlier decades had been a treat for the eye and the mind, but not for the
hand. The new, flexible shape, covered by a few thin layers of fabric, was
enjoyable to its owner and accessible to the male grasp. Fur coats came into
vogue, the dance craze erupted, and the diaphragm was invented, all well before
World War I.

            Breasts, however, presented a problem. They don't have
muscles that can govern their own movements, and if they're sizable, they swing
and bounce with the slightest motion of the body. In the brisk new
20 th century, it seemed a good idea for lightly clad but respectable
women to cover up their breasts and make sure they were held still--without, of
course, reverting to the lines of the old-fashioned corset. Some neat
arrangement was required that would inhibit neither the tennis arm nor the
Charleston.

            The first
bras simply flattened the bosom with a band, to help create a radically
immature-looking female form. That adroitly solved the public breast problem,
while new cylindrical girdles flattened the hips, tum, and bum. But when ripe
feminine curves came back into fashion in the '30s, there appeared the
double-breasted and cantilevered bra--the "uplift" bra. The Sweater Girl,
exemplified by Lana Turner, appeared in 1937; you could see that under her
sweater was her bra, lifting up, holding out, and separating and steadying her
breasts with firm insistence. Before long, breasts in visible or invisible
bras--torpedo-shaped, grapefruit-shaped, cone-shaped, headlight-shaped, all
held impossibly high up on the chest--appeared in movies, in ads at every
level, in comic strips, and in soft-core porn. It was the time of "I Dreamt I
Ran for Congress in My Maidenform Bra."

            
Later the padded bra and the underwire bra
added perfection to individual outlines, and still later, the molded, seamless
bra produced a skinlike surface under tight clothes. From roughly 1930 to
roughly 1970, the bra-shaped breast was the only one anybody saw in public
outside an art museum, and the vision was indelibly imprinted on the collective
mind. A rage for that shape persists; breast augmentation and reduction
procedures are popular, and the bra business is bigger than ever.

            But contemporary women can
have it both ways. Women who never really need bras can ignore them or wear
them at will. Modern feminism, modern habits, and modern fashion have
familiarized the eye with mobile and visible breasts of different shapes and
sizes, even with the harsh truths of breast cancer. Breasts have lost much of
their mythological aura and acquired some needed reality. But the delicious
look of breasts in bras, to say nothing of the delicious feel of them for the
wearer, taps into a very ancient human joy. Emphasizing breasts is too great a
pleasure to abandon.

         
      
   
