
   
   
      
         
            Piano Forte

            The tell us a lot about this
recording: First, a superbly voiced E-flat major chord with every instrument
audible, the winds biting through the string sound, the timpani crisp yet
viscerally forceful. Then, the soloist begins his famous heroic surge up the
keyboard. Except that he doesn't sound heroic; he sounds tinkly. His finger
work is impeccable, his phrasing elegant, his stance as swaggering as one could
wish, but the sound of his instrument--a fortepiano, an earlier, less powerful
version of our modern-day piano--is irreconcilably at odds with his
intentions.

            The
original instrument movement is several decades old, and has moved so far
beyond mere novelty that in some repertoires, it might even be considered the
new orthodoxy. Bach performance in the style of those old Grand
Teutons--conductors like Furtwängler, Klemperer, and von Karajan--has fallen
out of fashion and favor, and massed Victorian armies raising the rafters as
they belt out The 
               Messiah now seem quaintly anachronistic.

            In music of the 19 th century, though, the use of
original instruments is still controversial. Do they reveal the composer's
intentions, or merely demonstrate the practical limitations against which he
struggled? Keyboard music poses the question in its starkest terms: Was the
19 th -century concert grand developed in response to the music being
composed by Beethoven and his contemporaries, in order to realize its potential
more fully, or was the Romantic style of keyboard writing itself a response to
the sound of these new instruments?

            These
aren't idle questions. When Beethoven was sent a Broadwood grand as a gift from
its British manufacturer in 1818 (he maneuvered to avoid paying import duties,
incidentally), he was delighted--with both the gift and the instrument. It's
not unreasonable to assume that he considered it a superior medium for the
performance of his music, even music composed before he received the gift.

            
Robert Levin, the fortepiano soloist on this
recording and a respected musical scholar, assumes otherwise. As he makes his
way through the cycle of Beethoven concertos, he plans to use different
instruments for the different pieces, determining the compass of each
instrument he employs by the range of notes each piece demands. He believes, as
he put it in a conversation with me recently, that "no matter the size of the
room, Beethoven always insists on banging his head on the ceiling and stubbing
his toe on the floor." This is elegantly put and close to inarguable: If
Beethoven had a five-and-a-half octave instrument at his disposal, the music he
wrote for it probably would demand the highest and the lowest notes of that
five-and-a-half octave span. But does it necessarily follow that the instrument
available to him on any given occasion produced the ideal sound he heard in his
head?

            This
question is more pointed for the "Emperor " concerto than it might be for
its predecessors. Although not the first grandly heroic piano
concerto--Mozart's K. 503 arguably merits that description--the
"Emperor " proclaimed its grandeur in an especially aggressive way, and
in so doing, became the model for concertos of the Romantic era. The drama
inherent in concerto performance--valiant soloist vying with and defying the
mass of the orchestra with his eloquence and virtuosity--is the very essence of
the "Emperor ." One would think it requires an instrument that can
challenge the orchestra in volume and power. To play the piece on a fortepiano
seems almost perverse.

            That said, it must also be said that no other performance
could have offered a better opportunity to decide whether Levin is right.
Gardiner's conducting is so good (his Beethoven Symphony cycle is, to my ears,
the one to own, and his Mozart and Handel performances are exemplary); Levin's
playing is so dexterous, intelligent, and ardent; and the recording is so
technically splendid (there are felicities of scoring, such as a solo cello
line in the first movement I'd never noticed before) that, whatever its
peculiarities, this release at least qualifies as best of breed.

            And how does it fare? In the
lyrical sections, it works superbly (most of the second movement, say, and the
beautiful B minor/C flat major section of the first movement's second subject,
projected with supple delicacy by Levin). In the filigree figures accompanying
transitional passages in the first movement, or the dialogue with the French
horns near the end of the same movement, it's close to a revelation. This, I
found myself thinking, must be the precise blend Beethoven intended.

            But in the
heroic passages that define the work, it doesn't succeed for me at all. The
cadenza that opens the concerto sounds wan and unassertive; its even more
extravagant recapitulation tries harder while achieving less. The great
four-against-three contrary-motion chromatic scales, one of the most thrilling
virtuoso passages in the literature, are bland in spite of Levin's awesome
execution. And in the battle of block chords toward the end of the development
section, the piano comes off as strident rather than imperial as it attempts to
rival the orchestra.

            
This performance contains one other oddity
worth noting. Levin accompanies the orchestra, continuo-style, during the tutti
sections--passages when the soloist is normally silent. This is a controversial
practice even in Mozart concertos, and unheard of in 19 th -century
works. In his liner notes, and more elaborately in our conversation, Levin
claims the manuscript score makes Beethoven's intentions unambiguous on this
point. His argument is persuasive, but the conclusion is so
counterintuitive--why should the soloist meekly accompany the orchestra when he
isn't defying it?--that I remain unconvinced. His contributions in these
passages are largely unobtrusive--and in a medium without a visual component,
not especially bothersome--but the choice nevertheless seems eccentric.

            The other piece on the
recording, the Fantasy for Pianoforte, Chorus, and Orchestra 
               in C
Minor Op. 80, a hastily written occasional composition with amusing
premonitions of Symphony No. 9 , is not one of Beethoven's more inspired
creations. But the performance is splendid; Levin and Gardiner are powerful
advocates for a work whose position in the repertory has historically been
tenuous.

            It's impossible to arrive at
any general conclusions about what sorts of instruments are right for
Beethoven's keyboard music. It's true that different pieces benefit from
different treatment; the Op. 2 sonatas, for example, don't need a sound source
identical to the Hammerklavier . And the coming original-instrument
performances of the remaining concertos from Levin and Gardiner promise to be
revelatory. But--and Levin is likely to find this praise more infuriating than
any criticism--had he chosen to play his "Emperor " on a Steinway or a
Bosendorfer, he might have given us one of the greatest recordings of the piece
ever put on disc.

         
      
   
