
   
   
      
         
            Belle Lettrism

            The current
show at the Metropolitan Museum's Costume Institute concentrates on
20 th -century garments bearing words, letters, and numbers in various
ways. There are a few word-bearing accessories from earlier days--garters,
stockings, fans, and gloves, most with political or erotic reference--but the
clothes date mostly from the middle to the end of this century. Nevertheless
the show's punning title, "Wordrobe," appears on the wall with the displaced
"a" in flashing red neon above the first "o." Right away we're meant to think
of Hester Prynne's big scarlet A, imposed by the godly community, which she
defiantly embellished with gold thread. In so doing Hester was transgressing a
second time, because in the 17 th century, in which the novel was set
(and in the 19 th , in which it was written), wearing letters for
decoration on everyday clothing was entirely unacceptable.

            It is still disturbing,
or was until very recently. Why is that? Words, letters, and numbers on
garments seem riskier than kittens, clouds, and flowers on garments, just as
those seem less natural than stripes, plaids, or checks. But what, exactly, is
profaned by putting words on clothes? Is it the garment, the person, or the
words? I believe it is the writing. The written word was accumulating its own
sacred aura even before Homer and the Bible. Ever since priests, scholars, and
poets used writing to record Scripture, prayer law, and history both exalted
and prosaic, reverence for canonical writings has lent an august power to
written words themselves. And with all the weight of such a past, a certain
dread can still attach to the sight of them being frivolously used.

            In the middle of this century, turning words into fashion
seemed like just such a use. Some of the designs shown at the Met reflect a
serious daring; they are examples not just of amusing invention but also of
rule-breaking. Turning the cutout letters of Emily Post's Advice to
Debutantes into a debutante's dress (designed by Evans and Wong, 1996), or
knitting the preamble to the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence
into a cashmere sweater (designed by Joseph Golden, 1997), or even just making
a dress out of random alphabet-lace (French, late 1920s)--all these are ways of
flaunting modern fashion's basic iconoclasm.

            After the show, I looked
around the museum to see if I could find any paintings representing people with
writing on their clothes. I found only Christ and the Virgin and the occasional
saint, clad in ceremonial garments edged with golden or pearl-sewn words from
liturgy or Scripture--but these were worn only in heaven. Earthly mortals
didn't seem to have the privilege. Words or letters or numbers on your clothes
set you apart as some sort of human object, sacred like St. Anthony or shameful
like Hester Prynne or maybe useful like a team member.

            There is, in fact, an
old football jersey in this show, with a big number on it. But it's mainly
there as a foil to an evening dress by Geoffrey Beene (1968) with a football
number in glittering beading. Beene has another beautiful, sleek black one with
a sequined traffic sign emblazoned across the chest, a big, shiny yellow
triangle with "yield" in black capitals (1967). Wonderful to look at--with the
meaning not lost, just transmuted, by the sequins.

            More stirring is a sheer bodysuit designed by Jean Paul
Gaultier in 1994 that transforms the wearer into a living banknote, all
gray-green engraved swirls and crosshatching, with an occasional "100" at
salient corners. This stretches the theme a little, since there are no words
and it isn't the reproduction of a real bill. But it works, like so much else
in the exhibition, to show how practical signs can become erotic adornments on
the human surface, depending on texture and placement. This skintight,
transparent garment turns its pattern into a tattoo, a practice alluded to by
several other items here, including some skin-colored Gaultier swim trunks that
seem to cover the genitals with a tattoo saying "Safe Sex Forever" (1997).

            Monograms have a natural
place in the "wordrobe," but they were not invented for clothing. The rich and
the noble used to put them on personal effects to imitate the ancient royal
habit of stamping (or embroidering or incising) the king's property with his
personal cipher. Artisans would discreetly stamp precious creations with their
own monograms in minidesigner-label mode, while giving elaborate prominence to
the client's. There are plenty of surviving cigar cases, purses, boxes,
lockets, brooches, penknives, and all kinds of tableware with small
maker-monograms and large owner-monograms; and there are mountains of antique
household linen with embroidered domestic monograms.

            But none of these is
clothing. Putting monograms on display on garments is very recent. I know my
mother thought monogrammed blouses and bathrobes vulgar--but not monogrammed
bracelets or guest towels; from which I gather that vivid personal monograms on
clothes were new in the '30s. Once everybody got used to them in the next
generation, it was very easy to replace them with YSL and CK and the double Gs
in the following one. And those have acquired a lot more prestige than our own
ever had.

            Sultan Sáladin, the great 12 th -century Muslim
opponent of the Crusaders, had an ornate monogram that Mary McFadden borrowed
to adorn a dignified 1993 ensemble that is on view in this show. Of course it
can't be read by those familiar with only Greek and Roman letters; nor can all
the beautiful Chinese and Japanese characters in this exhibition, similarly
reduced to abstract motifs by our inability to recognize what they say. (It
does seem unfair to love them only for their looks, as if we despised their
minds.) Unlike Judaism and Christianity, Islam has used script for sumptuous
decoration of all kinds. But the Islamic artists, like those in China and
Japan, didn't forget that the immortal soul of the word is its sense; nor that
clothing, since prehistory, has made sense without words. Arabic words appear
on beautiful textiles, but not on those worn as clothing. Similarly, Japanese
calligraphy has a great artistic tradition, no less great than that of Japanese
watercolor painting or Japanese costume, and beautifully brushed poems may
appear next to watercolor images similar to those that often appear on clothes.
But the words do not go on the garments.

            It has taken modern Western
fashion to make that happen. Brocade or chiffon dresses covered in
who-knows-what utterances in beautiful Chinese and Arabic script, or dresses
wittily made of paper printed with the New York Yellow Pages, all express a
joyful relish in the decay of the written word, a forthright pleasure in the
way its meaning has been draining away. Indeed, you could view this show as a
carnivalesque celebration of our growing tolerance for illiteracy.

            At the end of the show is a
cluster of popular sportswear with Tommy Hilfiger, Donna Karan, Nautica, the
Gap, and such names applied to it. These prove that Hester Prynne's proud
display of her A was prophetic. For with the proliferation of shifting public
signage, slogans, logos, and the lava flow of printout, the words on your
clothes are now what certify your physical existence. They put you in harmony
with the rest of the material world, as well as with the electronically written
universe on the Internet. Words are now rarely carved in stone; printed books
are quickly pulped; but endless messages flicker momentarily on screens or on
this month's T-shirt. The exhibition tells us that as a vessel of lasting sense
or sacred truth, the written word may be losing ground, but that as a source of
inarticulate comfort, it has gained much.

         
      
   
