
   
   
      
         
            Star Power

            What accounts for charisma
in music--for the authority or power that strangely radiates from this or that
performer, not just from the sound but (so it seems) from the performer's
personality, from the shake of a head or the expressive curl of a wrist? I
realize that, of all the grand effects that music can produce, charisma is one
of the cheapest--which is to say, the easiest to fake, if your standards are
not too high. Years ago, in the days before I became a journalist, I played
trombone with a group called the Uptown Horns, backing up blues and rock bands,
and I savor the memory of how our jaded little group used to mock the rock
world's cult of the charismatic. To hold one's fist stiffly in the air in a
gesture of ridiculous defiance while the bass amplifier thundered and the
guitar shrieked and our man on tenor sax honked deliriously, and to see a
barroom audience respond with shouts and their own idiotic fists in the beery
air--that was to laugh. A fascist rally at the Second Avenue gin mill. We
musicians were all smirks, behind our kick-ass façade.

            In the
last few months I've been running around to classical concerts in New York
looking for charismatic qualities in places where, in theory, they might be
expected, and I've noticed something else about the charismatic in music. A
genuine touch of the charismatic is never where you expect it to be. A given
soloist might be wonderfully talented, and might choose to perform the kind of
music that exudes noble and heroic inspirations with every phrase--and, even
so, the indefinable strength that counts as charismatic might fail to appear.
An example--not to be cruel, but just to show what I'm getting at--could be
seen at the New York Philharmonic debut, a couple of months ago, of a violinist
named Frank Peter Zimmermann, from Germany.

            Zimmermann's reputation in Germany is said to be excellent.
In New York, where he played the Bruch Violin Concerto in G minor , the
audience leapt to its feet and gushed appreciation. The New York Times
pronounced itself content. Yet what can I say? It may have been the doughy look
of earnest concentration on the young man's ample cheeks, or it may have been
his habit, at the conclusion of every dazzling, double-stopped arpeggio, of
deftly lifting his bow off the strings with a satisfied air--a happy pastry
chef, pleased and relieved to have given the world one more perfect Linzer
torte. And the result was, to be honest, dismal--even if the concerto's many
splendidly demagogic passages, performed virtuosically, did their customary
work.

            The
clearest examples of charismatic musicianship that I've seen lately have been
in performances by Yuri Bashmet, the Russian violist, who was in New York not
long ago, conducting his own chamber orchestra at Carnegie Hall and playing
with the Philharmonic under Kurt Masur. Bashmet ought to be an unlikely source
of spectacular and forceful effects, due to the humble nature of his
instrument. The viola tends to be plaintively melancholic, or else to squawk,
ugly-duckling style, like a bassoon or an English horn. In the pantheon of
instruments, the viola is a mortal, not a god. Yet when Bashmet comes out onto
the stage, wiping his Prince Valiant locks off his face and holding his non-god
by its helpless neck, like a dead rabbit, you feel, even before he starts to
play, a vibration in the air, ever so slightly, as if gusting from the air
conditioner.

            
Before he starts? I admit there is something
fishy in that observation. I blame his pre-concert publicity. Bashmet, we are
told (by virtually every journalist who has written about him), began his
musical career on the electric guitar--a teen-age rock star in Rostov-on-Don
back in the late 1960s. He played in a Beatles-style band, then embraced the
viola out of the despairing recognition that, on the guitar, he would never
match the fireworks of Jimi Hendrix, his idol. And so the violist gazes outward
from the stage, and the audience, mulling over the biographical background with
its air of '60s mayhem and long-lost Soviet dissident hipness, is bound to
wonder: Is this a Promethean figure, Hendrix-like, standing before us? A man of
extremes? On the verge of mental derangement?

            He plays
with a weird supercontrol. He produces a wide, sumptuous when he wants to, and
at other times the speedy wobble of a swallowed scream. But characteristically,
he uses very little vibrato at all, and the tones that emerge are round and
affectless, like a man singing falsetto. His emotional peaks are almost always
achieved at the lowest volume. He whispers. You expect him to sink beneath the
level of audibility. But those falsetto timbres of his make a searing tone,
even in a middle register, where tones are usually not searing, and the sound
is an X-ray, which penetrates everywhere.

            The of his performances that I have heard do not capture
the full strangeness in this sound. The CDs get louder or softer, but the
quality of penetration fails to vary. The true X-ray tonality is something you
can hear only in the concert hall. And in the concert hall you become aware,
also, how risky it is for him to produce that very strange sound--which is to
say, how heroic is his playing. In a recital at Carnegie Hall more than a year
ago, he reached for that sound and, at one excruciating moment, lost control of
his bowing and sent out a wild overtone, double the volume of his normal
playing, like the feedback on an electric guitar, Hendrix-like, after all--the
worst howler I've ever heard from a musician of first rank.

            At his
Philharmonic appearance during his most recent visit, he performed a viola
concerto by the Russian composer Alfred Schnittke, who not only wrote the piece
for him but was kind enough to derive a theme cabalistically from the letters
in Bashmet's name. The concerto--you can hear it for yourself on --is a
fantastic affair. It feels like an ancient epic, with the viola as Gilgamesh,
wandering the earth. Unspeakable horrors deploy across the background. Tartar
hordes and Stalinist work brigades seem to go marching past, in flaming colors.
The violence is shocking. The starry sky is gorgeous.

            
Schnittke is a witty composer, and at certain
moments you have the feeling that he is drunkenly singing sardonic songs of woe
and contempt. And, all the while, Yuri Bashmet goes threading his way across
the foreground, a lonely man with an eerie and haunting sound, sometimes
quietly shrieking, sometimes singing lyrically--a heartbreaking figure,
heartbreakingly courageous--until, by the end, he seems to be quietly sobbing.
I'm not sure that, in the course of his performance with the Philharmonic,
Bashmet didn't once again lose control of . Yet by the end I was nearly sobbing
myself.

            It was because the
charismatic in music is genuinely awe-inspiring, and to watch the violist trek
across Schnittke's barbarous Russian landscape was like watching humanity and
inhumanity in ferocious battle, waging every grand and noble struggle that we
associate with the 19 th -century violin concertos, except without any
of the reassuring triumphalism that, among 19 th -century composers,
was indistinguishable from a finale.

            But what is this
awesome thing--the charismatic in music? My supposition of the moment--now that
I find myself under Bashmet's sway (a definite indication of charismatic force,
by the way)--is that charisma in music, the real thing and not the fake, is a
more-than-musical quality. Music is always telling stories (more or less), and
I think that charismatic power is an element in one of those stories--the force
we feel when a strong personality comes up against a demonic power and refuses
to be cowed, and takes hair-raising risks, and succeeds in being, if only for a
moment, the demon's equal.

         
      
   
