
   
   
      
         
            Cheater's Poker

            About
two-thirds of the way into Burn Rate , Michael Wolff's sardonic tell-all
about his failed attempt to become an Internet multimillionaire, the author
pauses to ask himself a set of questions I had been wanting him to address for
150 pages:

            How many fairly grievous
lies had I told? How many moral lapses had I committed? How many ethical
breaches had I fallen into?

            Alas, it
only sounds like soul-searching. Wolff relishes the many deceits and
indiscretions he commits in his pursuit of Internet riches and, after this
brief hiatus, he redoubles his efforts to hoodwink the financier-partners he
believes are out to swindle him.

            Burn Rate, currently all the rage in Silicon Valley and on
Wall Street and excerpted in the June Wired to wide acclaim, deserves
our attention for its panoramic treatment of the Internet's boom years and its
pus-ugly picture of the get-rich psyche. But Burn Rate will attract the
majority of its readers because its message--The Internet Has Failed
Us--panders to the current consensus. Didn't the last round of Internet initial
public offerings bomb? Aren't the existing Internet stocks depressed? Isn't the
Internet really about technology and not content? Isn't the Internet like cable
TV--all those Web sites and nothing on?

            The
Burn Rate saga begins in 1994, as Wolff, a respected journalist and
publishing entrepreneur in his 40s, attracts the interest of several
heavyweight New York investors and $5 million in financing. The money men want
to transform his little successes (a Yahoo!-like home page for the Internet
masses--"Your Personal Net"--and the NetGuide series of books about
what's on the Internet) into the next Yahoo! As the investors and the
investment banker prepare the foundation for an IPO--"There is no valuation.
There's only orchestration," intones the investment banker--Wolff imagines a
public company worth several hundred million dollars. Meanwhile, his company's
"burn rate," the amount it spends in excess of income, soars. By 1997, many
meetings, industry conventions, threatening phone calls, and transcontinental
flights later, Wolff flees from his creditors and the crocodile swamp of deals
and venture capital and legal disputes as competitors overtake his flimsy
concept. He decides he isn't a craven CEO, a Netrepreneur, or a deal maker.
He's a writer (with this book in him). And the Internet is a big joke.

            
Iowe Burn Rate a better synopsis, if
only to excavate the psychopathology that runs through it like a sewer. But
beware of comparisons with Liar's Poker (1989), Michael Lewis'
first-person account of his wild ride on the Salomon Bros. money-go-round and
his eventual escape. (In fact, beware of the flattering blurb by Lewis on
Burn Rate 's dust jacket.) Charm, not malice, guides Lewis' odyssey
through a business gone similarly bonkers. Listen to Wolff's treacherous
heartbeat as he daydreams on his way to a business meeting with CMP Media, the
multibillion-dollar computer-magazine publisher: "Would I get rich for being a
visionary? Or would I get rich for being a charlatan?" CMP wants to buy Wolff's
Web sites database and license his NetGuide name for a magazine about
the Web. Alison Anthoine, Wolff's wife and attorney, sizes up the deal with the
acumen of a confidence man. "They know nothing about this. And you know next to
nothing," Anthoine says. "It does appear, however, that we can sell them the
next to nothing we know for a lot of money."

            Wolff
gloats like a hyena when CMP makes the purchase. "I genuinely believe they
thought that they were buying the Internet from us," he writes. "Just think ...
how many stupid people there are in this world we can take advantage of." To
Wolff's all-knowing smirk, CMP pulls the plug on the NetGuide concept a
couple of years later, after having dropped tens of millions on it.

            This sort of candor and cold-bloodedness abounds on every
page. Wolff gratuitously singles out (by name!) one of his employees as having
"extreme body odor." He calls America Online executive Ted Leonsis "a fat man,
an ugly man, sweating like crazy." He labels his most dependable source of
investment capital a "wire-thin, almost feminized JFK Jr. look-alike" and
quotes the look-alike describing their investment banker as "a fat fuck." Of an
old colleague, Wolff writes, "I admired him at the same time I made fun of him
(behind his back)"; he goes on to dismiss him as "a gay Sammy Glick." He
ridicules Wired founder Louis Rosetto as a "lost soul" who wears
sneakers. (Full disclosure: I'm acquainted with Rosetto and the "gay Sammy
Glick.")

            Wolff
heaps analogous abuse on the Internet industry. "In the cyber business, it
seemed that no one ever told the truth. Sometimes it seemed that there was no
truth. It was all bullshit." He calls AOL "the most dysfunctional company in
America," adding that "every business AOL had ever tried had failed." The
moronic Baby Bells are 18 months behind the curve. Microsoft hasn't a clue.
(More full disclosure: Microsoft publishes 
                  Slate
               .) The
Washington Post ? Ready for fleecing when it invests in NetGuide .
Wolff admits only one person into his circle of virtue: Former Time Warner new
media chief Walter Isaacson, who has since ascended to the editorship of
Time . Isaacson's genius was that he understood the Web's potential but
was smart enough to leave the new media division early.

            
Delicious dish, but watch out for the
aftertaste. Wolff exploits the human tendency to confuse frankness and cruelty
with truth-telling. And by repeatedly reminding the reader of what a dishonest,
scheming little shit he is, he seeks to inflate his credibility. A real liar
wouldn't tell you that he's a liar as Wolff does, would he? The wealth of
verbatim quotations--constituting a good third of this book--also enhances
Burn Rate 's verisimilitude. But should it? Wolff writes that he jotted
down bits of dialogue on his legal pads during meetings while others composed
to-do lists. Not to accuse anyone of Stephen Glassism, but I'd love to see
Wolff post those copious notes on his promotional Web site, www.burnrate.com.

            As
Wolff's dreams of undeserved riches fade into a mirage, Burn Rate
becomes the journal of a loser. And, like most losers, he fails to give the
winners their due. No Web startup except for Yahoo! appears to be making much
money, yet scores of insurgent companies--Excite, AOL, Amazon.com, Virtual
Vineyards, Auto-by-Tel, TheStreet.com, and eBay, to name a few--continue to
massage the medium, attract serious investors, and lay the substructure for the
inevitable: an Internet economy. What's more, these companies believe in their
products--unlike Wolff--and back them with serious managers, who, whatever
their other weaknesses, are fleet-footed and care about their customers. Given
Wolff's transparent contempt for his industry, his business partners, his end
users, and his colleagues--actually, everybody but his wife and Isaacson--it's
a miracle he got as far in the Internet business as he did.

            Has the World Wide Web, which only appeared in 1993, failed
us? Can any 5-year-old fail us? Compare the breakneck growth of the Web with
that of any new medium of the past 150 years: the telegraph, the telephone, the
motion picture, radio, television, cable TV, and the VCR. Blithe investors toss
millions at the Web out of the conviction that it will subsume the other media,
change the face of capitalism, and generate billion-dollar payouts.

            They're right. But consider
yourself fortunate if you've never invested a penny in this market. Any sure
thing attracts too many hackneyed ideas, like Wolff's, and too much foolish
money. For all his bluntness, Wolff never concedes that the product he was
selling--essentially another set of Web directories--wasn't that appealing.
Nor, judging from this book, was its primary salesman.

         
      
   
