
   
   
      
         
            Modern Makeup

            In the past five years, my
friends and I have taken to getting our nails done--filed, painted--every week.
So, it seems, have many other women we see in the subway or office. Is this an
improvement in personal grooming (a thesis communitarian philosophers might
advance) or yet another imposition on busy professionals by the beauty industry
(as feminist pundits might argue)? Well, here's why I do it: Manicures look and
feel great, plus they're remarkably cheap and fast these days--$7 plus tip, 20
minutes tops. You used to have to go to a beauty salon, wait twice as long, and
pay twice as much. What happened? Entrepreneurial Korean and Vietnamese women,
putting ethnic credit unions to good use, opened discount nail salons in every
city neighborhood in America.

            If the
goal of feminism is greater economic and social independence for women, then
storefront manicure parlors are a feminist success story for the 1990s: They've
turned a generation of new female immigrants into small-business owners. But
cosmetics and personal care have always been a way for marginalized women to
gain entry to the marketplace. That's one lesson of Hope in a Jar , a
history of American beauty culture from the late-19 th to the
mid-20 th century, a period when the pursuit of improved looks was
transformed from a matter of folk recipes whispered from woman to woman to a
multibillion dollar industry. In fact, historian Kathy Peiss writes, "the
beauty industry may be the only business, at least until recent decades, in
which American women achieved the highest levels of success, wealth, and
authority."

            For the past three decades, feminists have been accusing
the beauty industry of fiendishly sophisticated campaigns to undercut women's
self-worth. A century ago, no one could have imagined that beauty could be
anything as faceless as an industry, let alone one capable of a broad social
agenda. In the late 19 th century, beauty, connoting as it did
individual service and the laying on of hands, was considered a trade too
vulgar for respectable people. It was a low-class, penny ante affair, therefore
an excellent opportunity for immigrants and blacks. There were men in the
field, but women had the edge. They could claim to use the products themselves
and other women trusted them. The women who rose to the top invented flamboyant
personas to go with their step-by-step systems, but they came from distinctly
unglamorous backgrounds.

            Helena
Rubenstein was a Polish Jew who embarked on a career as a cold- and
vanishing-cream saleswoman only after her parents interrupted her medical
education to ship her out of reach of an unsuitable boyfriend. But she claimed
to descend from aristocracy and to have advanced scientific degrees. Elizabeth
Arden was born Florence Nightingale Graham, the daughter of Canadian tenant
farmers. Madame C.J. Walker and Annie Turnbo Malone, two of the best-known
entrepreneurs in African-American history, were both daughters of slaves,
orphaned as children, who began as purveyors of black women's hair potions.
Both defused charges of pandering to the straight-hair, white ideal of beauty
by becoming prominent "race women"--hiring only blacks (usually women), giving
generously to black causes, and refusing to sell skin bleach, a popular item
among African-Americans.

            
The early female cosmetics tycoons faced two
problems. One was the lingering Victorian belief that face painting was for
hussies. The solution was to tie makeup to the freedoms women were beginning to
enjoy: The "New Woman" who worked in the city or went to college or just
thought of herself as modern needed and deserved a new face for the world, just
as she needed and deserved the right to work and vote.

            Women
eagerly embraced the idea that changing their faces would change their social
status. The new consumers of beauty products wrote to manufacturers that they
applied rouge, lipstick, and mascara for their own pleasure, not that of their
men. Men were more likely to oppose makeup than demand it, and often forbade
their wives and girlfriends to use it.

            The second problem was access to capital and to store
shelves. Bankers and distributors were generally loath to do business with the
gentler sex. The cosmetics queens solved this problem by exploiting their
intimacy with their customers. During the first quarter of the century, the
beauty industry advanced new sales techniques emphasizing personal contact:
door-to-door and mail-order marketing, beauty schools and correspondence
courses, lines of cosmetics tied to salons. Malone and Walker were particularly
adept at what is known today as "multilevel marketing": They traveled around
the country recruiting black women as sales representatives.

            The rise
of mass production, national advertising, and brand identity--the mainstays of
consumer capitalism--sent most small beauty manufacturers out of business, and
the rest into the hands of men who directed large corporations. (Rubinstein
sold out to Lehman Brothers. Later, enraged by their downscale positioning of
her upscale products, she bought her company back.) But female founders were
kept on as spokeswomen, or new front women were hired. Advertising agencies
hired their first women to write beauty copy, then promoted them to higher
positions. Beauty magazines, with scores of editorial jobs for women, emerged
out of what had been farm or dress-pattern publications. And some women, such
as Estee Lauder and Mary Kay Ash, made the strategic alliances with male
financiers required to keep them afloat.

            
For consumers, the key development of the 1920s
and '30s was the mass-produced image, which led to the culture of celebrity and
unified standards of feminine beauty. Suddenly, there was a look, and everyone
had to have it. Whereas once beauty practices had had an appealingly informal
kitchen quality, now skin care and makeup regimens were codified--even taught
in offices and schools. Women went from being active to passive participants in
the rites of beautification. No longer was putting on one's face seen as a
matter of individuality, dignity, or even racial advancement (moving to
Northern cities in the Great Migration of the 1930s, '40s, and '50s, many
former sharecroppers saw applying cosmetics as a step toward participating in
the wider American culture). Making up became an mandatory act of conformity
and, by the time the women's movement began to address it, of oppression.

            This is the resentful
perception so many mainstream feminists seem stuck in today. When Susan Faludi
and Naomi Wolf, for instance, talk about the beauty industry, they sound like
suspicious middle-class ladies eyeing a Chanel counter at Saks--they'll resist
those foreign wiles! But as Peiss' excellent research demonstrates, the culture
of beauty isn't all big corporations and victimized customers. Even during the
1950s, the height of American conformism, women consistently ranked advice from
mothers, sisters, and friends as more likely to drive their buying decisions
than advertising. Nowadays, lefty female academics dress as "white trash" as a
statement of class protest. Lipstick lesbians wear heavier makeup than straight
women. Black professionals braid their hair to display their ethnic pride. In
other words, using makeup is as complicated an act as it has ever been.

         
      
   
