
   
   
      
         
            Like Water From a Stone

            It may sound odd to hear the
name John McPhee in the same sentence as the phrase "cult writer." McPhee's
career developed smack in middle of the literary mainstream, in The New
Yorker of the '60s and '70s. In many ways he, along with Joan Didion,
Norman Mailer, and Tom Wolfe, helped define contemporary American writing,
elevating journalism from journeyman's status to something like literature.
What's more, McPhee's work is uncultishly genteel. Unlike his fellow New
Journalists, he rarely stoops to the first person. Where his peers wrote
frenzied accounts of Vietnam and racial strife, he gravitated toward tamer
subjects--the young Bill Bradley, for example, and canoes.

            In this
era of Monica overkill, it's not surprising to find a cult of a writer as
restrained as McPhee. Didion, Mailer, Wolfe, et al., have become somewhat
overexposed. McPhee's influence may have narrowed since his heyday, but he
remains the ultimate writer's writer. In creative writing programs, his focused
prose and reverence for facts are touted as the great model for literary
journalism. Among my acquaintances in New York publishing, McPhee has better
word of mouth than any author I know.

            This month his fans should be moved to even greater awe by
a giant new opus. Annals of the Former World is vintage McPhee--it
represents 20 years of New Yorker pieces and books, reworked for the
first time into a unified whole. All the craftsman's flourishes are on view.
Sentence by sentence, this book has more finely tuned prose than anything I've
read in ages. (Click for an excerpt.) Which is, as it turns out, its main
shortcoming. Things written sentence by sentence often lack a larger energy.
One could even call McPhee boring--except that the real problem is weirder than
that.

            Here is a
key fact about McPhee: He was born in Princeton, went to Princeton and, with a
few exceptions, has lived in Princeton all his life. The obsessive travels he's
recorded in prose are balanced by a level of stability almost unheard of for a
contemporary writer. His working life is just as consistent. He knew at 18 that
he wanted to write for The New Yorker . By the age of 34 he was on staff,
enjoying wonderful privileges--salary and benefits, huge word counts,
permission from his editor to do whatever he wanted. This is freedom the likes
of which American writers may never see again.

            
Early on, he specialized in admiring portraits
of successful young men: Bradley as a star college basketball player, Thomas
Hoving at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. It's hard to appreciate how
influential these pieces were, since their meandering narrative--a leisurely
stream of details set off by sharp, dramatic scenes--helped define the modern
magazine profile. What stands out about them today is how positive they are
about their subjects. Bradley has a great work ethic and uncommonly good
manners. Hoving is a shining star among art bureaucrats, so talented that every
major New York institution would swap favors with Satan to hire him. It's
refreshing to read a journalist who doesn't snoop around for hints that his
subject ever did anything sordid. Yet the pieces are also suffused with a
strange self-satisfaction. McPhee lays out a picture of young men who happened
to go to Princeton and to possess gifts (a good eye, discipline) not unlike his
own. Then, moving in to eat his cake, he asks us to applaud their modesty.

            As time
went on, McPhee began to focus more and more on the structure of a piece. Each
article, he believes, has an organic shape. He finds it by sorting his ample
research into subtopics, writing the name of each subtopic on an index card,
and playing around with the cards till he finds the right order. To an
outsider, the results of this search can seem specific to the point of
absurdity. An introduction to the collection The Literary Journalists
(1984) reports that the Hoving profile was shaped like a capital Y, in which
"the descending branches finally joined at a moment of an epiphany during
Hoving's college career at Princeton, and then proceeded along the bottom stem
in a single line." In some sense that I struggled to understand but eventually
gave up on, another famous piece, "Travels in Georgia," was apparently shaped
like a lower case e.

            His sense of shape may explain why he was drawn to geology,
a science that interprets rocks and gashes in the earth and weaves these
interpretations into a story of how the world grew. Annals of the Former
World began in the '70s with a piece for The New Yorker 's "Talk of
the Town" on road cuts around New York City, but McPhee knew he was onto
something bigger. Again, the form preceded the content: He imagined a book that
would journey in a straight line across Interstate 80. He began traveling
around the world interviewing geologists, journeying with them to outcrops,
looking and learning. The result is a majestic book, filled with fascinating
facts, memorable profiles of scientists, and a profound grasp of the fact that
we human beings are nothing but the merest specks.

            And yet, Annals of the
Former World numbs the brain. It makes you feel as if you'd been plucked
out of your own life and plopped down into someone else's repressed family.
This family's weird habits include, for example, assuming that when you see
something--a woman, a mountain, an empty soda can--the appropriate response is
not to decide how you feel about what you see but to think of tautly composed
phrases in which to describe it. The family belongs to the passive-aggressive
school of communication. Its members hint at what they're thinking and expect
you to read their minds.

            To be fair, this last
neurosis extends beyond McPhee. This book may be the grandest embodiment of the
principle that guided The New Yorker through its glory days under
William Shawn: that it is the role of good writing to arrange facts artfully
and discreetly, and not much else. Out of self-interest, I'm as nostalgic as
anyone for the era of big word counts and editorial carte blanche. But
Annals is a good antidote. For all McPhee's expertise at crafting a
narrative, it feels unnecessarily bloated; for all his famous humility, there's
a mild vanity in its fussy perfectionism. Above all, there's a sense of
strain--of McPhee working hard to make all these facts sing. And for what? A
well-curated museum exhibit backed by a few smart CD-ROMs could, in a day,
drill you in most of the geology McPhee has to teach. We could get upset about
this, and worry that technology is about to replace fine writing. I say bring
on the CD-ROMs--and free the writers to do something else.

         
      
   
