
   
   
      
         
            What's in a Face?

            A sphinx has the body of a
lion and the face of a man. Why is this no good? Simple: Because in order to
have a face, you need a pair of hands. Paws won't do. Animals with paws must
have big, furry, jutting muzzles, which rule out a face. They need muzzles for
biting, to defend themselves, and to attack prey, whereas possessors of hands
can fashion and chuck a spear or throw a punch. Animals need muzzles to carry
things and to gnaw on their food, whereas possessors of hands can make a fire
to tenderize their viands. And in order to have growing scalp hair--as humans
uniquely do--you need to have hands to cut it, lest it get so long that it
jeopardizes your survival. So faces presuppose hands. Sphinxes and centaurs and
other countenanced but handless creatures not only do not exist, they could
not exist.

            That exciting aperçu
occurred to me in the course of reading The Face and The Hand ,
two books that otherwise brought me unremitting boredom. Well, almost
unremitting. The Face made me cringe a lot. Its author, Daniel McNeill,
won a science-writing prize a few years ago, and this seems to have gone to his
head. His prose oozes a kind of rotten poetry, and no observation is too banal
to be left unspoken.

            Take
McNeill's extended meditation on kissing--please:

            A kiss can pour love from
lips to lips, two receptacles filling each other. ... The lovers' tongues
caress each other, dance about the teeth and inner cheeks, bathe in each
other's oral fluids. ... Long, luxurious smooches can end in a sound like
planes of glass rubbing, or even in a cheep. ... Family members and relatives
commonly kiss. ... The kiss is often a gesture of greeting.

            I didn't
know all that, did you?

            As for The Hand , by California neurologist Frank R.
Wilson, even the epigraphs are tedious. One of them reads:

            The true
relevance of lateralization of function will be ascertained only by careful
research that acknowledges that aspects of this function develop throughout the
life span, beginning at birth, if not before.

            Try as I
might, I can detect no lambent flicker of humor in these pages.

            There are
some scattered interesting bits in both The Face and The Hand ,
however. Someone ought to extract and put them in a concise form, to save
people the trouble of reading the books. In fact, that's what I'll do.

            
Let's begin with the chin. It is a singularly
human facial feature, one that even the Neanderthals lacked. The chin seems to
have emerged around 130,000 years ago. Why? Scientists have no idea. What they
do know, however, is that men's chins have been getting larger over the last
200 generations. They have a theory for this. The male chin grows during
puberty in response to testosterone. Testosterone weakens the immune system.
So, paradoxically, a big chin on a healthy man is an advertisement of
robustness: It means that, despite an excess of testosterone, his immune system
is still powerful enough to fight off disease. Therefore women should fancy a
big chin on a mate, and the trait is sexually selected. (Insert Jay Leno joke
here.) I do not know whether this theory is true. I do know that in good
society, chins are very important. Style largely depends on the way the chin is
worn. They are worn very high at present.

            If the
face has been getting longer at the bottom over the generations, it has been
getting shorter (and broader) on top. McNeill does not mention this, but it is
true. The trend is called brachycephalization, and it has been happening mainly
in rural Poland between the Carpathian Mountains and the Black Sea--which, for
some arcane reason, is one of the few places on Earth where humans are still
evolving. (Anthropologists discovered this by examining skeletons from the
region going back to 1300, some 30 generations.) The Darwinian advantage of
having a shorter head, if any, remains unknown. Some Indian tribes have gone
for the same effect by a horrific sort of plastic surgery. The Choctaws
flattened the heads of babies by placing bags of sand on their brows and
ridiculed whites as "longheads." By contrast, Nefertiti, the wife of Akhenaton,
seems to have had her cranium artificially stretched for beauty's sake.

            Did this really make her beautiful? What renders a face
truly soul-bewitching? Whatever it is, it transcends culture, despite what
Naomi Wolf may try to tell you. People everywhere share the same criteria of
facial beauty. This conclusion is supported by a wealth of studies over the
last 15 years in which individuals from different cultures have been asked to
rate photos for beauty. Chinese, English, and Indian women prefer the same
Greek men; Hispanic and black Americans agree on which newly arrived Asian
women are the genuine babes, and so on.

            The key
ingredient seems to be averageness. The most ordinary features are,
aesthetically, the most extraordinary. If you use a computer to merge a lot of
faces together, the result tends to look as fetching as Leonardo DiCaprio. This
effect was first noticed when a 19 th century eugenicist tried to
create an average criminal face by making a photographic composite of lots of
mug shots. The "prototypical criminal" turned out to be way too handsome.

            
There are two evolutionary advantages to
looking average. One is that potential mates can be sure you're a human and,
hence, biologically worth mating with. (Remember, Homo sapiens lived side by
side with Neanderthals for many thousands of years, and we differed from them
chiefly in the face.) Second, average facial features are a sign of good genes,
of being close to the optimal design favored by natural selection.

            But some
faces are even more pleasing than the average face. Women are judged to be
beautiful when they have larger than average pupils and retroussé noses; such
babyish features suggest that most of their childbearing years are still ahead.
Full lips are a plus, probably because they reflect high estrogen levels and
thus high fertility. Contrariwise, masculinized features in women--like a
large, angular jaw--signal too much testosterone, which reduces fertility.

            Our faces are fur-less and exposed to the world so that
they can be read. Cheaters and liars imperil the cooperative enterprises
necessary for survival, but they give themselves away by their skewed facial
expressions. The most important facial muscles are not under the control of the
will. A fake smile is seldom persuasive--it lasts too long, it looks wrong
around the eyes. Even at the corners of the mouth, the phony smile betrays
itself by being subtly lopsided: Involuntary expressions, arising in the lower,
unitary brain, affect both sides of the mouth equally, but willed expressions
are governed by the cerebral hemispheres, the dominant of which sends a
stronger signal.

            There is
much maundering in The Face about the face of the Mona Lisa , the
face of Jesus, the face of God. I have not seen the face of God, but I have
seen a certain Washington literary editor who looks like the Wrath of God.

            T>he Hand tells the affecting story of how the thumb
rose from being just another digit to being opposable. For our simian ancestors
in the trees, falling from branch to branch was a normal mode of locomotion,
but you had better have a prehensile paw for grabbing the crucial limb at the
last moment. When we landed on the ground, hands were first employed in
knuckle-walking, later in juggling and brain surgery.

            The most
interesting thing about the human hand is the phenomenon of "hand dominance,"
which, like speech and toolmaking, is unknown among apes. Why are we either
righties or lefties, and why in the ratio of 9-to-1? Is it this asymmetry in
the use of our hands--one of which is "good," the other relatively
disabled--that points up their intimate alliance with the brain, whose two
hemispheres (each controlling a different hand) are similarly specialized?

            It may well be that the hands molded the brain, not vice
versa, the stimulus being the all-important activity of marksmanship: throwing
missiles at prey. One amusing (but untestable) hypothesis has it that females
were the principal hunters on the African savanna and that they invariably
threw with their right arms, because they were carrying their babies in their
left arms up against their hearts, the beating of which soothed and quieted the
infant. In any case, the secret of manual dexterity is all in the
timing--hitting the piano key or releasing the curveball at precisely the right
instant. And it is in the analytical left hemisphere of the brain, which
controls the right side of the body, where these sorts of timing decisions are
best computed.

            It is a trite thought, I
know, but our hands and our faces come very close to being our selves--our
"higher" selves, at least (our lower ones reposing in some oafish organs in the
gut and below). The self that observes the world as a Cartesian spectator lurks
directly behind the face, just above the eyes. The self that engages the world
as a Heideggerian homo Faber inhabits the hands, just above the
palms.

            Both are subject to
alienating experiences. Staring at our face in the mirror, as The Face
author points out, "we become first and third person at once, viewer and
viewed. Even when the face is utterly impassive, we can know what it's
thinking, I know what it's thinking , and enjoy a moment of mind
reading." (For some reason, this works best at the end of a cocktail party,
when you have ducked into the bathroom and are feeling slightly squiffy.) Or,
wiggling your fingers by letting the motive force propagate directly from your
will to the digits, you suddenly notice the real cause of the action is quite
elsewhere, in tendons rippling beneath the skin way up at the elbow--a bit of
mechanical trumpery that gives the lie to the self. I would recommend these
metaphysical exercises as a cheap alternative to reading The Face and
The Hand .

         
      
   
