
   
   
      
         
            Broken Mainspring

            If you're in the market,
Haruki Murakami's The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle will teach you how to 1)
kill with a bayonet (thrust deep under ribs, drag in slow, deep circle to
scramble organs); 2) skin a man alive (slit skin at shoulder, peel slowly down
right arm); and 3) eliminate a zoo full of carnivores (four snipers per tiger
best). It will steep you in the bizarre lives and roles of 30ish Toru Okada, an
out-of-work law clerk, bent-tip-tailed-cat owner, house husband, toupee
researcher, well dweller, and prostitute. It will titillate you with red-hatted
mind readers and sexy phone calls, oozing pols and hot dreams, ill-omened
houses and unwaveringly plastic characters named Nutmeg and Cinnamon. Hanging
over the overwrought whole are an overcast sky and an elusive "wind-up"
bird--so named for its creeeak, creeeak song, which nauseates and dooms
the select few who hear it. Stripped of their powers of volition, they become
"no more than dolls set on tabletops, the springs in their backs wound up
tight, dolls set to move in ways they could not choose, moving in directions
they could not choose, ... most of them died, plunging over the edge of the
table."

            How
dystopian is Murakami's Japan, how sterile and subwayesque. Not for him the
cherry-blossom viewings and golden pavilions of Yukio Mishima, the monarchist
who disemboweled himself in 1970. No nostalgic ramblings, only details that
overrun the canvas and add up to nothing. A best-selling author in his country,
Murakami's most recent work before Wind-Up was Underground , a
mammoth exploration of the Aum Shinrikyo cult's sarin gas attacks on the Tokyo
subway. Away at Princeton when they occurred, he returned to examine Japan's
fascination with the cult and its tubby, half-blind leader. Underground
describes a nation bored and isolated by its successes and its failures alike.
Wind-Up fictionalizes that world--but barely, and to less effect.

            Rootless and lonely, Toru Okada plods across his
strenuously postmodern space. Until, that is, his spaghetti-cooking,
Rossini-humming contentment is dissolved by the sudden departure of first his
cat and then his wife of six years. Noburu Wataya (the cat) returns about
halfway through the novel; of Kumiko, the wife, one is less sure. She works at
a health magazine, whose strange hours screen her infidelities from an
improbably credulous spouse. Leaving as if for work one morning, she does not
return. She picks up her dry cleaning the following day, however, and
eventually writes him a letter, in which she recounts earth-shattering orgasms
with other men: "I'm sorry to have to tell you this, but the fact is that I was
never able to have true sexual pleasure with you."

            Toru's
life disintegrates following Kumiko's departure. Obsessed with finding her, he
takes off on a cinematic odyssey that collapses time and space. Murakami lays
several plot lines and, both consummate miniaturist and committed pessimist,
appears to develop each carefully while keeping the mix unstable. And so the
pressure builds. Toru reaches out to a pair of allegedly clairvoyant sisters
(as it turns out, to little result beyond a few crepuscular couplings that may
or may not be real). He meets a veteran whose wartime experiences allow
Murakami to play anti-imperialist. Toru's conversations with the lieutenant
yield an enduring image: a dry well, whose dark silences facilitate thought and
force people to confront their demons. Toru's suburban alley offers convenient
access to such a well, and into its clichéd dankness he descends ("my body
began to lose its density and weight, ... my mind was dragging my body into its
own territory"). It is the perfect birth canal, a magical anti-environment that
both suspends and exaggerates all sensation. For Murakami's reader, it conjures
up the excitement and terror, the white hots and the blue colds, of childhood
treks through a storm sewer system. For Toru, who is drawn back to it
repeatedly, it is simultaneously prison and release. It makes him face his
deepest fears (which puddle up in a stigmatic stain on his right cheek), then
allows him osmotic and healing passage to other worlds and narratives.
Mysteriously transported from the well to a mysterious Room 208 in a Tokyo
hotel, he taps into a labyrinth of stories that eventually reconnects him with
humanity.

            
Murakami's fiction before Wind-Up was
less ambitious in scale and makes a compelling case for his return to a smaller
canvas. He is a good reporter, well read, well traveled, and keen-eyed. All
this makes for good documentary and great short stories: His book about the
cult sticks with the conventions of storytelling and delivers emotion,
analysis, and narrative; the many-splendored tales that interpolate Toru's
story find Murakami at his most engaging. Each plot is painstakingly tooled,
generates momentum, and invites you to share.

            But look at the whole, and
Wind-Up confirms the Norman Mailer principle: The birth of a great
journalist is often paralleled by the death of a novelist. Murakami lets the
narrative lines, so carefully laid, snap; you're suspended midair, your tender
attentions scattered to the winds. You gulp, tell yourself you can transcend
the Aristotelian unities, and would move on if Murakami allowed you to. But he
does not. In what is either a belated acknowledgment of your investment--and
his own--or, less likely, a more directly subversive move, he starts reeling in
the lines about 100 pages from the end. The obvious is manfully recapped, the
bows tied in tweet, tidy trills. "Cinnamon's grandfather, the nameless
veterinarian, and I had a number of unusual things in common--a mark on the
face, a baseball bat, the cry of the wind-up bird. And then there was the
lieutenant who appeared in Cinnamon's story: he reminded me of Lieutenant
Mamiya [the war veteran]." And shortly thereafter, "Everything was intertwined,
with the complexity of a three-dimensional puzzle--a puzzle in which truth was
not necessarily fact and fact not necessarily truth."

            Back in Room 208 a few pages
before the novel's conclusion, Toru encounters a woman on the bed. Ping ,
goes the call button in his head: "I think you are Kumiko. Because then all
kinds of story lines work out." I'm tempted to give Murakami the benefit of the
doubt--to say, even, that his pat machinations force his readers into his crowd
of wound-up dolls (of whom most died, remember, "plunging over the edge of the
table"). But I'll settle for this: Murakami's story ran away with him. Too
little too late, his impulse to tidy resolution testifies more to his
discomfort with an expanded canvas than to his plug-and-socket skills.

         
      
   
