
   
   
      
         
            A Hole in the Head

            By Anne
Hollander

            
               (892 words; posted
Monday, July 8; to be composted Monday, July 15)
            

            Now that
we have dismissed corsets as ridiculous instruments of torture, we can safely
entertain a vogue for flesh-piercing jewelry. As the man said, "Il faut
souffrir pour être belle." In other words, to look as though you have willingly
undergone a bodily ordeal gives incalculable force to your erotic attractions.
Tattooing and piercing are among the most ancient of such practices; piercing,
as recently revived, is among the most violent.

            Tender nipples stuck through with gold rings, sensitive
tongues punched through with barbells that make a noise against the teeth,
penises pierced for rings that go fore-and-aft or sideways, rings for the
clitoral hood and labia both inner and outer--all these have been common
additions to the chic ensemble since about 1992, hidden away behind clothing or
lips. But more and more nostrils and eyebrows are joining earlobes as handy
flaps to carry holes for an array of public adornments. The other day, I felt
obscurely pained to see a pretty girl on the subway with a big silver ring in
the middle of her face, hanging from a hole in the central partition of her
nose. The effect was notably different from the off-center charm of a gleaming
stud in one nostril or a row of thin rings edging the flange of an ear. Those
things all seem part of fashion's usual piquancy. This wasn't. Somehow this
girl's massive bangle made her genial face seem masked, slightly--but
distinctly--dehumanized.

            Bodily ornament originally was undertaken to create the
self, to deck the outward being with the inward knowledge that trouble must be
taken and nature distorted in careful ways and at personal cost, so as to make
forever clear the gulf between a responsible adult and an infant or a beast.
Dramatic arrangements for doing this are famous--the head-flattening, the
neck-lengthening, the tooth-filing, the lip-stretching--all the irreversible
ways of completing the human body that were called "barbaric" by restless
people bent on scientific understanding, political and intellectual
enlightenment, or plain old empire, holy and profane.

            It was
those restless people who eventually invented fashion around the
13 th century, their fabrications marking the body not with received
wisdom but with doubt. The modern European self was created on the theme of
perpetual subversion--that nothing was absolute, that the truth could be
obscured and rediscovered, that all advance could be reversed and recommenced,
that any empire, including God's, could collapse and reform. And that effort
should be made, and money spent, to keep this idea in plain sight on the
surface of the body.

            
What really lasts are sex and death, as Woody
Allen once reminded everybody, and fashion endures because of those. Fashion
was born to stand for both unslaked personal desire and unappeased personal
dread; it reflects our modern devotion to the fragile trajectory of an
individual life. The one thing it must never do is look safe. Outrageousness
has always been provided by the young, but hitherto most commonly with hair.
Hair seems suited for nothing else: Its variable thickness of growth has
apparently no reference to climate, and its practical value seems to be its
malleability for purposes of erotic appeal. Hair revolutions are no longer as
outrageous as they have been in recent decades, though; nor are skimpy
garments. So we have turned to objects that make holes in faces and
bodies--unique or multiple, public or intimate, ferociously unnatural,
undeniably captivating, and faintly horrifying.

            A big
central nose ring goes beyond outrage. It comes from somewhere else, from the
non-fashion universe of eternal certainties and unbreakable cycles, where
bodily sculpture is applied with finality to signal a fixed social and sexual
identity. During the past seven centuries of Western modernity, the most
extreme bodily modishness always was reversible. Shaved hair could grow back,
pinched waists fill out, flattened breasts swell up. But a great big hole
through the septum does not close up without leaving a disfiguring scar.

            Western fashion has always included earlobe piercing for
both sexes, a small talismanic reminder of what has been called the "folk
order." But earlobe tissue heals very easily, and mainstream male fashion
abandoned earrings early in the 17 th century. Shakespeare wore them,
but Jonathan Swift did not; even the Marquis de Sade did not. Much later,
during the progressive first quarter of this century, pierced ears for women
became utterly unfashionable, a sign of Victorian bondage as abhorrent as
whalebone corsets and the double marital bed. Almost two generations of
20 th -century women lived with unpierced or healed earlobes, until
ear piercing became almost universal for both men and women in the 1960s, just
as if it had always been there.

            Maybe it was a prophecy.
Perhaps the era of fashion is over, or soon to be. These holes now mark a
generation of which the parents cannot confidently say, "They'll grow out of
it." Tight corsets never really hurt anybody--the fainting and the displaced
organs are long-exploded myths--but fatal infection is a serious current
horror. Punches and needles carry a lethal threat; an injury that rips the
flesh is real injury. The pierced generation may simply be acknowledging the
deadliness of the times we live in, suggestive as they are of earlier epochs in
human history. Perhaps, like the girl on the subway, they're just waiting to be
led by the nose.

            To see a range of faces with
central nose rings, see the piercing
gallery at Body Modification E-zine or the zine itself. For
state-of-the-art articles on piercing, see Flesh Canvas.

         
      
   
