
   
   
      
         
            Autopsy Gothic

            Who is today's leading
conservative novelist? One candidate is Patricia Cornwell, the best-selling
mystery writer based in Richmond, Va. A pert blond dynamo who could be Susan
Molinari's big sister, she's also got the credentials. Her first book wasn't a
mystery but a loving biography of Ruth Graham, the Rev. Billy's wife. She's an
advocate for tougher law enforcement and was a public supporter of Virginia's
Republican former Gov. George Allen. A few novels back, she even based a
fictional senator on Orrin Hatch and paid tribute to him as a brave soldier
fighting for truth. Her latest is dedicated to Barbara Bush, "with love."

            On the
other hand, Cornwell doesn't always fit the conservative bill. Allied with men
who prefer their women dutiful and demure, she herself has a macho side. She
flies a helicopter and makes statements about women surviving in a men's world
that could be confused with feminism. Her novels argue that criminals must pay
for their actions--no forgiveness, no rehabilitation, no excuses
whatsoever--but she's also admitted to bouts with childhood molestation,
bulimia, and bipolar mood swings, and she has asked that people who suffer such
traumas be given a little TLC. There are hints that she has a most un-Billy
Graham-like lifestyle. In a bizarre episode a couple of years ago, an FBI agent
claimed he was driven to attempt to murder his wife because Cornwell was having
an affair with her.

            In work and in life, Cornwell screams ambivalence, which
may explain why she's so popular and so queasily interesting. At a time when
most pop best sellers seem dumbed down to please a focus group, Cornwell is a
rarity: a writer with a vivid, at times even freakishly messy, personality. She
condemns America's moral decline with the smugness of a Charlton Heston, but
her narcissism and button pushing skills give the early Madonna a run for her
money.

            The
heroine of eight of Cornwell's nine mysteries is Kay Scarpetta. She's
middle-aged but still damned good looking, tough but vulnerable, and other
assorted mystery cliché traits. What's special about her is her job, chief
medical examiner of Virginia, which allows her to witness more gruesome sights
than one could dream of. During the 1980s, Cornwell worked in a coroner's
office, and now she specializes in clinical descriptions of autopsies,
explaining in graphic detail how to analyze the vaginal swab of a raped corpse
or how to test skin ripped off a tortured child's buttock. As if that weren't
bad enough, Cornwell has also given Scarpetta problematic colleagues. There's
Pete Marino, a bigoted and emotionally stunted cop who eats and drinks too
much, and Benton Wesley, an older WASP FBI profiler with whom she eventually
strikes up an affair.

            
In Postmortem (1990), Scarpetta's
impressive debut, the tone was grim and graphic, focused on the nitty-gritty of
crime detection and the challenges faced by a woman entering this mostly male
business. Scarpetta was the American counterpart, in a way, to Detective Chief
Inspector Jane Tennison of the British TV series Prime Suspect . As sales
skyrocketed, Cornwell hired a staff of researchers to help work up her autopsy
nightmares. The details are now more rigorous and even more clinically
rendered. (Click to read the latest tour de force, in which Scarpetta boils a
dead woman's bones.) But the plots have evolved to an abstract level--a kind of
metaphorical mist--and Scarpetta has acquired two archenemies: Temple Gault, an
evil-genius, white-trash skinhead, and his accomplice, an attractive young
psychopath named Carrie Grethen. After several tries, Scarpetta finally
defeated Gault, murdering him in a Manhattan subway tunnel. But in the new
installment Grethen escapes from a mental asylum and goes after her.

            Characters like Gault and
Grethen are the basis of the standard praise for Cornwell, which is that she
has a Dickensian grasp of evil. Don't believe it. Temple and Carrie are cartoon
meanies who hate Scarpetta for no apparent reason; they're about as Dickensian
as a satanic clown doll named Chuckie. Cornwell's plots are getting weaker, and
I won't claim too much for her prose, either. Lacking the self-monitoring skill
that's crucial to a really good writer, she projects ugly fixations onto
Scarpetta, remarking constantly--and with embarrassing, naked approval--on her
blond, "Teutonic" looks.

            My
favorite Cornwellian clunker is a cheap bid for sinister atmosphere, the Scary
Noun. That's when she drops the article before some harmless inanimate object,
lending it a kind of pseudohuman agency. Examples include "rain was slanted and
flying down like nails," and "rocks were black beneath stars," and--frightening
enough to make you shiver--"windshield wipers dragged across glass." (Click for
more reasons to dislike Cornwell.)

            So why do we all keep reading? Voyeuristic slumming, in
part. You wait with bated breath to see which hot social issue Cornwell will
take up and handle oddly. In the latest novel she addresses race--sort of--in
the form of a rich, power hungry, sexually overactive but ultimately humane
black activist and publisher. Point of Origin also further develops
Cornwell's most loaded theme, lesbianism, by way of Scarpetta's niece, Lucy. A
little girl when the series began, Lucy is now a brilliant young woman.
Scarpetta is turned off by Lucy's lesbian lifestyle and convinced that that
awful pervert Grethen seduced Lucy into it. At the same time, she's moved to
rather suspect erotic awe by the nubile beauty of Lucy's perfect young
body.

            On such issues, Cornwell is
hilariously confused but not without insight. The increasing abstraction of her
plots allows her to do what she does best: write about the job. The most
poignant parts of her books detail the pressures Scarpetta faces as an
executive who's responsible for the welfare of her subordinates but under
ruthless pressure to deliver results; the impossibility of sorting through
overwhelming floods of information and straining for an educated guess; the
sadness of a life lived in helicopters and planes rather than in hotels; the
inadequacy of colleagues who function like family but aren't. So what if
Cornwell perks up these not so uncommon problems with a backdrop of
unadulterated, almost supernatural evil? She conveys, somehow, a genuine grief.
Call it millennial, if you must, or simply modern-professional Gothic. "The
pain is out there," could be her slogan. At the end of Point of Origin ,
someone Scarpetta cares about meets a fate so gross and far-fetched it made me
giggle. It was also sad enough to remember for a while.

            
               If you
missed the excerpt from Point of Origin , click , and are more reasons to
dislike Cornwell.
            

         
      
   
