
   
   
      
         
            Apocalypse Imminently

            Let me make one thing clear,
before I cruelly attack this book: I admire Mike Davis. His 1990 jeremiad,
City of Quartz , was a classic of well-directed rage. In macho prose,
with obsessive reporting, Davis all but predicted the date and street address
of the 1992 riots. He attacked the Los Angeles Police Department, the corporate
boosters' whitewashing of city history, the absurd and isolating layout driven
more by greed than geographical logic. He displayed a rare awareness of Latinos
in the region, both past and present. (I'd love to know what he thinks of
Bulworth , with its literally black-and-white take on racial strife.)

            Above
all, Davis was humane. He was fascinated by the abstract weirdness of
contemporary Los Angeles, but he didn't get off on it like some silly French
postmodernist. Instead, he got angry. Sometimes too angry, seeming to argue
that all reformers were elitists, all whites closet racists.

            Over the past eight years, that anger has mushroomed into
panic. It's hard to describe Davis' new book, since it flits among several
genres. At its best, it's a sequel to City of Quartz , using the
environment as a window onto Los Angeles' social problems. At its weirdest,
it's a diatribe shot through with millennial overtones, so that its reach is
much larger than just the environment--it's about the ultimate doom of mankind,
or something like that. And then there are whole chapters that smell like old
articles Davis wrote a while back in the alternative press and recycled to fill
out a volume.

            The book
shuttles back and forth in a wacky dialectic. Thesis No. 1: Los Angeles'
ecological system is more likely than any place on earth to suffer earthquakes,
volcanoes, floods, fires, grizzlies, rabid squirrels, and killer bees. Even
tornadoes, which are generally thought to prefer the Midwest, spin
threateningly on the horizon. But, of course, Los Angelenos, world champions of
denial, are ignoring the situation. The fools assume that the aberrant
quiescence of the past 50 years is the norm. Thesis No. 2: Los Angelenos are
excessively paranoid. Natural disaster is all they think about--it's their
guiding legend, muse, and inspiration, as well as a great way to avoid thinking
about race and class.

            
Davis believes both Thesis No. 1 and Thesis No.
2, though they seem to contradict each other. Take the following dance:
"Middle-class apprehensions about the angry, abandoned underclasses are now
only exceeded by anxieties about blind thrust faults and hundred-year floods.
Meanwhile, Caltech seismologists warn that the Pacific Rim is only beginning
its long overdue rock and roll: the Kobe catastrophe may be a 3-D preview of
the Los Angeles 2000. And waiting in the wings are the plague squirrels and
killer bees." First Davis accuses the bourgeoisie of misdirected anxieties,
then he urges them to wake up and worry.

            The
disconnect here seems to represent a conflict basic to Davis. The reporter and
lover of nitty-gritty facts rubs up against the acolyte of the Frankfurt
School. At one point Davis borrows Walter Benjamin's melancholy idea that
history is a dialectical fairy tale--a bunch of contradictory stories people
tell about themselves, "linked together by strange ironies." Attempts to put
such notions into practice send Davis off the deep end.

            He's much more persuasive as a reporter. A great
mini-chapter on the history of Los Angeles floods shows how at a critical
moment city authorities rejected the idea of zoning to avoid floods. Instead
they went with the notion of flood control, which gave them a nice pork barrel
budget for public works and allowed rich people build a house wherever they
damn well felt like it. A rather heartbreaking section argues that similar
greed-based zoning has endangered the lives of firefighters. Unable to use
their usual firefighting techniques for fear of endangering the property next
door, they're forced into a futile house-by-house battle in what is essentially
one huge firetrap. Davis tells you more than you ever thought you wanted to
know about the hunting lobby and security at the Calipatria State Prison, where
a surrounding fence is rigged to zap human beings but welcome cute little
squirrels and birdies. And he has an eye for grotesque detail: In January of
1995, swarms of writhing snakes washed up on beaches from Tijuana to Santa
Barbara. It isn't clear what this fact proves, but it's alarming and
memorable.

            Plus it
has biblical resonance, and there are biblical implications to the story Davis
is telling. The ecosystem in the world that most resembles Los Angeles' is the
Mediterranean, he tells us--and the best natural history of the ancient
Mediterranean is found in the Bible. Davis seems to think that the four
horsemen of the Apocalypse will arrive via the Pacific Coast Highway. Chapter 3
is titled "The Case for Letting Malibu Burn." I fear that Davis really wants
this to happen. Maybe a good fire will shake things up, his thinking seems to
go--take the rich people out of their game. It'll accomplish what the Los
Angeles riots and all the striking unions and political protests in the world
failed to do: It'll bring on a revolution.

            
There's despair in this notion, and
frivolity--it's a good 20 minute riff at a cocktail party but not the stuff of
a book. Even Davis seems to realize this. He runs out of gas about two-thirds
of the way through and turns into an armchair academic. The last few chapters
are truly disappointing--slack, dated, and filled with tired ideas. Davis
surveys disaster stories set in Los Angeles, but he's an insecure literary
critic, and his emphasis on the fairy tale aspect of natural disaster
undermines the facts that have gone before. His argument appears to be that
fictional disasters stand in for racism. He appears to have missed the Will
Smith phenomenon, whereby a masculine and not deracinated black man repeatedly
saves the world.

            Upon finishing this book, I
was seized by a deep feeling of stuckness. "The 1990s in particular have been a
funereal decade, interring many of the hopes and fantasies of the earlier
twentieth century," Davis intones. Funereal, indeed. I'm not saying Davis
should stop complaining and suck it up, but this decade has seen the birth of
new fantasies, and he fails to take them on. There's no mention of the Internet
here, though surely it must have some effect on the way people define their
loyalties and civic duties. Ecology of Fear reads like a book written in
the middle of the 1992 recession. There's no sign of an economic boom or
increased optimism (whether justified or not) about technology.

            Also, Davis needs to get
over his Los Angeles exceptionalism. Segregation on Chicago's South Side is as
vicious as it is in Compton, and if you're talking about criminalizing the poor
and turning public space over to Disney, then Rudolph Giuliani's New York City
would seem to be the current industry leader. Scary rodent-borne viruses are
making a comeback across the country, not just in Southern California. And what
about floods in North Dakota and Iowa or fires in Oakland, Calif., and Daytona
Beach, Fla.? Maybe Los Angeles isn't the scariest place on earth after all.

         
      
   
