
   
   
      
         
            The Right To Be a Boor

            With the Paula Jones case
and the sexual harassment debate wearing thin, a new crisis looms on the
employment horizon demanding our urgent attention. According to a recent called
Diversity in the Power Elite: Have Women and Minorities Reached the
Top? , highly placed corporate white men are fretting over the slow but
steady rise of women, blacks, and Latinos to elite positions in the workplace.
Are they worried that these new arrivals will take away their jobs? No.
According to the study, what they fear is that women and minorities won't be
good at playing golf.

            OK,
accusing a man of golf anxiety isn't quite the same as alleging that he lowered
his pants in front of a subordinate and requested service. But far from making
a trivial point, the diversity study shows that the prosecutorial way we think
about gender in the workplace may not always be helpful. During the past few
months, Kenneth Starr's limitless pursuit of Clinton has caused sensible people
to wonder if we've let the battle against sexual harassment turn into a witch
hunt. I agree that courts aren't equipped to resolve many issues of gender on
the job--not because the results are unjust but because they're unsubtle.

            How could the courts possibly deal with golf anxiety?
Surely a person has every right to converse with colleagues who play golf.
Surely he also has a right to assume that a new employee doesn't play golf.
Likewise, he's entitled to appear shy or unfriendly around her, and perhaps
unintentionally hamper her ability to network inside the company, and even then
assume she lacks initiative and give her a mediocre job evaluation. But such
obtuse behavior, even if legal, causes suffering, and it's worth talking about
away from the blunt, guilty-or-innocent logic of the law.

            Arriving
as it does on the tail end of the Paula Jones disaster, Frances K. Conley's
memoir of sexism at Stanford may encounter a kind of sexual-conflict fatigue
and miss the attention it deserves. It's a treasure trove of messy, not always
courtworthy gender-job dilemmas that nevertheless need to be explored. Conley,
the first tenured woman professor of neurosurgery in the country, tells how she
left Stanford University School of Medicine back in 1991, after 25 years of
contented teaching and research. Traditionally, of course, neurosurgery has
been the elite macho pinnacle of medicine--its Navy SEALs. So at first glance,
when you consider how steely Conley had to be to rise in the field, the event
that provoked her to leave sounds pretty innocuous: A colleague named Gerry
Silverberg got promoted to be head of the program. Conley, who'd worked with
Gerry since they were in medical school, thought he was a jerk.

            
Sounds so far like a depressing but routine
power contest. Where did sex come in? Stirred by her anger, Conley eventually
began to face facts about Gerry that she had suppressed over two decades in
order to concentrate on work. She recalled how in years past, during training,
he made a juvenile habit of propositioning her in front of other male
students--really propositioning her, thrusting his pelvis in her face and
saying how much she'd like it. In recent years, he'd interrupted her during
complex brain surgery and shouted, laughing, "How's it going, hon?" All in all,
Gerry was a charmer.

            Conley
had to admit that while Gerry had no rivals as a pig, he was hardly alone in
his insensitivity. When she was a med student, all but a couple of generous
male advisers had told her, paternalistically, to give up her neurosurgery
dreams and stick with a nice female discipline like obstetrics. (One day she
finally got the courage to knock on the door of the department chair and ask if
she could join the program. He answered the door with his pants-string undone,
and a glance at the couch indicated he'd been screwing his secretary.) As a
young faculty member she attended weekly lunches because that's where the
networking action was. They were gross, childish stag affairs: In plain sight
of everyone, one colleague would caress her thigh, daring her to make him stop
and inviting all the men in the room to giggle. Then the urologists at the
table would speculate about who among their colleagues could get it up.

            One may ask why Conley put up with this for so long. It's a
fair question. Until the spring of 1991, she says, she'd basically identified
with men. "Wrapped and totally immersed within the competitive cocoon of
academic medicine, living every day at a great distance from the 'real' world,
I was all but oblivious to the fact that a woman's movement had started, and,
selfishly, had no idea how other women in my own world were faring." Conley's
writing voice even has something of a macho swagger, and once in a while it
hits a false note, as if she were building her broad case against the medical
profession in order to get back at Gerry, the vulgar meanie. At times, too, the
(cool expertise vs. righteousness, wit vs. no sense of humor) become almost too
vivid, as if she weren't a real-life polemicist so much as an intriguing
fictional character.

            But here's
where the case gets really fascinating. Conley says she never intended to take
legal action. She just felt Gerry would make an intolerable leader, and when he
got promoted she impulsively resigned. Then she naively sent a rambling op-ed
piece to the San Francisco Chronicle , outlining--in general terms,
naming no names--the sexist atmosphere at Stanford. The piece wasn't published
right away. Instead a reporter called, wheedled an interview out of her, and
without informing her ran a front-page story about her claims.
Nightline , 20/20 , NPR, etc., came along and ran stories
portraying her as a crusader against "sexual harassment"--a loaded phrase with
a specific legal import, which she had never used.

            
Now, all this happened just a few months before
Anita Hill announced to a TV audience that Clarence Thomas had left a pubic
hair in her Coke. In retrospect, the media transformation of Conley's case
looks like a rehearsal for its circuslike approach to Hill-Thomas. Conley had
hoped to spark a general discussion of sexism in the medical academic
profession. Instead the media claim of sexual harassment reorganized the debate
into a contest of personal adversaries. Stanford, as big and powerful
institutions tend to do, called for hearings. Conley, feeling that she should
see through what she had unleashed, returned to work in a Cold War atmosphere.
A two year agony of fact-finding panels and legal actions ensued, with losers
both male and female: Scapegoat men were singled out for behavior their
profession had never before discouraged; women who told of being pressured for
sex found themselves alone, laughed at, or forced by the hostile environment to
leave.

            It took
ages to resolve, but in the end Gerry didn't get to be department chair (though
the two are, somewhat horrifyingly, still colleagues). Conley, after becoming a
kind of national clearinghouse for complaints about sexism in medical schools,
traveled the college circuit to discuss flaws in both theory and practice of
medical instruction. But often, she says, the resulting reforms have been
cosmetic--a token low-level bureaucrat assigned to "hear" problems, with no
forum to do anything about them. Which isn't surprising. Who would want to go
through this kind of divisive battle every time an allegation came up?

            That's one problem with our current approach to sexual
harassment. As we've just seen in the Paula Jones case, it's exhausting.
Everyone gets tired of the ransacking of private lives, the cynical search for
ulterior motives, the weighing of imperfect evidence; after a while, people are
likely to say, "Just let it go." There's another problem, too. The focus on
legalistic descriptions of punishable human behavior ignores unconscious
behavior, the habits many men are accustomed to that don't call for punishment
but are still harmful--what Conley says occurs within "the reverberating
circuitry of maleness." The best parts of Conley's book are about deep,
institutional resistance to change: the way that otherwise admirable male
professors understandably draw on their training of 20 years ago, which assumed
the 70 kilogram male body as the human norm and left them totally ignorant of
female health problems; the way training in elite specialties like neurosurgery
still promotes a specific kind of cowboy bravado, which encourages women to
bail out for gynecology. On these issues, Conley raises difficult, important
questions. Unfortunately, crude history will more likely reduce her to another
role, as a pioneer of the he-said-she-said '90s.

            
               If you
missed the links in the text, click to read more on the Yale University Press
study and for some samples of Conley's conflicted prose style.
            

         
      
   
