
   
   
      
         
            Family Jewels

            The Cartier name connotes
luxurious objects, but none in particular. Fabergé means enameled Easter eggs
and Tiffany means wedding presents and engagement rings--maybe art noveau
lamps--but Cartier means, well, expensive jewelry in the abstract. The firm has
always been a retail business, the product of commercial enterprise rather than
aesthetic vision--a glorified jewelry store. Louis-François Cartier founded the
Paris firm in 1847, just in time to help deck the famous beauties of the Second
Empire, from the empress to the great cocottes. Branches were soon opened in
London and New York by Louis-François' sons to serve Victorian magnates on both
sides of the Atlantic, and eventually a Cartier grandson married the
granddaughter of Worth, the world famous couturier , as if to consolidate
the whole international luxury-goods network.

            Meanwhile
the Cartier firm ranged far, seeking clients in Imperial Russia and among
Indian maharajahs, buying enamels from Russia and pearls from India to sell to
French clients. For nearly 150 years, the three branches provided jewels to
suit the varied tastes of the world's multimillionaires--without ever imposing
a distinct artistic style on any of them. The client was invited to participate
in the creation of a given piece; his or her sketches were considered; his or
her stones might be used. But to establish a solid worldwide reputation among
the aesthetically alert and the crude alike, Cartier employed a single unifying
principle: the highest quality of materials and workmanship, and a single
standard of elegance.

            Which means that the stuff risked being stuffy, if you can
say that about jeweled ornaments. Cartier's defining epoch was the art deco
period, which the firm's designers seem to have anticipated by two decades and
extended through the 1930s. Beginning in 1907, they were already using
recognizable art deco forms, but clearly not as signs of revolutionary
modernity. The simple shapes and lines were being offered rather as extensions
of late 18 th century neoclassicism, as new bearers of old values. No
wonder they were popular with both nouveaux riches and royalty.

            The
current Cartier exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art is confined to
pieces made between 1900 and 1939, the period of Cartier's greatest fame. Most
of the show demonstrates Cartier's adherence to an old-fashioned view of
jewels. Take tiaras, for example. The tiara (that is, a woman's ornamental
crown of a more or less crescent shape) is not at all modern, but it is
definitely both classical and neoclassical. Sappho wore one. So did Nero's
mother, Agrippina the Younger, and Napoleon's Josephine. Thanks to Cartier, so
apparently did every commoner who could afford it between 1900 and 1939, to
match the royals and nobles who had inherited theirs.

            
Royalty was still big news in the first half of
this century. High-level elegance, then epitomized by Cartier, manifestly
required the effect that made Napoleon's upstart court look imperial and
legitimate. That look--simple yet richly paved with glitter and colored enamel,
altogether different from the frothy rococo excesses of the ancien

               régime --also suited New York's steel, railway, or breakfast-food
emperors and their descendants and emulators in the succeeding two generations.
Tiaras, imposing necklaces, multiple bracelets, everything in diamonds--it all
still held good, and Cartier kept it up.

            But the
whole idea is now passé. It lingered into the 1950s when Grace Kelly and Audrey
Hepburn gave it a whirl, but it's really gone now. A dazzling array of
hereditary jewels might occasionally adorn Queen Elizabeth, but other rich
women never appear in diamond tiaras. Figure skaters and ballet dancers are the
only ones who wear them, along with Miss America.

            My understanding of Cartier was so nebulous that I thought
an hour would suffice to check out the show at the Metropolitan Museum. I
strode briskly up to the first glass case--but there I stopped, transfixed. In
the first three cases were diamond brooches made to adorn the spacious dresses
of the belle 
               époque , gleaming leaf-and-flower compositions that
could sweep across a whole décolletage from shoulder to shoulder, or smaller
ornaments festooned with graceful diamond swags and dripping with pendant
diamond drops. Each piece was an entire show, dazzling under the lights. But
there was more.

            Each
diamond in each leaf and petal was surrounded by a tiny wall of platinum
beading, in what I learned is called the "millegrain" setting. No crude prongs
hold up these stones, but rather, a precise silvery tracing that sets off the
diamond and emphasizes the interlaced design of the brooch while hiding its
construction. Out of sight at the back, the grainy tracing around the stones is
held up on a continuous gallery of supports rising from another tracery that
lies against the body. The diamonds are lifted up on an airy cage, and light
can come through them from below.

            
I was repeatedly struck by how unlike these
Cartier creations are to modern rhinestone jewelry, or even to modern precious
jewelry. Today, the seriousness is missing. When it comes to style in jewels,
modern chic has followed Chanel, and Chanel refused to be solemn. She insisted
on casual fakes and mixtures of vivid barbaric ornaments along with real
pearls. Cartier jewels were once sought expressly for their link to a tradition
of exquisite applied craftmanship, as the best celebration of precious
minerals, something undertaken almost for their sake. Modern vanity is more
personal; we no longer want to wear ornaments with that detached eternal look.
The designs for the Cartier jewels have a consistent discretion. These are
never expressions of wild genius, like the beating heart made of rubies that
Dali designed. On the contrary, respect for the capacity of the materials
always wins out over daring visual invention, but a staggering technical
imagination has also been summoned. That, if anywhere, is where the modernity
of these jewels lies.

            I
learned, for example, how a diadem, brooch, or bracelet could be invisibly
hinged so as to be completely flexible in all directions, not a rigid little
beast of unyielding metal and stone, but supple, tender toward the body,
changeable in mood. I saw in the catalog how the lengthy diamond necklaces with
complex pendants were often made to be disassembled by the client, so she could
have four bracelets, two brooches, and a shorter necklace whenever she got
tired of the one big thing. Meanwhile her tiara, just right for attending the
coronation of a monarch, could be dismounted from its frame and reversed into a
necklace suitable for the opening of the opera season. The jewels would be
delivered in exquisite gold-tooled leather boxes with compartments containing
the relevant alternative mounts and fastenings, and a tiny screwdriver in its
own velvet nest.

            As I stared into the cases, I often heard "Oh my God!" next
to me or behind me, uttered in an undertone with a note of awe. I was tempted
to misquote Mae West: "God has nothing to do with it, honey." Here we abandon
him in the heady presence of treasures laid up on the earth, material wealth in
its most concentrated and enduring form. A diamond bracelet mocks all the
sables that wither and rot, the cars that rust, the champagne gone flat, and
the claret turned vinegar, even the crumbling great houses and the faded great
paintings--painstaking creations now fatally ripped, soaked, or burned.
Lifeless from the start, jewels sneer at death, and they require zero
maintenance.

            The Cartier operation kept
its jewels on the move. The client might lose at cards, and the gold cigarette
case with sapphires would be sold back to Cartier, who would promptly sell it
the next year to another gentleman. A ruby-and-diamond necklace might have to
go for inheritance taxes: Cartier would buy it back, dismantle it entirely, and
make it into two tiaras and a brooch for three other clients, maybe preserving
some elements and using them upside down or sideways. Each piece was
photographed for the archives, against just such a fate.

            The
cosmetics-and-smoking mania of the '20s resulted in a whole array of
gem-studded vanity cases with built-in lipstick, comb, and compartment for
cigarettes. These were meant to be carried in the palm of the hand at the ball
or the restaurant, and deployed in front of everybody, their gold interiors
with their clever little hinges flashing while the nose was dusted, the mouth
repainted, or a Sobranie selected. You had to take it back to Cartier to get
the lipstick refilled, and you held onto it with a little ring or chain that
hooked over two fingers.

            
None of these has much current appeal, luxe
notwithstanding. Of things we would like, whole categories are oddly
underrepresented. There are well over 200 pieces in this show, but only six
pairs of earrings, all very drippy ones from the '20s. Where are the little
diamond floral clusters for the lobe, the neat ruby circles? And there are
exactly two rings. Obviously all the Cartier rings are still in use, and all
the little earrings fell off in the taxi.

            I came
home drained and exhausted from thinking about how to adjust my diadem and
reassemble my lavaliere, and unable to choose between the Japanese-ribbon-knot
brooch with the rubies and the Gothic-style double-circle brooch with the
sapphires. The next day, fully recovered, I saw the photo in the paper of the
opening party. And there was one of Cartier's glorious tiaras on loan, crowning
the head of a 6-foot African-American lady wearing the perfect silvery backless
gown to go with it--but alas, she had to be followed everywhere by security
guards. Nevertheless, the tiara looked nothing at all like the Miss America
crown, and I must admit I felt a stab of envy.

         
      
   
