
   
   
      
         
            Extremities

            On a steep and twisted
cobbled street in Provence, I recently saw a beautiful young woman with a heavy
baby in her arms. She was wearing a flattering skintight jumpsuit, swinging her
long hair, and easily hefting her precious burden, and she sauntered with total
feminine assurance along that stony, hilly little street in a pair of
platform-soled sandals with skyscraper-high heels.

            She was a
breathtaking spectacle, a Madonna of the Foolish Shoes. But it's also true that
had she been wearing, in the name of Good Sense, elaborate running shoes--with
their ridiculous thickness and multiform brightness--they would have struck the
eye as equally attractive and equally absurd.

            It seems that feet are getting bigger all the time--shod
feet, that is. While upper proportions have shifted uneasily from big shoulders
and wayward hair to neater hair and narrower shoulders, there has been a steady
trend down below toward gigantic shoes for both sexes and all
ages--multicolored and padded feet, creatively laced-up, zipped-up, and
raised-up feet. The fashion press has called this part of a '70s Revival, and
those who remember that decade may recall the platform footgear then current.
Back then, they suggested a '40s Revival, but this time something else is going
on.

            More than
one thing, perhaps. Shoe fetishism is certainly nothing new, though for women
it has been mostly a 20 th -century passion. Like so much else, sexy
shoes used to be a male privilege, from the aristocratic pointed
poulaines of the 15 th century that stretched out as far as 30
inches to the huge cavalier boots of the 17 th century, with their
high scarlet heels and great butterfly shapes over the instep. During most of
that time, women's feet "like little mice stole in and out" (as Sir John
Suckling put it in 1641) from under the hems of floor-length skirts. No wonder
modern women went overboard once their skirts rose off the ground and pants
became an option. Again and again, feminine fashion in this century has
exploited the powerful erotic character of footgear, just when modern men's
shoes had begun to retreat into simplicity along with the rest of the male
wardrobe.

            
The shoe story is much more complex today. We
want to mask our deep love of bondage and ferocity with the rhetoric of
comfort, fitness, and athletic glory. Men can play that game too, and anybody's
shoes can now combine madness and badness with gestures toward utility. The
flabby man on the bus wears wrinkled pants, shirt, and windbreaker in
nondescript shades of gray, but on his feet are enormous shoes sculpted out of
bulbous shapes in dazzling white and purple, Olympic echoes in a sedentary
life. The tiny black dress of a scrawny girl at a party exposes thin whittled
legs ending in vast square-toed ankle boots just perfect for hiking over miles
of Himalayan glacier or surviving in the trenches during World War I. Delicate
pumps would never set off her frame as well as these monsters do.

            The
erotic charge comes from the shoes being crippling and enabling at the same
time, the effect traditionally produced by very high heels. They lift the lady
up, seductively tighten her leg muscles, and thrust her forward as if to launch
her into the air and into her future, even as they shorten her stride and
increase her risk of tripping. High heels look elegant and dangerous, like
those endless pointed shoes on the medieval princes, but they are also
thrilling, like roller blades, figure skates, or toe shoes. They are fierce
engines of art, designed to demonstrate that an authoritative grace can
transcend all danger, inconvenience, and absurdity.

            All this is possible because feet themselves are so banally
utilitarian and infinitely sexy, with sensitive nerve endings and suggestive
shapes clothing the tough muscle and articulated bone that carry us around.
Feet can kick and stomp and trample, or receive and give refined caresses; they
can make us dance like angels or march like brutes. But they're also acutely
helpless, with skin that's much too touchy and toes that aren't so clever. They
need help in a way hands don't. Like ears, feet are natural jewels that cry out
for visual emphasis. From my high window, I can see faraway people walking on
Sixth Avenue, their little white sneakers giving a pearly edge to each
stride.

            The notorious Chinese binding
of female feet emphasized their tenderness by reducing them to living
sweetmeats wrapped in silk--the lily foot was meant to slide easily into a
lover's mouth. We are now perversely disposed to do the same thing with clumpy
boots that box feet in or puffy shoes that muffle them up with blobs or
colorful wadding, to which delicious concoctions have been added--the weighty
clogs with dainty straps, the lofty heels with splayed bottoms. These are
endless new treats for the shoe fetishist who seems to lurk in every modern
soul, by turns obsessed with rapid mobility and paralyzed victimhood, high
prowess and low violence.

         
      
   
