
   
   
      
         
            Navel Gazing

            People used to go to the
beach to see other people in an unusual state of near nakedness, especially
girls, and stare at them in perfect freedom. It was impossible to do this
anywhere else. Magazines showed girls in sleek, revealing swimsuits (guys,
too), but that wasn't the same as real ones moving around, some of them people
you actually knew. It used to be the national pastime, after baseball, a summer
thrill for everybody. And then, after admiring all the pretty girls on local
beaches, you topped it off by watching the Miss America pageant and staring at
the prettiest girls in the whole country, parading around in their bathing
suits on TV instead of the beach. It was like dessert.

            Recently,
the pageant has got itself into trouble by implicitly acknowledging this truth
about itself. It decided to allow two-piece bathing suits into the competition.
At the same time, however, the Miss America pageant stiffened up its
terminology so as to avoid calling the event a beauty contest, or the girls
gorgeous. The word is out to call the girls talented and confident, and the
event a scholarship program. It is, I suspect, this bit of doublespeak that has
really set off the alarm, alerting both the hypocrisy-sniffers and the
exploitation-of-women's-bodies people at the same time.

            Excluding beauty is a ridiculous development for the Miss
America contest. Everybody knows that the pageant is about America's
Sweetheart, the girl whose earnest desire to do good in the world and do well
in her work is most purely embodied in her lovely face and perfect figure. It's
part of the wholesome old tradition equating Goodness and Truth with Beauty,
particularly the beauty of women. It's opposed to the wicked old tradition
equating the beauty of women with Sin and Perdition. Two-piece bathing suits
are so much a part of wholesome American life that the world's wives and
daughters have been wearing them for decades, and navels of all ages are a
customary sight.

            So
customary have they become, in fact, that the pageant's decision comes at the
time when bathing suits are no longer even considered particularly explosive.
The June issue of Vogue , for example, showed several shots of
girls--among them Uma Thurman--on a sandy beach, writhing in the surf wearing
long clinging evening dresses instead of bathing suits. A current issue of
French Elle shows a sunny beach with three shots of wet girls in long
printed wrap skirts and long-sleeved flowing shirts over their bathing suits.
Only one girl is wearing nothing but a bathing suit, and it seemed to be made
of a very shaggy bathroom rug cut in two.

            
Something has clearly happened to bathing
suits. Of course, something started happening to bathing suits as soon as they
were invented--that is, they got progressively more revealing. (Swimsuits were
invented in the revolutionary 1840s to permit mixed bathing on public beaches.
Before that, men and women bathed separately in the nude.) In due course we
wound up with the modern swimsuit and the respectable nearly naked nude,
ratified for all time by the Miss America pageant and Sports
Illustrated . In the beginning, though, a woman's bathing suit was designed
to repel the avid male gaze. With their knee-length bloomers, long stockings,
and big, thick belted tunic with elbow-length sleeves, these outfits were all
business and no pleasure. The advanced 1890s permitted bathing suits to catch
the eye, but only with nautical touches and a less engulfing shape, under which
corseting might be applied to sharpen the outline. No skin could appear.

            The real
change in bathing suits began during World War I. Even before that, a radical
exposure in female clothing was underway; skirts rose up and permanently
unveiled the shoes, necklines showing the collarbone began to be worn before
sundown. Wartime excitement fostered the sense that the Brave Boys deserved a
thrill before they marched away, and the truly patriotic bathing suit had to
deliver some instant courage to the allied troops.

            The style of that era was set by the Mack Sennett Bathing
Beauties of the silver screen: naked arms, shoulders, backs, and armpits topped
off skimpy costumes baring knees and an inch or two of thigh. The tight corset
had vanished and dieting had yet to be invented, so the jiggly female form
showed amply through the bathing suit. And soon such daring beach wear could,
should, and indeed had to be worn, not just by actresses with doubtful morals
and a professional stake in their physical looks, but by the girl next door. It
was all a matter of keeping the home fires burning and preserving the values
that mattered.

            Ever
since, it has been a part of every good girl's duty, heaven help her, to adorn
public beaches and neighborhood swimming pools with eye-striking,
heart-stopping, skin-baring bathing suits that provided less and less shelter
with every decade. A girl's respectability was forever sundered from the
concealment of her bodily facts--quite the reverse, it became attached to their
display. Consequently, keeping the body fit for the task has been built into
female basic training for four generations, despite new shifts in the direction
of female ambition and the foundation of new codes of female honor. And that
training still keeps the Miss America pageant in business, despite the
occasional minor agitation that vainly urges it to stop the swimsuit
competition.

            
Lately, however, a shift in fashion has
attacked this ancient female habit of body and mind. For one thing, as the Miss
America people have probably noticed, vast tracts of once-hidden bare skin can
now be everywhere exposed: in the public parks, in the buses and subways, in
Grand Central Terminal. Who needs the beach for the ritual summer thrill?
Further degrees of exposure became impossible after the string and the thong
came in, went out, and returned. And so what's happened to bathing suits is
that folks have lost interest in them, except, perhaps, for the organizers of
Miss America.

            Even the
two-part fluffy carpet I saw in Elle seems just an awkward effort to
stir things up. A recent Paris Match tried to help by offering The Most
Expensive Bathing Suits available this year, all photographed by Helmut Newton
and worn by the unbelievable Eva Herzigova. John Galliano won at $25,000 with a
black cotton-satin hourglass corset covered with jeweled sprays and stars and
faintly suggesting Jane Russell; followed at a great distance by a $2,000
Yoshibi Ishinuma bikini made entirely of swooping black coq feathers;
and a Robert Beaulieu bikini made entirely of pale mink, available at a modest
$750. Thierry Mugler's black satin one-piece took the sado-maso route with
stark black bands clutching ribcage and upper thigh, also for $750. Relief from
this was offered by Dolce & Gabbana's two-piece in white lace and Lycra,
indistinguishable from the underwear of 1949 and selling for only $125. But
such giddy stuff isn't really beach wear, great though Helmut, Eva, and
Galliano all are to contemplate at length.

            Extra daring nakedness has gone back to being the domain of
professionals, the models who pose for nude photos or who wear runway couture
that bares the breasts, buttocks, and navel under transparent spangled veiling
meant for ballrooms, not the beach. Meanwhile the neat bikinis and one-piece
suits also shown in the June Vogue look like timeless fashion classics,
photographed on a perfect body in a manner suggesting the serene elegance of
antique sculpture. We could easily follow along in that vein, in our less
perfect versions, and so can Miss America, in her sweet one; but what's truly
groundbreaking nowadays is to stroll on the sand or romp in the waves in a
full-length dress.

         
      
   
