
   
   
      
         
            The Conformist

            I'm not a man, so I'm not
one of the critics who hailed Nick Hornby's first novel, High Fidelity ,
as the ultimate exposé of the contemporary male psyche. What I do know is that
the story made for a fun read: A 35-year-old Londoner named Rob with the
maturity level of a high-school junior dumps his girlfriend and retreats to his
pathetic job in a music shop. He fetishizes his record collection until one day
he realizes that it's just a stack of plastic discs, not a fulfilling life
partner.

            Hornby
writes with awesome fluidity. His musings on the destructive beauty of pop
culture, the way it merchandizes melancholy to vulnerable young people, at
times achieve something like philosophical depth. (Click for an example.) The
book's unapologetic concern with personal happiness even lent it a classical
grace. You could almost see it as a throwback to the 18 th century,
before the Novel got confused with Art and the novelist's job was to write
clean prose, trot out a few moral guidelines, and make the reader laugh. My
only complaints with High Fidelity were with a few cloying Growth
Moments and the cute epilogue, a party at which Rob plays DJ and every
character in the novel appears to issue a happy farewell. The finale is
reminiscent of one of those Pollyanna-ish endings on Beverly Hills 90210
such as when Donna gets out of the hospital after an attempted rape, and the
whole gang gathers at the Peach Pit for a supersupportive celebration.

            If you had to quantify it, the brilliant-to-annoying ratio
of High Fidelity would probably be about 4-to-1. Maybe it was inevitable
that in a new Hornby effort, the first number would decline. Rob was immature,
but his desperate clinging to youth placed him inside a world of rock trivia
that Hornby described in beautifully specific detail. By comparison, Will, the
hero of About a Boy , is an abstraction, the sort of handsome cipher you
see in magazine ads for khakis. He's inherited a nest egg, so instead of
working he sits at home and watches daytime television. All signs to the
contrary, he thinks this shallow bachelorhood is glamorous. His joys in life
are dressing well and going "clubbing." In England, apparently, this makes him
an archetype of male cool.

            Will wants
to sleep with women, but he doesn't want to get involved, so he comes up with a
plan. He'll pursue beautiful single mothers and pretend he has a child, too.
This will trick his girlfriends into thinking he's capable of depth and caring.
Then, before things get too heavy, the woman will realize her child comes first
and break up with him. "Great sex, a lot of ego massage, temporary parenthood
without tears and a guilt-free parting--what more could a man want?"

            
In other words, the premise of About a
Boy is as thin as a Handi Wipe. It's like something a committee of TV
writers might dream up for George Costanza on a lesser episode of
Seinfeld . But after a few implausible episodes in which Will tries out
his ruse, he finally embarks on a challenging relationship. It's not with a
woman at all, but with Marcus, a geeky 12-year-old boy. Will meets the poor kid
when the woman Will is currently attempting to date drags the boy along on a
picnic as a favor to the boy's flaky mother. Will resents Marcus and finds him
weird, but when he drops him off at home, they find the mother passed out in a
failed suicide attempt, and Will's sympathy is engaged. Sort of. Actually,
Marcus fixates on Will as a potential father figure and starts appearing at his
house uninvited. Will feels guilty, lets him in to watch television and slowly,
very slowly, begins to get involved.

            Marcus is a complex and
touching creation, and his growth arc easily beats out Will's for interest. A
victim of the modern parental tyranny of hippie idealism, he doesn't watch
television, eat meat, or know how to dress, and his music-listening at home is
tragically restricted to Joni Mitchell. He misses the cultural references kids
throw around at school. The bullies in his class sense this and pounce, like
hyenas on a limping gazelle. Meanwhile, his well-meaning but narcissistic
mother mopes around the house, so his only example of adult behavior is
hopeless isolation.

            In his
clueless search for companionship, Marcus gets a crush on Ellie, a
troublemaking older woman (she's 14) obsessed with the pessimistic lyrics of
Kurt Cobain. Here you can see Hornby straining hard to live up to his
reputation as an interpreter of the Zeitgeist . The novel is set in 1994,
and the climax cleverly dovetails with Cobain's suicide. Hornby clearly means
to revisit a Defining Cultural Moment, with Ellie symbolizing the peril of
taking rock 'n' roll angst as a model for life.

            A couple of problems with this strategy: 1) It's too early
to look back on the mid-'90s with clarity, let alone nostalgia. 2) As wise as
Hornby's warning against overwrought adolescent feeling is, the alternatives
aren't very appealing. Marcus' classmates abuse him, his mother ignores his
needs, and Ellie is insane. That leaves him with Will. But what does Will know
how to do? Buy records and clothes, be selfish, and not take anything
seriously. In all the obvious ways, About a Boy feels like a
continuation of the themes in High Fidelity . But where High
Fidelity argued against too much coolness, the new novel is about the
benefits of fitting in.

            It's almost brave, this
defense of conformity. It certainly defies the standard tropes of writing about
young people--all that stuff about how it's OK to be yourself, even if you're
different. Brave or not, though, it's still shallow. One of the great things
about High Fidelity was the way it made emotional epiphanies function as
plot. Rob's painful realization that he was lonely was as thrilling as the
naming of a murderer in a whodunit. In About a Boy , characters go
through the motions of growing up without conducting the necessary internal
search. Will's maturity simply arrives one day, like a piece of mail: "Will
couldn't recall ever having been caught up in this sort of messy, sprawling,
chaotic web before; it was almost as if he had been given a glimpse of what it
was like to be human. It wasn't too bad, really; he wouldn't even mind being
human on a full-time basis." As for Marcus, under Will's sartorial influence,
"[h]e had flattened out and become as robust and unremarkable as any
twelve-year-old kid." The message is that there's a right way to dress and a
right set of music to listen to and that hippies, geeks, angry teen-agers, and
other marginal people would make life easier for themselves if they'd just get
with the program.

            Hornby still writes with
warmth and charm. In fact he renders his message in such appealing, facile
strokes that one wants to believe he just panicked after the success of High
Fidelity and turned out a callow rush job. More depressing is the
possibility that he means it.

         
      
   
