
   
   
      
         
            Long May It Wave

            The perpetual hair crisis is
never over. Hair produces 10 times the anxiety clothes ever stir up--nobody
admits to having a bad clothes day, for example. Fashion in coiffure naturally
relates to what's cool below the neck, but since we mostly grow our hair
ourselves, its visual life has a stronger meaning than that of pants and
shirts. A man I know, a distinguished professor of philosophy at a
distinguished university, has just had his short, light-brown hair dyed
platinum blond. What made him do that? He wanted, he told me--this man's career
is based on deep thinking and he lives in amorous harmony with a woman--to look
like a gay weight lifter. So he does, sort of. His new hair produces a fine
ambiguous effect, a not-so-easily-readable physical presence that can blend in
with several wayward forms of nonacademic company. It also gives just the
slightest salutary fright to colleagues and students.

            Not
everybody pinpoints his own wishes as accurately as my friend, but since the
death of compulsory hats, men and women have allowed their personal fantasies
to focus on hair even more than on clothes. Clothes are public husks, they
shift on and off your body and in and out of fashion and your life; you can
hide your alternate selves, or your mistakes, in the back of the closet. But
hair is only partially public. Since it stays with you continuously, even while
you're naked, your hair adorns your most intimate identity, just as your face
does, and only secondarily supports the roles you play in life. What you do
with it has to satisfy in both realms. Not so easy in our hyperconscious and
fractional modern world.

            The hard thing is that the comforting fantasy you realize
on your head may seem like quite another thing to the world. You cut your hair
very short to feel young and free; your audience sees the look of a plucked
turkey. Your haircut imitates a movie star's; in it you resemble a
schoolteacher. In fact, hair fantasy is mostly unconscious and so is the
response to it. Our personal failures count as such only if we feel that our
hidden hair agenda fails us. Most others don't notice anything.

            The
publicity of private hair is a long story; it figures in the willingly shaven
heads of ancient priests and modern skinheads, in the punitive shearing of male
convicts and female French collaborators, in huge powdered wigs and elaborately
extended curls or braids. Politically charged hair doubtless dates straight
back to humanity's first racial conflicts, perhaps preceded by its earliest
social conflicts. It's the hair of the enemy that marks him as such, as with
the flowing tresses of royalist Cavaliers (effete tyrants) and the cropped hair
of parliamentary Roundheads (crude thugs) during the English Civil War.
Partisan passion about hair has been keenest in gender politics--expressed
mainly by women cutting off their hair and by men growing it--since hair is
universally erotic and has no function except as a vehicle of pleasure and
meaning. The idea that men and women must wear differing coiffures goes very
deep, since visible hair is what should reveal the invisible difference between
the bodies. This shows up in pictures of Adam and Eve before the Fall, where
his hair is always rather short and hers is always very long and noticeable, as
if God had personally styled them that way from the beginning.

            
For some years now women have been wearing
disorderly hair as a rule--the more chic the messier. An insouciant, infantile
carelessness seems to be the desired effect, even if a well-tailored suit is
covering a well-tended body below the helter-skelter head. This custom suggests
new stages in the old rebellion against religious strictures, which once
demanded that female hair--divinely ordained to be long and seductive--be
covered up lest it incite lust. In the modern West, progressive slackening of
those rules came to permit naked hair for women, but only under visible
control--not hidden, but very well-dressed in public. Even short hair was
eventually acceptable for women, too, but visibly careful grooming was still
the rule for fashionable female heads until the last 15 years or so.

            Since
then we've been having the mop and the shag and the mane and the haystack, with
straight and curled, long and short versions of each, sometimes untidily caught
up in clamps and clasps and elastic bands. Hair in historical movies is often
the same, never mind the elaborately coiled and oiled evidence of history. It
would seem that the more powerful modern women feel, the less they want their
hair to look submissive--and that includes neat. By contrast the complex
systems of braids worn by many black women seem like elegant reincarnations of
ancient Egyptian or Minoan practice, a civilized display of effort made,
precise care taken, beauty manifestly pursued and achieved in the most august
tradition.

            This idea is even fashionably acceptable for the chic face
and body and for certain clothes, but not for modish hair. Heaven forbid that
the old tease-and-spray routines should appear habitual to Carolyn
Bessette-Kennedy or the supermodels. The look of money spent, yes--mops and
haystacks do actually need a constant attention that braids don't; and
elaborate processes for streaking and tinting and correctly disarranging them
can rack up a very noticeable tab. But the overall impression must remain that
of no trouble taken whatsoever, even to make a straight part, so that the hair
looks as if sun and wind and some tumbling in bed were all it ever got.
Anything too processed might smack of oppression or repression, pretension or
hypocrisy, maybe acknowledged alliance with reactionary values, the Margaret
Thatcher effect. Coiffed hair is desirable for TV anchorwomen and political
candidates, as a proper concession to masculine convention, but not when
off-duty.

            Men have a
harder time with their hair. Censure for hairstyles has mostly fallen on men,
since male appearance has forever mattered so much at war and work. Detailed
rules have much more often been applied to male rather than to female
arrangements. As a result men are much more afraid of looking ridiculous than
women are, since female fashion has risk built into it. For men's hair, the
cosmic risk is the possible baldness haunting them all, and that only adds to
the high tension attending male choices.

            
Modern men have been saddled with an image of
strong simplicity, the neat suggestion of an upper-class sporting and military
milieu. That Ralph Laurenish note blends quite well with proletarian chic or
the skinhead aesthetic. The visual keynote is sharp clarity, so that the
overall norm is neat, short hair, give or take a few inches. Long and flowing
is occasional, really messy is exceptional. But dreadlocks aside, modern
pared-down male looks, even daring ones, will not permit any deliberately
ornamental curling and braiding and powdering and adorning of hair. That mostly
leaves creative topiary, with shearing and partial shearing included, for the
fantasy life of male hair.

            Flagrant dyeing for men is
also becoming more common, following female practice--but not in the
mainstream, out of which my academic friend is so eager to keep. At an earlier
period, this same adventurous philosopher briefly affected the softly stubbled
face, and still earlier the quarter-inch-long haircut then uncommon even at the
margins, except in military school. When he did that, I said, how could you?
why did you? wailing at the loss of his fine thatch and simultaneously unable
to keep from stroking his mown, velvety skull. "Q.E.D.!" said he with
satisfaction. Touché.

             

         
      
   
