
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Dentists
Don't Need Welfare
            

            Regarding Stephen Chapman's
"Geeks Don't Need
Welfare":

            The same
thing happened in dentistry in the late 1960s and 1970s. With increased
government funding for training dentists, the nation got more dentists just in
time for the full effect of fluoridated water to kick in. The result: thousands
of unemployed or underemployed dentists through the late 1970s and early
1980s.

            -- Mike Rethman, D.D.S.,
M.S.
            

            
               Words,
Words, Words
            

            I just had to comment on the
commentary in "Today's Papers" (March 13 th ) on the "N word." I am an
African-American with many black friends and family members. No one I associate
with uses the term "nigger" to describe each other or any other black person
for that matter. I question what research and/or actual experience was used to
determine that "since it has become a common phrase of salutation and even
endearment among blacks, a high proportion of its current usage is in fact as a
synonym for 'black person.' "

            While that
comment sounds like amusing irony, it is in reality a dangerous assumption
based on very little (if any) actual experience with people who have had the
offensive term used to describe them. It is a propagation of the myth that if
black people would just respect themselves, they would receive respect from
other races in America. You may never understand how offensive that word is to
a black person--but trust me , as a black person in America, it in no way
meets my approval as an appropriate word to use to describe a human being.

            
               --Janet
Richards
            

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. Please include your address and daytime phone
number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
