
   
   
      
         
            Beavers on Probation

            
               Beaver
She-Men
            

            
According to the Ottawa Citizen , Canada's national animal is sexually
confused. A research team at the University of Guelph's Ontario
Veterinary College recently dissected 11 male beavers that were native to
Spencerville, just south of Canada's capital, and found that they all had
uteruses. They found the same curious biology in the majority of beavers from
three other locations as well. The finding wasn't such a surprise to the
researchers, whose routine post-mortems in the last few years have turned up a
very high percentage of such "pseudo-hermaphrodite" beavers. Ken Fisher, a
professor of biomedical sciences at the veterinary college, believes that the
development of a uterus is a normal part of a male beaver's genetics and
embryology: But "I wouldn't bet the farm on that," he says. "I'd bet a cup of
coffee."

            
               Smart
Banking
            

            Is it
too soon to prepare for a glut of academically inclined babies from China? The
newly opened "Notables' Sperm Bank" in Chengdu accepts donations only from
scholars who are under the age of 60, have no history of congenital diseases,
and are at the very least an associate professor. Of course, as the
Independent of Bangladesh points out, it has yet to be scientifically
proved that "intellectual quality can be enhanced by cattle breeding
techniques." But in the next few years, new data should be available.

            
               Shoot the
Loon
            

            An
economics professor at Simon Fraser University in British Columbia is urging Canadians
to ditch the "loonie," as the country's dollar is fondly called, and join a
monetary union with the United States. A report, co-authored by Richard G. Harris and
Queen's University's Thomas J. Courchene, argues that such a partnership would
be economically advantageous for Canada. But what about Canada's national
pride? "All the hang-ups that we now have about our paper money are going to
... go the same way as the buggy whip and typewriters," says Harris. The
Canadian government and the
Bank of Canada aren't biting, the London Independent
reports. Harris has found one supportive group, however: Quebec separatists who
believe that the currency union would ease Quebec's own transition to
sovereignty.

            
               Kangaroo
Saviors
            

            A
computer science professor has designed a "marsupial" to help search-and-rescue
teams in times of crisis. The robot, designed by Robin Murphy of the
University of South Florida,
has a pouchlike cavity inside of which a smaller "daughter" robot is stored.
The mother and daughter robots work as a team--the mother carries a load of
communications equipment and battery power into the search site, then deploys
the daughter to poke through the debris and rubble for evidence of survivors,
the Washington Post reports. (Click here
for a video clip of the "launch" of the daughter robot.) The robot system is
safer than dispatching human rescuers and, when space is tight, more
effective.

            
               Probation
Officers
            

            Since
1936, the American
Association of University Professors has censured universities that do
wrong to their faculties. This year's additions to the hall of shame are
Johnson and Wales University
and Mount Marty College.
The AAUP charged J and W with wrongful termination for not renewing the
one-year appointments of two professors teaching in a doctoral program in
educational leadership. Mount Marty administrators allegedly violated the
due-process rights and academic freedom of an English professor, who had been
trying to revive a local chapter of the AAUP, when they fired him a few months
ago. Does the AAUP censure matter? Some say the mark is "a serious stigma,
others call it a joke," reports the Chronicle of Higher
Education . Most administrations do their best to reform after receiving
the citation. This year, a record number of institutions (seven) were able to
persuade the AAUP that they had cleaned up their act and should be removed from
the list; 50 schools still remain under censure.

            
               School's Out,
Forever?
            

            
Despite achieving their primary goals, Mexican students are still on strike.
Nearly three months ago, when the administration at the National
Autonomous University of Mexico proposed a raise in student tuition from 2
cents to about $150 a year, students closed down the classes with a strike,
affecting 267,000 students and 30,000 professors. So why are students still
occupying the campus's major buildings? The Washington Post reports that
the students have escalated their demands to include the rollback of half a
dozen changes the university has imposed in recent years, including limits on
the number of years students have to earn degrees and tougher enrollment
standards. With negotiations at a stalemate and summer vacations removing the
motivation for an immediate solution, both sides appear to be settling in.

            

               Cybercheating
            

            The
Scotsman reports that Edinburgh University is withholding exam results from 90 computer
science students while the administration determines whether or not they used
the Internet to cheat. Graders became suspicious that students were sharing
answers via e-mail and using the World Wide Web to search for information when
they noticed similarities in the students' work--some to the point of being
identical. Although the incident has raised questions about whether electronic
cheating is commonplace, a spokesman for the university asserts that "there is
no evidence this is a more serious and widespread problem."

            
               Mau Mauing Goes to
College
            

            
Following a bloody assault by students at Nigeria's Obafemi Awolowo University,
Ile-Ife, last month, students are calling for the dismissal of a top
administrator, who they hold responsible for lax campus security. According to
the Associated Press, the attackers belong to a campus secret society that
functions like a gang, retaliating against students and teachers who oppose
them. The melee left at least seven students dead and incensed fears that
cult-related violence is rising on Nigeria's university campuses. The student
union president has promised a continued boycott of classes until campus
security is improved and the vice chancellor dismissed. The societies, which
have been blamed for dozens of rapes, murders, assaults, and arson attacks over
the years, are widely considered to be the most serious problem facing Africa's
largest university system.

            
               Packing
Heat
            

            
According to a study conducted by the Harvard School of Public
Health, as many as 400,000 undergraduates in the United States own a
handgun. The study also shows that student handgun owners fit the profile of
the average American gun owner: white men who live in the South and West or in
rural areas. The Chronicle of Higher 
               Education also reports
from the study that it points to a "worrisome association" between gun
possession and student drinking. Henry Weschler, one of the report's authors,
warns, however, against overreacting to the study: "We're not pointing to
hordes of drunken college students running across campus armed," he said. "I
don't want to give that impression."

            
               Chinese
Threat
            

            Top
U.S. schools and laboratories are worried that repercussions from the alleged
theft of nuclear secrets will hamper the recruitment of talented Asian and
Asian-American researchers, says the Wall Street Journal . Since the
charges in May that China gathered a rich harvest of nuclear secrets from
ethnic Chinese lab workers, the U.S. government has slowed the visa approval
process, making academic exchanges with China more difficult. In addition, low
morale is evident among Asian and Asian-American scientists, since suspicions
abound in the workplace. Dahwey Chu, a spokesman for the Asian-American
personnel at the Sandia
National Laboratories in New Mexico, commented, "Today it would take a
brave lab administrator to hire someone with a Chinese name."

            
               Scientists Who
Thawed Their Work Destroyed
            

            New
York City's power outage in early July may have damaged hundreds of experiments
that Columbia University medical researchers were conducting at laboratories in
upper Manhattan. The backup generators designed to power the various machinery
and refrigerator units failed. Currently, researchers are trying to determine
the extent of the loss.

            
               Comings and
Goings
            

            Stanley Fish, formerly of
Duke University's English department and now dean of liberal arts and sciences
at the University of Illinois at
Chicago, has lured two more high-profile scholars to join his ranks--the
transsexual economist Deirdre McCloskey from the University of Iowa, and Gerald
Graff, a professor of English and education at the University of Chicago.
... Elsewhere, the University of Pennsylvania has finally lured
provocative criminologist John J. DiIulio Jr. from Princeton. DiIulio will take
his endowed chair in August. ... The North Carolina-based National Humanities
Center has announced its fellows for 1999-2000. Scholars will
investigate a range of subjects including techno music and globalization,
avarice in the late middle ages and Renaissance, and African-Americans and
foreign affairs.

         
      
   
