
   
   
      
         
             Sins of the Tongue

            During the Flytrap scandal last year, traditional
Christian values were often invoked--but only those concerning sex. What no one
talked about was that from the Middle Ages through the Reformation era,
Christian moral theology, both Catholic and Protestant, has upheld other
principles relevant to Flytrap: above all, that "nemo tenetur detegere
turpitudinem suam ." That does not translate as "thou shalt not lie with
interns (nor lie about it thereafter)." It means "no one is compelled to reveal
his own secret sin." A corollary holds that no one--including judges and
prosecutors--has a moral right to compel another person to disclose his private
shameful acts. As the eminent Puritan theologian William Ames wrote in
Conscience and the Cases Thereof , "[H]e whose offence is hidden has ...
as yet right to preserve his fame that it should not rashly be laid open.
Neither is it the part of a judge to search into hidden faults."

            You may not agree with this principle, but it was
the church's position for centuries. According to medieval canon law, "private
and shameful acts," the sorts of things a penitent whispers to his priest, lie
outside the jurisdiction of public tribunals. Moreover, both Catholic and
Protestant writers argued against compelling people to answer specific
incriminating questions under oath--because, Ames explains, it is "against
nature" to expect "that any man should betray or defame himself." Even this
stiff old Puritan never supposes that it is only weak, unprincipled men who lie
under such circumstances. To put someone on oath, and then ask if he has
masturbated or committed adultery (both mortal sins according to traditional
Christian ethics), is merely to "give occasion of horrid perjuries." The Roman
Catholic jurist Julius Clarus says much the same, adding "as daily experience
teaches."

            Traditional Christian
morality even supports President Clinton's slippery answers to prosecutors'
questions. It was precisely to give witnesses and defendants a way out of the
perjury trap that theologians distinguished between a lie and a misleading or
equivocal statement. Henry Mason, an Anglican priest writing in the early
17 th century, points out that in traditional Protestant and Catholic
ethics "if there be just cause for concealing of a truth," one may use words in
a "less known and common signification, and in another meaning than it is
likely the hearers will understand them." Like, say, using "sex" in a sense
that excludes fellatio (though that's not an example that Mason gives).

            Traditional Christian moral theology does not view attempts
to hide one's private sins and shame as grave offenses. What it does view as a
fundamental violation of Christian charity is detractio : disclosing
another human being's private failings and weaknesses in order to ruin his good
name or otherwise bring him into discredit. According to the Summa
Theologica of Thomas Aquinas, to harm someone this way is a mortal
sin--even if the allegations are true--since "defamation is not a distortion of
the truth but the destruction of a reputation." Or, as Ames puts it, he is
"truly a detractor who revealeth a true sin of another man's ... spoiling the
man's reputation to the intent to hurt him."

            Aquinas considered
detractio more seriously wicked than theft, because "reputation is more
valuable than riches." Citing St. Augustine, some penitential manuals classify
it as a type of homicide, while others make it a sin against the Holy Spirit
and thus unforgivable. The Protestant Ames takes an equally hard line: "The
unjust revealing a secret hath in it oftentimes the pernicious violations of
trust, friendship, and honesty," and is therefore "not only in the common
esteem of men, but in the Scripture also, reckoned amongst the most odious
sins."

            To be sure, there are times when one has a moral right and
duty to reveal damaging information about another person. As Ames notes, "every
citizen" is bound to notify the authorities of "faults which do either
immediately hurt the public good ... or which hurt heavily any innocent." But,
he adds, as long as "the fault itself is not pernicious to others ... then
charity and justice require that, setting aside accusation, we content
ourselves with private correction."

            In other words, the release of the Starr report one
year ago this week was, by traditional Christian standards, the big sin of
Flytrap. Disclosing every last humiliating detail of Clinton's sex life
occupies the dead center of what traditional Christianity means by sin--and is
perhaps even more deeply wrong than either committing or concealing adultery.
If, as many said, Flytrap reflects the erosion of traditional Christian values,
it is not because a man committed adultery and lied about it--which is nothing
new. The evidence of eroding Christian values is that compelling a man to
publicize his hidden faults and punishing him for not cooperating in his own
disgrace are no longer considered by many to be sins at all.

         
      
   
