
   
   
      
         
            The Rules of Engagement

            If the
Internet is going to become the new campaign battleground, then a lot of
people-from federal officials to campaign consultants to election lawyers-will
jockey to define the rules of engagement.

            Should
individual political activity online, such as posting a message urging people
to vote for a particular candidate, be considered free speech or a campaign
contribution?

            Should
links between political Web sites be considered informational, or should
campaigns have to put a monetary value on a link and include it in federal
election filings?

            Should
a new top-level domain-.pol, for example, if it's not already taken-be created
for political Web sites to stem the growth of counterfeit or unauthorized
sites?

            These
were among the issues considered at a three-day conference-"Campaigns in
Cyberspace: The Promise and Practice of Digital Politics"-held recently by the
Aspen Institute. The Washington-based think tank assembled a panel of election
lawyers, federal regulators, Internet political consultants, academics,
journalists (including this writer), and others to devise recommendations to
help Congress and the Federal Election Commission revise laws for Internet
campaigning.

            "The
Internet is sort of the new town hall. Citizens can speak their minds and talk
to each other and talk to candidates freely," says Christine Varney, a
conference participant and former White House adviser who now heads the
American Bar Association's standing committee on elections. "At the same time,
regulations exist to safeguard against abuses and fraud. The question is how to
do that effectively on the Net. My position on all of these issues is to make
sure we don't intervene until we see more maturity in the marketplace."

            The
think tank's panel agreed, recommending that political activity on the Internet
be promoted, "absent specific intent to use the Internet to circumvent the
law." The group also proposed that candidates and party committees be allowed
to link their Web sites to others without considering the links contributions
or expenditures. In addition, some groups prohibited from making direct
contributions in federal elections, namely corporations and unions, should be
allowed to link to candidate Web sites as long as the links are bipartisan.

            Two
additional provisions would look at proposals to stem the growth of
unauthorized Web sites that purport to belong to a candidate and would require
periodic review of regulations to judge their impact on the use of the Internet
to spread political activity.

            The
Aspen Institute's conference presages an inquiry by the FEC, which could come
as soon as Oct. 28, to examine a whole slew of issues. Among the questions on
the docket: how the Internet fits with current regulations regarding political
action committees, corporations, unions, and individuals who want to express
advocacy of a candidate or an issue online. At press time, the FEC was
finalizing a 27-page draft proposal outlining the specific issues that the
commission intends to examine.

            "We
needed to have a generic inquiry as opposed to addressing one aspect at a
time," says David Mason, a Republican commissioner who attended the conference.
"We're not proposing 27 pages of regulations of the Internet. We're posing
questions."

            FEC Chairman Scott Thomas,
a Democrat who was also at the conference, noted that the Federal Election
Campaign Act of 1971 outlined three principles that need to be preserved on the
Internet: 1) disclosure of how money is raised and spent to influence
elections; 2) limits on the amount that any one person can contribute to a
campaign; and 3) restrictions on independent spending by corporations and
unions.

         
      
   
