
   
   
      
         
            No. 284: &quot;Gamy&quot;

            
               On Sunday,
speaking on CNN's Late Edition , White House economic adviser Gene
Sperling said it reminded him of the game "Twister." What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 283)--"Storm Warnings":
            

            

               
                  
                     The current issue of a national magazine lists these warning
signs: stain, unusual odor, the sound of broken glass or plastic. What
publication, what danger? (Question courtesy of Jim
O'Grady.)
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Cosmopolitan ; another 'Rate Your Man in Bed' quiz."-- Beth
Sherman ( Sylvia V. Bastani had a similar answer.)

            
"Car and Driver ; how to tell when your Expedition has hit another
Festiva. Those sedans can become wedged in the suspension and cause damage, you
know."-- Matthew Cole (similarly, Steve Reiness )

            "That
new Starbucks-Time Warner joint venture, Joe ; frankly, I think they're
overstating the dangers of Folgers Crystals."-- Tim Carvell
            

            
"Catholicism Today ; advising its readers how to stay clear of Mother
Teresa's miracle 'misfires.' "-- David Ballard
            

            "If I
remember, this was the last issue of Brill's Content . I got as far as
Page 7 before I nodded off and toppled a glassful of prune juice on the
rug."-- Dave Gaffen
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            "Just Before the Battle, Mother," one of the most
popular songs of the Civil War, sold over a million copies in sheet music, an
interesting thing to contemplate (or call for at a karaoke bar) as we await the
debut of Talk magazine (as I understand it, an abbreviated form of the
original title, Talk Is Cheap ) and the resumption of Tina
Brown-mocking.

            It's as if we were monologue writers for a
late-night talk show who knew that tomorrow Richard Nixon would rise from the
dead, recant his resignation, resume the presidency, and start having sex with
Monica Lewinsky and Joey Buttafuoco. Humbling. It's not often that life gives
you a second chance to do pretty much what you did when you had your first
chance.

            Some of you might feel
like Adm. Nelson before Trafalgar, Adm. Yamamoto before Pearl Harbor, Gen. Giap
before Tet. Are you worthy? Judging by the magazine savvy of today's responses,
I face tomorrow with confidence, eager to see you react to the premiere issue
of Talk (as I understand it, an abbreviated form of the original title
All Talk, No Action ), proud to be among we few, we happy few, we band of
quizzers.

            
               First-Class
Answer
            

            
               Postal Life , the in-house magazine of the
United States Postal Service.

            Signs that an unmarked package contains hazardous
material--HAZMAT.

            A photo accompanying an article in the July-August
issue shows a letter carrier holding a parcel that is smoking, presumably
another danger sign.

            The article proudly notes that the postal service
was in no way responsible for the 1996 crash of Valujet Flight 592 in the
Florida Everglades.

            "Mail has never been a contributing factor to a
plane crash," says the service's aviation mail security representative, Bill
Carlton, with barely a hint of disappointment. "And that's an impressive record
considering we could have mail on 56,000 flights a day!"

            Not all HAZMAT is taboo.
The post office will carry "nail polish, household cleaning supplies, dry ice
... some infectious substances and clinical specimens" if they are properly
packed and labeled so as to pose no threat to health or safety of postal
workers or the mail-reading public.

            
               Al Cloutier Signs
In
            

            END CONSTRUCTION

            Street sign or protest sign?

            And then we sing:

            END CONSTRUCTION!

            END CONSTRUCTION!

            
ENDCONSTRUCTIONENDCONSTRUCTION!

            
               The Last Word on
Charybdis/Caribdis
            

            "Jeff Newman was right. Charybdis is the Latin
spelling and became the preferred English spelling. Homer's Greek spelling
cannot be precisely rendered in Roman characters because not all the letters in
the Greek alphabet have exact analogs.

            For a very brief
discussion, see Spelling of Greek Names, which also explains that some
scholars might prefer Kharybdis as a truer transliteration of the
Greek."-- Roger "Cogito Ergo Spud (I Think Therefore I Yam)" Hipp
            

            
               Monkey News
Extra
            

            Which of these recent headlines and its
accompanying lead is an actual news story, and which is my way to give you a
few moments of amusement and some pointed social commentary because I like you
and just want you to be happy?

            1. HONG KONG BANS MONKEY FEEDING
Stifled by traffic and smog all day, Hong Kong residents know the value of
their parks for peace and quiet. That is, except for the wild monkeys ...

            2. NYC OFFERS $20 MILLION TAX ABATEMENT TO
MONKEY
Citing similar offers to Time Warner and to Ernst and Young, and noting that
"This is a very wealthy monkey who will create a lot of jobs, you stupid
bastards," Mayor Rudolph Giuliani announced ...

            3. FIVE PEOPLE ARRESTED FOR POACHING YUNNAN GOLDEN
MONKEYS
Five people have been given jail sentences of varying lengths by a court in
Deqing County in southwest China's Yunnan Province for poaching five Yunnan
golden monkeys in 1994. The Yunnan golden monkey is under state protection,
similar to the Giant Panda ...

            4. YOUNG GEORGE W. DRANK HEAVILY, STRANGLED
MONKEY
Describing a troubled phase of his early life that he says ultimately brought
him to Jesus, the Texas governor recalled a weekend binge that ended with the
corpse of Pepe, a rhesus monkey at the Houston Zoo, floating face down in
...

            5. ANGRY MONKEY BITES STEWARDESS IN LATEST CASE OF
"AIR RAGE"
Fed up with long lines, cramped seats, indifferent service, and third-rate
movies with the hot parts edited out, ChiChi ...

            6. BANGLADESH POLICE CAPTURE DRUG-DEALING
MONKEYS
Bangladeshi police said on Monday they had captured two monkeys trained to
deliver drugs to addicts in the capital Dhaka.

            7. BANGLADESH COPS RESCUE DRUG MONKEYS
(Same story, different spin.) Police say they have rescued two spider monkeys
who had been trained to sell contraband drugs by recognizing the colors of
different currency.

            8. REPUBLICAN TAX CUTS TO BENEFIT WEALTHY,
MONKEYS
Brushing aside the warnings of Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan and the
widely accepted research of Jane Goodall, House Republicans pushed ahead with
...

            9. UTAH ZOO CITES FAMILY
VALUES, ORDERS MONKEY PANTS
While it may be an ordinary fact of life that is practiced nearly universally,
masturbation is not ...

            
               Answers
            

            1, 3, 6, and 7 are
actual stories.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            
               George , assorted
aviation alerts.

            
               Schedule Note
            

            There will be only two quizzes this week, today and
Wednesday, so I'll have time to help PBS alphabetize its mailing lists.

         
      
   
