
   
   
      
         
            No. 314: &quot;A Chaucer, Not an Echo&quot;

            
               Fill in the blank
as David Mixner, a gay rights advocate, praises President Clinton at a
black-tie fund-raising dinner in Los Angeles: "Ever since 'The Canterbury
Tales'--strange crew that was--people have been judged by their ____________.
And we picked a good one in 1992."
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 313)--"What's That Smell?":
            

            

               It was caused by "a poisonous mix of greed, liquor, jingoism and bad
taste," writes Frank Hannigan, the group's former executive director. What
group; what happened?
            

            "Was
Jakob the Liar really that bad?"-- Peter Carlin
            

            "Those
Buchanan family reunions are getting a little out of hand."-- Andrew
Staples ( David Salzman had a similar answer.)

            "The
failure of the attempted merger between Revlon and China."-- Greg
Diamond
            

            "The
Jedediah Purdy for President committee was heckling Gary Bauer on the
17 th green of the Ryder Cup."-- Scott Pollino
            

            "Is it
Simhat Torah again already?"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Greed, liquor, jingoism,
and bad taste. If Hannigan didn't sound so grouchy, I'd say he was describing
Las Vegas, or perhaps one Vegas show in particular, Jerry Kuntash's "Splash!"
In the big finale, as men and women in tiny swimsuits perform a nearly
pornographic water ballet in a giant glass-walled tank, a row of topless
showgirls roars onto the stage on Harley Davidsons while lasers trace American
Icons--the Statue of Liberty, profiles of Washington and Lincoln, the
flag-raising on Iwo Jima--onto the wings of the stage, and a 15-piece pit band
plays Bruce Springsteen's "Born in the U.S.A." Greed, liquor, jingoism, bad
taste, and utterly compelling entertainment.

            
               Teed Off Answer
            

            Hannigan of the U.S. Golf Association decries the
American team's premature and boisterous celebration on the 17 th
green during the final day of Ryder Cup competition, "the climax of three days
of American Hubris."

            In "Rise of the Golf Hooligan," a New York
Times op-ed, he regrets the rough treatment dished out to the European
team: "spectators taunted them." Even worse, "One coach's spouse, positioned
inside the gallery-restraining ropes, exhorted the mob. The nonsense of
allowing spouses (in garish uniforms, no less) within the bounds of the arena
in sports is unprecedented."

            I'd say he presumes on
the marital status of the San Diego Chicken. But I'd say it in a quiet, polite,
Euro-Protestant tone of voice.

            
               Andrew Staples' All
Gall Extra
            

            Attention, Pinochet defense team:

            According to both Reuters and the Economist ,
Argentina has rejected an appeal from exiled Paraguayan coup leader Lino Oviedo
to delay his banishment to Tierra del Fuego until his hair transplant can take
hold.

            Oviedo fled Paraguay in March amid accusations he
plotted the murder of Vice President Luis Maria Argana, a political rival who
was gunned down in the streets of Asunción March 23.

            Lawyers for Oviedo, once the army strongman behind
Paraguay's disgraced President Raúl Cubas, said that Oviedo's plastic surgeon
doesn't want the general's scalp exposed to sun or wind for several months.

            I just thought you
should know.

            
               Chris Kelly's "This Is
Not Going To Be Another Complaint About How Badly Hollywood Treats the
Novelist" Ongoing Extra
            

            In Sunday's New York Times Warren Adler
writes about how his book Random Hearts was made into a movie.
("Published in 1984 and translated into more than 25 languages," if he does say
so himself, and he does.)

            Near the end of his article, Adler is explaining
why it's taken 15 years for his book to reach the screen, even after being so
extensively translated. The problem, you see, is that Hollywood phonies aim
movies at teen-aged boys.

            "My novels, in contrast, explore the mysteries
behind love and hate, the darkly amusing, deeply disturbing and ultimately
unanswerable questions that they inspire."

            And I have a thicker forearms than Lawrence
Durrell.

            Your News Quiz challenge is to find a more
shameless line of self-stroking whose author was able to wake up after its
publication, see it in print, and not kill himself with pills.

            Answers to run
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Buchananite tendencies.

         
      
   
