
   
   
      
         
            Timor the Merrier

            

               The Senate passed a ban on "partial-birth" abortions. The 63
to 34 vote fell short of the two-thirds majority needed to override President
Clinton's promised veto. The measure would ban a particular procedure often
used in late-term abortions. Supporters' spin: Abortionists are killing live babies . Opponents' spin:
You're trying to kill 
                  Roe vs. Wade
               . (Last year,

                  Slate
               's Atul Gawande the arguments over partial-birth
abortion.)

            

               Elizabeth Dole dropped out of the presidential race. She said
her inability to keep up with front-runner George W. Bush's fund raising made
her campaign "futile." Dole supporters' spin: Campaigns are now decided by money, not message. Dole detractors' spin: The
reason no one gave her money is that she had no message. Feminists debated
whether Dole 1) broke new ground for women in politics; or 2) failed to provide
an agenda for future progress. 

            

               Indonesia elected new leaders and voted to relinquish control of East
Timor. In the first contested election in Indonesia's history, the assembly
selected Abdurraham Wahid, a moderate Muslim cleric, as president. After a day
of violent protest by supporters of opposition candidate Megawati Sukarnoputri,
the assembly elected her vice president. Skeptics said the elections were
democratic in name only and questioned the new government's ability to unite
the country's diverse population and revive the economy. But the New York
Times , Los Angeles Times , and Washington Post deemed the elections a promising break
with Indonesia's autocratic history.

            

               The New York Yankees and the Atlanta Braves are in the World
Series. The Braves beat the New York Mets to win the National League
Championship. The Yankees prevailed over Boston in the American League. The
Atlanta-New York pairing is a rematch of the 1996 World Series, which the
Yankees won. The Braves, who are making their fifth World Series appearance
this decade, are billed as the "team of the 90s" (ESPN). With 24 World Series
Championships, the Yankees are claiming the title of "team of the century."

            

               The Senate blocked campaign-finance legislation. Only 53
senators voted to cut off a Republican filibuster, seven short of the number
needed to force a vote on the bill. The sponsors, Sens. John McCain, R-Ariz.,
and Russell Feingold, D-Wis., scaled back the legislation, which had been
approved by the House, in order to increase support in the Senate. The bill
would have banned "soft money" but would not have regulated issue ads.
Opponents had held that the measures would infringe on free speech. But the

                  Los Angeles Times
                called this argument "a sham,"
saying big money is not only corrupting the American political system, it is
"holding the Senate hostage ." The GOP spin: We handed
reformers their hats. The Democratic spin: No, you handed us a campaign
issue.

            

               Scientists recovered an intact woolly mammoth in Siberia. They
dug the 23,000-year-old animal out of permafrost soil and transported it--still
frozen--to a Russian laboratory. This spring, scientists will thaw the block
and examine the animal and surrounding plants. Researchers said the find
offered unprecedented opportunities: 1) to determine why mammoths became
extinct; 2) to understand the world's climate at the time; and 3) to clone the
animal. Supervising scientist Dick Mol said, "This is a dream for me--to find
the soft parts and touch them and even smell them. It's very
exciting."

            

               Kenneth Starr resigned from the criminal investigation of the
Clintons. Robert Ray, Starr's top assistant, will complete the
investigations of White House conduct regarding Kathleen Willey's sexual
harassment allegations and the dismissal of travel-office staff. Ray will also
oversee the final report on Starr's five-year investigation. Ray said his work
will be "responsible and cost-effective," but the White House said he was a
politically motivated ideologue. The 
                  Washington Post
                said Starr's legacy was mixed, but
"he should be remembered as a man who--hampered alike by intensely adverse
conditions and by his own missteps--managed to perform a significant public
service." Starr's spin: Personal attacks and political divisiveness made it
impossible for me to continue. Democrats' spin: Now you know how the Clintons
have felt for five years.

            

               President Clinton and congressional Republicans are meeting to
negotiate the budget. Clinton has threatened to veto many of Congress'
proposals. With only five of the 13 appropriations bills approved, Congress was
forced to extend the temporary spending measure that is keeping the government
open beyond its Thursday expiration. The GOP spin: We'll protect Americans from
Democratic tax hikes. The White House spin: We'll protect social programs from
Republican budget cuts. The cynical spin: The numbers require either tax hikes
or budget cuts. The feel-good spin: At least now they're talking .

            

               Pakistan's military leader promised to restructure the government and
restore democracy. Pervaiz Musharraf, who led last week's army coup
that ousted Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, announced that a military-civilian
council would be formed within a week to govern the country, but provided no
timetable for relinquishing power. He also withdrew troops from the Indian
border and called for the resumption of peace talks. The rosy spin: After
Sharif's corruption and ineptitude, Musharraf is a godsend. The gloomy
spin: Without a timetable for democracy, he's still a dictator.

            

               The Dow Jones industrial average fell 630 points in a week. It
was the biggest decline in 10 years. The most frequently cited causes were: 1)
Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan's cautionary comments to investors (he warned that
stocks and bonds could plunge if investors were to lose confidence in the
market); 2) anticipation of higher interest rates; and 3) fear of inflation.
The bearish spin: The big correction is starting. The bullish spin: Relax,
we're already bouncing back. ("" explains what Greenspan really said.)

         
      
   
