
   
   
      
         
            I'm Melting

            
               One
hundred eighty-two people have died in the summer heat wave. Health
officials worried about more deaths, and farmers worried about their crops. An
Agriculture Department meteorologist said that in some regions "there is a
drought that is comparable to the drought of the '30s." (Chatterbox wonders it
can get.)

            

               Rudolph Giuliani raised money for his New York Senate campaign in
Arkansas. Giuliani insisted that he went "to learn more about the things
that unite Republicans," but the New York Times called it a "brazen
publicity stunt." Republican Gov. Mike Huckabee jested, "He's never been here
before, he's never worked here, he's never lived here. ... Today he will be
announcing his candidacy for some significant major office in Arkansas."
Meanwhile, the New York Times Magazine prepares readers for a Rudy.

            
               The
FBI will guard computer data essential to the government and major
industries. It will monitor nonmilitary government networks and track
banking, telecommunications, and transportation networks. Civil libertarians
warned the New York Times that the monitoring could be misused for
spying on or hacking into private networks.

            

               Eileen Collins became the first woman to command and land a space
shuttle. Observers called her landing "beautiful" and "textbook." NASA
later acknowledged that the shuttle suffered a hydrogen leak and a
short-circuit as it took off.

            

               Republicans gathered support for a $792 billion tax-cut plan.
GOP leaders appeased moderates by agreeing to condition the cuts on yearly
reductions in the federal debt. In the Washington Post , House Ways and
Means Chairman Bill Archer, R-Texas, accuses Democrats of supporting
"big government 
                  on 
                  autopilot
               " and
argues that the cuts epitomize compassionate conservatism. But in the same
pages, deficit-hawk ex-Sens. Sam Nunn and Warren Rudman assert that the surplus
should be used to pay down the deficit , and Robert Novak advocates a
"modest, effective" plan quietly being brokered by Rep. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C.
The paper condemns the bill as "misshapen," "unaffordable," and
"a further mortgage on an already overburdened future." President Clinton
warned, "I will not allow a risky plan to become law."

                  Slate
               's William Saletan questions .

            
               A
motel handyman confessed to a spate of slayings in Yosemite National Park.
He killed three sightseers in February and decapitated a park-employed
naturalist last week. After the first killings, the FBI had questioned the
killer but ruled him out as a suspect. The Los Angeles Times instructs
the FBI to review "its
every action " in the case.

            

               King Hassan of Morocco died. Arab, American, and Israeli leaders praised
his deft leadership, opposition to militant Islam, and brokerage of Middle East
peace deals. Everyone wondered why Syrian President Hafez Assad didn't show up
for the funeral (see "" for more). The Washington 
               Post lauds
Hassan's "moderation and reason" but wishes he had done more to speed his own
country's progress.

            

               China banned the religious sect Falun Gong and arrested 5,000 of its
members. Among the detainees are 1,200 government employees, who will be
forced to take "re-education" classes. According to "," the official paper
China Daily accused the sect of spreading superstition, hoodwinking
people, provoking unrest, and jeopardizing stability. The New York Times
calls the sect harmless and warns China against "returning to the ideological
monitoring and indoctrination methods of the past." Madeleine Albright
journeyed to China for the first time since the Belgrade embassy bombing but
barely mentioned the crackdown.

            

               Fourteen Serb farmers were massacred in Kosovo. The Kosovo Liberation
Army denounced the killings, but the Washington Post attributed the
murder to a KLA faction. Observers worried that 1) remaining Serbs will now
flee Kosovo; 2) the murders, which happened within earshot of NATO troops,
demonstrate the ineffectiveness of the peacekeeping mission; and 3) they
demonstrate the ineffectiveness of NATO's entire campaign, since ethnic
Albanians and Serbs are still killing each other. A Post editorial noted
that "soldiers are not cops" but urged NATO to protect Kosovar Serbs .

            

               Ehud Barak pledged to strike peace deals with Syria and the
Palestinians within 15 months. Syria responded by asking radical
Palestinian groups in Damascus to end their attacks on Israel. His meetings
last week with President Clinton and Yasser Arafat were roundly applauded for
rebuilding relationships former Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had
soured, but David Plotz explains in 
                  Slate
                why Israelis
are . In the Washington Post , Henry Kissinger warned Israelis
not to leave the United States out of the peace
process, while an op-ed piece in the Israeli paper Ha'aretz cautioned
that congressional Republicans, under the sway of the right-wing Israeli Likud
Party, will "throw spikes into the newly energized peace train."

            

               U.S. diplomats will try to soothe tension between Taiwan and
China. The island abandoned its "one China" policy, which implied
China's sovereignty over and eventual reunification with Taiwan. "Don't
underestimate the Chinese government's firm determination to uphold national
sovereignty, dignity, and territorial integrity," warned the Chinese Foreign
Ministry in response. An editorial from the Chinese Xinhua news agency vilified
Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui for venturing down "a dead alley" and swimming
against the "historical tide" of unification. The Weekly Standard
argues that America should back Lee with words now and, if necessary, military
force later, but the Washington Post reports that the U.S. envoys will
pressure him to back down. The Wall Street
Journal predicted that the spat will blow over when Lee steps down in
eight months.

            John
F. Kennedy Jr. was laid to rest. The ashes of Kennedy, his wife, and
sister-in-law were scattered at sea. The Los Angeles Times attributed
the crash to a piloting error by Kennedy, but a tidal wave of eulogies
(including this one from the Washington Post ) blamed a curse
on the Kennedy clan. Other explanations: The New York Times cited
hazy flying conditions , James Fallows explained the of
the flight in 
                  Slate
               , the New York Post reported
that Kennedy had been obliged to schedule the Vineyard landing by his wife , and
Fortune says that Wall Street is blaming Morgan Stanley for making JFK
Jr.'s sister-in-law work late. The Jerusalem Post pointed to a
"novelty-seeking and risk-taking gene discovered in Israel" (see "International
Papers" for ). Michael Kelly asks Washington Post readers why "we lard
up the sorrow with this great and gross festival of national media blah-blah about
Camelot and royalty and The Kennedy Curse." In 
                  Slate
               ,
David Plotz how Douglas Brinkley has cashed in on the death; J. William Medley
tells he was with the deceased; and Jodi Kantor wonders how started.

            

               The Pentagon spent hundreds of millions of dollars on projects
unapproved by Congress. According to the New York Times , a
congressional report accuses the Pentagon of funding a top-secret Air Force
program, an $800 million satellite, a high-tech missile defense system
previously rejected by Congress, and other unapproved purchases. The report
expresses shock at the flagrant illegality of the expenditures. "Do we get it
right 100 percent of the time? Of course not," the Pentagon responded.

            

               The Senate agreed that a new agency should supervise nuclear weapons
research. The agency would report directly to the secretary of energy.
Sponsors of the plan say it would institute accountability for security
breaches, but the House reportedly prefers an even stronger independent
agency.

            
               The
New York Stock Exchange and the NASDAQ market are going public. Supporters
say the switch will result in more robust and better-financed markets for
investors and entrepreneurs; doubters ask how they will be regulated. The
New York Times doubts that they can continue to regulate themselves.

            

               Hewlett-Packard chose a female president and CEO. Carleton S.
Fiorina is the first female CEO among the country's 20 biggest publicly held
companies and the third among the Fortune 500. The Wall Street Journal
says the choice proves that H-P "is serious about continuing to revamp its
stodgy image," while a New York Times editorial calls it evidence that
the glass ceiling "is at least cracking."

            

               Woodstock '99 ended in vandalism, looting, and arson. Concert-goers
threw bottles, set fire to 12 tractor-trailers, and recreational bonfires grew
into serious blazes. "These kids are animals ," a 36-year-old attendee told
MSNBC.

            

               Cigars will carry warnings similar to those on cigarettes. The
Federal Trade Commission said the current
absence of labels implies "that cigars are a safe alternative to
cigarettes." Industry honchos protested that "cigar smokers are mature,
well-informed adults who smoke on an occasional basis."

            

               American cyclist Lance Armstrong won the Tour de France. He is a
survivor of testicular cancer that had spread to his brain and lungs. ESPN,
like everyone else, expressed awe at his comeback . "I'm happy I finished second. No one deserved to
beat Armstrong this year," said the second-place cyclist, Alex Zuelle. The
French media implied that Armstrong must have used performance-enhancing drugs.
The American media implied that the French were sore losers.

         
      
   
