
   
   
      
         
            Right Stuff Yogurt

            
               High
Culture
            

            The
British Broadcasting Corp. reports that microbiologists at the Institute of
Biomedical Problems in Moscow have developed a special yogurt made from
bacteria culled from the saliva and guts of Russian cosmonauts. Originally
developed to help space travelers maintain healthy levels of bacteria in their
intestines, the yogurt has become so popular with the cosmonauts that the
institute is marketing it commercially, along with new varieties of cottage
cheese and traditional Russian cheese products made with the same cultures. Who
knows what NASA may be up to, but one American microbiologist has remarked that
there is no evidence that the out-of-this-world yogurt is really better than
any other yogurt product.

            
               Fungi
Man
            

            A
five-year study by 200 plant scientists has produced a "family tree" of the
plant world that details the relations of the world's million species of
photosynthesizers. Findings include: There is not one plant kingdom but three;
a rare tropical flower is the closest living relative of the Earth's first
flowering plant; and many plant families appear to have evolved from a single
"Eve," whose close relatives survive in some of today's more pristine lakes.
The study also confirmed the theory that fungi are more closely related to
humans than to plants.

            
               Not a Shroud of
Doubt?
            

            New
research
by botany professor Avinoam Danin (Hebrew National University in Jerusalem)
lends credence to the theory that the Shroud of Turin is Jesus Christ's burial
cloth. Based on his analysis of pollen grains and plant images (imprints of
flowers and other plant parts) taken from the shroud, Danin says the cloth
existed in the eighth century, and maybe even before. He presented his findings
at the 16 th International Botanical Congress in St. Louis this month
and also offered evidence that the shroud originated in or near Jerusalem, the
International Herald Tribune reports. Continuing to dispute the theory
that the shroud wrapped Jesus' body are scientists at the University of
Arizona, who reiterate the results of their 1988 carbon dating of the cloth:
The cloth is no more than 600 years old, they say. "It's not the burial cloth
of Jesus," physics professor Douglas Donahue told the Associated Press.

            
               Quality Control
for Legal Pundits
            

            Legal
pundits: Boon or bane? Both, say law professors Erwin
Chemerinsky of the University of Southern California and Laurie
Levenson of Loyola Law School. TV and radio legal pundits both educate
and mislead the public about legal proceedings, Chemerinsky told the AP. The
two professors say the remedy for out-of-control commentators is a set of
voluntary guidelines (outlined here ), which will "raise the professional quality of
behavior" of legal commentators and the media outlets that broadcast them. The
guidelines suggest that pundits "1) comment only on subjects that the
commentator knows first hand, by watching the trial or reading trial
transcripts; 2) speak as neutral experts whenever possible, and disclose
potential conflicts of interest and biases; and 3) refrain from scoring trials
like sports events or predicting jury verdicts." Two nationwide voluntary
lawyers' groups--the American College of Trial Lawyers and the National
Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers--have adopted similar codes for their
members in response to the proposal, which has been outlined in recent law
review articles.

            

               Professor Full Monty
            

            A
Florida State University law school professor is returning to work after a year
off following a sexual harassment charge. Sixty-five-year-old William McHugh
was placed on paid leave (read the letter
from FSU President Sandy D'Alemberte to McHugh) after dropping his shorts to
show a female student his hernia scar--a move that also exposed his genitals.
The student filed a sexual harassment complaint against McHugh, who admitted to
showing his hernia scar but insisted that the full Monty was accidental.
According to the Tampa 
               Tribune , a panel of FSU professors
concluded a five-month investigation recently and found that McHugh had,
indeed, suffered from accidental exposure.

            
               They're
Here
            

            A
group of gay intellectuals has launched the Independent Gay Forum ,
which declares itself independent of left-right politics. Its
libertarian-minded associates include Jonathan Rauch of the Brookings
Institution, Walter Olson of the Manhattan Institute, and the Cato Institute's
David Boaz.

            
               Boomeranging
Diploma
            

            MIT
has revoked for five years the diploma of 1998 graduate Charles Yoo for his
role in the death of freshman Scott Krueger, reports the Chronicle of Higher
Education . As "pledge trainer" at the Phi Gamma Delta house, Yoo supplied beer and whiskey
to Krueger and other pledging freshmen, instructing them in how to become a Phi
Gamma Delta "brother." After Krueger drank the beer and whiskey, he consumed
some spiced rum provided by another brother and fell into a coma, suffocating
on his own vomit. A year after Krueger's death, a grand jury indicted the
fraternity chapter as an organization for manslaughter and hazing. (The case
was never tried because the fraternity chapter had disbanded by the time of
arraignment; click here for a list of news items from MIT on the
subject.) MIT's Committee on Discipline revoked Yoo's diploma after reviewing a
dean's official investigation of Krueger's death. Although it isn't unusual for
colleges to suspend degrees for cheating or plagiarizing, Yoo's punishment
marks what may be the first time a degree has been revoked for a violation of
student disciplinary code.

            
               Information Wants
To Be Free?
            

            The
academic community is protesting a new law that will require all recipients of
federal research grants to make their research data public through the
Freedom of Information Act . Researchers fret that corporate
and political interests will use the FOIA powers to stifle research on
controversial subjects by bombarding them with information requests.
Confidentiality agreements will also suffer, they worry. The law would also
require the disclosure of what has traditionally been confidential--from
medical histories of research subjects to scientists' e-mail addresses and
notebooks. The Clinton administration has proposed a regulatory fix that would
limit the definition of what information researchers must make public, as well
as the "reasonable fees" that federal agencies can charge for obtaining
requested data. The budget office intends to publish its final regulations by
Sept. 30.

            
               The Doctor Is
Out
            

            The
Massachusetts Medical Society has ousted
Dr. Jerome P. Kassirer, editor of the society-owned New England Journal of
Medicine , citing differences of opinion concerning "administrative and
publishing issues." More specifically, reports the Boston Globe ,
Kassirer opposed "branding"--using the journal's prestige to sell other
MMS-owned products and publications, such as journals HealthNews and
Heart Watch , whose quality and accuracy editors at the Journal do
not control. Additionally, over the past year the society has been striking
deals, such as a partnership with barnesandnoble.com, and upgrading its online
services--activities that strike Journal editors as too commercial.
Executive Editor Marcia Angell assumed the interim editor
position on the condition that the medical society not use the name "New
England Journal" in the title of new society-run publications.

            
               Egghead
Updates
            

            Last month, "" reported
the student boycott at Obafemi Awolow University in Nigeria. The students'
demand--that a top university administrator be fired for failing to confront
issues of campus cult violence--has been embraced by the Nigerian government.
Africa News reports that the government has ordered universities to
eradicate the cults and established a commission to investigate cult activity
and the inaction by universities. ... Mexico's National Autonomous
University student strike is stretching into its fifth month. The protest over
increased tuition--from 2 cents a year to about $150--has evolved into a fight
for the future of the university. The administration has consented to a
revocation of the tuition hike, reports National Public Radio, but now the
students and many professors are insisting on a more active say in how the
university is run. The strike may be losing steam, though: Students who want to
return to school are holding demonstrations against the strikers.

         
      
   
