
   
   
      
         
            Hail to the King

            Henry VI was the Jimmy
Carter of the 15 th century: Ostentatiously pious, surrounded by
mediocrities, and oblivious to England's crumbling international prestige, he
managed to cripple the military and bankrupt the government simultaneously.
Contemporary accounts repeatedly emphasize his gullibility. Senior statesmen of
Henry's own Lancastrian party judged him an unworthy successor to their
previous standard-bearer, the legendary Henry V, identified in the popular mind
with the romance of chivalry and the tragedy of an early death.

            All London cheered when Henry VI was driven from
office by Edward IV, an almost unbelievably charismatic and handsome man whose
personal badge, the Sun in Splendor, evokes the image of a shining city on a
hill. The elegance of Edward's court contrasted sharply with Henry's drab and
simple style, and the implied promise of a brighter future proved spectacularly
true. After a rocky first few years in office, Edward shored up the military,
restored England's presence abroad, initiated serious economic reforms, and
presided over a decade of remarkable peace and prosperity. He was, however,
frequently distracted by attacks on his wife, who was seen as an extravagant
spendthrift and a sinister influence on the king.

            Edward was followed in office by Richard III, the
man who had been closer to Edward than any other. Though renowned for his great
personal courage, Richard was widely disdained as a man with no guiding
principles other than an instinct for power. Before long he had squandered his
predecessor's magnificent legacy. The general dissatisfaction with Richard
spilled over onto the Yorkist party, which had seemed so invincible with Edward
at the helm, and raised Lancastrian hopes of regaining the crown.

            Determined not to miss
this opportunity, the Lancastrians swallowed their distrust of relative
outsiders and turned to Henry Tudor. Henry was from the remote country of
Wales, but he looked like a winner. And so he was. After ousting Richard and
claiming the throne as Henry VII, one of his first official acts was to raise
taxes. It was Henry's tax collector, John Morton, who invented the notorious
policy known as "Morton's Fork": If you live extravagantly, then you can
obviously afford to pay more taxes. On the other hand, if you live frugally,
then you can obviously afford to pay more taxes.

            If history repeats itself, we ought to be able to
figure out who's destined to succeed Bill Clinton in the White House. Henry VII
was followed by Henry VIII, a man best remembered for his gargantuan appetites,
his dissipative lifestyle, his troubled marriages, and his rocky relationship
with the Catholic Church. The message is clear. Ted Kennedy, your time has come
at last.

         
      
   
