
   
   
      
         
            Tom DeLay's Mental Shutdown

            If Tom
DeLay didn't exist, Bill Clinton would have to invent him. Last Friday, the
New York Times reported that the House majority whip had told
journalists "Republicans would spend next year's anticipated $14 billion budget
surplus--and had intended to do so all year long"--to "force President Clinton
to pay for any additional spending requests out of the Social Security
surplus." Clinton pounced on DeLay's remarks. "The Republican leadership has
revealed that actually they have a secret strategy ... to raid the Social
Security surplus to pay for ... a risky economic scheme. They say they're
spending more money now to force that result," Clinton declared. "I can think
of nothing more cynical and irresponsible."

            
Welcome to Government Shutdown III. In 1995, Clinton and the Republicans
refused to compromise on appropriations, the government ground to a halt, and
voters blamed the GOP. Last year, facing another impasse, the Republicans caved
and accepted additional spending demanded by Clinton. This year, DeLay has
decided to engineer the showdown so that the GOP will have the upper hand and
Clinton will take the blame. The plan is magnificently self-defeating. The
party that will lose the showdown is the party that is perceived to have
engineered it. And DeLay has just handed Clinton all the evidence he needs.

            
               1.
Strategy. According to the Times , DeLay referred twice to the GOP's
"strategy" and said it had been in the works all year: "From the get-go, the
strategy has always been we're going to spend what's left." Clinton immediately
dubbed this a "secret strategy"--White House Chief of Staff John Podesta
repeated that phrase twice on Meet the Press --and the press climbed all
over it. Saturday's Washington Post front page explored the GOP's
"strategy" to "deliberately spend" the surplus. Other publications affirmed
that the GOP had been plotting "all along." On Late Edition , Sen. George
Voinovich, R-Ohio, chided DeLay for "setting up" a crash with Social Security.
DeLay failed to grasp that when two parties collide, the public will blame the
one that doesn't look surprised. If you're going to have a secret strategy,
keep it secret.

            
               2.
Provocation. Having broadcast his "strategy," DeLay signaled his intention
to start the war. "GOP Picks a Budget Fight," announced the Post , citing
the Republicans' "deliberate provocations" and "confrontation strategy."
Gannett News Service reported that DeLay was "daring Clinton." Rather than
squelch this story, DeLay went on television Saturday and when asked whether he
was negotiating with Clinton answered, "There's nobody to negotiate. He doesn't
negotiate. He goes out [and] does photo ops." CNN's Rowland Evans concluded
that DeLay "certainly is not in a negotiating mood" and "has presented
President Clinton with a fait accompli --take it or leave it." When
Clinton leaves it, guess which man the public will blame?

            
               3.
Force. The Times paraphrased DeLay as saying that his "plan" would
"force President Clinton to pay for any additional spending requests out of the
Social Security surplus." Hours after the story appeared, Senate Majority
Leader Trent Lott held a press conference to brag about the GOP's freshly
passed tax cut. Instead, reporters pressed Lott about "DeLay's strategy" to
"force a showdown." The Associated Press confirmed that Republicans "planned
... to force Clinton to pay for his spending programs from the Social Security
surplus." If the plan works, Clinton will dip into the trust fund. And then,
with a mountain of press clips to back him up, he will repeat what he said
Friday: The GOP deliberately "forced that result."

            
               4.
Spite. "We will negotiate with the President, after he vetoes the bills, on
his knees," DeLay told the Times . "We've got him in the box." Pundits,
smelling blood, hyped these quotes on every talk show. "The Republicans are
somehow banking on the idea that Clinton ... will have to, as DeLay said, get
on his knees and beg," observed Juan Williams on Fox News Sunday . "DeLay
has made no secret he would relish such a scenario ... with Clinton 'on his
knees,' " added the AP. Everyone agrees DeLay is determined to beat and
humiliate Clinton at any cost. And guess who will get the blame for a shutdown?
The guy who seems determined to beat and humiliate his opponent at any
cost.

            
               5.
Blame. According to the Times , DeLay "indicated that if the spending
caps were lifted, that was acceptable 'as long as the American people
understand it's the President busting the caps, not us.' " CNN's Wolf Blitzer
repeated this quote and discussed the charge "that Tom DeLay wants the
president to go into that Social Security trust fund, in order to accuse him of
breaking it." The Post concluded that "GOP lawmakers ... are betting
that the public will blame the president, not Congress, for squandering the
money he has insisted be saved to shore up Social Security. The National
Republican Congressional Committee even conducted a poll on the subject."
Republicans end up looking as though they care more about the PR contest than
about the fiscal consequences--which is the surest way to lose the PR
contest.

            
Clinton's opening salvo conveyed the words Democrats will use to package
DeLay's plan: "cynical and irresponsible." That day, a White House spokeswoman
told the AP that the Republican budget "doesn't meet the responsibility test.
... It's a cynical plan.'' On Fox News Sunday , Clinton budget chief Jack
Lew assailed the GOP's "cynical charade." On Meet the Press , Podesta
attacked the Republican "strategy to go into the Social Security surplus in the
vain hope that the public will blame the president. It's cynical and it's
wrong." Meanwhile, Clinton and Podesta projected pacifism and public-spirited
diligence. ''I am not nearly as pessimistic as a lot of people are about the
prospects of our reaching an agreement, and I am determined to try to do it,''
Clinton declared Sunday. When asked whether the government would shut down
again, Podesta replied sadly, "I hope not. That's certainly not in the public's
interest."

            On the
Republican side, Lott and House Majority Leader Dick Armey have been left to
clean up DeLay's mess. "I'm not seeking a showdown," Lott insisted on This
Week as pundits bombarded him with questions about DeLay's plot. "We're not
looking for a battle. We're looking for solutions." On Fox News Sunday ,
Armey assured Brit Hume. "We will continue to work with the president." "On his
knees?" asked Hume. "No, of course not," Armey pleaded. In the event of another
budget impasse, Lott explained, Republicans would "keep funding programs at the
current year's level" to "avoid a train wreck" while they negotiate. That's
"the solution," he suggested.

            DeLay,
of course, put it differently. "There's a little trick that you can use called
[a] continuing resolution that continues spending at least year's level. And we
can keep that up all through next year if we have to," he bragged on CNN. "If
he vetoes that, the president will have shut down the government." Rather than
call this plan a "solution," as Lott did, the AP reported that DeLay had
conceived it as " 'a little trick' that would put Clinton at risk of being
blamed for a shutdown."

            You
can understand why DeLay keeps boasting of his "tricks" and "strategies." He's
determined not to lose the shutdown the way he did last time--and thanks to his
new plan, he won't. Above all, he's determined to prove his critics wrong. They
said he had no plan. They said he was stupid. Well, he showed them.

         
      
   
