
   
   
      
         
            No. 317: &quot;She's Still Got It&quot;

            
               "We are quite the
best country in Europe. In my lifetime all the problems have come from mainland
Europe, and all the solutions have come from the English-speaking nations of
the world," said Margaret Thatcher in her first speech at a Conservative Party
conference since stepping down as prime minister in 1990. Lady Thatcher was
inspired to speak by a particular cause. What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 316)--"Don't Do It, Deacon Don!":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        Deacon Don Thomas of the Lily of the Valley
Church of God in Christ in Fairbanks, Alaska, defends what he does to reach the
community: "Yeah, we want to compel people to come to Christ, but at the same
time we don't want to intrude on people. I think there's a big difference."
What does Deacon Don do? 
                        ( Question courtesy of Charlie
Glassenberg. )
                     
                  
               
            

            "Nude
choir."-- Brooke Saucier
            

            "Well,
that explains the 'You May Already Have Been Saved!' letter that came
yesterday."-- Jon Delfin
            

            "I
think keeping your church in Alaska is an excellent method of giving the
impression of nonintrusiveness."-- Michael S. Gilman
            

            "Kids
these days. Isn't the threat of eternal damnation compelling
enough?"-- Dennis Cass
            

            "You
know, Fairbanks is such a small town, he probably wouldn't have to do much
besides hit the bars talking about Christ dying for your sins and shooting a
good game of nine-ball, and folks would just follow him. It would be something
to do, and once they got bored with Don's sermons, they could eat
him."-- Kate Wing
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            A method adopted by
demure advertisers who don't wish to intrude is to ask permission. When you buy
something online or fill out a warranty card, there's often a little box at the
bottom: Check here if you wish to receive announcements about our new products
and services that may delight and amuse you. Some go further and involve other
people: Check here if you'd like us to sell your name to strangers who will
send you information about utterly unrelated products that will frighten and
confuse you. They never ask you to volunteer for the really good stuff: Check
here if you'd like more information about Claire Pospisil, say. I believe they
use a similar form for undergraduates having sex at Cornell. Check here if
you'd like me to unbutton your blouse. Check here if you'd like me to touch you
there. Check here if you'd like Jesus to save you from burning in hell for what
we just did so pleasantly to one another. Deacon Don, help!

            

               Technochrist 
               Answer
            

            Deacon Don used "Voice Blast," a technology for
sending phone messages simultaneously to an unlimited number of people, reports
Bradley Foss of the Associated Press.

            And it's not just Deacon Don. Ball clubs are
calling thousands of season ticket holders, schools are contacting everybody's
parents, and disaster-prone regions are planning emergency warning systems. But
some consider blast voice mail a nuisance and, when unsolicited, an invasion of
privacy.

            "It's just, like, phone spam," says Jason Catlett,
president of Junkbusters Corp. A former database analyst for AT&T, Catlett
started Junkbusters in 1996 to help consumers defend themselves against
telephone marketing.

            In January, when Dick Clark left messages on the
answering machines of residents in Washington, D.C., and Detroit to promote the
American Music Awards on ABC, a front-page story in the Washington Post
described his pitch as a "telephonic assault" on the public's ear. "The
geriatric old fool should be dragged out to the Mall and trampled by wild
horses," the Post did not add.

            The Telephone Consumers
Protection Act of 1991 prohibits automated ads to residential phones without
prior consent, but allows blast voice mail for institutional investors,
schools, and emergency services, and compelling people to Christ.
Hallelujah.

            
               Though

               Dead, He's Still Got It Too Extra
            

            The release of the
latest batch of Nixon tapes shows that death has not softened the old
anti-Semite, except in the sense that he's dead. Some samples:

            

               On Max Frankel and the New York Times : "Don't give them anything.
And because of that damned Jew Frankel all the time--he's bad you know. Don't
give him anything."

               On Daniel Ellsberg: "Incidentally, I hope to God he's not Jewish is
he?"

               On American communism: "The only two non-Jews in the Communist conspiracy
were Chambers and Hiss. Many felt that Hiss was. He could have been a half, but
he was not by religion. The only two non-Jews. Every other one was a Jew. And
it raised hell with us."

               On Pentagon Papers Judge Murray Gurfein: "He's a Jew, a liberal. But I
think tough. I think tough. But he may be sucking up to the liberal left. In
New York, you just can't tell what happens to those guys."

            

            The Nixon Library issued
a statement saying the president was not anti-Semitic. Then we all had a good
laugh and went out to dinner.

            
               Chris

               Kelly's Me-Wonderful-Me Extra
            

            Participants were invited to submit actual examples
of authorial self-praise as smug and fatuous as Warren Adler's: "My novels ...
explore the mysteries behind love and hate, the darkly amusing, deeply
disturbing and ultimately unanswerable questions that they inspire."

            Read more of Warren
Adler's insights into the work of Warren Adler at www.warrenadler.com. The home page appears to
be printed on parchment, so you know he's a real writer.

            "
'When I cleverly coined the phrase "nattering nabobs of negativism." ' (William
Safire, every third column.)"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "
'It's a weird book. It doesn't move the way normal books do. It's got a whole
bunch of characters. I think it makes at least an in-good-faith attempt to be
fun and riveting enough on a page-by-page level so I don't feel like I'm
hitting the reader with a mallet, you know, "Hey, here's this really hard
impossibly smart thing. Fuck you. See if you can read it." I know books like
that and they piss me off. I loved the book, but I think anyone with 200 pages
of footnotes in a book of fiction is in fact saying "Fuck you, see if you can
read it." ' (David Foster Wallace, about Infinite Jest [weighing in at
1,088 pages, including 200 odd pages of footnotes] in Salon .)"-- Andrew Staples
            

            "
'What I try to write about are the darkest things in the soul, the mortal
dreads. I try to go into those places in me that contain the cauldrons. I want
to dip up the fire, and I want to put it on paper. The closer I get to the
burning core of my being, the things which are most painful to me, the better
is my work.' ( Babylon 5 writer Harlan Ellison.)"-- CK
            

            " 'You
see what happens with Bill Faulkner is that as long as I am alive he has to
drink to feel good about having the Nobel Prize. He does not realize that I
have no respect for that institution and was truly happy for him when he got
it.' (Not, strictly speaking, self-praise, but it is Ernest Hemingway in
Selected Letters 1917-1961 , edited by Carlos Baker, Pages
768-769.)"-- Dan Dickinson
            

            " 'My
fault is honesty.' (Jesse Ventura. Not, strictly speaking, a writer. But
killing himself with pills might accelerate his reincarnation as a 38DD bra, so
better to let him swim along in his pool of piety.)"-- John Barnicle
            

            "
'Someday someone's going to dissect my whole life through my work. When I
finished writing (the opening episode of Wasteland ) I cried because I so
felt for the main character. ... It's fun, but it's really sad.' (Kevin
Williamson in Entertainment Weekly .)"-- CK
            

            "
'What I mean to do, by evoking the people whose lives and work I have admired,
is not to dictate the terms of virtue but to invite other people to reciprocal
thoughts about what seems to them to be inescapably good or important, and how
to put that into a life.' (Jedediah Purdy on himself, in a recent

                  Slate
                'Dialogue.')"-- Arthur Stock
            

            " 'One
of the smartest things I did was call a management coach. She gave me this
advice: Stop worrying about yourself and concentrate on how to make Nickelodeon
a good place for all our employees to work. That was a transforming moment for
me. ... At the center of everything I did at Nickelodeon was honoring creative
people.' (Geraldine Laybourne, not strictly speaking a writer, writing in the
New York Times with the help of some other writer just to turn out 500
words. Laybourne now honors creative people at Oxygen Media by making sure that
they don't have health insurance so their creativity isn't stifled by taking
their kids to the doctor. And no pensions means no complacency. Refusing to
become a Writers Guild signatory, Oxygen Media uses only scab writers. No
union. No benefits, but plenty of honor.)"-- Ed.
            

            " 'The
reason War of the Roses has become a classic is that it deals with these
unanswerable questions. And I have a feeling the moviemakers caught that. They
got it from my book like a virus. ... That's what makes it enduring. It deals
with the eternal mysteries of life. Why do people love? Why do they hate? How
are people attracted to one another? What breaks up relationships? From my
point of view as a novelist it came out of my subconscious, but it has found
its way into popular culture.' (Warren Adler)"-- CK
            

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Caribou dung.

         
      
   
