
   
   
      
         
            No. 272: &quot;The Old Ways&quot;

            
               Yesterday Bill
Clinton did something that no American president has done since FDR did it on
vacation in 1936. What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 271)--"Stop the Pressing":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        On Wednesday, the Future Homemakers of America
made a startling announcement. What?
                     
                  
               
            

            "We're
leaving you for Mia Hamm. Make your own goddamned dinner."-- Beth Sherman
( Greg Diamond had a similar answer.)

            
"George W. pulled strings to join in '68."-- Mac Thomason and Stephen
C. Shakle
            

            "We're
not wearing any underwear!"-- Betsey Brock
            

            
"President Kennedy has been shot!"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Fuck
the gravy; let's go to Arby's!"-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Just because an
organization drops off the cover of Vanity Fair or People or the
Saturday Evening Post doesn't mean it has ceased to exist. Boy Scouts,
fraternities, drum and bugle corps, anti-Semitic croquet clubs with a deep
bronze suntan hungry for a thick steak with a fried egg on top and a cigarette
to settle the digestion! Is that a reactionary bastion, a pathetic anachronism,
or something truer, something with enough confidence to survive without media
ratification. As that housewife club thing turns out--reactionary bastion. But
I admit that when a drum and bugle corps marches by playing the Star
Wars theme, I get a lump in my throat. Then I vomit into the gutter, and
after that I'm OK.

            
               Old Whine in New
Bottles Answer
            

            They're changing their name to Family, Career and
Community Leaders of America.

            The FHA was founded in 1945 to teach teen-age girls
how to keep house for their husbands-to-be. Much has changed since then, and
teen-age girls are now a quaint relic of a bygone day, or perhaps it's husbands
and houses that are the quaint relics. But there is a relic and, by God, it had
better be quaint.

            In 1973, the group began
admitting boys, who now are 45,000 out of a total membership of 220,000. Its
current mission is to teach career development, community service, leadership,
and balancing family and career.

            
               All Talk No Action
Extra
            

            The first subscription solicitations have been
mailed out by Talk magazine, marking the official return of Tina Brown,
as welcome a development as the renewal of bald eagle hunting. Impressively
vacuous, the Talk mailer is short on specifics--it mentions neither a
single forthcoming article nor any writers--so we can only speculate about the
magazine itself. But judging by the mailer, Talk will be good, not bad;
exciting, not dull; the sort of thing people are interested in, rather than
something they ignore.

            And, judging by that
mailer, Talk will be much, much more:

            
               Will There Be Lots of Adverb-Adjective
Pairs?
            

            Yes. "Interestingly
different. Refreshingly provocative" Reversing these duos would have given a
whole other impression. "Differently interesting" sounds like naked pictures of
someone in a wheelchair; "Provocatively Refreshing" implies an overly
aggressive breath mint. Avoiding this error bodes well for Talk .

            
               Can We Expect Clapped-Out
Neologisms?
            

            Yes: "spinmeisters,"
"digerati." I'm not "intellectually adventurous, provocative, funny,
wide-ranging, or visually engaging," but if it were "spinerati" and
"digemeisters," wouldn't you be more likely to subscribe? But there's still
time to correct this before the first issue "closes."

            
               Anything for the Reader Who Enjoys
Meaningless Dichotomies?
            

            Yes. "It makes elite
subjects accessible. And accessible subjects elite."--I'm pretty sure the
former involves a hidden camera in Miss America's shower, and the latter
involves some animal (a pig? a monkey?) wearing a crown and a velvet cape.
"You'll discover the extraordinary side of the ordinary and the usual side of
the unique." I have no idea what this means. But I'm sure they do up at
Talk , and I'm eager to learn. That must be what they mean by
"provocative."

            
               What About Reminders That This Year Is
1999?
            

            Yes. Three in a
four-page pamphlet, including "new millennium" and "new century," but no
mention of July giving way to August, or 8 o'clock to 9. We'll have to wait and
see. But I can't wait! Or see! My eyes! My eyes! I joke. It's my quick and
agile wit (see below).

            
               Any Mention of That Crazy
Viagra?
            

            Just one, part of the
"spectrum of society--from the street to the suite." So there's room to improve
here, and I'm confident they will.

            
               Can I Look Forward to Shameless Pandering
to the Reader?
            

            You mean, like this:
"Only a select few will receive this exclusive invitation. Why you? Because
you're ... Someone with a curious nature, an acute sense of style, a level of
sophistication that matches our own, and a quick and agile wit. Someone who is
100 years young today!" (Except for that last bit, which I added on account of
my, wadda ya call it, quick and agile wit. )

            
               Adam Sandler's Ongoing
R&D Extra
            

            Participants are invited to submit actual
quotations that sound dirty and adolescent enough to be dialogue in his future
projects. While sophisticated double-entendres are permitted, single-entendres
are preferred. Perhaps this example will stimulate a response, if you know what
I mean:

            "I'm here to say I hope
she will go all the way. I will go all the way with her."-- Patrick Moynihan
endorses Hillary Clinton, July 7, 1999
            

            
               Mike Madden's Good News
Extra
            

            "Kids Turn
Innocent-Looking Cigars Into Stogies Laced With Marijuana"--headline, some
paper in south Jersey

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Future Homewreckers of America.

         
      
   
