
   
   
      
         
            G.W. Bush vs. gwbush.com

            The
slogan on George W.
Bush's Web site is "Prosperity With a Purpose." The slogan on Zach
Exley's parody of George W. Bush's Web site, gwbush.com , is "Hypocrisy With Bravado." Exley means
to mock the contradiction between Bush's presumed use of drugs and his support
of harsh prison sentences for drug offenders today. But he might have an even
better case based on the way the Bush campaign has harassed him. Bush and his
lawyers are demanding the meticulous enforcement against Exley of minor
campaign finance rules--rules they themselves consider dated and
ridiculous.

            In
May, a Bush campaign lawyer named Benjamin Ginsberg filed a complaint against
gwbush.com with the Federal Election Commission. In it, Ginsberg contends that
the parody site constitutes an "independent expenditure" under federal election
law. In other words, Bush is arguing that Exley's Web site--a one-man operation
started on a lark--should fall into the same legal category as the Willie
Horton ads run against Michael Dukakis in 1988. The intimidating letter further
warns that if Exley, a free-lance computer programmer in Boston, has spent more
than $1,000 on his site, he must register it as a "political committee," which
means filing an even more elaborate disclosure. For a Web site run by a private
individual in his spare time, meeting these requirements would constitute a
substantial burden.

            The
complaint is hypocritical on a couple of counts. The first is that G.W. Bush
himself has bought his own way out of some of the more onerous FEC disclosure
requirements. Because his campaign is forgoing federal matching funds, it
doesn't have to file quarterly disclosure statements electronically. That means
that Bush's contribution reports remain essentially useless raw data for
several weeks while those of his rivals are available for database searches.
Bush also thinks that limits of $250 and $1,000, fixed in 1971, are
anachronistically low and should be raised. Yet he is using these pre-inflation
thresholds as the basis for his complaint. Even Bush's lawyer seems to question
his own assault. "It's a fair question to ask whether the rules should cover
him," Ginsberg says of Exley.

            In his
response to Bush's
complaint Exley rehearses the history of Bush's antagonism toward his
site, citing W.'s infamous statement that "there ought to be limits to
freedom." He points to a number of absurdities about his situation. "I appear
to be caught in a catch 22; so far I have not spent over $250 per year on the
Web site," he writes. "However, paying for legal advice would put me
immediately over the FEC spending threshold, thereby validating Bush's
complaint against me."

            This
is a clever point. In fact, though, legal fees don't count toward the
disclosure limits. What Exley's response misses is a much better argument for
why the FEC should leave him alone: He's press. gwbush.com is one of the kinds
of new media made possible by the Web. In fact, Exley instinctively thinks of
it this way. "This is my private little magazine," he told me. If he wants to
put his non-disclosure on a firm legal footing, Exley could ask the FEC for an
advisory opinion to that effect--something the FEC has to rule on within six
weeks instead of several years. And Exley would have a good case, since his
site isn't anti-Bush propaganda so much as a wacky, Bush-averse take on the
news. It links to Gore parody sites as well.

            The
FEC will probably not be in any hurry to settle the matter if it can avoid
doing so. The narrow issue of whether Exley's Web site constitutes an
independent expenditure opens a much larger can of worms. It points to the
reality that many of the old campaign finance laws simply don't make sense in
cyberspace. Should someone who starts a site stating his views have to disclose
where his money comes from in the way someone who buys a newspaper ad does? If
a Web site itself counts as an in-kind contribution to a candidate, as an
earlier FEC ruling indicates, a $1,000 spending limit may apply. And if
hyperlinks count as contributions, as the FEC has also indicated, then
corporations, labor organizations, and foreign nationals cannot legally link to
official campaign sites. Many, if not most, of the key distinctions of campaign
finance law simply dissolve when immersed in the Internet.

            The ethos of the Web
argues against regulating private, individual activity in any way. And indeed,
because the Web does much to create an open and level playing field for
political expression, restraining it in the name of fairness seems
counterproductive. The Center for Democracy and Technology recently published
an excellent report on this topic, titled "Square Pegs and Round
Holes: Applying the Campaign Finance Law to the Internet." It doesn't settle
any of the specific questions about how campaign finance law should work in
cyberspace. But it does make one thing damningly clear: The FEC is utterly
unequipped to deal with them.

         
      
   
