
   
   
      
         
            The Life and Vines of Tarzan

            
               What's Wrong With
Being a Momma's Boy?
            

            Michael Lind ("") needs to get a grip. It's a kids'
movie, my friend, and it is as true to the original text as it can be in our
politically correct times. A more "feminized" society is not the repressed,
horrible existence Lind portrays--why are less violence, less aggression, less
machismo, less extremist Darwinism, and greater sensitivity bad things? Let's
face it, people like Hitler took their "survival of the fittest" theory out of
hand and the result was far from pretty.

            And anyway, a guy who
knows how to treat his mother well is way sexier than a guy who thinks he's too
cool and manly to care for his family. Maybe Lind is grumpy because he wouldn't
look quite so hot in a loincloth by conventional standards of beauty.

            
-- Ann Stanton Euclid, Ohio

            
               Book
Clubbing
            

            Might I respond to Eric
Alterman's sarcastic remark ("") that I "graciously declined" to reply to a
column by him in The Nation attacking my New Republic "Diarist"
on Yale University Press and its series on communism? For the second time--the
first was in a letters exchange in The Nation --Alterman has somehow
inferred that my silence connoted acquiescence with his article. Since Alterman
did not point out any factual inaccuracies in my Diarist and since he defended
the notion that Russians were sent to the Gulag legally, I thought his article
too trivial and silly to merit a response. But because Alterman ungraciously
persists in depicting me as having repudiated my own article, I feel obliged,
for what it's worth, to note that I think it holds up perfectly well.

            
-- Jacob Heilbrunn Senior editor, the New
Republic Washington

            
               
                  Eric Alterman
replies: Jacob Heilbrunn has messed up yet again. I intended no sarcasm in
crediting him with sensibly refusing to defend what was clearly a shoddy and
indefensible piece of work. I thought he was showing some class.
            

            
               Heilbrunn calls my
objections to his Diarist "trivial" and "silly." Let's say he's right. Why,
then, did conservative historians Harvey Klehr and John Earl Haynes feel a need
to condemn Heilbrunn as well in letters published in TNR 's own letters
section? Why did the equally conservative Richard Gid Powers call Heilbrunn's
accusations against Yale "absurd" and existing "only in the minds of the
pathologically suspicious" on the same page? Why did even the venerated
anti-Stalinist historian Robert Conquest call Heilbrunn's article "unfair" and
"exaggerated"? Why did the director of Yale University Press, John Ryden,
insist in a letter to more than a hundred people that, "TNR 's
Editor-in-Chief Martin Peretz has admitted that Heilbrunn's piece is unfounded
and should not have been published." (Peretz denies this.) Are the criticisms
of Harvey Klehr, John Earl Haynes, Robert Conquest--and if Ryden is to be
believed--even Heilbrunn's boss, Marty Peretz, among many others, all too
"trivial" and "silly" to merit a response as well? Or was a strategic silence
really the right response for Heilbrunn after all?
            

            
               Criticizing the
Kosovo Critics
            

            Thank you for William Saletan's brilliant analysis
("") of the war. As a lifelong conservative and Republican, who feels that
President Clinton defamed the office of the presidency, I was amazed that all
the major conservative commentators and politicians were against the U.S.
action. After all, the previous Republican administrations had sent troops into
Somalia for humanitarian reasons, and yet the operation was largely a
failure.

            I believe the prevailing
Republican opinion was largely generated from an anti-Clinton feeling,
particularly after a failed attempt at removing him from office. One
commentator said that we should have provided the Kosovo Liberation Army with
weapons but not sent our troops. Imagine if the United States had adopted this
isolationist policy during World War II. The face of Europe might look quite a
bit different.

            
-- Gary Spiegel Los Angeles

            
               Retire the World's
Policeman
            

            William Saletan showed more than a little bias in
the piece about the Republican condemnation of the Clinton administration's
actions in Kosovo ("").

            What were we really doing bombing Serbia? Maybe
extending the ideas of a "New World Order" in which hard-working Americans are
expected to pay the price not only of our freedom, but of the freedom of the
whole world. We had no business in any of the NATO actions; there was no real
possibility of this expanding throughout the region as everyone in the
administration was spouting. It didn't concern our energy supply--not much oil
comes out of Kosovo. They were not a direct threat to our national security.
They were not a world threat such as Germany or Japan was in World War II. So
what were we really doing there?

            And what of the
atrocities? Were they going on before the bombing started? Do we have proof of
that? Maybe these atrocities began from the outrage of the Serbians knowing
that their cities, homes, and factories were getting bombed, and their brothers
and sisters being killed.

            
-- Gary W. Meadows Spring, Texas

            
               Buckley Barks
Back
            

            Last week, William F.
Buckley Jr. read a 
                  Slate
                "Book Club" about his latest
novel, The Redhunter: A Novel Based on the Life and Times of Senator Joe
McCarthy , and decided enough was enough. One of the Clubbers, Eric
Alterman, had called Buckley's book "a lumbering, themeless pudding of a novel
that forces one's eyelids shut like an invisible vise." The other, Ronald
Radosh, had described it as "heavy and plodding, without any real juice to it."
Buckley weighed in, defending his work against all charges aesthetic,
historical, and ideological, and quoting a critic writing in Buckley's own
National Review , who deemed the book "wonderfully readable ... a
witty, fast-moving yarn." Now Buckley has asked 
                  Slate
               
to run the following excerpt from the book, so that readers can judge for
themselves. We are delighted to oblige. Click for the excerpt.

         
      
   
