
   
   
      
         
            No. 319: &quot;Formerly Known As&quot; 

            
               There's been more
and more of it at Princeton in recent years, but now a faculty committee
proposes to eliminate it or at least rename it. What's the old name; what's the
new? 
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question (No.
318)--"Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien":
            

            

               "You won't hear any apologies from me," said Dr. Stephen Ostroff of the
Centers for Disease Control. "Anyone who continues to maintain that there was
some mistake here doesn't understand the way science proceeds." What isn't
Ostroff apologizing for?
            

            "Look,
people, the whole point of the study was to see how well endangered condors
could withstand the Ebola virus."-- Greg Diamond
            

            
"Trying to pass off a few flasks of blue water and dry ice as a multimillion
dollar cancer research project."-- Floyd Elliot
            

            
"Biography, not biology. Sheesh."-- Kyrie O'Connor
            

            "Why
can't you people understand that Cybill Sheperd would make an outstanding
president of the United States?"-- Steve Roche
            

            
"Random Hearts . 'As anybody with any understanding of the scientific
process could tell you, the problem here lies with Sydney Pollack,' Dr. Ostroff
noted. 'Although Harrison Ford surely shares some of the blame.' "-- Tim
Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            To apologize
convincingly takes exquisite timing. Do it too soon and you seem glib and
insincere: "You're sorry? Well, 'sorry' won't make the dog's leg grow back!" Do
it too late and you seem, actually it's glib and insincere again. "Oh, you're
sorry about slavery? About what you did to that nice Galileo?" Too long
deferred, your apology will be dismissed as self-aggrandizing. It wasn't you
but the organization you lead that committed the misdeed. The apology shows
what a sensitive person you are, while you needn't alter your behavior at all,
unless your slaves are doing something unkind to Galileo or that gimpy dog of
his. To have meaning, the apology must convey recently acquired insight into
personal wrongdoing, something neither Dr. Stephen Ostroff nor the Fox TV
network seems inclined to do. Sorry about that.

            
               Unregrettable
Answer
            

            Ostroff is not sorry that it took so long to
realize that what seemed like an encephalitis outbreak in New York City was
really an infestation of the West Nile virus in Chicago. OK, they got the city
right almost at once, but not a lot more. And don't expect him to say, "I
apologize for all the confusion, like not bothering to get in touch with the
scientist who first identified the disease."

            It was Dr. Tracey McNamara of the Bronx Zoo who
noticed there were a lot of dead crows in the neighborhood, but her emus were
doing fine, and they're highly susceptible to encephalitis, so there had to be
some other disease at work. Creepy detail: The birds were bleeding from the
brain and had badly damaged hearts. "We had dead people and dead birds and I
thought we needed to pursue this." But she couldn't get scientists at the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to seriously consider her suspicion
that the bird disease and the people disease were the same.

            McNamara is understanding about the chaos at CDC.
Alan Zelicoff, a scientist at the Federal Center of National Security and Arms
Control at Sandia National Laboratories, takes a harder line: "It is a
sobering, not so reassuring demonstration of the inadequacies of the U.S.
detection network for emerging diseases."

            "If you're waiting
around for me to say, 'Oooh, sorry your bird's brain is bleeding,' " Ostroff
did not add, "you've got a long wait coming."

            
               It's a Small, Small
World Stinking of Death Where You Really Work up an Appetite Extra
            

            War, earthquake, radiation leaks--in an age of
swift transportation, one encounters death in many forms befalling people of
many faiths. Can you navigate today's post-fatality formalities without
committing an embarrassing faux pas?

            Below, 10 denominations. After the funeral, will
food be served or do you need to bring a sandwich?

            (All facts from the
delightful new, How To Be a Perfect Stranger: A Guide to Etiquette in Other
People's Religious Ceremonies , Vol. 1 and 2.)

            
               Q: Will Food Be Served?
            

            1. Islam

            2. Baptist

            3. Disciples of Christ

            4. Christian Science

            5. Hindu

            6. Quaker

            7. Catholic

            8. United Church of Canada

            9. Jewish

            10. Episcopalian

            
               A:
            

            1. Possibly. Often, women in the local Islamic
community prepare food for mourners and their guests. (
               While the
men sit around mourning manfully, but in some larger and incomprehensible
sense, equally. Forget it, Jake, it's religious tradition.)
            

            2. Yes, but no alcoholic beverages. It would be
considered impolite for a visitor not to eat. No grace or benediction will be
recited before or after eating or drinking. (
               Use the time to
contemplate how your fellow Baptists have been on the wrong side of every
social policy from the civil-rights movement to gay rights with a stop-off to
support the Vietnam War.)
            

            3. Yes. Wait for grace to be said before eating. It
would not be considered impolite not to eat. (
               It would, however, be
considered impolite to take a bite out of a Baptist.)
            

            4. Possibly. But no alcoholic beverages. (Note:
even BYOB considered thoughtless, vulgar.)
            

            5. Varies according to tradition. (But beware of
con men: No Hindu tradition includes formal tie-in with Pizza Hut.)
            

            6. Possibly. (Although snacking during actual
service is discouraged.)
            

            7. Possibly. Given the broad ethnic mixture of
Catholicism, some Catholics may have a "wake" at which food (and often drink)
is served. (Others may be pandered to by a mayor offended by snippy art
shows. No food is served during the pandering.)
            

            8. Often refreshments or a light meal will be
served at a reception immediately following the memorial, funeral, or interment
service. (And should you get a bad clam, an excellent system of universal
health care is provided: Oh, Canada!)
            

            9. Probably. Guests should not wait for a grace or
benediction before eating. Guests will eat as they arrive, after expressing
their condolences to the bereaved. (
               Etiquette note: Don't crowd the
nova.)
            

            10. Yes, but it won't be
very good and the portions will be small. (I paraphrase.)
            

            
               Ongoing Bail-Out
Extra
            

            "And now a reply from House Speaker Dennis Hast
..." Boom. That's where I dive for my remote control like a terrier down a rat
hole--you know, if the terrier was digging really fast.

            Participants are invited to submit other actual
examples from any news source of what The New Yorker used to call
"letters we never finished reading." (Or something like that.)

            Best examples to run
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Terrifying flesh-eating virus; stupefying
prime-time TV.

         
      
   
