
   
   
      
         
            Getting Personal

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               Re your asinine
column, are you always such a self-righteous snob?
            

            

               --VP
            

            Dear V,

            Pretty much.

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I thank you! No
matter how heavy the cares of the day, your witty responses evoke hearty
laughter in most instances, and thus a lighter spirit. You are positively a
riot and a good counselor to boot!
            

            

               --Michael, honestly
            

            Dear Mic,

            There's a small
difference of opinion here ... but Prudie, in her wisdom, has decided you are a
more reliable critic than VP.

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Marry me! Well, not
really, because I already am. But really, the was stellar. Oh well, if we're
not destined for matrimony in this lifetime, perhaps circumstances will someday
allow me to buy you a beer or Dr Pepper or something. Your job must be fun, and
all the more so because you do it so well.
            

            
               --Biggest Fan on the
Block,
            

            

               Mike C.
            

            Dear Big,

            Oh, stop guys ... and
both named Michael! Prudie is blushing.

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Do you make this up,
or do people actually write to you about stupid, everyday concerns? Prudie must
tear her hair out every day dealing with the petty moral dilemmas your clueless
devotees experience. God love ya!
            

            
               --Sincerely,
            

            

               Fan From Ohio
            

            Dear Fan,

            Pause for a moment and
contemplate the possibilities for chaos in the human condition, then question
no more the authenticity of Prudie's correspondents. How wonderful that you are
not beset by stupid everyday concerns and petty moral dilemmas. Prudie's
readers no doubt wish they had all your clues.

            
--Prudie, with all her hair

            

               
                  Prudence,
               
            

            
               You are getting
older by the minute and one day soon you will be looking at men as old as Bob
Dole (see the "" column), and it may be your husband, so don't lose the
information, dearie. You will want it soon.
            

            

               --Snowtop
            

            Dear Snow,

            So noted.

            
               
                  Hey,
Prue,
               
            

            
               Please pass along to
"Ricespring" my deep appreciation of the sentiment expressed and my full
agreement, along with bemusement. I believe the most unsettling image currently
extant in popular culture is that of Bob Dole under the influence of Viagra. I
don't believe children should be allowed to view this ad. The craggy old
pervert is just plain scary, particularly when he smiles that
beyond-the-grave--and now sexually aroused--smile. No wonder Liddy spends so
much time hoofing it on the road.
            

            

               --Wolfman
            

            Dear Wolf,

            Many readers checked in
to say that they applauded the former senator's forthright approach to a real
problem. The following writer, however, was not one of them.

            

               
                  Prudie,
               
            

            
               Not to belabor the
point, but I have often thought Liddy Dole had better put a pillow over Bob's
head if she expects to be elected president. I am so sick of his whining and
sniveling over his ED. You know, there are a lot of single women and widows in
this country who manage to stay happy without the constant focus on erections.
Time for you to get a life, Bob. Try reading ... or chocolate cake. Prudence,
sock it to 'em!
            

            

               --Scott W.
            

            Dear Scott,

            Prudie is going to
change the subject, though to stay in the moment, the next letter is political,
as well.

            
               
                  Prudence, oh,
Wise One,
               
            

            
               What's up with that
Neanderthal Jerry Springer having contemplated running for the Senate? (The
Senate!) I was shocked that such a thing could even be a possibility. I share
the sentiments of the chairman of Ohio's Republican Party who said, "Was Howard
Stern busy?" Say it's all a goof.
            

            

               --Poor Resident in Ohio
            

            Dear Poor,

            It is, indeed,
dispiriting that someone with Mr. Springer's history might have been considered
simply because of name recognition. There is precedent, however, and it is
regrettably recent. "Dubya," Texas Gov. George Bush, has no particular
qualifications aside from being merely appealing and the son of a president.
Mr. Clinton was elected when he was known to be irresponsible. And don't forget
Mr. Reagan, of whom it could be said he wasn't really a president but played
one on television. We are seemingly suckers for "charisma" and exercising an
electoral death wish.

            --Prudie, resignedly

         
      
   
