
   
   
      
         
            
<P>Is the &quot;Sensation&quot; Art Worth the Fuss?</P>

            

               
                  Click here to view the entire "Sensation" show
online.
               
            

            Dear
Deborah,

            Last time we chatted, it was in the TriBeCa loft of
the abstract painter Melissa Meyer, at one of her Sunday teas, and like her
work and her friends, our conversation was eminently civilized and stimulating.
I must say I'd rather spend the next couple of days thinking and writing about,
and hearing your views about, a single picture by Meyer than every piece by
every artist in the "Sensation" show at the Brooklyn Museum. Even though I'm
young and British myself, born on the same day as Rachel Whiteread, as it
happens, I have to confess to being as profoundly alienated from the YBAs as
they seem to be from the kind of art that turns me on. From the kind of art, in
a word, that is about "little sensations" as Cézanne called them, rather than
the tabloid sensationalism in which the Brooklyn show wallows.

            Of course, however wonderfully and sensitively you
and I were to write about one abstract painting, there is no denying that to
the average reader--even indeed to the committed art aficionado--a two-day
debate about Meyer's (or anyone's) use of pink would get a little wearisome.
Whereas we could get hotter and hotter under the collar about the ethics of
displaying one man's collection of new art in a public institution, of public
subsidy for art the public is goaded into hating, of how blasphemy has become
an article of faith in an institutionalized avant garde, etc. etc. For
journalists--even for respectable critics like you and me--"Sensation"
is great copy.

            I know 
                  Slate
                wants us to talk about
the art in Brooklyn, not the kerfuffle surrounding it (and hats off to them for
wanting it so) but one point has to be made: It is irksome when art becomes a
moral cause. It is as if during a fencing match someone were to start hurling
bombs. It polarizes debate in such a way that aesthetic discernments become
irrelevant. When mayors and clergymen and animal-rights activists start
weighing in, the issues become freedom of expression, the meaning of images,
the ownership of icons (does the Virgin belong to the Church or to everyone
touched by the concept?) etc., all fascinating issues, but leaving anyone
concerned with art obliged to argue for basic artists' rights rather than
attending to more localized and interesting issues, like is Chris Ofili any
good? But this in turn raises another issue: Does Ofili want us to ask whether
he is any good, or does he not short-circuit the evaluative process by making
art contrived to raise hell with Catholics and excite a frisson of
old-time anticlericalism in the rest of us?

            It seems to me absurd to try and read an image like
The Holy Virgin Mary 1996 in purely formal terms, because it would be to
apply aesthetic criteria and art-historical comparisons to a work that draws
its power primarily from iconoclasm and irreverence. Ofili wants, surely, to be
raw, crude, angry, Bad. It doesn't do much good to come along and say, well,
the encrustation of cut-out porno photos has a decorative quality that recalls
Gustave Moreau's overloaded, quasi- (queasy) mystical images of the (last)
fin de siècle ? Better would be to compare and contrast it with other
art brut and with other blasphemous imagery. In respect of the former,
it competes with Dubuffet, and of the latter with Buñuel, Dalí, Max Ernst. I'm
thinking of Ernst's mock Renaissance altarpiece of the Virgin spanking the Holy
Infant with the artist, Breton, and I think Éluard as witnesses. On both
counts, prewar anti-clericalism and postwar apocalyptic angst gave the
Surrealists and Dubuffet, respectively, historic urgency lacking in the
gratuitous neo-primitivism of Ofili. Unless we want to argue that Ofili's art
is about the loss of center that gives meaning to the kind of gestures
he deploys.

            The problem remains: Do
we, should we, bother with evaluative comparisons and contextualizations
with an artist like Chris Ofili whose agenda seems to be anti-aesthetic, and
whose context is much more the current sensations of pop music and fashion with
which he vies in terms of energy and verve, than the old masters, the "strong
and durable" art admired by Cézanne in the Louvre, and by many of us in the
permanent collections of the Brooklyn Museum?

            Best
to you,

            
David

         
      
   
