
   
   
      
         
            Wing Man

            
               General Aviation: Safe,
Legal, and Not That Rare
            

            Steve Chapman's attack on general aviation ("")
paints a distorted picture. To begin with, all transportation in the United
States is "subsidized" by taxpayers. Car drivers in Idaho help pay for
Chicago's mass transit system, for example. A safe, well-regulated
transportation system benefits everyone.

            Some 75 percent of major airline flights operate to
just 46 big-city airports, and half of all airline flights merely shuttle
passengers among just 21 hub airports. General aviation provides air
transportation for the rest of the country by serving some 13,000 airports.
General aviation carries 99 million passengers per year.

            And it does it safely. In 1998 there were 361 fatal
accidents out of 39 million flights. The "risk" of a fatal accident is only
0.000009 percent. On a per-mile basis, you are seven times more likely to be
involved in an automobile accident than a general aviation accident.

            The air traffic control system was created by and
for the airlines. General aviation is only a marginal user of ATC services. The
vast majority of general aviation flights are flown under Visual Flight Rules,
which don't require ATC. And general aviation is often forced to use ATC
services that it doesn't want or need. Many small airports have control towers
simply because of one or two airline flights a day.

            According to the General Accounting Office, the
costs of providing air traffic control services to each segment of aviation are
unknown because the Federal Aviation Administration does not have an adequate
cost accounting system. But the costs imposed by general aviation aren't
anywhere close to the number cited in the GRA study, which reached erroneous
conclusions based on mistaken assumptions.

            The bulk of federal airport grants go to commercial
(airline) service airports. In fiscal year 1997, commercial service airports
received more than $1.1 billion. Reliever airports (which give general aviation
aircraft an alternative to using commercial service airports) received $100
million, and general aviation airports received $139 million.

            General aviation aircraft don't cause delays for
airliners. The airline hub-and-spoke system (which has large numbers of flights
all trying to use the airport at the same time) and weather are the major
causes of delay for airline passengers.

            That Chapman considers search-and-rescue services
and accident investigation a "subsidy" for general aviation is absurd on the
face of it. It's an appropriate role for government to rescue its citizens,
whether they be boaters, hikers, pilots, or airline passengers. And that
rescue, more often than not, will be accomplished using general aviation.

            General aviation isn't a
"hobby"; it's serious transportation that fulfills many vital needs in the
United States.

            
-- Warren Morningstar Director, media relations
Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association
Frederick, Md.

            
               The Ditch Is
Back
            

            I would like to suggest that the research for
Michael Brus' "" ("In the Event of a Water Landing") was lacking. I spent 10
years in commercial aviation with two U.S. flag carriers and offer the
following comments based on that experience.

            1) There have been numerous ditchings of U.S. flag
carriers. At least three incidents that immediately come to mind involved Pan
Am and United (Pacific Ocean), as well as Western Airlines (San Francisco Bay).
I believe that all three incidents involved fatalities; however, the vast
majority of passengers and crew survived.

            2) Air crews are routinely trained for water
landings and must be certified by the Federal Aviation Authority to fly over
water. Cabin crews receive specific passenger safety training with emphasis on
aircraft evacuation, since this is their primary area of responsibility. Flight
deck crews do not focus on passenger survival because they are responsible for
the overall aircraft systems operation and are the crew members least likely to
survive a traumatic event.

            3) While water landings are treacherous, they are
survivable, irrespective of Ralph Nader's comments.

            4) Since most major
airports are located around large bodies of water, both air crews and aircraft
are certified with airworthiness certificates based on evacuation procedures
that include water landings.

            
-- Pamela Azar Malibu, Calif.

            
               
                  Michael Brus
replies:
                
               I got my information on accident history from the FAA. Its
database does not go back to the beginning of commercial flight, obviously, so
it is possible there were ditchings before it began keeping records. It is also
conceivable that some accidental crashes into water upon landing or takeoff
were not classified as deliberate ditchings.
            

            
               How do crews receive "overwater" training? There
are no test crashes done, either by Boeing or the FAA, so "evacuation
procedures" are about the extent of the preparation--which could help if the
fuselage remains intact, but that is a big "if." Only military helicopter
pilots get dropped in water as part of their actual training.
            

            
               Are water landings survivable? Only in best-case
scenarios. There are too many variables involved to make a rule, but ditchings
of international carriers have shown that keeping the fuselage intact and the
passengers out of cold water is hard indeed.
            

            
               Boeing does not
perform crash tests on the water, nor does the FAA require them. Their planes
are subject to stress tests in a hangar.
            

            
               Tax Talk
            

            In "," William Saletan did his usual admirable job
of delineating the competing "Greenspins" of congressional Democrats and
Republicans. However, he failed to address a gaping hole in the Republicans'
tax cut plans that neither Democrats nor the media had pointed out: Namely,
that a tax cut of the size proposed might stimulate the economy to the point
that the Fed would feel compelled to raise interest rates in a pre-emptive
strike against inflation.

            In his remarks to the
Senate, Greenspan spoke of the benefits of "pre-emptive" action, i.e., moving
against inflation before it actually develops. I--and, I think, many
others--consider this remark an explicit warning to congressional Republicans
that, however the debate about the projected budget surplus goes, a large tax
cut will endanger low interest rates and thus the prosperity that makes
surpluses--and thus the proposed tax cuts themselves--possible.

            
-- Andrew B. Goodwin Clinton, Wash.

         
      
   
