
   
   
      
         
            To Hang or Not To Hang

            The
sentencing to death for murder and treason of the Kurdish separatist leader
Abdullah Ocalan was the top story Wednesday across Europe, with practically all
newspapers urging the Turkish government to call off his execution. An array of
editorials in France, Germany, Britain, Italy, and Spain trotted out much the
same arguments: Hanging Ocalan would ignite more Kurdish violence in Turkey and
further strain Turkey's relations with the countries of the European Union,
which it wants to join. It was also widely claimed that the arrest and
conviction of Ocalan offers a rare opportunity for Turkey to negotiate a peace
settlement with its rebellious Kurdish minority.

            In
Britain, the Times proposed a do-nothing policy "until today's passion and
polemics fade away." It said: "Formally commuting the death sentence might, for
now, strike Turkish voters as weak. But if Ocalan was alive, in prison, with a
death sentence over his head, the PKK [his Kurdish Workers' Party] might
exercise more restraint: meanwhile, the Turkish Government might win time for a
broader approach to the Kurdish question." The liberal Guardian said it would be
"greatly in Turkey's interest" to embark on a dialogue with the Kurds. It said:
"The Kurdish question, the existence of which Ankara officially denies,
continues in reality to disrupt its internal affairs. ... It has hampered
Turkey's ambition to join the EU, and raised concerns about its NATO
membership. The constant stream of condemnation of Turkey's oppression of its
Kurdish minority poisons daily its commerce with the world." The Independent said that
although Ocalan was no saint or democratic hero, hanging him would only make
things worse by turning him into a martyr for the Kurdish cause.

            In
Germany, Die Welt led
on European indignation at the death sentence and appeals for Turkey to commute
it. In a front-page commentary, the paper said it was true that Ocalan has
blood on his hands and that the Turkish people want revenge, but it also said
that "a dead leader would be immortal as a martyr to the Kurdish cause." In
Paris, Le Figaro
reported that Europe was "mobilizing" to save Ocalan and commented on its front
page that Turkey has every reason to show generosity toward the Kurds: "It is
in a position of strength on the ground, and it knows that a gesture of
appeasement would convince the European Union to look more favorably on its
application to join, which has been on the table since 1987."

            In
Italy, the papers also led on European warnings to Turkey not to carry out the
death sentence, and La
Repubblica of Rome said that just as the price for Russia's cooperation
in Kosovo had been a huge loan, so perhaps the price of Ocalan's life would be
Turkey's entry into Europe. In Spain, El País said that Ankara would be committing "a grave
error" if it carries out the death penalty against Ocalan, since it has "an
historic opportunity to exercise magnanimity and to lay the foundations of a
reconciliation with the Kurds."

            The
other main stories in the European press Wednesday were the first big
demonstration in Yugoslavia against President Slobodan Milosevic, and the
cliff-hanging negotiations in Belfast on the implementation of the Northern
Ireland peace settlement, for which British Prime Minister Tony Blair has
declared midnight Wednesday the "absolute" deadline. But British papers were
dominated by the rain that wiped out all play Tuesday at the Wimbledon tennis
championships and by an administrative fiasco at the government Passport Agency,
which has left more than half a million people due to travel abroad within the
next four weeks waiting for passports.

            With
the Princess Diana museum reopening Thursday, her birthday, for its second
summer season at Althorp, her family home in England, the Daily Telegraph reported that some 25,000 tickets still remain unsold,
whereas last year all 150,000 tickets were snatched up before opening day. This
is one of a number of recent indications that Diana fever has declined
substantially. The Times reported that her brother, Earl Spencer, is
considering breaking his ties with the memorial fund through which the proceeds
from the museum have until now been channeled for charitable purposes, while
from New York, the Daily Express reported a plan to build the world's
first permanent monument to the late princess on a three-acre site in Central
Park.

         
      
   
