
   
   
      
         
            America in the Doghouse

            A
worldwide chorus of outrage greeted the U.S. Senate's refusal to ratify the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, but the Daily Telegraph of London was
a rare dissenter. In a rather limp editorial Friday, it described Sen. Richard Lugar, R-
Ind., an opponent of the CTBT, as "a scholarly, moderate, highly respected
legislator" whose views should be taken seriously. "The instruments for the
control of the evil of nuclear proliferation must be effective," it said. "It
is such questions that the Senate vote has rightly raised." The
Telegraph also ran an article by Richard Perle, a former U.S. assistant
secretary of defense, attacking British, French, and German leaders for trying
to influence the Senate vote through an article in the New York Times .
"Why didn't the Senate congratulate its friends [Blair, Chirac, and Schröder]
on their wise and timely counsel?" he asked. "I suspect that one reason is that
the Senators have actually read the treaty and understand how deeply flawed it
is, how unlikely it is to stop nuclear proliferation or even nuclear testing,
and how it has the potential to leave the United States with an unsafe,
unreliable nuclear deterrent. ... In domestic affairs, no-one would seriously
propose that the police and criminals come together and sign agreements under
which they accept the same set of restraints on their freedom of action."

            
British papers were otherwise unanimous in their condemnation of the Senate. In
the liberal Guardian , foreign affairs columnist Martin Woollacott
said Republican senators "sent out a dismal message--of
American selfishness, American foolishness, and American readiness to put her
own safety first, whatever the consequences for the rest of us." A Times of London
editorial said the vote was "a serious blow to America's political and moral
authority" and that the "Senate Republicans, by exploiting the opportunity to
inflict a very public defeat on a lame-duck President, have done their country,
and their allies, a grave disservice."

            The
Independent
ran an article jointly authored by Professor Harald Muller,
director of the Peace Research Institute in Frankfurt, Germany, and William
Walker, professor of international relations at the University of St. Andrews,
Scotland, who said the vote was "deplorable" and reflected a situation in which
"American policy is increasingly being shaped by people with isolationist, or,
even worse, a supremacist agenda. They want to expand military programs, weaken
international institutions and run the world by flaunting power." An op-ed
piece in the Financial
Times said the vote underlined "the extent to which international
considerations have been pushed to the fringes of American politics. The broad
consensus about US responsibilities in the world has fractured."

            In
Paris, Le Monde 's
main front-page headline Friday was "America Reopens the Nuclear Arms Race,"
and the paper said in an editorial that "in the essential area of nuclear
nonproliferation, the United States has set the worst possible example." It
concluded, "The world's greatest power will from now on be less credible on the
international scene." Le
Figaro , in a signed editorial by Pierre Rousselin, used exactly the
same phrase as Le Monde when it called the vote "an unprecedented
snub"--"un camouflet sans précédent "--to a president of the United
States. Bill Clinton's credibility is now damaged, perhaps irredeemably, as he
embarks on his last year at the White House. "French people will easily
remember the United States' virulent campaign against our nuclear tests in the
Pacific," Rousselin wrote. "At that time, in 1996, Bill Clinton defended the
CTBT to get himself re-elected. Today, Washington has no lessons to give
anybody." In a report from Washington, Le Figaro told George W. Bush
that he is now the candidate of a "blind, reactionary and inward-looking
party." The Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung of Germany said the vote was a rejection of security
through international cooperation. "That, after the Senate's decision, is what
the Europeans should be thinking about most."

            The
Washington correspondent of La Repubblica of Rome put some of the blame on Clinton for
not resigning over the Monica Lewinsky crisis. "This terrible defeat, more so
for all of us than for the image of America, was exactly what was feared might
happen in those days of 1998 when Clinton was forced to admit in public to his
own pathetic errors as a man and to his own unforgivable lies as a president,
and therefore had to undergo the indignity of a public trial over the Monica
affair. ... The price for his survival in office has been paid now and been
paid by the rest of the world."

            In one
of the two nuclear powers on the subcontinent, the Times of India said in
an editorial that it is now "absolutely certain" that neither Russia
nor China will ratify the CTBT. It said Clinton's credibility abroad has
suffered a very serious setback, not only because of the Senate decision but
also because of "the Pakistani military ignoring US advice on restoring the
democratic process in their country."

         
      
   
