
   
   
      
         
            No. 300: &quot;First Sight&quot;

            
               "I've never seen
one of these," President Clinton said Monday, as he used something for the
first time. Apparently he enjoyed the experience: "Now that I'm a homeowner, I
better get one of these." What was it, and what did he do with it?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 299)--"What Would Jesus Sue?":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        In England, a group of 40 independent Christian
schools plans to petition the European Court of Human Rights to have the ban
lifted. Ban on what?
                     
                  
               
            

            "The
use of 'Baby I'm-a Want You' in the regular rotation of morning
hymns."-- Bill Scheft
            

            "Those
new British 'People's Crucifixes' with Princess Diana hanging on the
cross."-- Molly Shearer Gabel
            

            
"British beef-based religious objects."--Richard Nikonovich-Kahn
( Melody 
               Yiu had a similarly beefy answer.)

            
"Teaching creationism as science, and the Narnia books as history."--Floyd
Elliot
            

            
"Hunting, with horse and hounds, the smallest boy in the fourth form."-- Kim
Day
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Murderous gangs in East
Timor, deadly bombings in Israel and the Caucasus, scary tumors in Cardinal
O'Connor's head, fugitive financier Martin Frankel in the Holsenglacis jail,
runaway parade floats plowing into the crowd and yet not crushing a single
presidential candidate--so much news and so little time, the effect of the
summer schedule on News Quiz--which, incidentally, you can play all week
without paying New York sales tax or showering or even getting out of your
pajamas: Such is our end-of-summer malaise. Or perhaps it's just a perverse
disappointment that the anxiously anticipated NQ3C problem was no problem at
all. Today's publication of News Quiz question No. 300 resulted in no fiery
eruption on Strom Thurmond or Alan Greenspan's ... well, never mind. I'm sure
we all did the best we could, although many participants, absorbed with the
idea of burning heretics, seem to have confused the C of E with the RC, so
let's all reread Barchester Towers and study up on the Gordon riots,
with our trousers down around our ankles.

            
               Thank You, Sir, Could I
Have Another Answer
            

            Christian schoolmasters want the court to lift the
ban on their fundamental human right to hit children with a stick.

            On Sept. 1, school beatings were banned from
Britain's private schools, bringing them in line with state-run schools where
caning was outlawed 13 years ago.

            "I believe the government should not intervene in
how parents bring up their children. This is dictatorial and an example of the
nanny state,'' said Philip Williamson, headmaster of the Christian Fellowship
School in Liverpool, which is leading the protest. "It's a slippery slope.
First you can't thrash them, next you can't give them a good boot in the ribs,
then no summary executions of the really impertinent ones," he did not add, nor
did he emphasize his point by menacingly slapping his palm with the "Fellowship
Stick," as he does not call it since it does not exist.

            A spokeswoman for
Britain's Department of Education was unimpressed with the spanking-obsessed
schoolmasters. "The European Union is itself against corporal punishment so it
is unlikely to uphold any arguments that the new provision against caning is an
infringement of human rights,'' she said

            
               See Everett. See
Everett Koop. Koop, Everett. Koop, Koop, Koop Extra
            

            Which were actual topics
in Monday's "Today in Health Chat," a regular feature on Dr. C. Everett Koop's
Web site, and which are
cheap attempts to mock a beloved national figure's efforts to cash in on this
whole Internet thing?

            1. "Hey, It Itches!"

            2. "Stay-at-Home Moms"

            3. "Stay at Least 500 Yards Away Due to a Court
Order Dads"

            4. "Love the Swelling, Hate the Redness"

            5. "Memory Loss or Alzheimer's?"

            6. "What Was That Last One Again?"

            7. "Does This Smell Funny?"

            8. "Women With MS"

            9. "Women With Motorcycles--Nude! Nude! NUDE!!"

            10. "Adios, Señor Spleen"

            11. "Ostomates"

            12. "Tough Guys Don't Dance"

            13. "Tough Guys Do Dance With Ultra-Hot
Ostomates"

            14. "Conquering Self-Abuse"

            15. "Shirtless Pictures of Dr. Koop for Those Who
Surrender to Self-Abuse"

            16. "Don't Pick at
It!"

            
               Actual Topics
            

            2, 5, 8, 11, 12, and
14.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Burning heretics.

         
      
   
