
   
   
      
         
            Beanie Baby Panic

            

               The 
               Justice Department agreed to an independent inquiry
into the Waco incident. After six years of denials, the FBI confessed it
had fired incendiary tear gas devices at the Branch Davidian compound. The FBI
still says it's unlikely that these devices caused the fire. Attorney General
Janet Reno ordered federal marshals to seize videotapes from FBI headquarters
on which agents reportedly can be heard discussing the use of these devices.
The New York Times suggested Reno's actions would damage an already
strained relationship with the FBI. Pundits doubt her
get-tough attitude will redeem her reputation as "."

            

               Violence 
               broke out in East Timor. The South Pacific
territory voted this week on independence from Indonesia. Results are expected
to show that the referendum passed. Pro-Indonesia militias have killed three
demonstrators and have threatened civilians, reporters, and U.N. officials. The

                  Washington Post
                criticized Indonesia, which is
still responsible for maintaining peace on the island, for failing to respond
to the militias. The New
York Times warned that international intervention might become
necessary.

            

               One
               -third of the Major League Baseball umpires lost their
jobs. The 22 umps had resigned in July, hoping to win concessions from the
league. When the league accepted their resignations, they sued to block their
removal. The union accepted their removal in a settlement but claimed victory
because 1) the league agreed to let an arbitrator decide whether to reinstate
the umpires; and 2) in any event, they'll be paid for the rest of the season.
Most umpires disagreed, saying they'd rather be working .

            

               Beanie 
               Babies may be "retired" at the end of the year.
The cryptic announcement by the toys' manufacturer sent collectors rushing to
stores. The anxious take: The manufacturer's notorious quirkiness lends
credibility to the announcement. The cynical take: It's a
marketing ploy to jump-start demand. Collectors warned
that Beanie-loving children and their parents wouldn't take kindly to being
jerked around. (
                  Slate
               's James Surowiecki .)

            

               Scientists 
               improved memory in mice by implanting a
gene. Mice with the extra gene outperformed normal mice at learning and
memory tasks, though the difference dissolved after a week. The media called
the improved mice "smarter" and "geniuses." The findings, published in
Nature , are
expected to boost 1) biologically based theories of intelligence; 2)
development of medicines for memory loss and Alzheimer's; 3) worries about
"designer babies" and a superhuman race; and 4) concerns that humanlike animals
will require humanlike rights.

            

               SAT 
               scores may soon be adjusted for socioeconomic
background. Under a plan being considered by the Educational Testing
Service, students who score at least 200 points above the norm for their
socioeconomic cohort would be classified as "strivers." Supporters and
detractors called the plan an end run around affirmative action bans at state
universities. Affirmative action opponents warned that any consideration of
race in the new formula would be unconstitutional. ETS did not comment on
whether wealthy, low-scoring students would be classified as
"underachievers."

            

               Hurricane Dennis still 
               hasn't come ashore . Having
disappointed the media hype, the storm lurked off the North Carolina coast. The
old spin: It's a threat to life, limb, and property. The new spin: It's a
threat to Labor Day beach weather.

            

               The 
               Clintons bid on a Westchester home. The century-old
Georgian Colonial features five bedrooms, a swimming pool, and an exercise
room. It is listed at $1.7 million.

            
               The
head of ABC Entertainment resigned. Jamie Tarses, who created hits such as
Friends and Mad About You at NBC, left her ABC job after being
demoted. The New York Times wondered if she was "too young, too
immature, too emotional and, yes, too female for the job she was assigned." The
Wall Street Journal wrote that Tarses' tenure at ABC was marked by few
hits but a great deal of personal friction.

            

               The Bank of 
               New York may have laundered money for the
Russian mafia. Investigators are examining whether mobsters diverted
funds--including foreign aid--out of the country through an offshore network
built by a former International Monetary Fund official. According to the
Washington Post , Steve Forbes and George W. Bush are
criticizing Al Gore for naively accepting Russian pledges of economic
reform.

            

               The U.N. 
               war crimes tribunal caught a suspected Bosnian war
criminal. Gen. Momir Talic, the highest-ranking Serbian official to be
arrested so far, was seized in Vienna. The Washington 
               Post
predicts that the arrest will remind other suspected war criminals not to travel abroad .

            

               American Airlines employees were caught smuggling drugs to the United
States. They stashed cocaine and marijuana in food trays and used their
security clearances to transport the contraband.

            

               China will prosecute the leaders of Falun Gong
               . A
government order excused most followers saying they had been brainwashed into
joining a subversive political organization.

            

               Samuel Sheinbein will serve a murder sentence in Israel. The American
teen-ager had fled to Israel after allegedly committing murder in Maryland. The
Israeli Supreme Court refused to let him be extradited back to the States.
Under a plea bargain, he will be sentenced to 24 years in prison and will
probably serve less. Prosecutors from both countries decried the way he
manipulated the discrepancies between the two legal systems.

            

               The Los Alamos whistleblower resigned. Colleagues had called
Notra Trulock's allegations against Wen Ho Lee racist and had said there was
not a "shred of evidence" against Lee . Trulock
countered that only three of the 12 initial suspects in the case were of
Chinese background. He also called a recent report exonerating the Clinton
administration a "whitewash" and said that Deputy Secretary of Energy Elizabeth
Moler blocked him from briefing Congress.

            

               French prosecutors 
               blame Dodi Fayed for Princess
Diana's death. The Guardian reported that Fayed commanded an intoxicated chauffeur to drive them and that
both could have survived had they been wearing seatbelts. The British
Sun labeled Maj. James Hewitt a "Judas," a "heartless beast," a
"rotter," a "love traitor," and a "repulsive pariah" for publishing a book
about his affair with Diana; see "" for more on the outraged reaction.

            
               The
NFL allegedly ignored positive drug-test results. In a 1995 tape of an NFL
Players Association meeting obtained by the New York Times , an
association official boasts of having secretly convinced the NFL to overlook 16
positive drug tests.

         
      
   
