
   
   
      
         
             Mother Nature

            The Borders around the corner, which would never
dream of selling dirty books, is stocking its register display this week with
another kind of smut: Weather Porn. There's Storm of the Century ,
Isaac's Storm , The Perfect Storm , When the Wind Blows , and
my favorite, Nature on the Rampage , a Kamasutra for weather nymphos.
Nature on the Rampage 's cover promises "Hurricanes, Droughts, Wildfires,
Tornadoes, Floods, Heat Waves, Blizzards. Also Volcanoes, Earthquakes,
and even Comets!" ( Even comets! ) Inside are titillating photos--houses
bitten in half by tornadoes, cars swallowed in snow banks, etc.--and details to
arouse even the most jaded weather fetishist. Did you know that several
Americans are killed every year when lightning strikes a phone pole, courses
through the phone line, and electrocutes them as they are making a call? Tip:
Use a cordless.

            Mother Nature, the
Vanessa del Rio of this weather bordello, has never seemed more fascinating
than she seems today. Hollywood's flood of natural disaster
movies-- Volcano , Twister , Asteroid , The Flood,
etc.--ebbed just in time for the real thing: earthquakes in Turkey and Taiwan,
a drought on the East Coast, Hurricane Floyd and its allied floods. Americans
have followed all this obsessively, with weather Web sites reporting record
traffic in the days before Floyd's landfall. Is there anyone who can't explain
the Richter scale or distinguish between a Category 4 hurricane and a Category
5?

            With all this talk of upheaval ("Nature's Bedlam," as
Nature on the Rampage likes to call it), you'd think we were suffering a
plague of chaos--record numbers of Category 5 hurricanes, epic tornadoes,
droughts, and the like. It's true that the United States, with its endless
coastline, vast climatic variation, massive fault lines, and dozens of active
volcanoes, is exposed to more than its share of Mother Nature's fury. But the
number of natural "events" nationwide and worldwide remains constant. (Some
meteorologists speculate that we are entering a busy hurricane cycle, but the
jury is still out.)

            Americans are more alert
to Mother Nature's rage in part because more people are in its way. According
to Time , 139 million Americans live in regions threatened by hurricanes.
Earthquakes, floods, and volcanoes endanger millions more. Because property
follows people, natural disasters have become more destructive: A storm that
rips through Florida today shreds many more houses than it would have in 1970.
According to the National Science Foundation, natural disasters now cause about
$100 in damage per American per year, five times as much as a generation ago,
even accounting for inflation.

            It's no accident that anxiety about nature is surging
during a time of domestic tranquility and (relative) world peace. Weather is a
form of war, God's conflict with man. Weather is defined by martial
metaphors--"fronts," "clashing" air masses, "striking" storms. (War, curiously,
is full of meteorological metaphors: a "hail" of bullets, the "fog" of battle.)
Everyone needs an enemy. It's easy to understand why we replace vanishing
Mafiosi and Commies with asteroids, hurricanes, and volcanoes. Natural disaster
books dominate best-seller lists for the same reason: In an age without great
wars, these are our war narratives.

            Today's paranoia about the Earth Mama also owes
something to millenarianism, both religious and environmental. Pat Robertson
has blamed Orlando's nasty weather on Disney World's hospitality to gays.
Christian millennial Web pages find biblical significance in every blizzard or
quake. Greeniacs, too, view natural disasters as retribution. Hot Zone
author Richard Preston, the Alfred Hitchcock of germ terror, has described
murderous jungle viruses this way: "The Earth is mounting an immune response
against the human species. ... Mother Nature is going to get even."

            Gaia theorists, who
contend that the planet is a superorganism in which creatures unconsciously
regulate the atmosphere in order to ensure favorable conditions for life, also
believe Mother Nature is on the warpath. James Lovelock, who proposed the Gaia
theory, writes that "Gaia ... always keep[s] the world warm and comfortable for
those who obey the rules, but [is] ruthless in her destruction of those who
transgress. Her goal is a planet fit for life. If humans stand in the way of
this, we shall be eliminated."

            But the most important reason why Mother Nature seems more
powerful these days is the media. The ascendance of the Weather Channel, the
USA Today weather page, and weather Web sites (click for an earlier

                  Slate
                piece on the weather Web) have turned weather into national
entertainment. We can (and do) view weather satellite photos of any spot on
Earth with a click, hear forecasts 24/seven, and watch live footage of weather
disasters on television. There is an endless appetite for weather. It is more
important than sports, more dramatic than the news, and always changing.

            (The media fuel weather
obsession partly because we can now do something about the weather, not
just talk about it. TV stations send barrages of warnings about storms,
hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, blizzards. These warnings undoubtedly save
lives: Natural disasters may cause more property damage in the United States,
but they kill fewer people.)

            The blanket coverage of Mother Nature exacts a price:
weather fatigue. The more she's covered, the less people care about her, and
the more reporters hyperbolize. All three newsmagazines turned their Hurricane
Floyd articles into jeremiads about worsening weather. Time warned of a
future of "supercanes," "hypercanes," and "megastorms" that would make Floyd
look like a spring shower.

            The final reason for our Mother Nature obsession is
politics. As Jodie T. Allen in 
                  Slate
                in 1997, a primary function
of any disaster is to funnel pork to important states. President Clinton
choppers in for commiseration and photo ops. The woebegone victims congratulate
themselves for their fortitude. The National Guard is called out to do whatever
it does (guard?). Congress busts the budget caps to protect the poor sodden
folk. Then the victims bank the cash and return to their flood plain or tornado
alley. Economists call this moral hazard. Politicians call it constituent
service. In the end, it seems, Mother Nature is just another welfare mom,
ruining homes and taking billions of tax dollars to do it.

         
      
   
