
   
   
      
         
            No. 273: &quot;Fun With Ambiguity&quot;

            
               Here's a headline
from this weekend's New York Times : "Swerve and Sharp Elbow Cost a
Hotfoot the Stage." What's the lead?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 272)--"The Old Ways":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           Yesterday Bill Clinton did something
that no American president has done since FDR did it on vacation in 1936.
What?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Told
an aide named Ickes to stop giving so many crazy ideas to his wife,
goddammit."-- Peter Carlin ( Jennifer Miller had a similar
answer.)

            "Had
sex with a member of the class of '00."-- Bill Gammons
            

            
"Packed the selection jury for a new dime design."-- Steve Bodow
            

            "Bill
Clinton reviews the FDR section of his legacy checklist: 'Cheat on wife' ...
been there. 'Get into European war' ... done that. 'Die in office so
unimpressive vice president can be elected' ... Maybe I'll just visit an
impoverished Indian reservation."--Sean Fitzpatrick
            

            
"Visited an Indian reservation. Pat Buchanan followed immediately behind,
handing out smallpox-infected blankets and bottles of whiskey."--Floyd
Elliot
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            "President Attends World Cup Final, Enjoys Two
Scoreless Hours." That's the headline that didn't run in Sunday's papers,
suggesting that, contrary to many News Quiz responses, Clinton's portrayal as
prancing national satyr is ended. Further evidence: At the end of the match,
when Brandi Chastain tore off her shirt, ABC did not go to a split-screen shot
of the president drooling. Which was only fair, because he seemed to be
salivating less over America's new golden girls than over his giant tub of
fried something or other--popcorn? Clams? Chihuahuas?

            If ABC's coverage of the big game is portentous,
Clinton's place in history is as the fatty boy we first elected: Every time
they cut to him, he was eating junk food. There was a guy beside him--Secret
Service?--who poked him in the ribs whenever he was on camera; his goofy stare
would flit from his trough of nachos to the playing field. Apparently
schoolchildren of the future will learn anecdotes of Clinton and French fries,
like those heartwarming stories of President Taft's giant bathtub. Filled with
chili.

            There are, incidentally,
no known photographs of FDR with any sort of junk food. But activists are
determined that the new Roosevelt statue in Washington will depict him eating a
bean burrito.

            
               Is That a Pocket of
Poverty, or Are You Just Glad To See Me Answer
            

            As a part of his Poverty '99 Road Tour--and the
tour jackets, incidentally, are way cool--Clinton visited the Oglala Lakota
Sioux Indian reservation in Pine Ridge, S.D., making him the first president to
set foot on a reservation since Franklin Roosevelt visited some Cherokee in
North Carolina more than 60 years ago.

            Clinton's determination to eradicate poverty is
consonant with the welfare "reforms" he championed so vigorously, his
determination to raise the minimum wage so high that it's nearly possible to
live on it, and his commitment to do something or other for the 43 million
Americans who lack health insurance.

            Here's the slogan that's
not emblazoned on the back of those jackets: "Casino Gambling--Is There
Anything It Can't Do?"

            
               MyTwinn™ Extra
            

            A perverse practice played for laughs in Austin
Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me and for terror in voodoo cults is now a
freakish gift for children: You can buy a tiny duplicate of yourself. Or
someone you love. Or, presumably, hate.

            For $134.95, the MyTwinn "artisans" will make a
posable, 23-inch doll that bears a frightening resemblance to your
daughter.

            To order, send a photo and fill out a questionnaire
that's pretty much a police Identikit. There are 26 pictures of eyeballs in
assorted colors; circle the one closest to your child's. There are, however,
only six choices on the skin tone chart, from "porcelain," to a suspiciously
light "dark brown." There are also hair and eyebrow charts and a sketch of a
face upon which you draw birthmarks, moles, and freckles. "Pierced ears, cleft
chins or dimples are not currently available."

            "MyTwinn dolls are created to be more child-like
than doll-like, which makes them more fun to play with. They are soft cuddly
and durable; and they become a treasured keepsake for years." Isn't this the
sort of thing no longer available in Times Square?

            The other business here is to make you a steady
customer for doll-and-daughter outfits at around $50 to $100. The catalog,
filled with photographs of overly cute little girls and their grotesque
simulacra--identically dressed!--is deeply disturbing. Deeply. I'm not kidding.
Deeply.

            Near the end of the catalog are the MyTwinn Boys.
Not for the fainthearted. And, in a chilling retroactive Dorian Gray bargain,
"[G]randmothers can also have a MyTwinn doll made to resemble them when they
were 3-12 years old." And alive.

            The MyTwinn workshop is
in Colorado; the Ramsey family, same thing. Read more about it and order a
catalog of your own, if you've got the guts, at www.mytwinn.com.

            
               Alex Balk's Good News
Extra
            

            "Al Gore Should Pick
This Jew for His Running-Mate."--
               Richmond Times-Dispatch
headline over Ben Wattenberg's column on Connecticut Sen. Joe Lieberman

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Sex on wheels.

         
      
   
