
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Don't Ask, Don't Tell, Don't Continue</SPAN></SPAN>

            
               
                  New
Republic ,
               Sept. 6
            

            The
cover story says George W. Bush's
less-than-overwhelming straw poll victory makes the primaries competitive.
Elizabeth Dole's third-place finish demonstrates she can compete with John
McCain as the moderate alternative to Bush. (For 
                  Slate
               's Ames
debriefing, click here .) ... A book review calls the military's "don't
ask, don't tell" policy an abysmal failure. In practice, commanding officers do
ask and vigorously root out homosexuals. Many soldiers have been put under oath
and forced to describe their sexual propensities; more than 5,000 have been
discharged. ... "TRB " extrapolates Warren Beatty's presidential platform from
his political manifesto, Bulworth . That "108-minute-long affront to
black dignity" portends a demagogic campaign that blames corporate interests
for America's real and imagined ills. (
                  Slate
               's "" bets against a
Beatty candidacy.)

            

               
                  Economist
               , Aug. 21
            

            A
piece predicts that brick-and-mortar companies will
beat pure Web retailers in the battle for e-customers. Although Internet
companies have lower start-up costs, meat-space firms have loyal customers,
established distribution systems, and the ability to cross-market through their
retail outlets. ... The cover editorial warns that the East Asian economic
recovery is precarious. Real recovery depends on regional political stability,
the continued strength of the export-absorbing American economy, and Japan's
ability to bounce back from its slump. ... An article cautions against underestimating the
possibility of a Chinese military assault on Taiwan. Even though China is
reluctant to anger the West, Taiwan's rejection of a "one China" policy makes
any diplomatic settlement difficult.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               
                  , Aug. 23 and Fall Fashion Supplement
            

            The
cover package worries about boys. One story says that boys, bombarded with
images of unattainable male bodies, have more body image problems than ever.
(G.I. Joe has got buffer, so have Calvin Klein models.) The "culture of
cruelty" in junior high can make adolescents "pathologically preoccupied" with
body image. More adult men are getting liposuction. ... The other cover
story describes the survival strategies of high-school outcasts, who seek
solace in computer games, camaraderie, and the occasional joint.. ... A
profile of B. Smith touts her as the anti-Martha Stewart. The former model has
parlayed her restaurant successes into a lifestyle TV show and a forthcoming
magazine. She has a much more relaxed style than Mistress Martha. Smith is an
icon of the new black upper-middle class, though three-quarters of her audience
is white. ... The surprisingly delightful Fall Fashion Supplement is
full of blithe self-parody and reader games. There is a fashion-centric
crossword puzzle, a color-by-numbers dress, a Mad Libs column, and a cutout
Gwyneth Paltrow doll, among other amusements.

            
               
                  Atlantic
Monthly , September 1999
            

            The
cover story argues that stocks are massively undervalued. Bullish investors are
not irrationally exuberant; they recognize that stock prices have been
depressed by an excessive aversion to risk. According to the authors' valuation
theory, the Dow should be heading toward 36,000. (Author James Glassman
expounded this theory last year in . disputed it.) ... A piece
lavishes praise on Waldorf schools. Established by an Austrian in 1919, the
schools place imagination at the center of the learning process and emphasize
art projects, oral presentations, poetry recitations, and discussion. Graduates
are capable and inquisitive. There are more than 100 Waldorf schools in the
United States and 700 worldwide.
            

            
               
                  Newsweek ,
Aug. 23
            

            A
special issue on guns includes a rare editorial declaring war on "one common link in the chain of
violence: firearms." All assault weapons should be banned, all gun owners
licensed, and all guns registered. ( Newsweek 's crusade follows a
Time essay earlier this month calling for a handgun ban.) ... A
Newsweek 
               poll finds that 74 percent of Americans support registering
all handgun owners; 93 percent favor a mandatory waiting period for gun
purchases. ... A piece explores the backroom battle between the gun industry
and the gun lobby. The industry wants to make concessions, but the NRA
threatens the gun-makers with boycotts if they give an inch.

            
               
                  Time ,
Aug. 23, 1999
            

            The
cover story reports on new discoveries about human evolution.
We started walking on two legs between 6 million and 4 million years ago,
tool-making began 2.5 million years ago, and our brains grew dramatically
between 2 million and 1 million years ago. Abstract thought began only tens of
thousands of years ago. Our technological improvements have dramatically slowed
natural selection. ... A piece surveys new school safety precautions,
including mass-shooting drills, locker searches, and security cameras.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker , Aug. 23 and 30
            

            The
"Adventure" issue meditates on human limitations, trust, and courage. A
correspondent camps out in Central Park, braving gangs, ducking cops, and
talking to raccoons. ... An author recounts how he abandoned a plan to
sail solo to Alaska in order to nurse his dying father. His father's gracious
acceptance of death is a braver act than any macho journey could be. ...
A profile of Lynne Cox describes how the solo swimmer conquered fear by braving
icy, shark-infested waters. She traversed seemingly unconquerable bodies of
water, including the Bering Strait, to demonstrate the potential for harmony
between hostile neighbors.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard , Aug. 23
            

            The
cover
story calls for censorship of movies, television, and music. The mass
media's "moral pollution" is "actual and malignant." Our forefathers didn't
have sex and violence in mind when they crafted First Amendment freedoms. The
choice is censorship or barbarism. ... A series of commentaries rejects the censorship proposal, arguing that
Americans do not want to be regulated by institutional elites. Government
should discourage images of sex and violence in the media by holding
congressional hearings that demonize Hollywood. ... An article argues
that the United States should provide Taiwan with new weapons and military
advice in order to deter Chinese expansionism.

         
      
   
