
   
   
      
         
            No. 315: &quot;Cool, Calm, Rejected&quot;

            
               "They're taking
something that's about as likely to happen as a meteorite falling on your head
and telling everybody that it could happen any time," said Dr. Merlin D.
Tuttle, about those worry warts at the New York State Health Department. Name
that exaggerated (or not) danger.
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question (No.
314)--"A Chaucer, Not an Echo":
            

            

               
                  Fill in the blank as David Mixner, a gay rights advocate,
praises President Clinton at a black-tie fund-raising dinner in Los Angeles:
"Ever since The Canterbury Tales --strange crew that was--people have
been judged by their ____________. And we picked a good one in
1992."
               
            

            "Grete
horses buttokes."-- Daniel Radosh ( Ellen Macleay and Floyd
Elliott had similar answers, but in modern English.)

            
"Ability to accept specious Pardoner's Tale s."-- Adam Bonin
            

            "Sely
instrument. Hey, look, I made a dirty joke in Middle English! My college
English professors would be so proud of me, if they weren't all dead or
senile."--Floyd "Loving the Tavern Better Than the Shop" Elliot
            

            
"Pandering. No, wait, that's Troilus and Cressida . Hey, somebody call
Vernon Jordan and find out where the hell that girl is with the
pizza."--Alison Rogers
            

            
"Ability to say one thing while doing the exact opposite. (HELLO?? Gay people??
He signed the Preservation of Marriage Act! Christ on a crutch, what does he
have to do to lose your support, stab David Geffen with a kitchen
knife??)"-- Eric Berlin (similarly, Chris Thomas )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            It is astonishing to see a public figure at a
political event refer to any work of literature written before 1985 or, in the
case of George W., written. In her best column in years, in which she reverts
to actual reporting, Maureen Dowd had a fascinating talk with G.W. about his
cultural tastes. It turns out he has none. He is a man of unflappable ignorance
who, despite the round-the-clock presence of his librarian wife, remains all
but illiterate. " 'I've always liked John La Care, Le Carrier, or however you
pronounce his name. I'm mainly a history person.' He's just finished Isaac's
Storm , a history of the Galveston hurricane of 1900, and reads Robert
Parker's detective-for-hire stories." It's one thing to be a deeply ignorant
man with a satin-skinned complacency, a cheek unwrinkled by self-doubt. But
when you declare that you'd like to be president, shouldn't everyone just mock
you with a lot of snooty literary references that you don't get?

            "Classical quotation is
the parole of literary men all over the world," said Dr. Johnson, I
note, quoting Dr. Johnson, who, while not actually classical, was not all over
the world either, although he once took a very nice tour of the Hebrides. He
found it to be a lot like Galveston or Galvoostoon or however you pronounce
it.

            

               Angwissous 
               Answer
            

            "Ever since The Canterbury Tales people have
been judged by their traveling companions ."

            Mixner, a Clinton friend for 30 years, paid tribute
to the political gains the president has made for gay and lesbian Americans and
encouraged their continued support of the president.

            In 1992, gays and lesbians raised $4 million for
Clinton-Gore, and the Democratic ticket received 80 percent of their vote. Or,
to put it more weirdly, 20 percent of lesbians and gays voted Republican.

            While acknowledging his disappointments--Mixner was
jailed in 1993 while protesting the president's position on gays in the
military--he applauded Clinton's many victories.

            As John Broder describes
it in the New York Times , the president responded with appropriate
modesty and--if I can read between the lines or simply make things up,
important things, things that should have happened--brushed away a tear, " 'I
wish I could have done better,' Mr. Clinton said wistfully. 'But we've done
pretty well, and we're a long way from where we were.' "

            
               Joy

               Nolan's Fun With Canterbury Tales Extra
            

            "Ever since The Canterbury Tales , people
have been judged by their stunning ability to have their careers summed up
by the A, B, and C entries in the glossary for The Canterbury
Tales
               .

            Check this out--a "coverchief" is a head-dress.
(Think it over.) Fuck's sake, Randy, flyppe through these! It's like Chaucer
was in, like, pre-cahoots with Ken Starr or somethynge.

            Plus, you toss in a
little punctuation, and some consecutive entries read like excerpts from
Starr's Ouija board, or last year's Times :

            

               "Aleyes alkamystre, al speke he, 'Amor vincit omnia,' angwissous ape
aperteneth areste." (Translation: Garden-paths alchemist, although he may
speak, 'Love conquers all,' anxious fool befits stop.)
               

               "Asterted, astoned, aswowne avowtier, bauderye." (Translation: Escaped,
astonished, aswooned adulterer, pandering.)
               

               "Bigileres biknowe, bille bitook, biwreyed blent, bleynte, boghte."
(Translation: Liars confess, formal charge, entrusted betrayed, turned pale,
redeemed.)
               

               "Clerk clippeth cokkow." (Translation: University student embraces
cuckoo.)
               

            

            So anyway, here are
selected A, B, and C words from the CT glossary. I'm telling you,
though: coverchief = head-dress is the best. (Get it? Head dress? Coverchief?)
That David Mixner clearly has his planchette on the pulse.

            aleyes: garden paths

            angwissous: anxious

            ape: 1. fool, dupe; 2. monkey

            assoillyng: absolution

            asterte, asterted: escaped

            astoned: amazed, astonished

            aswowne: in a swoon, aswooned

            avowtier: adulterer

            bauderye, bawderye: pandering

            bigileres: liars, deceivers

            biknowe: reveal, confess

            bille: petition, formal charge

            biwreyed: 1. revealed, exposed; 2. betrayed

            blent: deceived, blinded

            bleynte: turned pale

            bord bigonne: sat in the place of honor

            bour: bedroom, private room for lord and lady

            briberyes: ways of stealing money

            brike: trap, plight

            brotelnesse, brotilnesse: insecurity, instability,
fickleness

            buxom: obedient

            capul: nag

            chaped: mounted

            chastitee: chastity, abstinence from sexual
intercourse

            chidyng: scolding

            clippeth: embraces

            cokewold: cuckold, husband of an adulteress

            conseil kepe: keep secret

            contricioun: the state of being contrite, affected
by guilt, feeling

            remorse or penitence

            coom: came

            corage: 1. heart, feeling; 2. (sexual) desire,
ardor

            corrumpable: corruptible

            costlewe: very expensive

            countrefeted: imitated

            coveitise, coveityse: avarice, greed,
covetousness

            coverchiefs: head-dresses

            covyne: treachery

            crekes: tricks

            culpe: guilt

            cure: charge,
jurisdiction

            
               Chris

               Kelly's Ongoing Amour-Propre Extra
            

            "My novels ... explore the mysteries behind love
and hate, the darkly amusing, deeply disturbing and ultimately unanswerable
questions that they inspire."--writer Warren Adler takes a long hard look at
his work, including Random Hearts , and likes what he sees.

            Participants are invited
to submit similar authentic examples of rigorous self-assessment. Replies to
run Thursday.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Penises and noses, which, incidentally, scans
beautifully when substituted for the refrain in "Lollipops and Roses," the 1962
Grammy-winning Jack Jones hit written by Tony Velona. Let's sing it together
right now! Everybody!

         
      
   
