
   
   
      
         
            You Don't Tug on the Avenger's Cape

            Greetings, oh frustrated and bone-weary consumer! It is I,
the great Shopping Avenger, who has pledged himself to the betterment of all
humankind, or at least to that portion of humankind that shops at Circuit City
and rents trucks from U-Haul.

            The Shopping Avenger has much to discuss today: You
will hear the tale of a Hasidic rabbi who suffered greatly at the hands of TWA,
but who, due to his mystical and gentle nature, sought not the help of lawyers
but instead the help of Shopping Avenger, who is a part-time kabalist and runs
special discounts for clergy every Tuesday, and you will also learn the winning
answer to the recent contest question "How much Turtle Wax constitutes a year's
supply of Turtle Wax?"

            But first, the Shopping Avenger would like to tell
his own tale of consumer woe. Many of you might find this a shocking statement,
but even the Shopping Avenger sometimes gets smacked upside the head by the
evil forces of rampant capitalism. Granted, this seldom happens when the
Shopping Avenger is wearing his cape and codpiece and special decals, but the
Shopping Avenger seldom ventures outside the Great Hall of Consumer Justice in
his cape and codpiece and special decals, on account of the fact that he
doesn't want to get arrested.

            What you should know is
that by day the Shopping Avenger is a mild-mannered reporter for a major
metropolitan magazine, and it is in this guise that the Shopping Avenger
sometimes finds himself holding the short end of the consumer stick. Whatever
that means.

            Take the following incident, which occurred at Heathrow
airport, which, I am told, is somewhere in Europe. The Shopping Avenger, who
was scheduled to transit home from the Middle East through Heathrow, was
feeling ill and generally fed up at the end of his trip and so decided to
upgrade himself, using his own money, to business class. The total cost of the
ticket: $1,732. Remember that exorbitant sum.

            The first flight, out of
the Middle East, left late and arrived even later at Heathrow, though not too
late to make the connection. However, the Shopping Avenger and several other
passengers were met at the gate by a British Airways agent, who said that there
was no time to make the connection, which was leaving from a different
terminal. Technically, he admitted, there was enough time, but since British
Airways was committed to "on-time departures," the plane's doors would be
closing early. The Shopping Avenger argued in his mild-mannered manner that
British Airways did not, in fact, have a commitment to "on-time departures"
because the originating flight did not depart on time. The Shopping Avenger
received no answer to this statement. Instead, the Shopping Avenger was booked
onto a later flight and so asked the agent if he could use a British Airways
telephone to call Mrs. Shopping Avenger, who would be waiting for him at the
other end. The agent directed the Shopping Avenger to the British Airways
business-class lounge, where a telephone would be made available to him.

            You, of course, know what happened next. The Shopping
Avenger was told by a very nasty airline employee that only first-class
passengers would be allowed to use the telephone. When the Shopping Avenger
argued, in an increasingly less mild-mannered manner, that the call was
necessitated by a British Airways screw up and, therefore, British Airways
should pay for the call, he was told that pay phones could be found outside the
lounge. This was when Shopping Avenger stated very loudly that for $1,732, he
should be allowed to make a two-minute phone call. And it was the weekend!
Weekend calling rates, for Pete's sake!

            But British Airways is an insufferably greedy
little company, and so the Shopping Avenger was given no recourse but to invoke
the power of his high office. The Shopping Avenger asked this nasty lady if she
had ever heard of the Shopping Avenger. To the Shopping Avenger's dismay, this
was her answer: "No."

            What about 
                  Slate
                magazine? "No."

            Well, whatever. The Shopping Avenger, while not
identifying himself as the Shopping Avenger--this would have meant changing
into his codpiece and cape in the business-class lounge--informed this poorly
informed British Airways employee that the Shopping Avenger was America's
foremost consumer advocate (this is a lie, but she's English, so what does she
know?) and that the Shopping Avenger would hear about this treatment and seek
vengeance.

            Well, did her tune ever change. Not exactly her
tune--she remained as mean as a ferret, but she did let Shopping Avenger use
her telephone.

            The moral of this story
for the world's airlines: Penny-pinching might make you rich, but it also gets
you blasted in 
                  Slate
                magazine. The other moral: Superheroes
should never travel without their codpiece under their pants.

            There is only one airline the Shopping Avenger believes
understands the fundamentals of customer service, and that is Southwest
Airlines. But more on that in the next episode. First, this month's U-Haul
outrage. The following letter contains perhaps the funniest story the Shopping
Avenger has heard about U-Haul, and by now the Shopping Avenger has received
upward of 6.7 million complaints about U-Haul. The story comes from one Susan
Hwang:

            "A year ago, I, too, reserved a truck at U-Haul and
get this--they said someone with my SAME NAME--Susan Hwang is really
common--and going to the SAME SUBURB of Chicago, picked up my truck. Amazing!!
They had to rent a bigger truck to me, which, of course cost more and at that
point, they have you by the balls."

            At least the anatomically
confused Susan Hwang got her truck. Most of the Shopping Avenger's
correspondents wind up having to rent from Ryder and Budget, who seem to keep
extra trucks on hand in order to benefit from U-Haul's nefarious practice of
overbooking.

            On a semi-positive note, the Shopping Avenger did finally
hear from Johna Burke, the U-Haul spokeswoman, who apologized for the
inconvenience caused K., the . (For other U-Haul horror stories, click .) K.,
you'll recall, was left standing in the U-Haul parking lot when a credit-card
reservation he'd made was dishonored by U-Haul. "Mr. K.'s two day rental
reservation should have been honored so long as he provided us with his credit
card number, which we will assume was the case. This is what we at U-Haul call
a 'confirmed reservation.' "

            Burke's letter, though, is filled with what we at
Shopping Avenger call "bullshit."

            "Once we have a confirmed reservation we should
have moved heaven and earth to see that Mr. K.'s two day reservation was
filled," Burke wrote.

            Yes, of course they
should have--but they never do. This is not Burke's fault. She is simply paid
to explain the inexplicable. The Shopping Avenger has received 164--no
exaggeration for effect in this instance--letters so far from people who say
they had confirmed reservations with U-Haul, only to show up and find no truck
waiting for them. The Shopping Avenger would like to hear from more--to show
Burke and the bossmen at U-Haul the hollowness of their concept of "confirmed
reservations."

            One more thing before we get to our tale of rabbinical woe:
the winning answer to the recent contest question "How much Turtle Wax
comprises a year's supply of Turtle Wax?"

            Fifty-eight of you wrote in, 48 with the correct
answer, which is, of course: "Depends upon how many Turtles you wanna wax," in
the words of one of our winners, Samir Raiyani. Or, as another of our winners,
Karen Bitterman, wrote, it "depends on the size of the turtle--and whether or
not you park it in a covered space."

            Unfortunately, because so
many of you wrote in with the more or less correct answer, the Shopping Avenger
is unable to award the contest prize, which was to be a year's supply of
Rice-a-Roni, the San Francisco treat.

            Now to our hapless rabbi, Rabbi S., who wrote the Shopping
Avenger seeking worldly justice in his case against TWA. The story of Rabbi S.
is entirely typical of the airline industry--a minor problem made enormous by
the cruelty and ignorance of employees who are, in theory, hired by the
greedheads who run the airlines to take care of passengers.

            Rabbi S., his wife, and kids arrived at Kennedy
airport in time for his flight to Detroit, parked curbside, unloaded their
luggage, and proceeded to the check-in counter. There the rabbi asked a TWA
representative if he could leave his luggage by the counter for his wife to
check in while he parked the car, to which he received a positive response and
left to go park. No one told him, though, that he must first show his
driver's license to the ticket agent.
            

            The ticket agent refused to check the rabbi's bags
once he left, telling the wife that "security reasons" forbade him from
checking the luggage of ticket holders who were not present. But then she told
Rabbi S.'s wife: "If you want, you can pay an extra $100 for the extra
bags"--i.e., charge his luggage to her ticket.

            "How could it be a
security issue," Rabbi S. wrote the Shopping Avenger, "if they're ready to take
money for the bags?"

            Rabbi S. was running late (Kennedy airport is not a
parking-friendly place), and his wife refused to check her bags without his
bags. She was then told that she would miss the flight, and then her children
began crying, and then she began crying.

            Rabbi S. finally made it back to Terminal 25 minutes
before the flight was scheduled to depart. His wife handed him one baby and
took the other to the gate. "The woman at the counter treated me like a piece
of dirt," he wrote. "First she said she's not sure whether the flight is still
open. Then she took more than five minutes to look around and find someone who
said, 'Yeah, I think we just closed it a minute ago.' ... In the meantime, my
wife went to the gate and the people at the gate told her there's plenty of
time for me--and let her wait outside the gate for me for another 15 minutes.
Alas, my wife didn't realize that [I] could not come because of the luggage
issue and the haughtiness of the people downstairs."

            At the ticket counter, Rabbi S. was told that he
wouldn't make this flight and that he should book himself on another. His wife
and one of his children, meanwhile, got on the flight to Detroit. Rabbi S. had
TWA book him on another flight, a Delta flight, and he schlepped--that's the
only word for it--to the Delta terminal, only to be told that his was a
"voluntary" transfer--he was late for his TWA flight--and so therefore he would
have to pay an additional $300. "My fault!?!? I'm thinking to myself, 'If your
people would have been competent enough to tell me that I should show my
license and courteous enough to put the luggage on for my wife, then I would be
on a flight now with my family to Detroit, not roaming an airport with a
starving baby being sent on a wild goose chase."

            Here the story becomes as confusing as the Book of
Leviticus, but suffice it to say that TWA continued to torture Rabbi S. for
another day--finally forcing him to buy a new $400 ticket.

            "I have never in my life
been treated so horribly," Rabbi S. wrote.

            The Shopping Avenger contacted Jim Brown, a TWA spokesman,
to discuss Rabbi S.'s case. To his surprise--the Shopping Avenger has not had
very good experiences on TWA--Brown investigated the complaint and wrote: "TWA
has issued a credit for the value of Rabbi S.'s ticket for $244. In addition, a
Customer Relations representative has been communicating with the rabbi on this
incident and is sending him the difference between that ticket and the cost of
a new ticket, $219, plus a letter of apology for the behavior of our
representatives at Kennedy Airport. She is also enclosing four travel coupons
valued at $75 each."

            Brown, however, had no
explanation for the behavior at the Kennedy ticket counter--entirely typical
behavior that often makes the already unpleasant air travel experience
completely unbearable.

            In the next episode, the Shopping Avenger will tell the
story of Southwest Airlines, the only airline that seems to actually care about
customer service. But the Shopping Avenger needs your help! Keep those airline
stories coming--and all those other stories, too--except computer stories. Let
me say again, the Shopping Avenger does not fix computers.

            One final request: The Shopping Avenger would like
to hear from anyone who has actually eaten Rice-a-Roni and from anyone who
could explain why it is known as "the San Francisco treat."

            Onward, shoppers!

         
      
   
