
   
   
      
         
            No. 305: "Safe Sects"

            
               On Wednesday, the
Xinhua news agency described a step China has taken to ensure "social stability
and safety" during their big 50 Years of Revolutionary Rule celebration set for
Oct. 1? What did China do?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 304)--"Hee, Hee, Hee":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           You give the lead, I give the headline
from Wednesday's London Mirror : "HE'S HUGE, HE'S POWERFUL, HE'S FAST
AND HE'S MEAN"
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Jesus
Christ returned to Earth yesterday, and he was in a bad mood. 'The meek of the
earth won't inherit nothin'--they're a bunch of chumps,' He was quoted as
saying."--Andrew Staples
            

            "In a
world first, Mark (formerly Margaret) Thatcher completed his historic
sex-change operation today."-- Richard Nikonovich-Kahn
            

            "Shamu
the killer whale, relaxing in his tank at Sea World after being given the power
of speech, showed a thoughtful side to this reporter in an interview last week.
'I like to bite the heads off seals,' said the giant marine mammal."-- Floyd
"Look, I Didn't Ask Them To Give the Hurricane My Name, and I Wish No One Ill,
and I Realize It's a Bit Sick, but, You Know, I'm Kind of Glad It's Really
Kicking Ass" Elliot
            

            "And
yet we'd all like to keep working for Rupert Murdoch ..."-- Alison Rogers
( similarly , Mac Thomason)
            

            "Or
that's what small, weak, slow-moving, and sweet-tempered Sammy the Friendly
Snail Bent on Taking Over the World would have you think."-- Francis
Heaney
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            While the headline seems to describe something
pretty scary, the first three qualities--huge, powerful, fast--actually sound
pretty appealing until the fourth comes along. We'd welcome a huge, powerful,
fast car or coal mining apparatus, or mythical railroad-constructing hero like
John Henry. But meanness trumps the other qualities. Once it arrives in the
sentence, even reversing the previous three gets you nowhere. There's nothing
attractive about something small, weak, slow, and mean. Horrible. Like George
Wallace in his twilight years.

            One tiny typo, one
dropped letter would transform the headline into a dark and pompous assertion
about the human race: "HE'S HUGE, HE'S POWERFUL, HE'S FAST AND HE'S MAN." Two
dropped letters, and we've reached the ludicrously boastful, like the lyrics to
some dreary rap: "HE'S HUGE, HE'S POWERFUL, HE'S FAST AND HE'S ME." Three
dropped letters, and it's James Bond making a catty remark about a co-worker.
That 007, he is just so mean!

            
               Anglocentric
Answer:
            

            "Thousands of terrified British holidaymakers fled
Florida last night as monster Hurricane Floyd headed towards them."

            That storm has
apparently targeted British vacationers with its stormlike fury. Some other
English-relevant details from the Mirror 's coverage:

            

               "The storm, twice the size of Britain ..."

               " 'It's terrifying,' said Debby Campbell, 27, of Bath, Somerset, in Miami
Beach with pal Lisa Shepherd."

               "Kevin Gater, 30, planned to marry Samantha Robinson, 23, there on Friday
but they are sheltering on the fourth-floor ballroom of their hotel near the
capital Nassau. 'The wedding was to be in a gazebo on the beach but I don't
suppose that will still be standing,' said Kevin, of Stoke, Staffs."

               "Were she still alive, Diana, the People's Princess, would also fear the
colossal storm, but would admirably conceal her terror with a plucky smile and
fistful of mood-altering drugs obtained from the rich lay-abouts she thinks of
as friends," the Mirror did not add.

            

            Incidentally, the
Mirror 's headline is not just arbitrary sensationalism; it is
sensationalism with a source, a description of the storm offered by Richard
Moore, a "public safety boss in North Carolina."

            
               More Paladin Press
Extra:
            

            Despite it's legal
troubles, the embattled publisher has an impressive list of fall titles (many
marked with the coveted symbol "Y2K Resource") as well as a solid backlist.
Shunning the traditional organization, fiction and nonfiction, Paladin's
catalog is arranged by categories including Sniping, Silencers, New ID and
Personal Freedom, Action Careers, Combat Shooting, Knives and Knife Fighting,
and Revenge and Humor. Some sample titles:

            

               
                  JUSTIFIABLE HOMICIDE, The Intelligent Use of Deadly Force , by
Denny Hansen: "When can you legally shoot an intruder in your home? This
question is on every person's mind when he or she hears a loud bang in the
middle of the night or a knock on the door at three in the
morning."-- Actually, the question on my mind is. "When will Florence
Henderson realize that no means no?"
               

               
                  EAT WELL FOR 99¢ A MEAL , by Bill Kaysing: "This book could make
your Y2K experience a lot more palatable."-- Has the Frugal Gourmet struck
you as just a little paranoid lately?
               

               
                  EXPERIMENTAL HOMEMADE FIREARMS: 
                  The 9mm Submachine Gun ,
by P.A. Luty: "Imagine you live under a regime that has banned most types of
firearms--or controls them so tightly that they may as well be banned. Author
P.A. Luty lives in such a place, and he understands the frustration of
attempting to build homemade firearms based on designs that are too complicated
or so crude as to be undesirable."-- I have the same problem with IKEA,
except for the blood stains.
               

               
                  THE ARMED-CITIZEN SOLUTION TO CRIME IN THE STREETS, So Many Criminals,
so Few Bullets , by Mack Tanner. "Tanner points out the most likely
pitfalls -- including getting around restrictive gun control laws, obtaining
concealed weapon permits and avoiding adverse publicity."-- Boy, you shoot a
few school kids and the press jumps all over you.
               

               
                  THE WORLD'S MOST DANGEROUS PLACES, The Hard-Core Adventurers Guide to
Getting in, Getting Around, and Getting Out , by Robert Young Pelton and
Coskun Aral: "This guide is packed with inside info on how to make your way
though hot spots, war zones and lethal lands, whether it's Bosnia, Botswana or
the South Bronx."-- I don't know about Bosnia or Botswana, but for the South
Bronx I suggest the 2 train on the IRT.
               

               
                  MANTRAPPING , by Ragnar Benson: "Includes such mantraps as the
Malaysian Hawk, the Andes Mountain Trail Trap, the Sheepeater's Rock Fall and
the Cuban Water Trap. For academic study only."--I believe Ragnar Benson
used the Malaysian Hawk to trap that dreamy Kevin Spacey.
               

            

            

               Clarification
            

            If media giant Rupert
Murdoch does choose to dine on human flesh, there are no kosher dietary laws
that need deter him: Murdoch is not Jewish.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Wrathful deity, woeful Gingrich, and (just like
every other News Quiz) wonder penis.

         
      
   
