
   
   
      
         
            No. 308: &quot;Praise With Faint Damns&quot;

            
               According to
remarks made Tuesday, it is characterized "by greed and lust for power, by
hot-blooded hatreds, and stone-cold hearts." Who was describing
what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 307)--"Scotch and So ...?":
            

            

               Alexander Graham Bell, Mary Queen of Scots, Andrew Carnegie, William
Wallace--what's the connection?
            

            
"They're examples of the kind of 'good immigrant' Pat Buchanan is looking
for."-- Alex Balk ( Tom Reynolds had a similar answer.)

            "All
appear as characters in Dutch: A Memoir of Ronald
Reagan ."-- Mark 
               Greenberg
            

            "They
all invented the telephone."-- Al Cloutier (all but identically, David
Finkle )

            "OK,
so they didn't break the chain, and I did--what's your point?"-- Julie
Anderson
            

            
"Because of an ancient Scottish curse, anyone who writes a life of these four
historical personages ends up reproducing, word for word and comma for comma, a
long-out-of-print biography that they have never even read!"-- Katha
Pollitt
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Among his many
accomplishments, Dr. Johnson was the first of the great Scot-bashers, elevating
a common anti-immigrant prejudice to a wittier sort of anti-immigrant prejudice
and a way to tweak his great friend James Boswell. Some examples, taken from
the delightful Samuel
Johnson Sound Bite Page maintained by Frank Lynch.

            

               When Boswell boasted about his country's landscape, saying it had many
noble prospects, Johnson replied: "The noblest prospect which a Scotchman ever
sees, is the high road that leads him to England!"


               "What enemy would invade Scotland, where there is nothing to be got?"


               At dinner, Mrs. Thrale expressed a wish to go and see Scotland. Johnson:
"Seeing Scotland, Madam, is only seeing a worse England. It is seeing the
flower gradually fade away to the naked stalk. "


               "Knowledge was divided among the Scots, like bread in a besieged town, to
every man a mouthful, to no man a bellyful."--Hester Thrale Piozzi:
Anecdotes

               

               Asked by a Scot what Johnson thought of Scotland: "That it is a very vile
country, to be sure, Sir" "Well, Sir! (replies the Scot, somewhat mortified)
God made it." Johnson: "Certainly he did; but we must always remember that he
made it for Scotchmen, and comparisons are odious, Mr. S, but God made
hell."--Piozzi: Anecdotes

               

               "Your country consists of two things, stone and water. There is, indeed, a
little earth above the stone in some places, but a very little; and the stone
is always appearing. It is like a man in rags; the naked skin is still peeping
out."--Boswell: Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides

               

               Mr. Arthur Lee mentioned some Scotch who had taken possession of a barren
part of America, and wondered why they would choose it. Johnson: "Why, Sir, all
barrenness is comparative. The Scotch would not know it to be barren." Boswell:
"Come, come, he is flattering the English. You have now been in Scotland, Sir,
and say if you did not see meat and drink enough there." Johnson: "Why yes,
Sir; meat and drink enough to give the inhabitants sufficient strength to run
away from home."


               I having said that England was obliged to us for gardeners, almost all
their gardeners being Scotchmen; Johnson: "Why, Sir, that is because gardening
is much more necessary amongst you than with us, which makes so many of your
people learn it. It is all gardening with you. Things which grow wild here,
must be cultivated with great care in Scotland. Pray now," throwing himself
back in his chair, and laughing, "are you ever able to bring the sloe to
perfection?"

            

            (All taken from
Boswell's Life of Johnson unless otherwise noted.)

            
               
                  Déjà Vu
Answer
            

            Each was the subject of a biography by James Mackay
that faced charges of plagiarism.

            The prolific Scottish author of more than 100
books, Mackay is accused of cribbing passages of his newest work, I Have Not
Yet Begun To Fight: A Life of John Paul Jones . Publication of this
biography of another Scottish-born subject, set for next month by the Atlantic
Monthly Press, has been put off.

            "I am holding back distribution and getting an
independent evaluation," said publisher Morgan Entrekin. "Like I should have
done with that Jay McInerney rubbish," he did not add.

            While Mackay acknowledges similarities between his
books and those from which he is accused of copying, he denies wrongdoing,
pointing out that "there are only a certain number of words in the English
language."

            He does admit stealing
valuable proofs of stamps belonging to the crown when he worked at the British
Museum but notes that this was a long time ago. "This is something that
happened when I was a young man. I've surely paid my price for youthful
folly."

            
               Ongoing Help the
Sloganless Extra
            

            Shallow catch phrases
still sought for Al Gore, John McCain, Dan Quayle, and Elizabeth Dole. Answers
to run Thursday. Some early entries:

            Al Gore:

            "Hi. I'm Al
Gore."-- Dave Gaffen
            

            John McCain:

            "I was locked up in a
dank prison for five #$%^&* years ... oh, and I'll cut your
taxes."-- Erin H. Murphy
            

            Dan Quayle:

            "Prosperity With a
Purpos."-- Bill McDermott
            

            Elizabeth Dole:

            "The other
ED!"-- Andrew Solovay
            

            
               
                  The New Yorker
Cartoons Without the Drawings Extra
            

            Pete Seeger? I said,
"Hire Peter Singer!"

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Mocking Mel Gibson's career, reciting Mike Myers'
routines.

         
      
   
