
   
   
      
         
            No. 325: &quot;Wrapped Attention&quot;

            
               In a TV commercial
running in Houston, friends cover a Diane Keaton look-alike in bubble wrap then
roll her down a hill and through a sprinkler. We don't find out what's being
advertised until the end, when the tag line comes up. For 500 points and the
game: What is the tag line?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 324)--"Mad About Beef":
            

            

               Fill in the blank as Donald Gregg, former U.S. ambassador to South
Korea, comments on some declassified documents with this personal anecdote: "My
residence had just been broken into by six students angry about beef quotas.
They tried to burn my house down. And I thought, 'God Almighty, if they get
this mad about beef, what will they do when they learn we have _________ here?'
"
            

            
"Beefcake."-- Matt Sullivan , David Finkle , and Dee
Lacey
            

            
"Cable."-- K. Coombs
            

            
"Copies of the final."-- Dave Gaffen ( Neal Pollack and Dee
Lacey had similar answers.)

            "If
this were 'Match Game '74,' Charles Nelson Reilly would answer 'bazooms.'
"-- Kenton Cernea
            

            
"Martha Stewart's balsamic glazed onions."-- Jay Majors and Barbara
Lippert (similarly, Todd York )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            We risk hubris, given
our lackluster national cuisine--not that I'm knocking high-fat, high-calorie,
high-profit, bland stuff served up on a bun and eaten in a car--if we mock the
food of another country. So, unlike many Quiz participants, I won't. Instead,
I'll point out that one of the pleasures of urban life is
juxtaposition--buildings of different eras, clothing of various subcultures,
books, movies and, of course, food. When we make dinner plans, we don't name
restaurants; we list countries: Should we go for Thai? Italian? Indian?
Mexican? Vietnamese? French? Spanish? Ethiopian? Argentine? Brazilian? Cuban?
Chinese? Cuban-Chinese? And I'll say this: If all the nations of the world got
along as well as do the bagel and mango on my breakfast table every morning,
that would be an impressive amount of along-getting. Right, anxiety-free doggy?
Rrrrrrrrright!

            
               Critical Mass Appeal
Answer
            

            If they get this mad about beef, what will they do
when they learn we have nuclear weapons here?

            During the Cold War, the United States stored
12,000 nuclear weapons in at least 23 countries, including some with a no-nukes
policy, not always informing local governments of this deployment. Currently
American weapons of mass destruction are kept in at least seven foreign
countries--Belgium, Greenland, Italy, the Netherlands, Germany, Turkey, and
Britain.

            It took 16 years to declassify the document,
"History of the Custody and Deployment of Nuclear Weapons: July 1945 through
September 1977." William Arkin first requested it in 1983 under the Freedom of
Information Act for use in a book he was writing, Nuclear Battlefield .
An article describing the document is in the current Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists .

            Ambassador Gregg's
colorful anecdotes now delight his colleagues at the Asia Society.

            
               Raymond Chen's at the
Movies Extra
            

            Edward Norton explains what the fighting in
Fight Club is really about: "It's very much a metaphor for
self-transforming radicalism, for the idea of directing violence inward at your
own presumptions. ... The fighting is a metaphor for stripping yourself of
received notions and value systems that have been applied to you that aren't
your own. And freeing yourself to discover who you actually are."

            "And pummeling your opponent into a bloody pulp,"
he did not add.

            (Read more preposterous
actor jabbering here.)

            
               Floyd Elliot's Media
Buyers Extra
            

            Floyd Elliot's News Quiz
responses are for sale to reputable or disreputable advertisers. Drug dealers
welcome. Contact Floyd's parole officer for details.

            
               Sure and Certain Proof
That the '60s Are Over Again Extra
            

            Actual evidence gathered from actual publications,
because the Man can't bust our news sources.

            

               "Gregory Sizer was running a Christian bookstore here when he decided to
launch a second business: selling guns." ( Wall Street Journal , Oct. 19,
1999)-- Jay Carvell
               

               "Tom Jones and the Semiotics of Panty-throwing--by Virginia Vitzthum."
( Salon 's Table of Contents, Oct. 19, 1999)-- Joy Nolan
               

               "Jimi Hendrix's 'Let Me Stand Next to Your Fire' now used to tout Pontiac
Sunfire in TV spots."-- Ed.
               

               "By using her celebrity in exchange for stock in the company, Ms. Goldberg
adds her name to a list of cyberrepresentatives that already includes the
former Star Trek actor William Shatner. I'm speechless."-- Ellen
Macleay
               

               "Peace, love, and understanding--hrrrpphh, that's funny! What a joke. I
swear to God. You know what I'd do? I'd line 'em up and shoot 'em. Yeah, yeah.
Shoot 'em all. Hrrrpphh. Hilarious." (My friend's ex-hippie older brother, now
a golf course designer in Tampa.)-- Jim O'Grady
               

               "The Pink Panther/Owens Corning Fiberglas commercial co-opting Fractured
Fairytales . I hope moose-and-squirrel got mucho bucks out of them,
considering the legalistic stink the P.P. folks (Universal) made several years
ago when a gay nonprofit anti-violence group had the temerity to call itself
'Pink Panthers' (although in this drunk-on-synergy era Universal probably owns
all of Jay Ward's output as well)."-- Fred Gormley
               

               "In 1997, I co-authored a 'comprehensive and dramatically told' ( San
Francisco Chronicle ) biography of radical anti-war priests Daniel and
Philip Berrigan, and it sold many less copies than, oh, Jewel's diary or a
novel by Ethan Hawke. Yet conveniently, my book made it into paperback and can
be purchased by clicking here."-- Jim O'Grady
               

               "In 1968, News Quiz was used to fight imperialism in solidarity with the
workers and peasants, not to promote one's own books."-- Ed.
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Funny foreign food, Pokémon.

         
      
   
