
   
   
      
         
            Cat-Sitters Who Love Too Much

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               This question may be more of a moral or ethical
sort, but my behavior is being called into question, and I'd like it if you
could answer this for me. A friend asked me to watch his cat while he was
abroad for two weeks. I came by every day and noticed that the cat was looking
a little under the weather. I wasn't concerned, though, and thought the cat was
just missing his owner. (I'm not much of a cat person.) The situation got
rapidly worse, and one day when I came to the house the cat was obviously very,
very sick. It could barely walk. I called the owner in Europe and explained the
situation and asked if I should take Kitty to the vet. He said, "No." I
explained again that the cat looked to be at death's door. The owner said he'd
take care of it when he got home (in three days).
            

            
               After I got off the
phone I just couldn't leave the pathetic animal there to suffer, so I took
Kitty to an animal hospital where he was treated for a deadly cat stomach
problem. I saved the cat's life. And paid a couple thousand dollars to do so.
The owner is refusing to reimburse me and is saying that I shouldn't have gone
against his wishes. I feel like I did the right thing. Of course I've written
off this friendship, but am I within the limits of proper behavior to demand
reimbursement for Kitty's operation? Or did I, as the owner says, intrude into
an area where I didn't belong?
            

            
               --Thank you,
            

            

               ZM
            

            Dear Z.,

            How unfortunate that you wound up looking after a
pet whose owner decreed it was a Christian Science cat. ("Let's wait three
days," indeed.) Your experience, alas, is a perfect example of the old saying,
"No good deed goes unpunished."

            Prudie is on your side,
however, and the side of Kitty. There are animal cruelty statutes (which are
criminal), which differ from state to state, but Prudie thinks your best avenue
is a civil suit, probably in small claims court. The vet's records should
attest to the cat's precarious condition. You did the only humane thing. One
wonders what the outcome would have been had The Traveler been in residence
when his pet's condition was moving toward ... well, catatonic. In any case,
Prudie hopes you prevail in court and that Kitty's remaining eight lives will
be uneventful.

            
--Prudie, litigiously

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               A former (almost)
significant other thinks I'm stalking her, but I'm really not. I need a way of
conveying that without seeming like a stalker. Telephone, letter, and direct
contact are all out of the question. Also, it needs to fit into my budget
($15), so no airplane stunts. And what, exactly, is the line between stalking
and not stalking, anyway?
            

            

               --Caught-22
            

            Dear Caught,

            Prudie thinks you meant your signature to be
"Catch-22," which suggests either English is not your first language or you
have made quite a Freudian slip. When you say that phone, letter, and direct
contact are out of the question, Prudie infers that there may be a restraining
order.

            The line of stalking/not
stalking, in general nonlegal terms, would probably be drawn where the person
feels he or she is receiving unwanted attention. Being in the general proximity
of such a person would be unwelcome, as would written communications--even
skywriting. Prudie suggests you "convey" your nonstalking status by forgetting
this girl exists, which means not trying to be where she is and stopping all
communications of any kind. That is the surefire way for her to know you are
not stalking her. And Prudie just saved you $15.

            
--Prudie, definitively

            
               
                  Prudie
dear,
               
            

            
               Don't you get just the least bit uncomfortable
presuming to explain and comment on the motives of folks who choose to ? Are
you saying you wouldn't let yourself be found in that situation? Good for you!
(Some might wonder if you would ever be invited to be in that situation--but
that would be very catty of them.)
            

            
               I thought the
general rule was: If it's not affecting you or anyone else adversely, then your
reactions to it are not of interest and should not be shared. Or, as Dear Abby
might say, "MYOB."
            

            

               --Speaking of Hef's Harem
            

            Dear Speak,

            To borrow a technique of our president, the answer
to your question depends on what the meaning of "situation" is. Prudie has
never been asked to share Hef's bed, but she has been invited to both his
"mansions," as he likes to call them. And she has gone. (Yes, Prudie is that
old .) And the parties were quite sufficient for Prudie, if you receive her
drift.

            As for the MYOB rule
(originated by Ann Landers, a woman of whom Prudie is extremely fond), Prudie
must point out that her job description is specifically to mind other
people's business. Granted, it's a thankless task, but she's got a lot of karma
to burn.

            
--Prudie, busily

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I'd like to quibble
with your response to "." My mother taught me that one excuse is plausible.
Four excuses sound like you're holding back the real reason. (I can't go out
Friday night because I have to wash my hair. Besides, my grandmother is sick.
Also, I have a lot of homework. Oh, yes, and I promised my dad I'd clean the
garage. Universally understood translation: I wouldn't be seen in public with
you for a million dollars.) Ohio should stick with, "Let's do dinner
instead."
            

            

               --MMD, a wise woman's daughter
            

            Dear MM,

            Your mother is wise
indeed, and Prudie laughed at your wonderful example. In the main you are
correct, though there are occasions when stringing together emotionally
sequential reasons, as it were, is useful. Prudie leaves this decision to the
discretion of each excuse-maker.

            --Prudie, plausibly

         
      
   
