
   
   
      
         
            Clinton's Nuclear Alarm

            Last
week, 51 Republican senators voted not to ratify the nuclear Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty. The direct result of this vote was virtually nothing. No missiles
were launched. No bombs were detonated. No agreements were voided. The treaty
itself remained open to ratification. Instead, analysts agreed that the import
of the vote lay in the "signal" it sent to foreign governments. At his news
conference the next day, President Clinton had an opportunity to define that
signal for good or ill. He chose both. While assuring other nations that the
vote signified no change in America's commitment to nonproliferation, he told
Americans that arms control had suffered a disastrous setback and that the
United States was withdrawing from the world.

            
Clinton's equivocation on the test ban vote is the latest chapter in the
struggle between his two personalities, Policy Bill and Political Bill. Policy
Bill strives for solutions and looks for deals. Political Bill strives for
advantage and looks for fights. Policy Bill treats elections as a means to
passing legislation. Political Bill treats legislation as a means to winning
elections. Policy Bill wants arms control as an accomplishment. Political Bill
wants it as a festering issue. Policy Bill wants to frame the treaty vote in a
way that will calm the world by minimizing the perceived damage to arms
control. Political Bill wants to frame it in a way that will alarm American
voters by maximizing that perceived damage.

            
Republicans said they voted against the treaty because it lacked adequate
monitoring and enforcement mechanisms, wouldn't affect rogue states, and
imposed too permanent a commitment on the United States to refrain from
testing. Several indicated that they would have supported it if Clinton had
worked with them to amend it. By voting against it, were Republicans giving
foreign regimes a "green light" to test nuclear weapons? No, they replied. They
argued that the best safeguard against proliferation was the previously
ratified Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and that Clinton was sending a "green
light" by failing to enforce that pact. Was the GOP turning away from the
world? No, said Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky. "The Republicans are not
isolationists. We're the party of GATT, NAFTA, and the WTO." Were they
rejecting arms control? No, said the Republicans. They observed that pragmatic
hawks such as Sen. Dick Lugar, R-Ind., who had supported previous arms control
pacts, deemed this one unwise. "The leader of the nonproliferation effort over
the last 50 years, the United States of America, is not abandoning its
leadership," said Sen. Chuck Hagel, R-Neb. "I don't believe that's what that
vote was about."

            
Clinton could have used his news conference to affirm this soothing message, as
Sen. Joe Lieberman, D-Conn., did in a joint appearance with Hagel. "We have
come together today to say to anyone who will listen, to the American people,
and hopefully to people around the world, that although there are not now
sufficient votes in the Senate to ratify this test ban treaty, that does not
mean that the cause of nuclear nonproliferation died on the Senate floor
yesterday," said Lieberman. "That cause ... is embraced by a great majority in
Congress," he went on. "We do want to signal to nations around the world in the
aftermath of yesterday's vote that neither the American people nor the United
States Senate are walking away from our responsibility to lead the effort"
against proliferation.

            At
Clinton's news conference, his two personalities wrestled over how to spin the
vote. Policy Bill played it down. "We will not abandon the commitments inherent
in the treaty and resume testing ourselves," he told the world. "I call on
Russia, China, Britain, France, and all other countries to continue to refrain
from testing. I call on nations that have not done so to sign and ratify the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. And I will continue to do all I can to make that
case to the Senate. When all is said and done, I have no doubt that the United
States will ratify this treaty. ... We are not going to reverse 40 years of
commitment on nonproliferation." He concluded: "So I urge [other nations] not
to overreact, to make clear their opposition to what the Senate did, but to
stay with us and believe in the United States, because the American people want
us to lead toward nonproliferation."

            But
Political Bill was determined to punish Republicans at the polls by depicting
their vote as a repudiation of arms control. They had "betrayed the vision of
Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy" and embraced "a new isolationism," he
charged. "The Senate majority has turned its back on 50 years of American
leadership against the spread of weapons of mass destruction. They are saying
America does not need to lead either by effort or by example. They are saying
we don't need our friends or allies. ... We say to them [our allies], 'Go take
a hike.' ... We're not cooperating with them anymore. 'As far as we're
concerned ... anything you want to do with your money is fine with us, because
we have more money than you do, so whatever you do, we'll do more.' "

            
Political Bill's scare tactics destroyed Policy Bill's reassurances. "The
Chinese should have every assurance that, at least as long as this
administration is here, we support [the moratorium on] nuclear testing," said
Policy Bill. Abruptly, Political Bill interjected, "Now, if we ever get a
president that's against the test ban treaty, which we may get--I mean, there
are plenty of people out there who say they're against it--then I think you
might as well get ready for it. You'll have Russia testing, you'll have China
testing, you'll have India testing, you'll have Pakistan testing. You'll have
countries abandoning the Nonproliferation Treaty." Political Bill didn't care
how these words affected world leaders. To him, the test ban treaty was just
another wedge issue. That's why he opened his news conference not by
distinguishing arms control as a transcendent responsibility but by lumping it
together with budget politics: "In recent days, members of the congressional
majority have displayed a reckless partisanship. It threatens America's
economic well-being and now our national security."

            
Clinton's partisan teammates repeated his alarmist spin. "This vote sent a
dangerous message to people around the world," said Hillary Clinton. In a
campaign ad endorsed by Senate Democrats and the White House, Vice President Al
Gore warned, "This vote goes against the tide of history." The Senate had
decided to "roll back 50 years of progress on real efforts to stem the nuclear
proliferation," lamented Senate Minority Leader Tom Daschle of South Dakota,
calling it "a definitive vote that said, 'Around the world, we relegate
leadership on nuclear proliferation to somebody else.' " The Democrats'
campaign chief, Sen. Bob Torricelli, D-N.J., charged, "Republican senators have
bought responsibility for the North Koreans and the Iranians and the Iraqis in
the next decade, [who] almost assuredly will continue now with nuclear
programs. ... Other nations are going to interpret this vote by the Senate as
an opportunity to break out of [arms] controls."

            
Foreign governments and the media were already inclined to interpret the vote
as a renunciation of arms control and global engagement. Clinton only
encouraged that interpretation. The vote "halted the momentum" toward nuclear
arms control and "further weakened the already shaky standing of the United
States as a global moral leader," the New York Times concluded in a
front-page analysis the day after Clinton's news conference. Another
Times story added that "fears have been heightened by what looks like an
American renunciation of any controls over its huge nuclear arsenal," and "the
appearance that Americans are moving away from international agreements and
responsibilities can also be alarming." A Los Angeles Times analysis
said the Senate was "signaling an ominous retreat from the world."

            The perverse irony of the
nuclear age is that the survival of humankind has rested as much on
international perception as on reality. Thirty years ago, it rested on the
perception that we were willing to build bombs and deploy them. Today it rests
increasingly on the perception that we're willing to stop. Clinton has the
ability to sustain that perception despite the test ban's defeat. If only he
had the will.

         
      
   
