
   
   
      
         
            The Rating Game

            
               X-it
Strategy
            

            David Edelstein's ("Blame Blockbuster, Not the
MPAA") makes good points about the way that the after-market also influences
what can be seen in theaters. But I believe the MPAA is partly to blame for
that situation, because it allowed first the X and then its clone the NC-17 to
be described as categories hospitable to hard-core pornography. My hope is that
an A rating would work specifically because the NC-17 would be retained, to
give Blockbuster something to feel pious about.

            The current situation
has become impossible. The R rating has been stretched to the bursting point
and now permits material that would have been NC-17 a few years ago. Yet a
Kubrick film cannot be seen as he intended it.

            -- Roger Ebert
            

            Chicago

Burning Bush
            

            I was disappointed in Michael Kinsley's "" because
it took so many cheap shots and was so internally inconsistent. He first
asserts that George W. Bush's having an opinion about how one gets to heaven is
tantamount to "condemning most of humanity." Then, in response to Bush's
efforts to get out of this subject by stating that God decides who goes to
heaven, Kinsley mocks him, noting that "we can stipulate that God decides."
Well, which is it--is Bush "condemning" people by having an opinion, or is he a
weenie for saying that God decides?

            Then, after frying Bush
for having a view, idly wondering if he is an anti-Semite, and criticizing him
for trying to avoid a theological quagmire in the midst of a political
campaign, Kinsley attacks him and others for not sticking to their true views
and also criticizes the general public (to which he was pandering only a few
column inches previously) for caring about what other people believe about such
issues. Really--it seems like Mike is trying to have his cake and eat it
several times.

            -- Steve
Aeschbacher
            

            
Woodinville, Wash.

            
               The Road to
Hell
            

            Who in the hell cares
whether anyone thinks someone else will go to heaven? (See Michael Kinsley's
"Go to Hell") Does this belief change one's ability to govern? This should only
matter if the person governing is governing over the place where admission to
same is the governor's prerogative. As long as the religious belief of the
person governing does not promote or condone acts of violence against those
governed, or in the repression of those who fail to share his/her religious
convictions, then the beliefs that the governor holds are not a newsworthy
event, or even the public's business. We in the United States seem to give too
much weight to things that do not have any bearing on the person's ability to
lead the country. I couldn't have cared less if President Clinton had an
extramarital affair, other than that he spent taxpayer money to get on
television and swear to us repeatedly that it did not happen. His affair has no
bearing on his ability to do his job ... his dishonesty does. If we ever prove
that George W. Bush has lied to us at our expense, then this will be a factor
that should be weighed in determining his ability to truly lead this country.
But otherwise, so long as his religious convictions, no matter how weak or
strong they may be, are not geared toward the outright oppression or
destruction/neglect of those who fail to share his views, they should not
matter, and warrant no scrutiny.

            -- Jeffrey K.
Honor
            

            
Raleigh, N.C.

            
               Closing the
Circle
            

            I shall direct my remarks to Ellen McGarrahan ("").
I, like you, on the morning of May 4, 1990, attended the legal execution of
Jesse Tafero, at the Florida State Prison. I, like you, was attending his
execution as a witness, not for my former employer, the Florida Highway Patrol,
but to complete a cycle. A promise to myself, as it were. You see, unlike you,
I was on the scene the morning of Sept. 19, 1976, after Jesse Tafero shot and
killed state trooper Phillip A. Black and his friend Canadian constable Donald
Irwin. Irwin was unarmed. I will save you the description of the scene that
morning, but it is indelible in my mind, as Tafero's execution obviously is in
yours. Your murderer, you said, suffered for seven minutes. I cannot tell you
the length of time it took Black and Irwin to die. Irwin was shot through the
eye. Black was shot multiple times and had a stun gun used on him. Then the two
were left to die on the pavement. I thought it more than a little curious that
you did not mention those fine law enforcement officers in your article.

            I realize the purpose of
your article was to indict the electric chair, as well as to generate sympathy
for the likes of Jesse Tafero. Yes, the death penalty involves death.
Unfortunately, it is often the death of a law enforcement officer that
initiates the process. I am somewhat surprised that you did not invoke that
over-worn liberal word "deterrent" somewhere in your article. But then your
essay was not against the use of capital punishment, only the barbaric electric
chair. Well, I'm sorry that I cannot join your indignant outrage. If someone
being electrocuted in the chair, God forbid, happens to get burned or suffer a
nosebleed, so be it. One fact remains above all others; it was Jesse Tafero's
choice.

            -- Don Walston
            

            Fort Pierce, Fla.

         
      
   
