
   
   
      
         
             Flushed

            Today's decision by the South Carolina Supreme
Court to outlaw the state's $2.8 billion video poker industry is the most
remarkable defeat for gambling in memory. Other states have blocked
gambling--as Alabama did by defeating a lottery referendum this week--but this
marks the first time in 50 years that a state has outlawed gambling and
uprooted a living industry.

            The South Carolina decision is a triumph for
anti-gambling activists, who have been hammering the Palmetto state for years.
Yet, weirdly, it is also a victory for gambling--at least the kind of gambling
that Americans want.

            To understand why, you
have to realize how ugly the South Carolina video poker industry is. Those who
have not visited South Carolina recently don't know what a favor the Supreme
Court has done the state. Gambling everywhere in America has produced its share
of social disarray and political sleaziness, but nothing remotely equals South
Carolina, whose poker industry was built on lies, legal chicanery, and just
plain crime.

            Most Americans don't realize South Carolina even has legal
gambling, yet it has 7,000 places to gamble--more than any state and three
times as many as Nevada. It has 34,000 gambling machines, more than all but
three states. South Carolina is--and there is no other word for it--blighted by
gambling. About one-quarter of all South Carolina retail businesses
offer gambling. Every place you can think of that might have gambling has
gambling: Convenience stores, bars, restaurants, bowling alleys, truck stops,
etc., are fogged with cigarette smoke and filled with people who don't have
much money playing games they can't win for five, 10, 20 hours at a stretch.
(I'm not exaggerating. I have seen this.) Video poker operators grossed $750
million last year, and their take has been growing 20 percent annually. And all
this has occurred in a state that never intended to legalize gambling.

            The video poker industry
finessed itself into existence. South Carolina law clearly banned gambling. But
in 1986, as a favor to a big local businessman, a state senator stuck a tiny
amendment in the back of a gigantic budget bill. The amendment erased two
words--"or property"--from an obscure South Carolina law. It passed without any
debate--public or private--and without legislators knowing what they had done.
It legalized video gambling, allowing game owners to pay jackpots to video
poker winners. It wasn't until 1989 that the state even realized what had
happened.

            Having legalized itself through the backdoor, the industry
proceeded to duck, skirt, or break every law passed to control it. When the
state banned big jackpots by forbidding machines to pay more than $125 to a
player in a day, poker operators ignored the law. They continued to offer
multithousand dollar jackpots: If a gambler hit the jackpot, he was simply paid
$125 a day for as many days as it took to empty the pot.

            When the state banned
casinos by limiting operators to five machines on one "premises," operators
surmised that "premises" meant, essentially, anything with a wall and a door.
Then they jammed 40 or 60 or 100 machines into a single building and subdivided
it into endless five-machine closets. (They call these places, with a sick
sense of euphemism, "video malls." More dismal casinos you cannot imagine. At
one "video mall" where I spent several days, the only food on offer was Tootsie
Rolls.) Unlike virtually every other state with gambling, South Carolina does
not tax gambling revenues, does not forbid children to play the machines, and
does not ban felons from owning them. Gambling experts call it the "Wild West"
of gambling.

            The video poker industry's latest trick was buying itself a
governor. After Republican Gov. David Beasley tried and failed to ban video
poker last year, the industry went to war against him. It spent at least $3
million--and almost certainly a lot more--to defeat Beasley's re-election bid.
By one estimate, video poker supplied more than 70 percent of Democratic
gubernatorial candidate Jim Hodges' war chest, plus another million from a
single poker operator on his own anti-Beasley operation, plus another million
or more in soft money for the Democratic Party. (The chairman of the state
Democratic Party is the leading lawyer for the poker industry.) Beasley, a
popular Republican governor in a thriving Republican state, lost to a
little-known, uncharismatic Democrat. The poker money swamped him.

            But despite Hodges'
victory, the backlash against video poker grew. The overwhelming image of
American gambling is of Vegas glamour, but the new reality is "convenience
gambling." This is the industry euphemism for the infiltration of gambling into
everyday life (which is indeed convenient for the businesses that make millions
off it). Traditionally, Americans have separated gambling, exiling it to the
desert of Nevada, the horse track, or the beach. But convenience gambling has
brought it next door, in the form of video gambling in places such as Montana,
South Dakota, and Louisiana, and in the form of scratch-off lottery games all
over the country. South Carolina is by far the most extreme example of
convenience gambling.

            Experts deplore convenience gambling. It is extremely
dangerous to addicts: Every trip to the store becomes a temptation. (Video
poker, which is fast and requires skill, is known as "video crack" because it
is by far the most addictive form of gambling. According to the only study of
South Carolina gamblers, the state seems to have a problem-gambling rate twice
as high as Nevada's.) Convenience gambling also addicts businesses. South
Carolina hooked previously independent gas stations, convenience stores, bars,
and restaurants on gambling dollars.

            Most alarmingly,
convenience gambling exacts huge social costs in the form of addiction and
financial hardship without providing any economic benefit. Unlike casino
gambling, convenience gambling does not bring with it hotels, restaurants,
tourists, or good jobs. "There is no pretense that this is about tourism or
about a nice night out or this is entertainment. This is hard-core,
grab-the-paycheck gambling," said Tom Grey, founder of the National Coalition
Against Gambling Expansion, when I interviewed him about South Carolina this
spring for Harper's .

            Today's decision is the culmination of the anti-poker
backlash. This summer, the legislature ordered a Nov. 2 referendum to decide
the status of poker once and for all. The law specified that if the referendum
were ruled unconstitutional, poker would be banned in July 2000. South Carolina
has no referendum right, so the Supreme Court canceled the vote and upheld the
ban.

            It's unfortunate that the Supreme Court voided the
referendum, because it deprives voters of the opportunity to throw out the
poker industry themselves. And there is little doubt they would have done so.
The anti-poker campaign has galvanized the state like no issue ever has.
Virtually every church in the state, the top strategists from both parties, the
state chamber of commerce, and thousands of grassroots organizers banded
together to defeat poker. The most recent poll suggested that the anti-poker
forces would win in a rout: More than 60 percent of voters favored banning
poker, and only 16 percent wanted to keep it.

            "Poker was a like a
houseguest that was unwelcome in the first place, that stayed too long, and was
really obnoxious. People just want it gone," says Glenn Stanton, who runs the
anti-gambling Palmetto Family Council.

            Video poker is not gone yet. The industry has a magnificent
aptitude for escaping defeat. It has used suits and lobbying and more suits to
stymie previous efforts to restrict it. There is no doubt the industry will ask
the legislature--poker usually "asks" with thousands of dollars in campaign
contributions--to reconsider the ban.

            The irony of the South Carolina fight is that video
poker's death may actually help the gambling industry. For the past few weeks,
rumors have been circulating in South Carolina that Nevada casino owners were
subsidizing the anti-poker campaign. The American Gaming Association has spoken
out against the state's gambling anarchy, and for good reason. The gambling
industry wants to be the gaming industry. Casino owners have carefully
cultivated a family-friendly, law-abiding image: They loathe South Carolina,
where gambling is criminal, ugly, and unpopular.

            Kill video poker in
South Carolina, and you erase the biggest stain on gambling's image. The
businesses that remain--perfumed slot palaces, Indian bingos, lotteries--seem
virtuous, and are virtuous, by comparison.

         
      
   
