
   
   
      
         
            Dysfunctional Dole

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               This is a political
concern, not personal. Each time I see the erectile dysfunction ad with Bob
Dole, I cringe. What happened to his statesmanlike demeanor? Is it entirely a
coincidence that we have a president who can get it up (for each and every one
who asks), instead of a president who can't? Do we need to know about Bob's
penile trouble in order to go forward? Must we be a party to all his
witherings? Surely someone agrees with me.
            

            

               --Ricespring
            

            Dear Rice,

            Prudie guesses Mrs. Dole
and her campaign aides agree with you. And Prudie is reminded of the old
vaudeville joke about an older gentleman who tells a friend that he finds sex
at his age terrific. Especially the one in the winter.

            
--Prudie, neutrally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Your advice to the
seemed fair and balanced. How rare. I thought, however, I might take the
opportunity to chime in and mention that I have got wind of the existence of an
herb, indigenous to Thailand, which reportedly stimulates the actual growth of
existing breasts. I've heard only scattered reports about it, and those mostly
relating to the Thai government's efforts to quell its export. Your readers who
are currently considering artificial augmentation (which as a man I find
repugnant) may just want to wait a while. I'm sure a fistful of American money
will have the Thai people throwing seeds over the border in no time.
            

            

               --Ameer
            

            Dear Am,

            After an inquiry
regarding Bob Dole's ... well, anyway, your letter is most interesting. Prudie
has heard nothing of the Thai herb. It is hard to imagine, though, why any
government would embargo such a product, unless the plastic surgeons' lobby has
already got to them. Prudie hopes your information is correct--if only so some
health food company can market a product called Gingko Bilbooba.

            
--Prudie, naturally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I grew up being
taught that people should not make loud noises when eating in public. I am
quite bothered by co-workers who eat loudly at their desks, which are very near
to mine. (It is common practice in our office to eat at one's desk, since
there's no nice place to eat on the premises.) One person in particular always
comes over to talk while loudly snacking on potato chips and other items.
Trouble is, I can't think of any remotely acceptable way to convey my
unhappiness with this behavior. I'd be very grateful if you could.
            

            

               --J.W. in Massachusetts
            

            Dear J.,

            You are correct that you
cannot come right out and say, "It is gauche to come over and serenade me with
your potato chips, so please go away." Here are a few options that are not
confrontational. You might have something to read during lunch, sort of a de
facto "Do Not Disturb" sign. You could hook up to Walkman earphones. You might
inform everyone that you are meditating, or simply say you'd love to visit
during a coffee break, but lunch is when you've decided to catch up on your
checkbook/Italian lessons/letter to Mom/fill in the blank. Prudie sees no
reason to be held prisoner to a potato chip. As for the sounds from other
desks, use earplugs or the above-mentioned Walkman to drown out the sounds of
celery.

            
--Prudie, tactfully

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My wife and I are
gearing up for our daughter's third birthday party. We had a blowout (45
people) for her first, a pretty large to-do for her second (35 people), and
have decided that this party will be for 3-year-olds and close relatives only,
thank you. Many of our friends are relieved, I think, not to have to give up a
summer Sunday afternoon. But, of course, there are those who expect to be
invited, and I don't know how to break it to them that they are not welcome. To
make things worse, they have already told me about the ridiculously expensive
gifts they have purchased for our irresistible little birthday girl. I am
looking for a delicate way to get the gifts but stand firm on the
invitations.
            

            
               --Not Entirely
Unselfishly,
            

            

               Daddy
            

            Dear Dad,

            Prudie will try not to
be too judgmental about your delicacy, though your wish to grab the gifts with
no party attached leaves something to be desired. In addition to looking
askance at your rather material approach, Prudie has long disapproved of
elaborate birthday parties for tykes ... going back years ago to a celebration
for a 1-year-old child, where the parents engaged a chimp and a trainer, and
the animal bit the birthday girl. But back to your deal: Since people have
already mentioned their gifts and their plans to launch your darling into year
No. 3, you may be stuck for one more over-the-top party. Prudie suggests,
therefore, that you say on the invitations, "Shirley Ann's Last Birthday Party
With Grown-ups." The inference will be clear that next year, when the child is
4, she will have her own circle of friends from ... well, somewhere. If you are
absolutely not up to having dozens of chums this year, tell them that it's just
playmates from now on--and be prepared to forgo some loot.

            
--Prudie, directly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My daughter recently
graduated from high school after a successful year of captaining the winning
softball team. During the softball season my husband and I got to know many of
the team parents and were particularly taken with the extended family of a
ninth-grader, a new player on the team. At the end of the school year, I called
to invite this family, their young daughter, and her older brother--also a
graduating senior--to our house for a cookout with the softball coaches before
our daughter left for summer study abroad. I did not intend this party to be a
graduation or a bon voyage party for our daughter. We were quite taken aback
when various members of this other family brought gifts and graduation cards
for our daughter ... including cash totaling about $200! We had prepared no
graduation gift for their son, whom my husband and I do not know well. My
daughter expressed gratitude and is writing thank-you notes and plans to bring
the family a gift from France. I wonder if I should have done things
differently--perhaps whipped up a card and cash between serving courses? Should
we send a gift as the son prepares to go to college? Should I have anticipated
the interpretation of my invitation as a gift solicitation, given the timing?
Or should I just relax and consider their gifts a generous expression of their
appreciation for my daughter's leadership and mentoring of the younger player
throughout the year?
            

            

               --Julie
            

            Dear Jule,

            Prudie votes for
"relax." Your motives were pure and a good time was had by all. It may be a
personal bias, but Prudie has long wished the tit for tat principle would fall
by the wayside. The giving of gifts simply to even things up is just another
version of "You look lovely"/"So do you." Your daughter's present from France
will be very meaningful, and the timing will be perfect.

            
--Prudie, genuinely

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               You missed something important about the
problem of "." Vague or unintelligible phone messages, with a clear reply
number, are now a tool of telemarketers. Some of them do this just to get the
victim to call an expensive toll number. Many refer to correcting a credit
problem, which is fictitious.
            

            
               Of course, Slurred
Off could have had a simple garbled message, I suppose. How boring.
            

            

               --Jim S.
            

            Dear Jim,

            What an interesting take
you have offered. Because Prudie harbors hostility toward intrusive
telemarketers, she is most happy to pass the word. And she does not want one
letter from the offending telephone pests arguing with her. She knows it's a
tough way to make a living, but unsolicited pitches are just junk mail
delivered by a human voice.

            --Prudie, feistily

         
      
   
