
   
   
      
         
            Of Dictators, Benevolent and Otherwise

            Ehud
Barak, who took office Tuesday as Israel's new prime minister, was heralded
Wednesday in the Jerusalem
Post as the country's most powerful leader since the old days of Labor
Party dominance, which ended two decades ago. Barak has "artfully protected his
freedom of movement," the paper said in an editorial.
"He has built a government that cannot be brought down by any single party,
surrounded himself with a deliberately weak cabinet, and left outside his
government a demoralized and confused opposition of less than a third of the
Knesset. In short, the newly launched Barak era has the makings of the
democratic version of a benevolent dictatorship." Ha'aretz , which led
its front page Wednesday with a report
that Barak is planning to seek détente with Israel's "enemy number one," Iran,
against strong objections by his own military intelligence, also pointed out in
its Wednesday editorial that Barak has "achieved his fundamental goal--a
government unthreatened by a sword of Damocles over its head." It said that the
hopes and expectations of "the entire public" are with him.

            
Abroad, the Times of London said Barak's overtures toward Israel's
neighbors will be "widely welcomed" but warned that he needs to get a move on.
Although he now enjoys "a formidable amount of individual political authority,"
it is unlikely that he will "be able to retain such power on a permanent
basis," the paper said in an editorial. "It will not be long before the Labour
Party starts to resent its semi-detached leader, before secular and religious
parties find cause to conspire against each other within the Cabinet, and
before the voters demand immediate action on other domestic issues." A comment piece in the Independent of London Wednesday said that Barak has
come to power "with the immense advantage of succeeding Benjamin Netanyahu,
who, in three years, became the most widely detested Israeli leader at home and
abroad since the formation of the state. Mr Netanyahu is now expected to
disappear, unlamented in Israel, on to the American lecture tour circuit,
though there are no signs of anybody offering the $60,000 he is asking for a
single speech."

            In
Paris, Le Figaro ,
which led its front page with Barak's advocacy of a "peace of the brave"
between Israel and its Arab neighbors, published an interview Wednesday with
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, who described Barak as a "promising" prime
minister who will "probably adopt the same line as [assassinated Prime Minister
Yitzhak] Rabin." Mubarak also said he hopes to arrange an Arab summit
meeting--the first since 1996--in the autumn, with the inclusion of Iraq "at a
level of participation still to be determined." Asked why Yugoslav President
Slobodan Milosevic caved in to American military pressure while President
Saddam Hussein of Iraq has not, Mubarak replied, "One lives in Europe, the
other in the Middle East." In Italy, Corriere della
Sera of Milan published an interview with Rabin's widow, Leah, who
warmly praised Barak as a brilliant man who will push the peace process forward
and finish the work her husband did until his murder in November 1995. Barak
will create a completely different climate from that of the past three years,
during which Netanyahu "continually went back on his word with the Arabs and
nurtured the culture of distrust," she said.

            In
Russia Tuesday, Izvestiya published a rare interview with President Boris
Yeltsin in which he said he will retire next year when his current term of
office ends and hand over power to a successor elected by the people. While
this disclosure failed to excite those observers who think that the main issue
is whether Yeltsin will live to see out his term, it was described in the
Moscow Times
as "noteworthy" in view of the speculation that has been going on in the
Russian media for years that he will never voluntarily give up power. The
president told Izvestiya that he has a successor in mind but will not
identify him because "as soon as I name him, he won't be let live calmly, he
will be henpecked." But he warned against this person being regarded as "a
successor to the throne," since the next head of state will be chosen not by
Yeltsin, but by the Russian people.

            
Yeltsin also confirmed that the body of Lenin will eventually be removed from
the mausoleum in Red Square and buried in an ordinary grave (a story taken up
Wednesday on the front page of Germany's Die Welt ). "The question is when," he said. "The
problem is a serious one. Lenin in his mausoleum is an historical symbol of our
past, but I agree with Alexiy II, patriarch of all Russia, when he says that it
isn't Christian-like behavior to keep the body of a long-dead person on public
display."

            The
Times of London led its front page Wednesday with the jailing in Serbia
of a TV technician who sparked the biggest anti-Milosevic demonstration since
the Kosovo war by breaking into a broadcast of a basketball championship match
to urge viewers to take to the streets. The demonstration by around 30,000
people in the town of Leskovac was one of several across Serbia Monday. The
tabloid Daily Express reported Tuesday that attempts to secure asylum
for Milosevic in Libya, South Africa, Russia, or China have all come to
nothing.

            Most
British papers also reported a speech in the House of Lords Tuesday in which
former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said that Britain's treatment of the
former Chilean dictator Gen. Augusto Pinochet has left her country's
"reputation for loyalty and fair dealing in tatters." She said that his arrest
while under sedation in a London hospital was "inhumane" and "unlawful," and
that while Chileans have so far responded to it "with great restraint," it
should not be assumed that they will continue to do so, "particularly if Sen.
Pinochet, who is not in the best of health, were to die in Britain." In an
editorial, the conservative Daily Telegraph agreed with
Thatcher that Tony Blair's government was doing Britain unnecessary harm
"merely to enable the vengeful pack in pursuit of Pinochet to settle their
scores."

         
      
   
