
   
   
      
         
            &quot;Genetic Super Babies Storm&quot; 

            

               Le Monde
               
of Paris led its front page Thursday on the tension between Europe and the
United States over genetically modified (GM) crops. It reported that two French
companies, the country's leading animal feed and poultry producers, have formed
a pact against GM soya seed imported from the United States. The companies,
Glon-Sanders and Bourgoin, have put together a scheme with French farmers to
exclude GM soya from the food chain. Le Monde said that even U.S.
consumers are beginning to show anxiety about GM foods. "The American
administration, which has collaborated with industry from the start to promote
GM foods, seems to be in an uncomfortable position," it said. "It is being less
threatening toward Europe and Japan, which oppose these products." In Britain,
Thursday's papers were largely dominated by Doogie, the GM mouse. The Daily
Mail underscored not Doogie's possible role in helping old people with
memory loss but the risk that he might give rise to an elite race of high-IQ GM
children. "Genetic Super Babies Storm" was its front-page splash.

            

               Le
Figaro
                of Paris led Thursday on the Russian money-laundering
scandal and the United States' threat to oppose any further loans to Moscow by
the International Monetary Fund. Many European papers dwelt on the harm the
scandal may cause to the presidential ambitions of Vice President Al Gore. In a
report from Washington Thursday, the Independent of London said that "the risks to his
presidential bid are considerable." The Russian press blamed Western reporting
of the scandal on U.S. Republican machinations against the IMF leadership and
the Democratic Party. Tycoon Boris Berezovsky's daily, Nezavisimaya
Gazeta , said Wednesday that the foreign media are "engaged in killing the
Russian state and Russian companies as possible economic partners." Their
campaign has two main purposes, it said: first, to find a pretext for the West
to distance itself from Boris Yeltsin, whom it no longer needs as a bulwark
against communism; and second, to dump Gore as a contender for the
presidency.

            As
anarchy continued in East Timor, the South China Morning Post of Hong Kong blamed Indonesia for
the breakdown of law and order in the territory. In an editorial Thursday, it said Indonesia should be made to
pay "a very heavy price" if it continues to fail to deliver on the promises it
made so confidently before the referendum. "All aid to Indonesia should be put
on hold until it has brought the militia groups under control," it said.

            As
Madeleine Albright arrived in the Middle East to join the tense
Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations, various commentators in the Arab press
drew parallels between the current state of Arab politics and the indiscipline,
score-settling, and violence that marred the two-week biennial Pan-Arab Games
which ended Tuesday in Amman, Jordan. In Thursday's Pan-Arab al-Hayat ,
Joseph Samaha described some of the scenes shown on television during the
games: "One athlete assaults another. Football fans invade a pitch. A coach
curses an administrator. A woman martial arts competitor attacks a referee. A
bodyguard draws his pistol. A policeman fires tear gas. Fans wreck the seats in
a stadium or hurl them on to the pitch. Players are bombarded with bottles. A
number of people are wounded." They showed, he said, that there are some people
in the Arab world who refuse to lose--or even to draw--under any circumstances
whatsoever.

            The
30 th anniversary of the coup in Tripoli, Libya, that brought Muammar
Qaddafi to power was marked in La Repubblica of Rome Wednesday by an interview with
seven-time Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti (now on trial in Italy for
alleged connections with a Mafia murder), who said that while in office he was
given false information about Libya by the U.S. intelligence services. On one
occasion, an American envoy touring European countries to convince their
governments of Qaddafi's responsibility for a terrorist massacre at Rome's
Fiumicino airport in December 1985 offered as evidence the fact that the
perpetrators were carrying Tunisian passports stolen from Tunisian workers in
Libya. Andreotti replied that he knew for certain they were Algerian passports
as they were in the possession of the Italian authorities. "Are you doubting
the word of the president of the United States?" the unidentified envoy
retorted. Andreotti said Qaddafi had once given him a copy of his Green
Book and asked him to hand it on to President Reagan, which he subsequently
did. "Reagan accepted it and said he would read it, but I don't know if he ever
did," Andreotti said.

            Among
many features in the European press linked to the 60 th anniversary
of the outbreak of World War II in Europe, Corriere della Sera of
Milan ran an interview Wednesday with British historian Denis Mack Smith, who
said he has evidence that Mussolini warned Churchill of Hitler's invasion plans
in August 1939. Mussolini hated Hitler and wanted him to be defeated, Mack
Smith said, but he eventually entered the war as his ally because he was
frightened that the Germans would otherwise invade Italy.

            An
interview given to the New York Times by Prince Edward, the queen of
England's youngest son, brought down the wrath of Rupert Murdoch's British
newspapers Thursday. The prince, interviewed in Los Angeles where he was trying
to drum up commissions for his TV production company, said he preferred doing
business in America because in Britain "they hate anyone who succeeds." The
Times of
London accused the prince of letting Britain and its royal family down "with a
casual insult" made all the more distressing by the fact that the interview was
designed to promote his own commercial interests. "The Prince may feel it is
appropriately ingratiating to tell his American audience that there is a 'much
greater openness and willingness to take us for what we are over here,' " the
Times said in an editorial. "But does he pause to consider what effect
such a dismissal of Britain will have, what outmoded stereotypes of a crabbed,
cobwebbed, and unenterprising nation his words will perpetuate?"

            
Murdoch's mass-circulation tabloid the Sun went further. In an editorial
which both agreed with Prince Edward's comments and excoriated him for making
them. The Sun called him "a pampered, privileged young man who has
achieved nothing, despite being born with a royal silver spoon in his mouth,
despite all the undeserved advantages he has been handed." Then, praising
America's classless meritocracy, it said: "Maybe Britain should have got rid of
the royals too." This statement perpetuated doubts about Murdoch's attitude to
the British royal family.

            In
Canada, the National
Post reported Thursday on a commemoration ceremony for the 229
people who died last Sept. 2 when Swissair Flight 111 crashed in St. Margaret's
Bay, Nova Scotia. For the purpose of "adding to the closure" for the relatives
of the deceased, a Mountie, Inspector Andy Arsenault, stepped up to the
microphone to sing. "Love will be our legacy," he sang. "When dreams get
tossed, we'll share the cost, and lay the roses on the rocks."

         
      
   
