
   
   
      
         
            No. 294: &quot;Whose Tiara Is It, Anyway?&quot;

            
               Facing sinking
ratings, the producers of the Miss America pageant last week announced a change
in format, to make the telecast more entertaining for the home audience. Name
that change.
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 293)--"Sporting Life":
            

            

               This weekend, 6,500 Canadians will jam Montreal's Olympic Stadium to
share in a timeless spectacle involving bravery, farm animals, and Velcro. What
is it?
            

            "
'Timeless' they may be, but Sun Myung Moon's weddings are getting way too
elaborate."-- J.D. Majors
            

            "The
complete, uncut version of Carnie Wilson's gastric bypass, including the
little-known post-op scandal: the installation of the 'secret' velcro
flap!"-- Barbara Lippert
            

            "In
the height of corporate arrogance, Nike is putting its sweat-shop operations on
tour, marketing them as an 'extreme sport.' "-- Matt Sullivan
            

            "It's
Canadian football! The typical insular American probably doesn't realize just
how different a game it is up there. (The 'E-Z-2-Catch' brand Velcro football
is still controversial, though . )"-- Francis Heaney
            

            "Safe
sex."-- Olivene Hargrave
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Tim's Wrap-Up
            

            Quiz participant Harald
Amodt began his response with the observation, "It's the inclusion of farm
animals that makes one wonder if this spectacle involves sex or violence." As
dubious as that sentiment might at first appear, a cursory look through his
fellow participants' answers shows that he's quite right: As far as News Quiz
readers are concerned, those are the two activities associated with
livestock. (Which, I'm sure, must make this page especially attractive to
prospective 
                  Slate
                advertisers. I'm not sure if this means that
PETA ought to spend more on those banner ads, or if it means that they should
save their money. Probably the latter.) (Randy may be back a little sooner than
expected, folks.) The other notable thing about Amodt? His name looks an awful
lot, on first glance, like "Hannah Arendt," who, I'm fairly sure, never
advocated sex with or violence to animals, at least, not in her published
works. And what else did we learn from today's Quiz? A quick recap. Canadians:
dull, provincial, and oddly prevalent on U.S. comedy shows. Montreal: Frenchy.
Alan Greenspan's ass: still funny. Alan Thicke's ass: curiously
unmentioned.

            
               The Maple Leaf
Answer
            

            
               (supplied by Chris
Kelly)
            

            A bloodless bullfight.
Instead of stabbing the bulls, the matadors will tag them with velcro
banderillas . Or is it the banderilleros who use the
banderillas ? What about the picadors? Note to self: Must reread Death
in the Afternoon . On second thought, no.

            
               Ratings-War
Extra
            

            With the current furor
over the MPAA ratings system, perhaps it's time we turn to an alternative: the
CAP-Alert system. CAP (short for the ChildCare Action Project), located at
www.capalert.com,
offers detailed synopses of current releases for fundamentalist parents, along
with a traffic-light ratings system (red, yellow, or green). See if you can
match the current release with its CAP-Alert ratings and excerpts from its
review.

            1) The Iron Giant
            

            2) Star Wars: Episode I -- The Phantom
Menace
            

            3) An Ideal Husband
            

            4) Tea With Mussolini
            

            5) Tarzan
            

            6) Inspector
Gadget
            

            A) Red light; offenses include "strong focus on
nuclear warfare and the nihilistic desperation of it ... dangerous example of
risky medical assessment ... suggestive eye movement ... display of the yin
yang."

            B) Red light; offenses include "statue nudity ...
suggestive eye movement ... arrogance against father."

            C) Yellow light; offenses include "implications and
references to Darwinian evolution ... parental arguing ... skimpy dress
throughout."

            D) Red light; offenses include "flatulence ...
repeated exposure to adult underwear ... automatic gunfire with lustful
enjoyment ... a computer image of a champagne glass with an olive."

            E) Yellow light; offenses include
"levitation/psychokineses ... scant clothing ... statue nudity ... eating of
animals by animals."

            F) Red light; offenses
include "statue nudity ... anatomical reference ... attachment to a pet
endangering self or others ... expressing joy at husband's death."

            
               Answers
            

            
               1-A, 2-E, 3-B, 4-F,
5-C, 6-D.
            

            
               Weeklong Extra
            

            A headline from Monday
morning's Daily Variety : "Dutch regulators issue equal-access
guidelines." Participants are invited to find, in an actual newspaper or
magazine, a less enticing headline. Deadline is noon, Wednesday. Answers posted
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Expos.

         
      
   
