
   
   
      
         
            The Art Giuliani Was Spared

            
Although the election of the Islamic leader Abdurrahman Wahid as Indonesia's
new president came too late to be reported in any of Wednesday's papers, the
ballot process was seen as giving hope for democracy. An op-ed in the
South China Morning
Post of Hong Kong said that "despite all the mess, the killing, the
corruption and deceit, Indonesia is engaging in a more open and competitive
political process than ever before." The Guardian of London
said in an editorial that the ballot by parliament marked "a crucial turning
point" for Indonesia since it was the country's first contested presidential
election.

            
However, there were worries about the potential consequences of the defeat of
the nation's most popular presidential candidate, Megawati Sukarnoputri. The
Australian ,
Rupert Murdoch's national daily, said Wednesday that if she failed to win, the
Indonesian economy could be halted by strikes and popular unrest. This was a
warning made Monday by Gen. Zen Mulani, head of the country's national
intelligence agency, in a briefing to economists and presidential advisers. He
said that banks and capital markets are expected to be the main targets of
industrial action. In an editorial, the Age of Melbourne criticized Australian Prime Minister
John Howard for publicly backing Megawati's candidature on the eve of the vote.
"Australia would be better served if he kept his own counsel on who should lead
another nation," it said.

            In an
editorial, the Daily Telegraph of London
condemned as "disgraceful" the treatment meted out by the British police to Wei
Jingsheng, China's leading democratic dissident and a former nominee for the
Nobel Peace Prize. The police seized and held him Tuesday as he tried to unfurl
a banner in front of Queen Elizabeth and Jiang Zemin as they processed in a
royal carriage up the Mall to Buckingham Palace during the Chinese president's
state visit to Britain. "This country is increasingly seen by dissidents as an
accomplice of the Chinese Communist Party," the paper said. Noting that the
Chinese authorities had let it be known in advance that Britain would pay a
penalty if it tolerated public protest during Jiang's visit, it commented, "The
Government may have been right to invite President Jiang to Britain, but it
should not kowtow to repressive demands." Wei himself told the press: "We think
the police behavior is without reason. We thought it was only in China that
freedom of expression was forbidden." The Times of London said the
police operated a policy of "zero tolerance" toward all demonstrators except
for 40 Falun Gong practitioners who were allowed to practice their spiritual
exercises opposite the prime minister's office.

            On
Tuesday, Izvestiya of Moscow noted an alarming new tendency in Russia:
In the absence of effective enforcement of property rights, people simply grab
what they think should be theirs. It gave the example of the Barrikady
agricultural cooperative in the Volgograd region, where peasant shareholders,
claiming a combine harvester and a herd of cows as their own, seized them from
a neighboring village. "This is how bloody slaughters have started in Russian
history, leading in the end to two revolutions and the placing of Russia
outside the civilized world for the entire 20 th century," the paper
said.

            The
Moscow Times
ran a comment by Yulia Latynina Wednesday on a rise in the approval ratings of
Prime Minister Vladimir Putin because of Russian successes in the Chechen war.
The writer said Putin is bound to slump again in the polls, though, because
Russia will lose the war. "To win it requires money that is not in the budget,
sober-mindedness that Russian leaders don't have, and a readiness to fight to
the end that too frequently is absent in Russian soldiers. It is funny to think
that our army--in which 'surgical strikes' are useless because enlisted men
shake the TNT out of the bombs and sell it--could consider fighting a country
in which war is considered the one worthy male occupation."

            The
Independent
of London reported Wednesday from Moscow that TNT isn't the only thing
being sold by the Russian military. It said the Russian navy is selling off the
kamikaze dolphins it trained to blow up enemy ships by carrying mines to them.
"There is a general disposal of surplus military equipment, old trucks, tanks,
armoured personnel carriers and bulldozers, which the impoverished Russian
military no longer needs or can maintain," the paper said.

            The
Independent also reported from Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, that the death of
former President Julius Nyerere is generating "the biggest outpouring of
collective grief that southern Africa has ever seen." Madeleine Albright is
among world leaders due to attend his funeral there Thursday amid "a 48-hour
non-stop orgy of tears for Baba wa Taifa--the father of the nation." The paper
described a tearful child on television singing "You did more in your life than
all the water in the sea." This included running the economy into the ground
and at one point having more political prisoners than South Africa, but his
work in the cause of African emancipation was celebrated in a poem by Kenneth
Kaunda, the former president of neighboring Zambia. That country's Post
quoted from the poem: "I am sure you know of all those successes ... in
Namibia, South Africa. Why then, Julius, do you leave Burundi unfinished?"
Kaunda told the Post that he would present another poem to Nyerere's
widow at the funeral.

            In
Israel Wednesday, Ha'aretz led its front page with a report
from Washington that Congress' refusal to include funds to implement the Wye
agreement in the foreign aid bill it approved this week "could throw a monkey
wrench" into both a final-status agreement with the Palestinians and a deal
with Syria. The Clinton administration had specifically pledged $1.2 billion in
aid to evacuate residents, relocate industries, and establish military
facilities, the paper said. It added that Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak
remains confident that the $500 million dollars of aid slated for this year
will eventually be approved because "Congressional Republicans say they do not
object to the aid in principle--it is merely a tool in their power struggle
with the White House."

            A
strange development occurred this week in the Australian referendum campaign on
the abolition of the monarchy. On Monday, the Sydney Morning Herald
reported that the Buckingham Palace Web site had quietly changed its
description of the queen's constitutional position in Australia from "head of
state" to "sovereign." This apparently delighted many Australian monarchists
who have been countering the Republicans' "resident for president" slogan with
the bizarre claim that Australia already has an Australian head of state in the
person of the governor-general, the queen's representative there. Buckingham
Palace, while claiming to be aloof from the campaign, admitted to the Daily
Telegraph Wednesday that it made the change to its Web site--calling it "an
appropriate amendment"--but wouldn't say why. The Herald said monarchist
Prime Minister John Howard was under suspicion and linked the change to the
monarchists' strategy of pretending the queen doesn't exist or, at any rate,
doesn't matter. The latest Herald opinion poll has supporters and
opponents of an Australian republic at 43 percent each.

            It
will only be known after the vote of Nov. 6 if the queen will go the way of a
species of dinosaur just discovered in Australia. The Australian
reported Wednesday that scientists have discovered a dinosaur the
size of a small gray kangaroo and have curiously named it "Qantassaurus
intrepidus" after the Australian airline, Qantas. They say it is 115 million
years old and should contribute to the paleontological debate about whether
dinosaurs were warm-blooded or cold-blooded.

            A piece of modern British
art which New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has fortunately been spared is
My Bed , by Tracey Emin, one of five artists short-listed for the annual
$30,000 Turner Prize. Featuring prominently in an exhibition at the Tate
Gallery in London, it is said to be the bed in which the artist spent a week
contemplating suicide after breaking up with a boyfriend. The Daily
Telegraph said Wednesday that the bed "is covered in urine-stained sheets
and torn pillows and is surrounded by the detritus of her sojourn. This
includes half-smoked cigarettes, condoms, packets of contraceptive pills, empty
vodka bottles, a pregnancy testing kit, sanitary towels, nylons and three pairs
of her dirty knickers." The paper's art critic compared the exhibit to
"unprocessed sewage" and said that if Emin wins the prize, as she very well
might, "her victory will testify not to the vitality of British art but to a
campaign of promotion so brazen that it has left even the cynical London art
world awestruck."

         
      
   
