
   
   
      
         
            No. 326: &quot;Scents and Sensibility&quot;

            
               "This is a dream
for me--to find the soft parts and touch them and even smell them. It's very
exciting." Who said this about what? 
               
                  (Question courtesy of
Jamie Smith and Andy Aaron.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 325)--"Wrapped Attention":
            

            

               In a TV commercial running in Houston, friends cover a Diane Keaton
look-alike in bubble wrap then roll her down a hill and through a sprinkler. We
don't find out what's being advertised until the end, when the tag line comes
up. For 500 points and the game: What is the tag line?
            

            
"George W. Bush: The courage to laugh at women on death row. The creativity to
carry out the execution in bold new ways."-- Jake Tapper ( Jennifer
Miller had a similar answer.)

            
"Arrive moist and fresh. Fly Federal Express."-- Merrill Markoe
            

            
"Everybody in Packing Materials. The Gap. (You forgot to mention she was
lip-syncing "Helter Skelter.")-- Floyd Elliot (similarly, Michael
Mannella and Al Estrada-Berg )

            "A
year later this footage was found. The Blair Witch Project II ."-- Paul
Krug
            

            "We're
adding new diagnostic procedures each day. We're your HMO."-- Kim Day
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Many News Quiz
participants suggest that the entire Bush campaign is an ad for which we do not
know the product. Sure, this is cowardly, intellectually dishonest, and an
insult to the democratic process, but it's also thrifty, and that's important,
too. (Not important to G.W., who enjoys Scrooge McDuckian campaign funds, but
important in ways that will be revealed at the end. Of something.) As long as
G.W.'s policies remain ambiguous, every TV ad is a stealth Bush ad. Any
commercial that features some kind of cool car driving through some kind of
perfect landscape implicitly says: Let G.W. (the driver) take the nation (the
car) into the future (it's just over the next fashion model). Or the ad when
the Wagnerian soprano (G.W.) spears (anti-missile system) the cell phone (bad
schools?) of a discourteous opera fan (affirmative action? The Taliban?): I
think that means he wants to cut taxes for his rich friends. You can't be
overly literal. This thing works subconsciously, like workfare.

            
               Answer
            

            "Shop together, play together, eat together."

            The ad is for the Mills Corp.'s 10 th and
newest mall, each organized around the theme "total experience," by which is
meant a combination of shopping and entertainment, by which is meant a chance
to buy stuff at Foot Locker and then play a video game. The malls combine
discount shopping, high-tech amusement arcades, theme restaurants, and 24-30
screen multiplexes showing the same teen-sex comedies, but on 24-30
screens.

            The reason we don't know
why they're being so mean to Diane Keaton until the end of the ad? "That was
very deliberate. The idea is to give a sense of intrigue that this is a new
type of experience," said John Parlota, executive vice president of the ad
agency that produced the spot. "Of course, when people find out it's just
another crappy mall, they get pretty damn mad, but by then, I'm miles away," he
did not add.

            
               Weekend Weddings
Extra
            

            
               Results:
            

            

               Duke weds Duke

               Connecticut College weds Duke

               Duke weds Montclair State

               Yale weds Yale

               Mount Holyoke weds Princeton

               Harvard weds New Hampshire

               Dartmouth weds Penn

               Rutgers weds Fordham

               Barnard weds University of Chicago

               University of Colorado weds University of California, Davis

               Penn State weds North Carolina State

               St. Francis weds St. Francis

               Davidson weds Davidson

            

            
               Highlights:
            

            "The bride owns and manages olive groves in
Tuscany."

            "In the summers he is a
fly-fishing guide."

            
               Beat the Odds:
            

            The bride, 39, graduated
from Harvard Law. The groom, 31, graduated from New Hampshire College; he is an
antiques dealer.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Content-free George W. campaign.

         
      
   
