
   
   
      
         
            No. 290: &quot;Fighting Crime ... With Science!&quot;

            
               According to the
Cambridge, Mass., Police Department, the list includes Mexican-Americans,
Pakistanis, Indians, and Cajuns. List of what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 289)--"No Problem":
            

            

               
                  
                     Quoted in the Wichita Eagle , Kansas Gov. Bill
Graves said, "This is a terrible, tragic, embarrassing solution to a problem
that did not exist." What is?
                  
               
            

            "The
new state law requiring public school teachers to use
quotation-marks-with-hands gestures whenever they use the words 'evolution,'
'Darwin,' or '20 th century' in class."-- Andrew Milner
( Alex Pascover had a similar answer.)

            "The
forced annexation of Kansas City, Mo., to avoid geographical confusion. But
it's not a problem, since nobody knows anything about geography anymore
anyway."-- Mac Thomason
            

            
"Warren Beatty's threat to run for president. Imagine 14 months of that
excruciating white-guy rap! Al's and Bill's and W's fund-raising excesses don't
seem so bad anymore, do they?"-- Scott Baisch (similarly, Jay D.
Majors and Sean Fitzpatrick )

            "The
decision by the Kansas Board of Education to define pi as 3.0. The resulting
increase in computational speed is expected to raise the state's average SAT
score by approximately 0.1415926."-- Sean Fitzpatrick (similarly,
Jonathan E. Snow )

            
"MAXIM ."-- Colleen Werthmann
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Chris'
Wrap-Up
            

            What do we think of
Kansas, class? It's pretty flat, we know that, and it's all in black and white,
as opposed to Oz. They have tornadoes. It entered the Union as a free state,
and In Cold Blood happened there. Bob Dole's from Kansas and ... um ...
its state fair is in Hutchinson, starting the Friday after Labor Day. But now
I'm cheating by looking in the almanac. Some places are so boring that that's
what's comically interesting about them: Peoria, Encino, Cleveland. Kansas is
so boring it's not even funny. Sort of like Bill Bradley.

            
               Faith-Based
Answer
            

            As many of you knew, Gov. Graves was talking about
the Kansas Board of Education, and its decision to excise evolution from the
state's science curriculum. As another step in its retreat into state-sponsored
superstition, the board has also forbidden all references to the Big Bang.
"Creationism is as good a hypothesis as any for how the universe began,"
editorialized the Topeka Capital-Journal . "And we're pretty sure thunder
is caused by Jews doing some sort of loud Jewy thing," the paper did not
add.

            A supporter of the new educational guidelines, Mark
Looy of Answers in Genesis, a creationist group, said: "There's no meaning in
life if we're just animals in a struggle for survival. It creates a sense of
purposelessness and hopelessness, which I think leads to things like pain,
murder and suicide." Which is hanging a lot on the poor old theory of natural
selection. I thought pain, murder, and suicide were caused by television.

            Wait a minute, what about that smutty
Friends show? Only one member of the ensemble appears to have a job, and
what is it? "Ross Geller" is a paleontologist. A paleontologist, people! Not
only does he have premarital sex, he believes in dinosaurs. If you were from
Kansas, it would be almost enough to make you think. And by the way, what kind
of name is "Geller"?

            By 1861, even Thomas
Huxley was tired of arguing with people who didn't believe in evolution; "Life
is too short to occupy oneself with the slaying of the slain more than once,"
said the eminent biologist. Little did he know.

            
               Parallax
Extra
            

            Last week, Arianna Huffington decided that Warren
Beatty was running for president and said so in her
surprisingly-still-syndicated column. He wasn't and he isn't and he won't, but
the idea was intriguing enough to go a couple of news cycles in the legitimate
press and on Fox News. One remarkable thing didn't come up in the discussions
of the candidate: his age. I think this says nice things about us as a society
and nice things about Beatty's colorist.

            If elected, Beatty would
be older than 37 of America's 41 presidents the day they took office. Arrange
these presidents and candidates by age at their inauguration or prospective
inauguration.

            Calvin Coolidge

            Liddy Dole

            Warren Harding

            Teddy Roosevelt

            Chester Arthur

            Warren Beatty

            Orrin Hatch

            John Adams

            Pat Buchanan

            James Polk

            
               Common
Denominators
            

            Bob Dole, ignorant Christian hicks, primates,
Viagra.

         
      
   
