
   
   
      
         
            Sizzling Bacon

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Stir
               
               
                  of Echoes
                (Artisan Entertainment).
The second film this summer featuring a little boy who sees dead people gets
decent reviews, but most say it's not as good as the similar box office smash
The Sixth Sense . Echoes focuses on the little boy's father,
played by Kevin Bacon in "one of his best performances" (Roger Ebert, the
Chicago Sun-Times ). Bacon also possesses second sight, not to mention a
compulsion to dig up his backyard following an impromptu hypnosis session at a
party. The film "is at its best in its mysterious, genuinely chilling first
half. But as the plot kicks in, the hysteria mounts and the explanations start
coming, the tension starts to dissipate" (David Ansen, Newsweek ). (Click
here to find out about
Kevin Bacon's band, the Bacon Brothers.)

            

               
                  Stigmata
                (MGM-UA). This would-be thriller gets
punctured by the critics: "Possibly the funniest movie ever made about
Catholicism--from a theological point of view" (Ebert, the Chicago
Sun-Times ). The film stars Patricia Arquette as a beautician who is
mysteriously afflicted with stigmata after receiving a rosary with a history
from her mother. Critics term it "a silly, roiling melange of special effects
and overheated religious symbolism" that is at heart a "half-baked anticlerical
screed" with "lots of broken glass, bird feathers, dripping blood and
desperately fancy camera angles" (Stephen Holden, the New York Times ).
(Click here to visit a fan page devoted to the film.)

            

               
                  Outside
               
               
                  Providence
                (Miramax Films).
Evenly divided negative and positive reports for this unexpectedly sincere
coming-of-age story from the masters of gross-out comedy, the Farrelly brothers
( There's Something About Mary ). Directed by Michael Corrente and based
on a novel by Peter Farrelly, it's a standard fish-out-of-water tale (poor kid
from small-town Rhode Island gets sent to a snobby boarding school). Those who
like it say it's "a sweet, funny little movie" (Ansen, Newsweek ) and
that "one finds oneself asking how such familiar material breeds contentment
instead of contempt" (Richard Schickel, Time ). Critics also note that
two great performances, by Shawn Hatosy as the kid and Alec Baldwin as his
gruff dad, help lift the film above cliché. Those who pan the movie call it a
vanity project for the now-famous brothers that offers "nothing fresh, and
everything bland" (Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ). Or as Susan
Wloszczyna writes in USA Today : "Let's hope they have exorcised these
pap-spewing demons and get their minds back in the gutter." (Click here to read an interview with the Farrelly brothers, and to read
David Edelstein's rave in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  For Common Things: Irony, Trust, and Commitment in America
Today
               , by Jedediah Purdy (Knopf). Critics dig into 24-year-old
Purdy, who argues that irony and ironic figures such as Jerry Seinfeld are a
cancer corrupting the soul of America. Unsurprisingly, Irony Inc. (a k a the
New York Observer ) shreds the book, calling the chapter on the dangers
of genetic engineering "a warning so bloated with bombast that one begins to
wish that the gene for pomposity could be extirpated for the sake of future
generations. ... I say earnestly, with feeling, What garbage! " (Adam
Begley). Harper's calls Purdy a "cornpone prophet" and blasts his
"unctuous sentimentality" (Roger D. Hodge). Christopher Lehmann-Haupt writes in
the New York Times that the book is "impressive if somewhat pious" but
finds Purdy's points unoriginal: "He labors at length such crashingly obvious
ideas as the ethical ambiguities of technology." A few stick up for the
embattled author, arguing that though "the ideas expressed aren't complicated,"
Purdy "grapples with them with a seriousness that puts more seasoned--and
ironic--commentators to shame" ( Publishers Weekly ). Walter Kirn, writing
in Time , seems a bit gleeful at the fact that "the brainy nature boy has
stormed the capital, panicking the languid sophisticates with an unfashionably
passionate attack on the dangers of passionlessness," only to later concede
that the book is "an arduous read that would test the syntactical skills of a
tenured professor." (Click here to read the first chapter.)

            

               Snap Judgments
            

            
               Book
            

            

               
                  'Tis: A Memoir
               , by Frank McCourt (Scribner). The hype
revs up for McCourt's follow-up to his best-selling, Pulitzer Prize-winning
Angela's Ashes . 'Tis tops all fall preview lists, and now the
first review is in: Michiko Kakutani (the New York Times ) says it's "a
considerably angrier book than Angela's Ashes . ... [T]his sour tone of
complaint does not make for particularly engaging or sympathetic reading."

            
               Movie
            

            

               
                  Chill
                
               
                  Factor
                (Warner Bros.).Critics
barely even bother with this action flick starring Cuba Gooding Jr. and Skeet
Ulrich as a pair of ne'er-do-wells who end up with a load of heat-sensitive
poison on their hands. They drive it around the country in a dilapidated
ice-cream truck trying to keep it cool. "Stale macho jokes and formulaic
cliffhangers drive this chase-by-numbers thriller on the bumpy road to nowhere"
(Holden, the New York Times ).

         
      
   
