
   
   
      
         
            Proxy War

            In Brent Staples' memoir Parallel Time , he
recounts a game he used to play while a student at the University of Chicago.
Staples, who is black, would pace the streets surrounding the campus after
dark. When he spied a white couple strolling toward him arm in arm, he would
walk directly at them, at a normal pace. The couple would first tighten their
grip on each other. Then, as Staples continued to head toward them, they would
panic, release their grip, and scurry apart. Staples would breeze between them,
without losing a step, without looking back. He called it "scattering the
pigeons."

            The "pigeons" feared
Staples because of his blackness--they were using his race as a proxy for
potential criminality. Using superficial traits to infer deeper characteristics
in people is common and need not be racist. Generalizing from what is easily
and quickly knowable to something that is hard to know for sure is what
economists think of as minimizing information costs. If the clouds turn dark
and ominous and it starts to thunder while you're out for a stroll, you can
find a phone and call the weather service, or you can ignore them on the
grounds that predictions about the weather are often wrong, or you can take
cover under the assumption that it's probably going to rain. But using race as
a proxy is sensitive, for good and obvious reasons.

            If skin color as a proxy for criminal intentions were a
precise tool--that is, if every young black man strolling the sidewalks were a
mugger--it would be hard to criticize. And if the implied generalization had no
validity--if a young black male was no more likely to be a mugger than anyone
else approaching on the sidewalk--it would be easy to label as racist. But,
like most such generalizations, it is valid but not perfect. A young black man
is more likely to be a mugger than a young white man--but the assumption that
any particular young black man is a mugger will usually be wrong. So is using
race as a proxy racist?

            This is what the current
"racial profiling" controversy is about. Racial profiling is when police use
race as a reason to search someone's car or to frisk a pedestrian. Almost all
black men have tales of being stopped by a cop for no reason other than their
skin color. It's derisively known as "DWB": the crime of driving while black.
Earlier this year the governor of New Jersey, Christine Todd Whitman, fired the
state police superintendent for telling a journalist that blacks were more
likely to commit crimes than whites. But she has since admitted that state
police systematically stop cars simply because the driver is black. And racial
profiling has many defenders who say it is sensible, hard-nosed policing of the
sort that has led to a dramatic drop in the nation's crime rate.

            O ne generalization that can be made about racial
profiling--a valid but not perfect generalization, of course--is that
conservatives tend to support it, while liberals tend to regard it as racist.
In another controversy, the one over affirmative action, the opposite
generalization holds: Liberals tend to support it, while conservatives tend to
regard it as reverse racism.

            And yet affirmative
action and racial profiling are essentially the same. Affirmative action
amounts to the use of race as a proxy for other, harder-to-discern qualities:
racial victimization, poverty, cultural deprivation. Few critics of affirmative
action are against compensating victims of specific and proven acts of racial
discrimination. And the critics often positively endorse programs giving a
special break to people who've overcome economic or cultural disadvantage. What
they object to is generalizing these conditions from a person's race. Defenders
of affirmative action say, in essence, that as policy-making generalizations
go, this one is overwhelmingly valid--and that more justice will be lost than
gained by insisting on scientific precision.

            Defenders of affirmative action and defenders of racial
profiling even resort to the same dodge in defending their cause against
colorblind absolutists. They say they, too, think it's wrong for a person to be
promoted and/or arrested just because of his or her race. But, they say, it's
OK for race to be one factor among many.

            Here is Gov. Whitman,
quoted in the New York Times Magazine last month, explaining the
difference between profiling (good) and racial profiling (bad):

            

               Profiling means a police officer using cumulative knowledge and training to
identify certain indicators of possible criminal activity. Race may be one of
those factors, but it cannot stand alone. Racial profiling is when race is the
only other factor. There's no other probable cause.

            

            
This precisely echoes Justice Lewis Powell's
famous explanation of permissible affirmative action in the 1978 Bakke
case:

            
               Ethnic diversity is only one element in a range of factors a
university properly may consider in attaining the goal of a heterogeneous
student body. ... In [a constitutional] admissions program, race or ethnic
background may be deemed a "plus" in a particular applicant file, yet it does
not insulate the individual from comparison with all other candidates for the
available seats.
            

            The factor fudge
satisfies some critics, but it doesn't solve the racial proxy dilemma. Stopping
and frisking a driver or admitting a student to Yale is a yes-or-no decision.
As legal scholar Randall Kennedy wrote in his book Race, Crime, and the
Law , "Even if race is only one of several factors behind a decision,
tolerating it at all means tolerating it as potentially the decisive
factor." When it's the decisive factor, it might as well have been the only
factor. If it's never decisive, it's not really a factor at all.

             

            The main difference between affirmative
action and racial profiling is that one singles out blacks for something
desirable and the other singles them out for something undesirable. Reasonable
people can differ about whether using race as a proxy is OK. Obviously it
depends on how valid the generalization is in any given case, and how costly or
impractical it would be to get alternative information. When you fear a man
approaching you may be a mugger, you may not be able to find out in the next
five seconds whether he happens to be a University of Chicago intellectual
headed for the New York Times editorial board. On the other hand, race
is not just any proxy, and probably should be used more sparingly--especially
by the government--than the narrow logic of probabilities would justify.

            Racial proxies are a tough call. But it's safe to
say that anyone who is outraged by racial profiling but tolerates affirmative
action, or vice versa, has got it wrong.

         
      
   
