
   
   
      
         
            China's Spiritual Void

            
China's banning of the Falun Gong (Buddhist Law) religious sect was strongly
condemned Friday by the South China Morning Post of Hong Kong. The paper said in an
editorial that China is facing more than enough crises
already, from the economy to relations with Taiwan, and it should focus on
these problems rather than "launch a massive crackdown against a group which
has never done anything more harmful than organise peaceful protests." The rise
of Falun Gong is a byproduct of China's new materialism, it said. "The collapse
of the ideological basis for communist rule in the rush towards a free-market
economy has left a spiritual void. It is inevitable that people thrown out of
work or otherwise unsettled by the sweeping changes on the mainland should seek
solace in some form of religious-like activity. ... Beijing should consider
itself fortunate that the popular desire for spiritual inspiration took such a
benign form." Falun Gong's only sin was to build a mass organization
independent of the Communist Party. "This is something the leadership is still
not prepared to tolerate. For all the changes that have taken place in recent
years, yesterday's arrests were a reminder of how far freedom of expression
remains curtailed on the mainland." The paper reported that more than 70 Falun
Gong leaders were arrested in China this week, including Ji Liewu, a mainland
businessman in his 40s who was responsible for bringing the sect to Hong
Kong.

            
Announcing the ban Friday, the official China Daily said the
sect had engaged in illegal activities: advocating superstition and spreading
fallacies, hoodwinking people, inciting and creating disturbances, and
jeopardizing social stability. The paper also quoted Chinese Foreign Ministry
spokeswoman Zhang Qiyue as saying that Falun Gong had been banned because it
had not been registered in the manner required by law. She also claimed that
the sect had a declining membership of about 2 million, while other estimates
have put it as high as 100 million.

            In
Israel, Ha'aretz led
Friday with the United States urgently pressing Prime Minister Ehud Barak to
make implementation of the Wye River accord his top priority and to carry out
agreed Israeli pullbacks from the West Bank. Meanwhile, the U.S. administration
decided to go easy on Syria, with President Bill Clinton postponing a planned
telephone conversation with Syrian President Hafez Assad. Barak told
Ha'aretz that "an air of suspicion is clouding the whole issue of Wye"
and that "before this suspicion becomes mythology, it must be dispelled and
understanding must be reached."

            
Friday's Guardian featured an interview with former Chilean President Gen. Augusto
Pinochet, who has been under house arrest for several months awaiting the
outcome of Spain's request that he be extradited and tried there for murder,
torture, and other human rights violations. This is the second interview
Pinochet has given since his arrest in London last year. The first, last
weekend, was with the conservative Sunday Telegraph , which opposes his
extradition. The liberal Guardian , by contrast, wants to see him tried,
and its reporter, a former human rights activist, noted that his fingers are
"flat and meaty like those of a butcher." The general's answers in both
interviews were almost identical. He categorically denied all charges against
him and complained about Britain's treatment of him. "I wasn't in England as a
common bandit," he said, in reference to his arrest. "I was here as a
diplomatic figure and had been welcomed as such."

            In
Germany, the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung led Friday on a UNICEF report that more children are
now born in poverty than ever before, and the paper discussed the growing AIDS
catastrophe in Africa, where 21 million people are infected with the disease.
Die Welt led on a new
birth control patch, developed by Johnson & Johnson, which it said would
offer strong competition to the pill when it is put on the market next year.
The Süddeutsche
Zeitung of Munich led on a new drive by the German government to get
Turkey admitted to the European Union, provided its human rights record is
acceptable.

         
      
   
