
   
   
      
         
            Voting Online

            

               First of two parts
            

            Next
week, Jodi Kantor will report on the emergence of Internet voting and some of
the obstacles to it, the most daunting of which is ballot security. But let's
assume for the moment that the practical problems can be overcome. Will
Internet voting be good news for American democracy?

            The
chief argument for e-voting is that it will cause more people to vote. As
everyone knows, turnout has been declining. In presidential elections, it has
fallen from 63 percent of the voting-age population in 1960 to less than 50
percent in 1996. There are many reasons for this, but one of them is surely the
inconvenience of casting ballots in person. Before you can vote, you need to
have registered, often several weeks before an election. Then you must go
somewhere and stand in a line--on a day that seems scientifically chosen to
maximize the odds of lousy weather. If you're going to be away from home on
Election Day, you have to think ahead about getting an absentee ballot.
E-voting would eliminate these hassles. Some advocates believe that it would
have its greatest impact on participation by voters aged 18-24, who turn out in
lower numbers than any other group.

            On the
other side are a variety of objections. In addition to concerns about fraud,
some argue that Internet voting would accentuate the socio-economic skew of our
elections. Wealthier, whiter people are more likely to vote than poor people
and minorities. Since they're also more likely to own personal computers,
online voting might exaggerate the disparity. There is also an argument that
the familiar process of voting in person serves a civic purpose. Rick Valelly,
a professor at Swarthmore College, argued  in the New Republic recently that real
voting is a "vital public ritual that increases social solidarity and binds
people together." You might call this the communitarian objection. Valelly
thinks that e-voting would create "political anomie."

            I
think it's fairly easy to answer the race-and-class argument. No one thinks
that e-voting would replace r-voting any time soon. So long as it is an
optional alternative, e-voting makes it easier for some people to
vote--especially the handicapped, people living abroad, and frequent
flyers--without inconveniencing anyone else. This is what's called a win-win
situation. Over the next decade, access to the Internet is forecast to become
dirt cheap and quasi-ubiquitous. But for those who still can't afford or don't
want private access at home, there will be public Internet terminals in
libraries, schools--and probably grocery stores and bus stations as well.
E-voting might actually be a boon to the poor, who often can't miss work to
vote as easily as higher-income types can.

            The
communitarian objection is a bit more troubling. Around the world, people
struggle and die for the right to vote, just as people in this country once
did. If you've ever seen the once-disenfranchised standing in line all day to
cast the first ballot of a lifetime in South Africa or Guatemala, it's hard not
to be appalled at how cavalierly people treat voting in this country. It's
tempting to say that anyone unwilling to sacrifice an hour to exercise the
right to vote doesn't much deserve it. Having to take a bit of trouble to vote
reminds you that voting is the cornerstone of all our rights. By eliminating
the ritual, e-voting stands to diminish the meaning attached to it.

            I'd
say that this complaint is valid but not persuasive. The chief value of the
ritual of voting is to convey the significance of voting to democratic
citizens. Once the ritual becomes a deterrent to the act itself, as it pretty
clearly has, it ceases to serve its purpose. In the end, the communitarian
objection to e-voting seems more aesthetic than substantive. On the Internet,
more of us will exercise our right and fulfill our civic responsibilities. We
just won't meet in a church basement to do it. The trade-off of higher
participation for poorer visuals would seem one well worth making.

            In fact, e-voting is less
of a leap than it might seem. When you think about it, voting has long been a
fusion of public and private, of tradition and technology. The secret ballot
was a Progressive Era reform. Voting machines--which utilize primitive, punch
card computer processing--came into widespread use in the 1960s. These two
innovations mean that we already vote privately by computer--we just visit a
public place to do so. It's not that nothing will be lost when we all vote from
remote terminals instead of at the local polling place. But what we stand to
lose is ephemeral. What we stand to gain from virtual voting is very real.

         
      
   
