
   
   
      
         
            No. 320: &quot;Futurific&quot; 

            
               "It is one of the
most significant developments in the history of the space age," said John E.
Pike of the Federation of American Scientists, reacting to Tuesday's big event.
What happened?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
319)--"Formerly Known As":
            

            

               
                  There's been more and more of it at Princeton in recent years,
but now a faculty committee proposes to eliminate it or at least rename it.
What's the old name; what's the new? 
               
            

            
"Cheating; collaborative learning."-- Katha Pollitt ( Russell Scott
and Eddie Haskins had similar answers.)

            
"Herpes; happy pants."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Joyce
Carol Oates' oeuvre ; Whatsername's stuff."-- David Finkle
            

            
"Untenured faculty; groundskeepers."-- Floyd Elliot
            

            
"Disabled; genetically inferior and slated for elimination."-- Tom
Baker
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            News Quiz participants offer two oddly
contradictory views of Princeton life. In one view, loutish slack-jawed
children, admitted to college only so the bursar can suck money out of their
rich alumni parents, cheat their way through class and, if that doesn't get
them good enough grades, bully their professors into upping their marks. Those
craven souls knuckle under because, weak and untenured in their pathetic
tweeds, they must capitulate or end up doing yard work at some ethnically
cleansed eating club.

            At the Princeton in a parallel universe,
perpetually drunken students sleep it off in class, their clothing disarrayed
in such as way as to catch the eye of Sadean professors by whom they are
sexually exploited in exchange for better grades. The only ones exempt from
this cruel pawing are the Jewish kids, who aren't there anyway, and the
physically disabled, who are being quietly slaughtered, one by one, by Peter
Singer's special-duty teaching assistants.

            Which of these
Princetons is the one Bill Bradley attended?

            

               Inflatable 
               Answer
            

            A+; A With Distinction.

            Worried about grade inflation, a Princeton faculty
committee proposes replacing the A+, worth 4.3 grade points, with the new
designation that would be worth only 4.0, the same as an A, but would denote
particular academic excellence.

            The New York
Times attributes the increasing number of A plusses and the decrease in C's
and D's to "lenient professors and students who badger them for higher
grades."

            
               Some

               Other Actual Name Changes in the News Extra
            

            

               Palestinian Web addresses used to end ".wg" indicating the West Bank and
Gaza; they will now end ".ps" indicating that the Palestinian state is pretty
much an afterthought.

               The e-mail newsletter Harvard Today will now be known as Today@hcny,
as the university protects its trademark from New York's Harvard Club, which
might also have to change the name of its all-male nude review, you know, if it
had an all-male nude review. Which I for one would certainly pay to see. More
for cultural than erotic reasons. Not that I begrudge anyone his pleasures.
I'll stop now.

               The advertising tag-line "Always Coca-Cola" will now be "Enjoy all that's
inside," in an effort to reinvigorate sagging cola sales. "They want to try
root beer, then fruit drinks; they jump all over the place," said Bruce
Llewellyn, grouchy CEO of the Philadelphia Coca-Cola Bottling Co. "They'd drink
their own urine if we let them. The fickle bastards should be horse-whipped,"
he did not add.

               Ellen Barkin will, one day soon (if there's a God in heaven, and Revlon's
stock continues to plummet as a feckless addlepated heir drives a once-thriving
company into the ground with his big bald head) be changing her name to Ellen
Cohen, if I can just get the judge to lift that restraining order.

            

            
               John

               Murdoch's Correction Corner
            

            (In yesterday's Death Without Missed Dinner Extra,
I foolishly wrote "Use the time to contemplate how your fellow Baptists have
been on the wrong side of every social policy from the civil-rights movement to
gay rights with a stop-off to support the Vietnam War." Below, John Murdoch
sets me straight-- Ed.)
            

            You're doubtless thinking of the Southern Baptist
Convention. Let me assure you that the National Baptist Convention was entirely
in support of civil rights; it is a largely black association. The American
Baptist Churches (note the plural: Baptists object to the idea of
denominations, choosing to "freely associate" instead) absolutely took the
liberal position on practically any social issue from the 1960s on (which is
why they're losing churches to the Southern Baptist and National Baptist
conventions).

            Who's the largest
religious denomination associated with Americans United for the Separation of
Church and State? The American Baptist Churches.

            
               Ongoing

               Bail-Out Extra
            

            Some leads so deftly encapsulate the article to
follow that the reader instantly knows he'd sooner be struck blind than read
on. Participants are invited to submit actual examples from any news source of
what The New Yorker used to call "letters we never finished reading" (or
something like that), like this one from Ken Tucker:

            "What a contradictory country this is ..."--Anthony
Lewis, New York Times , Oct. 12, 1999

            Best examples to run
Thursday.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Faculty-student sex.

         
      
   
