
   
   
      
         
            Enquiring Minds in Slovakia

            With the end of summer upon us, Keeping Tabs'
thoughts have turned to a high school in Slovakia, where American teacher
Monica Fenton has been using the National Enquirer as a "teaching tool"
in her English classes. "The kids in Slovakia read a lot--and they see the
Enquirer as a big scoop of American culture," the West Palm Beach native
tells the Enquirer . "Their vocabulary is growing rapidly ... and they
are learning a lot about life in the States."

            No doubt. How else would
those poor Slovakian kids have been able to "Meet the Dentist to the Stars"? In
fact, we shudder to think of all that our young Slovakian friends might have
missed without the Enquirer this month, from the detailed story of the
wedding of a woman missing the entire lower half of her body (she walked up the
aisle on her hands, with the garter concealed under her sleeve) to the
assertion that Al Gore may be more electable than George W. Bush because of his
strong jaw and cheekbones.

            Perhaps most important, it's reassuring to know that all
those Slovakian teens, far away though they may be, will learn that Sylvester
Stallone's mother, Jackie, who's previously dabbled in astrology, has moved on
to what she calls "Rumpology," the supposedly ancient art of reading prints
made from inking a person's posterior. "[It] goes right back to the time of
Nostradamus," asserts Jackie Stallone. "It's all written on your behind who
you're going to marry, love affairs, health--and most important of all in
Hollywood, whether you're going to have a successful career." "It may sound
crazy," notes "top astrologer and palmist" Anthony Carr, "but I think she's on
to something with this."

            It's unclear whether it
could have been predicted by a good rump-reading from Mom, but Sly Stallone
leads the pack of celebrities having meltdowns over seemingly innocuous slights
this month. The Enquirer reports that while shooting a movie in
Vancouver, British Columbia, the actor "went Rambo" and threw a meal of hot
chicken, French fries, and coleslaw out the door of his trailer, splattering a
"shocked crew member." Stallone apparently flipped out because, like everyone
else in Hollywood, he's on a no carbohydrate diet. "When I say I want a f-----g
chicken, I want a f-----g chicken!" Stallone reportedly screamed. "I want ONE
chicken!" (Stallone apparently missed the Enquirer 's story claiming that
the no-carb, high-protein diet that slimmed Jennifer Aniston down is
dangerously unhealthy and "could even be fatal.")

            Jennifer Lopez, meanwhile, stormed off the set of her
latest film because she was unhappy with the wig she was supposed to wear, says
the Globe , which also reports that Ben Affleck was "rude, difficult and
furious" when he was required to have a skull X-ray after an on-set mishap. The
most bizarre celebrity snit might be that of Jesse star Christina
Applegate, who the Enquirer says is feuding with her show's producers
because she refuses to conceal the "unsightly" bags under her eyes, claiming
they give her working-class character authenticity. "They think she's acting
like a spoiled brat and an ingrate," says a set insider.

            In fact, the tabs have
been uncommonly fixated on under-eye maladies of late. The Enquirer
complains that the new Caribbean stamp honoring 60 Minutes stalwart Mike
Wallace makes him look like an "old geezer ... with eye bags big enough to pack
for an overnight trip." And the Globe felt compelled to point out that
when her husband suffered a heart attack, Sharon Stone rushed to the hospital
from Vancouver, British Columbia, "without stopping to put on makeup." A source
confirmed to the Star that Stone's eyes were "puffy from lack of sleep.
She was pale and wore no makeup." Ditto for Dana Scurry, the girlfriend of
hospitalized actor Martin Lawrence, who according to the Star waited by
his bedside with "bloodshot" eyes and makeup "smeared from crying." The
Globe , however, reports that it was Lawrence's fiancee, Shamicka Gibbs,
who has been "sitting at [his] bedside clutching Martin's limp hand and praying
to God to spare his troubled life." Perhaps not surprisingly, Gibbs is said to
have got into a "vicious catfight" at the hospital with an unnamed woman who
claimed to be Martin's girlfriend. We certainly hope, for Lawrence's sake, that
it was Scurry.

            It appears that the only person in a California hospital
without bags under her eyes is Elizabeth Taylor, who's suffering from a
vertebrae fracture that the tabs fear may leave her unable to walk. But at
least she'll look good. According to the Enquirer , famed hairstylist
Jose Eber has visited Cedars-Sinai Hospital several times to do Taylor's hair
and makeup. The Star reports that she has been greeting hospital
visitors in a "glamorous pink chiffon negligee" and is being pampered "with her
favorite soaps and oils" by "three specially trained nurses."

            With no celebrity ailment
too inconsequential to mine for dramatic potential, Friends star
Courteney Cox's routine LASIK surgery to correct her nearsightedness is treated
with the kind of life-and-death anguish usually reserved for quadruple bypass
operations and liver transplants. Far be it from Keeping Tabs--who's no
stranger to Coke-bottle lenses--to appear unsympathetic to the visually
impaired, but we raised our eyebrows just a tad at the Star 's assessment
that this "miracle eye surgery saved [Cox's] vision" when the story explains
that it was simple vanity about wearing thick glasses that put Cox under the
knife. The Globe weighed in with a story titled "How Courteney beat
blindness," which included the touching detail that Cox awoke from the
operation sobbing, "Oh my God, I can see!" while her husband, David Arquette,
was "so moved by [her] joy" that he began to cry as well. The Enquirer
claims that Cox's surgery "saved her career," given that the ever-squinting
actress couldn't read cue cards well enough to host Saturday Night Live .
Things got so bad, says the Star , that Cox "often couldn't tell Lisa
Kudrow and Jennifer Aniston apart" and occasionally knocked coffee over. Thank
God for modern medicine.

            If she weren't so spectacle-averse, Cox might have turned
for help to former PTL televangelist Tammy Faye Bakker, who the Globe
reports has amassed an impressive collection of eyeglasses belonging to dead
people. "I believe the eyes are the soul," Bakker says by way of explanation.
Her favorites, the story says, are the glasses belonging to her late mother,
apparently because of their almost meditative powers. "I like to put them on
and think, 'You know, Momma looked through these,' " she tells the
Globe . Apparently Bakker shares this maudlin optical fascination with
Judge Judy Sheindlin, who (according to the Enquirer ) almost "burst into
tears" and stopped production of her TV show when she misplaced her reading
glasses, which once belonged to her beloved late father.

            Finally, as he prepares to launch his own daily TV
show, we thought we'd highlight National Enquirer columnist Mike
Walker's confident prediction that "there'll never, ever be a post-Lewinsky
photo showing Bill [Clinton] with a cigar." Memo to Walker: Check out Page 12
of this week's Star . Where did you get that tip--from a rump
reading?

         
      
   
