
   
   
      
         
            Living the Greek Way

            
               Rush to
Judgment
            

            All this sorority
bashing is getting so old (see the "," by Alison Spurgeon, sorority
sister). Ironically, those who spout off the most about Greek life and
conformity are just as guilty of it. Do people who are covered with piercings
and tattoos really believe they are expressing their individuality? They are
just as conformist; humans naturally gravitate toward groups and chances to
belong to a larger whole.

            Having been in a
sorority and then working in government, nonprofits, and the corporate world, I
find that Greek life was very representative of the "real world." Every house
has idiots, sluts, social climbers, and alcoholics. Every house also has
geniuses, philanthropists, and varying kinds of campus leaders. There are
brown-nosing and backstabbing and viciousness. There are also kindness and
loyalty and real bonds that are developed between people. For someone like me,
who hadn't had very many close friendships with women, it was a truly
beneficial experience, even if I hated a lot of what went on.

            -- Michelle
Honald
            

            
Denver

            
               Leave It,
Levitt
            

            Steven Levitt is being extremely disingenuous when
he claims that he takes no position on the public policy implications of his
research (""). Obviously crime is a bad thing, so if your research indicates a
correlation between a social practice--abortion--and a reduction in crime, you
are at a minimum implicitly advocating that practice with the minimum of legal
restrictions.

            Your analogy to global warming research points up
the deceit. The impetus for research on global warming has come from those who
believe that fossil fuel consumption is out of control and who reinforce their
beliefs with global warming research, given everyone's understanding that major
man-made climatic change is a bad thing. No one is out there advocating global
warming. Maybe your research is right, maybe it is wrong, but you undermine
your credibility when you claim to be oblivious to its implications. You had to
have a thesis going in when you started your research, and given that we
already knew crime rates were falling, it is hard to believe you weren't
looking for a correlation between abortion and falling crime rates. Life is too
short to use one's career wandering in the dark, and no one is going to believe
that's what you did.

            By all means, fight back
on the eugenics attacks. That's below the belt. I think it is perfectly
respectable for you to use your results to say that all those who have been
pointing to overall demographic shifts, or changing police tactics, or
increasing incarceration rates are missing a key factor. But you are just
waving a red flag to a bull when you cast attacks on others for supposedly
misreading you altogether.

            -- Ken O'Brien
            

            Los
Angeles

            
               Malleable Lamar
            

            Lamar Alexander's campaign never got off the ground
because the American people can recognize a phony (""). Alexander can and will
mold himself into anything. As Bush's secretary of education he was for
"Break-the-Mold" schools. Earlier he had favored comprehensive schools. Now
that people have turned against large government interventions, he wants to
make every school a "charter school" with power vested in the parents and
teachers. He says this will make our system the best. When Linda Wertheimer
asked him, "How would we know?" there was a moment of glorious dead air.

            Michael Lewis,
interviewed about his book Trail Fever , observed that Alexander "did
something I didn't think possible in this campaign. He proved you could be too
phony. This is why Clinton feared him most of all the candidates. He was so
malleable. He even looks a little like putty."

            -- Gerald W.
Bracey
            

            Alexandria, Va.

         
      
   
