
   
   
      
         
            Tea and Cookies 101

            

               Iggy's Stooges
The Ig
Nobel Prizes, spoofs on the Nobel Prizes that honor both genuine and phony
research, were handed out this month. Len Fisher of the University of Bristol
won the physics prize for researching the best way to dunk a cookie. A South
African team won the peace prize for a car alarm that stops thieves with a
flamethrower. The British Standards Institution received the literature prize
for its six-page exposition on the proper way to make a cup of tea, while the
Kansas Board of Education and Colorado State Board of Education shared the
science-education prize for "mandating that children should not believe in
Darwin's theory of evolution any more than they should believe in Newton's
theory of gravitation ... or Pasteur's theory that germs cause disease,"
according to the Chronicle
of Higher Education . Neither board sent a representative to the
Cambridge, Mass., award ceremony.

            
               The Allah Who
Failed
            

            
University of Kuwait professor Ahmad al-Baghdadi was jailed for blasphemy after
writing that Mohammed failed in his mission to convert Mecca's nonbelievers to
Islam. The professor, chair of the political science department, was sentenced
to one month behind bars for offending Islam and immediately went on a hunger
strike that sent him to the hospital. Upon his release, the professor
apologized for any offense he caused, reports Agence France Presse.

            
               A 4.3 Grade Point
Average
            

            
Princeton
University wants to ditch the A-plus. There are "too many of them to
suggest that the students getting them are really doing exceptional work," a
university spokesman told the New York Times . A faculty committee
wants to replace the A-plus with an "A with distinction." Teachers would still
be able to personally annotate the A, but it would still only be worth 4.0
grade points (compared to the A-plus' 4.3). Students oppose the proposed
change. The university says the new grade will allow outstanding work to be
honored while "not disadvantaging students in the contest for academic honors,
awards, and prizes which depend significantly on grade point averages." (See

                  Slate
               's "" for an irreverent take on the grade
deflation.)

            
               Gettin' Buggy Wit
It
            

            How do
locusts swarm? BBC News reports that Oxford University scientists have
determined that locusts attract other locusts with chemical signals to amass
swarms that can strip a field bare within hours. Swarming female locusts can
also manipulate the genes in their eggs to ensure that their young will want to
join the swarm immediately. (Locusts reared in seclusion are reluctant to
gather.) Researchers hope to isolate the chemical and use it to design
synthetic compounds that will block swarming.

            
               Punt, Pass, and
Cheat
            

            Tutors
may have done schoolwork for at least five members of last year's national
championship college football team, according to an ESPN
report. University of Tennessee Coach Phillip Fulmer declined to discuss
the allegations, but school president J. Wade Gilley told the Associated Press
that the school's general counsel is reviewing the matter. If the ESPN report
is true, players, tutors, and administrators will be subject to punishment
under the school's honor code and NCAA guidelines.

            
               Visions of
Dylan
            

            
Britain's Poet Laureate Andrew Motion has dubbed Bob Dylan's "Visions of
Johanna" the best song lyrics ever written. Citing "the concentration and
surprise" of Dylan's lyrics, as well as the "rasp of his anger," Motion
rhapsodized over the songwriter's use of language. Not all British poets share
Motion's taste. Dannie Abse told the London Observer , "[Dylan's]
writing is inferior poetry, and inferior poetry is not really poetry at all."
Poet Craig Raine argued that Lorenz Hart was a better lyricist than Dylan.

            
               
                  In Loco
Parentis Returnus
               
            

            
Recently amended federal confidentiality laws have prompted such schools as the
University of Delaware,
Indiana University, and
Penn State to notify parents
when students under 21 violate campus rules concerning drugs or alcohol. A
student referendum on notification at the University of Illinois produced the highest turnout for a
student election in 10 years: More than 80 percent of students voted against
it.

            
               All Hail Marx and
Einstein
            

            Karl
Marx is the greatest thinker of the millennium, according to a BBC News Online
poll. Albert Einstein placed second. Rounding out the top
10: Isaac Newton, Charles Darwin, St. Thomas Aquinas, Stephen Hawking, Immanuel
Kant, René Descartes, James Clerk Maxwell, and Friedrich Nietzsche.

            
               Indian
Giving
            

            The
Lilly Endowment Inc.'s recent donation of $30 million to the American Indian College Fund
is the largest private donation ever made to a Native American organization.
The money will be spent on improved classrooms, labs, and libraries at tribal
colleges on reservations. In July, Lilly gave $50 million to the Hispanic Scholarship Fund, and last
year it donated $42 million to the United Negro College Fund, making it one of the largest
supporters of minority education.

            
               Journalists, Heal
Thyselves
            

            The Journal of the American Medical
Association has appointed its first female editor: Dr. Catherine D.
DeAngelis, a former nurse, the vice dean of Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, and a member of JAMA 's editorial board. The Journal
dismissed George Lundberg as editor in January after he published a survey of
college students' sexual attitudes (sample question: Is oral sex the same as
sex?) that too conveniently coincided with President Clinton's impeachment
trial. Asked if she was offered guidelines about editing the journal after
Lundberg's dismissal, DeAngelis told the Washington Post , "Editorial
freedom is essential. I have no doubt that editorial freedom will be the
byword."

         
      
   
