
   
   
      
         
             David Rieff

            If "intellectual" were a title like "baron" that
could be inherited, few people would have a stronger claim to it than David
Rieff. His father is University of Pennsylvania sociologist Philip Rieff, the
author, most notably, of Freud: The Mind of A Moralist . His mother is
essayist, novelist, filmmaker, and political activist Susan Sontag, as iconic
an intellectual as our resolutely anti-intellectual culture is ever likely to
recognize.

            David, the only child of their brief marriage, may
well prove to be the most influential member of the family. He is certainly the
most visible, holding forth in the pages of everything from the Wall Street
Journal to the New Republic to Salmagundi . More than any
other journalist, Rieff has tried to mold the lessons of Bosnia and Rwanda into
a coherent worldview. For him, these wars exposed the political bankruptcy and
strategic incompetence not only of Western governments but, even more starkly,
of the international do-gooder establishment--the United Nations, the
International Committee of the Red Cross, and the proliferating nongovernmental
organizations that provide relief on the ground in times of emergency.

            Rieff has relentlessly
argued that the prevailing paradigms of humanitarian assistance and
international law are inadequate to the brute realities of the post-Cold War
world. A willingness by the Western powers--in particular the United States--to
intervene on one side in military conflicts rather than treat them as
quasinatural disasters is the only way to advance the causes of democracy and
human rights. While his response to NATO's intervention in Kosovo has been, as
we shall see, ambivalent, the decision to intervene is evidence that Rieff's
arguments have, for the moment, prevailed.

            There is an obvious irony in the fact that the son of one
of the most implacable critics of American imperialism in the '60s should
emerge as one of its most vocal champions in the '90s. More amazing still is
that Rieff couches his saber rattling in the language of dissent. He takes
strong, uncompromising positions that leave him curiously unaccountable. When
his mother went to Hanoi in 1968, she returned with the conviction that a North
Vietnamese victory was the best outcome for Vietnam, for America, and for the
world. In the decades since, she has had to grapple with the consequences of
that position. Rieff's interventionist stances on Bosnia and Rwanda evade such
reckoning. He is always ready to take a position on what should have been
done.

            Rieff has also
short-circuited criticism by making arguments that, if they are not flatly
self-contradictory, can only be the stages of a grand dialectical
work-in-progress of Hegelian complexity. He has hailed those who work for NGOs
as heroes, while decrying the NGOs themselves as "feudal lords" of "the new
medievalism." He has heralded the end of the nation-state and dismissed rumors
of its death as exaggerated. He is a self-described "Neo-Wilsonian" who is
skeptical of liberalism, hostile to the United Nations, and suspicious of
empire. He has called the advocates of civil society "the useful idiots of
globalization" even as he has co-edited a new book-- Crimes of War: What the
Public 
               Should 
               Know --that seems to rest its hope for a humane
international order on the shoulders of transnational, extra-governmental
institutions. The only position he consistently advances is that he is right
and everyone else is wrong.

            Before he became the intellectual conscience of the new
world order, Rieff was an editor, reviewer, and travel writer. His first two
books, Going to Miami: Exiles, Tourists, and Refugees in the New America
and Los Angeles: Capital of the Third World , relate his discovery that
the cultural geography of American cities was being transformed by a new wave
of immigrants from the Third World. Apparently, he made the discovery all by
himself. The nonimmigrant residents of Miami and Los Angeles appear in Rieff's
books to be, if not entirely clueless about what's going on around them, then
at least hopelessly unable to explain it. "Everyone I knew was taking the
transformation of their own country in stride," Rieff marvels in Los
Angeles . Not him: "Often, I would sit in a restaurant and be literally
unable to follow the conversation going on around me, so mesmerized was I by
the Laotian busboy, or the Peruvian parking lot attendant, or the Haitian
dishwasher--our new fellow countrymen. Who are they? I thought. Who are we? I
thought." What the hell are you looking at? thought the Laotian busboy.

            Even then, Rieff was
thinking on a global scale, pondering the decline of the nation-state, the
transformation of the international economy, and the obsolescence of New York
City. He was also indulging his taste for grandiose pronouncements:

            
               The great lesson of New York's decline was that the curtain comes
down just as surely on historical periods as it does on individual lives. ...
And what could be said about New York seemed to me to apply also to America as
a whole. In retrospect, Reaganism had been less a period in which the United
States reassumed the mantle of empire than one in which new empires--Japanese
finance, the European Community--began to take their proper role in the
world.
            

            In retrospect, this is nonsense, but at the
time it no doubt seemed prophetic. Rieff might have reread these passages
before he wrote a scathing review of Thomas L. Friedman's The Lexus and the
Olive Tree for the Los Angeles Times last month, in which he
ridiculed Friedman for just this kind of naive extrapolation of the future from
the present. Friedman may be guilty of the fatuous contention that no two
countries with McDonald's franchises have ever gone to war with each other, but
Rieff, in Los Angeles , indulges in some fast-food mysticism of his own
when he sees a harbinger of our globalized, miscegenated, Third World future in
the advent of the pita fajita.

            While Los Angeles
aims an occasional rhetorical jab at the left, Rieff's second book on Miami,
The Exile , was an act of defiant apostasy, sympathetic to the Cuban
émigrés' sufferings and aspirations, and contemptuous of the Castro regime. In
the precincts of the American left that still dream of Fidel and Che in the
Sierra Maestra, Rieff's book was greeted with murmurings of disapproval--the
kind of murmurings that had greeted Sontag's famous Town Hall declaration of
the moral equivalence of communism and fascism some years before.

            In 1992, Rieff went to Europe to explore the transformation
of its cultural geography by Third World immigration. He ended up,
fatefully, in Sarajevo, just as the first details of the Bosnian genocide were
becoming known. His experience in Bosnia awakened his conscience, and made his
career.

            The book that resulted,
Slaughterhouse: Bosnia and the Failure of the West , is an unrelenting
indictment of the international community's inability--or unwillingness--to
step in and stop the killing. It is an odd piece of reportage, with no interest
in the evocation of place. This is post-traumatic journalism--repetitious,
impatient, and emotionally raw. The Bosnians--in whose name Rieff brings his
indictment against an indifferent world--function as a kind of abstraction. We
see very little of their lives, and only rarely hear their voices. They are the
Laotian busboy, only more like us. At the heart of the book is the claim that
by treating a political cataclysm in strictly humanitarian terms, Western
governments and the United Nations assured the destruction of a democratic,
multicultural nation in the middle of Europe and abetted the cause of Serbian
fascism. Those who protested NATO's action in Kosovo because it lacked a U.N.
mandate should read Slaughterhouse to see what an earlier mandate
produced: ethnic cleansing superintended by men in blue helmets.

            Even though Kosovo was the West's attempt to compensate for
the failures outlined in Slaughterhouse , as recently as last September
Rieff opposed military action against Serbia in an op-ed, calling such
intervention unwarranted because the sufferings of the Kosovars "pale in
comparison" with the starvation of refugees in southern Sudan and Sierra Leone.
"Unless one believes that the lives of Europeans are intrinsically more
valuable than those of Africans, the humanitarian justification for military
intervention is unsustainable," he wrote.

            Does David Rieff
contradict himself again? Has he already forgotten that Slaughterhouse
castigates former U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali for making a
similar formulation, describing as "racist" the world's attention to Bosnia and
disregard for the sufferings of the Third World? Didn't Boutros-Ghali earn
Rieff's undying scorn when he told the besieged Sarajevans he could name 10
places in the world where things were worse?

            But last autumn's dove became a hawk again this spring.
Shortly after NATO's bombs stopped falling and Milosevic capitulated, Rieff
assessed the lessons of Kosovo in a short Newsweek piece that made the
case--from the safety of retrospect, naturally--for ground troops. The question
of ground troops was not strategic, but moral. "Had the West been willing to
unleash a ground war to secure its military, humanitarian and human-rights
objectives," Rieff argued, "there would be more room for optimism." So much for
southern Sudan.

            Rieff's Newsweek piece did allow that, in
spite of having "to fight a just war with one hand tied behind its back ...
NATO actually succeeded to a greater extent than might have been predicted."
"Might have been" is either disingenuous or overly modest, since Rieff himself
had, almost from the start, pronounced NATO's action an unambiguous failure. In
a cover story in the New Republic in May, Rieff painted a grim picture
of "lost Kosovo." "The real question," Rieff insisted, "is whether the refugee
emergency is going to be permanent ... or whether NATO actually intends to
fight a war that will allow the refugees to return to Kosovo."

            If that question has, for the moment at least, been
answered, you won't hear it from David Rieff. Don't expect to see him marching
in any victory parades. But don't look for him at any protest marches either.
In the months ahead, you'll most likely find him in the pages of the opinion
journals or across the table from Charlie Rose, heaping scorn on the U.S.
government, NATO, the United Nations and, of course, the left, whoever they
are. He will continue to lecture us on the importance of choosing sides, and of
fighting to win. He will remain passionate, eloquent, and sure of himself. But
I, for one, can't read him without hearing the strains of an old marching song
from my own left-wing childhood. Which side are you on, David? Which side are
you on?

         
      
   
