
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=350300619-12101999><SPAN class=350300619-12101999>Ambulance Chasteners</SPAN></SPAN>

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Bringing Out the Dead
                (Paramount Pictures). Director
Martin Scorsese and screenwriter Paul Schrader--who collaborated on Taxi
Driver , Raging Bull , and others--team up again, this time for a
film about a burned-out New York ambulance driver played by Nicolas Cage.
Critics respond with a sprinkling of hearty positive reviews, but the majority
are gingerly worded negative takes. Almost everyone draws parallels to Taxi
Driver (another Manhattanite on the edge driving an automobile), though
nobody says it compares favorably. David Ansen does call it "superbly shot ...
full of bravura moments and high-wire performances" ( Newsweek ), and
Roger Ebert raves that "it contains some of [Scorsese's] most brilliant
sequences" ( Chicago Sun-Times ). Overall, though, the reviews complain
that the film feels too familiar and short on plot. (David Edelstein the film
in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               
                  The Best Man
                (Universal Pictures). The first film
from director Malcolm D. Lee (Spike Lee's cousin) gets lukewarm reviews, but
moviegoers still made it No. 1 at the box office last week. The story focuses
on a group of college buddies reunited for a wedding, which makes it "a kind of
Big Chill for black folks" (Lonnae O'Neal Parker, the Washington
Post ). (A similar comment in Entertainment Weekly provoked an
indignant letter to the editor from star Taye Diggs.) Several critics say it
"does not deliver on what could have been a promising premise" (Bill Zwecker,
Chicago Sun-Times ), but Newsweek 's David Ansen finds it "funny,
sentimental, cheerfully bawdy." (Click here to find out more about the film.)

            

               
                  Crazy in Alabama
                (Columbia Pictures). Antonio
Banderas' directorial debut--which stars his wife, Melanie Griffith--leaves
critics cringing. Although Banderas directs "capably enough" (Janet Maslin, the
New York Times ), the plot is a dud. Twin stories follow a batty woman's
flight to Hollywood after killing her husband, and a young boy's first
encounters with racism; the two story lines link up at the end. "Of all the
patronizing white-witness movies made in Hollywood about the civil rights
movement, this has to be the loopiest" (Steve Daly, Entertainment
Weekly ). (Click here to find out more about Banderas.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  The New New Thing: A Silicon Valley Story
               , by Michael
Lewis (W.W. Norton & Co.). Positive responses to Lewis' ( Liar's
Poker ) inquiry into what makes Internet mogul Jim Clark--and all Silicon
Valley--tick. On the upside, the book is a ripsnorting read, and Lewis "has a
natural talent for spinning hilarious scenes and uncovering wicked details"
(Steven Levy, Newsweek ). As Michiko Kakutani writes in the New York
Times , "Lewis uses a sort of Tom Wolfe approach, enlivening his account of
complicated financial deals and even more complicated engineering feats with
snappy cameo portraits, exclamatory descriptions and lots of subjective
judgments." Or as Joshua Quittner writes in Time , "sometimes I got the
feeling that Lewis so reveres his protagonist that he became his apologist."
(Click to read 
                  Slate
               's "Book Club" on The New New
Thing .)

            

               
                  Personal Injuries
               , by Scott Turow (Farrar Straus
& Giroux). Excellent reviews for the lawyer-author's fifth novel, about a
morally ambiguous attorney's collaboration with law enforcement to nail a group
of corrupt judges. It's "street savvy and emotionally rich" (R. Z. Sheppard,
Time ); though "[l]egal fiction has turned depressingly formulaic and
melodramatic lately ... Turow's just gets richer and smarter" (Tom DeHaven,
Entertainment Weekly ). Michiko Kakutani delivers one of the few downbeat
reviews, claiming that the novel "imparts little of the insider's knowledge"
that graced his other books and that "it lacks a fundamental sense of suspense"
(the New York Times ).  (Click here to read an
excerpt from the book.)

         
      
   
