
   
   
      
         
            Aftershocks

            A
socio-political aftershock rumbles through Turkey. The Aug. 17 earthquake "sent
tremors rippling through Turkey's political and social world, triggering a
backlash against the traditional Turkish faith in an all-powerful state,"
reported Toronto's Globe and Mail . Although it is unlikely that the current
government will be brought down by the crisis, the paper says it could lead to
"the grassroots development of Turkey's fragile democracy. The thousands of
volunteers who poured into the earthquake zone will not easily forget the power
they were able to mobilize."

            
Writing in the International
Herald Tribune , Turkish journalist Mehmet Ali Birand called
for "massive economic-political support, reminiscent of the Marshall Plan."
Referring to Turkey's longstanding application for membership in the European
Union, Birand said, "A special fund needs to be established to get the Turkish
economy up and running, not under the leadership of the United States but this
time with a campaign led by the EU. It is urgent that the European Union
formally grant Turkey candidate status."

            
Meanwhile, Britain's Independent reported that the PKK Kurdish separatist group has started to
withdraw its forces from Turkey into northern Iraq a week earlier than
previously announced. A statement issued by the group declared, "To
unilaterally stop the war at this time of heavy disaster is the greatest
support to the state and people of Turkey," since money spent fighting the PKK
should instead go to earthquake-recovery efforts.

            After
25 years of comparative neglect, East Timor has found its way into the world's
papers this week (see Monday's ). Writing in the Globe and Mail , Marcus
Gee said that of the two options in the Aug. 30 referendum--autonomy within
Indonesia or independence--the most likely outcome might not be the best.
"Becoming independent may end their oppression; it will not end their troubles.
In fact, it may only make those troubles worse." He added, "The independent
nation of East Timor would be a flyspeck on the world map." Without Indonesian
subsidies East Timor would be at the mercy of the international aid community
and susceptible to civil strife.

            
Another referendum is scheduled to take place Sept. 16 in Algeria, where voters
are being asked to approve or reject a presidential reconciliation effort that
offers amnesty to people convicted of actively supporting violence as long as
they did not actually commit acts of violence. To enhance Algeria's chances of
peace, Pakistan's Dawn said in an editorial
that the recent upsurge of political violence--at least 130 people have been
killed by armed extremists in recent weeks--must "not be allowed to weaken or
derail" the peace efforts. At the same time, the paper said, Algerian President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika "must concentrate his efforts on removing one of the
primary causes of popular discontent and strife, namely, economic mismanagement
which has led to a high unemployment rate and declining living standards."

            The
kidnapping of four Japanese mining engineers in the central Asian state of
Kyrgyzstan has caused a crisis in Japan. According to Asahi
Shimbun , the hostage takers are Islamic rebels from Tajikistan.
Mainichi Shimbun speculated that jealousy might have been a
motive for groups within Tajikistan or other neighboring countries envious of
Japan's generous aid program to Kyrgyzstan. One commentator suggested that "the
culprits may well have deliberately targeted the Japanese knowing that Japan
places top priority on human lives in settling [hostage] cases. ... Taking
hostages could be aimed at getting a ransom as well as weapons, water and
food." Another pundit questioned the Japanese aid agency's decision to declare
the area safe. Lax security has been blamed for other hostage-taking incidents
involving Japanese nationals, such as the four-month seizure of the Japanese
Embassy in Lima, Peru, in 1996, and this may have led to a perception of
Japanese as easy targets, Asahi Shimbun said.

            The
Hindu of
Madras reports that India's hottest Web site is www.soniagandhionline.com. Normally thought of as reclusive, the
leader of the Congress Party is now accessible "with a vengeance." Stung by
accusations that it has fallen behind in the online competition, Congress' main
political rival, the BJP, said that it prefers a chat format for online
discourse and will have a site up and running soon.

         
      
   
