
   
   
      
         
            Sibling Rivalry

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               A recent inquiry regarding replacing the has
prompted me to seek your assistance. I asked my younger sister, age 20, to be
my MOH. But she is making the planning of my wedding a nightmare. I had thought
it would be a kind gesture if I asked her to pick out the dresses for the
bridesmaids. We visited three bridal salons, and she made a veritable scene in
each one. She was unspeakably ugly to both my mother and me, as well as the
staff (swearing, sarcasm, and just plain rudeness). I was deeply embarrassed,
and she apparently doesn't understand that this is not going to be "her
day."
            

            
               I asked her to help
address envelopes and other little things that need doing, and she refused:
"Not in the mood." The icing on the cake is that when she asked if the MOH is
supposed to make a toast at the reception and I said it was traditional, she
flat-out refused. Both my mother and I have tried speaking with her, but that
just unleashed foul behavior. I am sick of her antics and fed up with her. I
realize that asking her to relinquish the "title" may jeopardize our
relationship, but I don't understand her behavior at all.
            

            

               --T.H.
            

            Dear T.,

            Prudie does. The little sister is competitive with
you, and there's a chance she wishes the bride and bridesmaid roles were
reversed. Acting out in stores and "foul behavior" are indicative of emotional
problems, deep hostility, and no self-control. By all means withdraw the
"title," and tell her you do not wish to burden her with MOH chores, nor do you
wish to have your dream day spoiled. There is not a reason in the world that
you should have to tolerate this pill of a sister. In fact, suggest that she
not attend the wedding. You need not be the victim of her neuroses.

            As for "jeopardizing the
relationship," with all due respect, it sounds as if it's already on life
support. Just because she is your sister doesn't mean she gets to behave less
well than a friend. Sometimes a relative is just an annoying person courtesy of
DNA (or, if you're religious, a punishment from God).

            
--Prudie, proactively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               My question also
concerns , but this time in an office setting, in a bathroom with many stalls.
If you think you recognize the feet of the user in the stall next door and you
have a question or a comment, should you start talking?
            

            

               --Wondering, too
            

            Dear Won,

            If this is a same-sex
bathroom, not an Ally McBeal unisex setup, Prudie would say it's OK. (She is
not exactly sure why, though.) Do begin, however, by verifying it's the person
you think it is so that you are not having a conversation with the wrong pair
of shoes. You might also want to edit your conversation for whoever else might
be listening. This would entail, Prudie guesses, checking for more shoes.

            
--Prudie, loquaciously

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I thought your
response to the about telemarketers was wonderfully done. Would you run for
president? Better yet, would you spearhead a tasteful anti-telemarketing
crusade? I am thinking of an Internet movement. Can you imagine thousands of
people answering telemarketers by singing one line of "Alice's Restaurant" and
then hanging up?
            

            

               --D.C.
            

            Dear D.,

            Prudie cannot run for
president because she is having such fun working at 
                  Slate
               . She
is, also, alas, out of the crusade business. Your idea, however, about singing
and hanging up is now being read by tons of people, so telemarketers
beware.

            
--Prudie, melodically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Thanks for all your
good advice. Here's my problem: I broke off a relationship with a delightful
man who lives two houses up the street. We were together for nearly four years.
I'm starting my own business and just don't want to be in a committed
relationship right now--but I would like for us to be friends. He is having a
great deal of trouble letting go of the more physical aspects of our past and
spends a lot of time begging for "just one more time." How can I make it clear
to him that breaking up means losing that physical connection? He's prone to
pouting, and it's driving me nuts.
            

            
               --Thanks,
            

            

               TOO MUCH LOVE IN VT.
            

            Dear TOO,

            Prudie is going to give
you the exact language. This is what you say: "The last time was the last
time." And if you have broken up, how is it that you are subject to the
pouting? By the way, it seems quite clear that your current neighbor/former
beau is not looking to be "friends."

            
--Prudie, definitely

            

               
                  Prudence,
               
            

            
               When taking my seat
in a crowded movie theater, do I say, "Excuse me" to those already seated
before, while, or after I step on their feet?
            

            

               --R. Smith
            

            Dear R.,

            Prudie always says it before.

         
      
   
