
   
   
      
         
            Danforth on the Case

            

               Former Sen. John Danforth, R-Mo., will lead an independent inquiry into
the assault on Waco. Attorney General Janet Reno appointed him in
response to revelations that the FBI lied about the use of tear gas. Everyone
agrees Danforth is principled and independent. Democrats say his appointment
will rebuild support for Reno, who has done an "extraordinary job ." Republicans say Reno is still incompetent
and should resign . (
                  Slate
               's and assess
Reno's performance.)

            

               East 
               Timor is in chaos. Military-backed
militias have killed hundreds and forced thousands to flee since the South
Pacific territory voted last week for independence from Indonesia. Martial law
has been declared, and Indonesia has rejected a U.N. offer of peacekeeping
troops. The international community is debating whether continued inaction
would be: 1) prudent because it is important to maintain good relations with
Indonesia; 2) foolish, since Indonesia's inability to maintain peace makes
intervention inevitable; or 3) hypocritical in light of the United Nations' active role in
Kosovo. (For more, see 
                  Slate
               's ".")

            

               Boris 
               Yeltsin is suspected of taking bribes. Swiss
investigators say that a construction company may have paid him over $1 million
in exchange for contracts to renovate the Kremlin. Yeltsin denied the charges.
The White House hinted that it doesn't believe him. Foreign leaders expressed
weary distaste and suspicion that Yeltsin is mixed up with the Bank of New York
money-laundering scandal. Russians speculated about whether he will quit early
and whether he will name Prime Minister Vladimir Putin as interim president or
force an election.

            

               Viacom is buying CBS . The $35 billion marriage would be the
largest media merger ever and would join television's highest-rated network
with the owner of Paramount and MTV. Investors' spin: It's a perfect fit , since the new company would control the
creation, production, and distribution of TV shows and movies. Media-watchers'
spin: Viacom's ascendancy reflects a new
balance of power --niche programming beats out shows aimed at wide
audiences. Consumers' spin: Yaaawn. Let's just hope they don't cancel
Touched by an Angel . (
                  Slate
               's "Moneybox" the merger.)

            

               Israel and the Palestinian Authority signed a peace
deal.
                The deal modifies the previously signed but unfulfilled Wye
agreement. The rosy spin: Peace at last! The skeptical spin: That's what they
said when the last deal was signed. The cynical spin: Now that the peace
process is back on track, terrorists are staging bomb attacks in Israel to make
sure it's derailed again. Meanwhile, Israel's highest court shocked everyone by
restricting the authority of Israeli security forces to use force against
detainees. (
                  Slate
               's "Frame Game" explains the between
peace and terrorism.)

            

               Twelve Puerto Rican nationalists accepted President Clinton's clemency
offer. The prisoners, members of a terrorist group linked to 100
bombings in the United States, agreed to renounce violence in exchange for
their freedom. Hillary Clinton had announced last week that she no longer
supported her husband's offer. Politicos disagree about which was clumsier:
Bill's offer of clemency to cultivate Puerto Rican support for his wife's
Senate campaign; or Hillary's rejection of that support in an attempt to
cultivate her own identity.

            

               Bill 
               Bradley declared his candidacy for president. He
emphasized his small-town upbringing and his distance from the current
Washington scene. The pessimistic spin: He can't beat Vice President Gore, who
is well-funded, well-connected, and leads in the polls. The optimistic spin: He
trails Gore by only a few points in crucial states and will take off as Clinton
fatigue grows.

            

               Henry 
               Cisneros pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of
lying about payments to his former mistress. He accepted the plea bargain
just before being tried on 18 felony counts. The unanimous spin: Yet another
independent counsel has wasted vast sums of money trying to prove a flawed case
against a member of the Clinton administration.

            

               The Clintons bought a Westchester, N.Y., home. Terry
McAuliffe, the president's chief fund-raiser, used his own money to secure the
loan for the $1.7 million house. Pundits whether the assistance was an
apolitical gesture of friendship or an attempt at improper influence.

            
               The Houston
Comets won the Women's National Basketball Association
championship.
                They have won the title in each of the league's
three years. Everyone now agrees they're a "dynasty." The pessimistic view:
This robs the WNBA of suspense and makes it boring, which a fledgling league
can ill afford. The WNBA's view: Having a "dynasty" team helps the league
market itself. The long view: Relax, dynasties haven't killed the men's
game.

         
      
   
