
   
   
      
         
            Online Political Advertising: Our Salesman Reports 

            Over
the past few years, the advertising business as a whole has moved from a mood
of hostile skepticism toward the Internet to an almost euphoric embrace of its
possibilities. In my new job as manager of political advertising for the
Microsoft Network, I'm experiencing what feels like a warp-speed repetition of
the same process. For the moment, buyers are still resistant to the new medium.
But I suspect that their doubts will melt as the 2000 campaign demonstrates the
open-ended potential of political advertising on the Web.

            The
basis for skepticism about Web-based candidate advertising is that few have
ever seen such a campaign, let alone one that had a demonstrable result. Peter
Vallone, the Democrat who ran against New York Gov. George Pataki last time
around, was one of the few candidates to make significant use of banner ads in
1998. Vallone ran negative ads about Pataki on the New York Times Web
site, among other places. While one study suggests that these ads diminished
Pataki's favorability rating among those who saw them, the negligible boost to
a losing campaign didn't quite make the case.

            A year
from now, we'll have better data about the effectiveness of candidate ads. What
we can say in the meantime is that Web advertising is capable of doing things
no other kind of political advertising can. Here are some of the advantages I'm
touting to political consultants and campaign managers this election
season.

            

               Targeting
            

            When
you advertise on television or radio, you base your spending decisions on
viewer and listener surveys, but you can't target precise groups of swing
voters that might matter to you. With the Web, you can strike at them
surgically. There are thousands of niche sites on the Web as well as Internet
service providers, network portals, and free e-mail services. These sites pride
themselves on collecting highly specific information about users, through
registration, subscription, and the use of "cookies" (for more on cookies, see

                  Slate
                article by Michael Kinsley). Banner ads can be directed at
precise demographic groups defined by age, ZIP code, income, and various other
characteristics. What's more, several of the larger portal sites are able to
"merge and purge" their user data with voter lists. This means that Bill
Bradley can target not just middle-aged basketball fans but also middle-aged
basketball fans who are registered Democratic voters in New Hampshire. Of
course, the more precise the targeting, the more expensive the ad. Reaching
generic New Hampshire citizens might cost $20 per thousand impressions. For a
specific category of registered voters, the price might rise as high as $70 per
thousand.

            

               Activization
            

            The
Web can serve as a tool to motivate those that are passionate about issues. A
recent campaign hosted by the Juno Advocacy Network shows this potential. Juno
sent an e-mail on behalf of Heritage Forests Campaign to more than 1 million
subscribers. In response to this, 171,000 users sent e-mail messages to Vice
President Al Gore asking him to help America's forests--without cutting down
any trees. That's a 17 percent response rate. With more expensive conventional
direct mail, a 4 percent to 5 percent response is considered highly
effective.

            

               Measurability
            

            Data
returned from user interaction with Internet ads far outweighs what you can
discern from television, radio, or direct-mail campaigns. Thanks to the miracle
of cookies, clients know precisely how many of the individuals they targeted
interacted with their ad in a number of ways. A banner ad that contains a
streaming video version of a 30-second spot can tell you not only how many
people viewed the commercial but also where in the commercial they got bored
and clicked out.

            The
first banner ads were relatively obvious appeals for a "click-through." Now
they are becoming interactive in ever more imaginative ways. Think of a banner
ad as the Internet on a bumper sticker. It can do just about anything with
video, sound, or animation. But first it has to grab your attention from a
three-quarter inch space on the computer screen. The most popular forms at the
moment include:

            
               Active

               Information Banners
            

            The
AIB delivers real-time information in the banner. The ad displays information
in a format similar to a stock ticker. Advertisers control the text in the
banner and can target it by demographic or issue group. Advertisers might also
use the AIB to respond to a recent news event they're taking a position on or
for any other rapid-response need.

            
               E-Mail

               Manager Banners
            

            The
e-mail manager banner ad gives advertisers an opportunity to collect e-mail
addresses from Web users. The advertiser may then use the information to
distribute e-mail messages, create user demographic profiles, and gather
information. For users, this banner provides an easy, convenient way to
subscribe to e-mail announcements from a candidate or campaign of choice.

            
               Expanding

               Menu Banners
            

            The
expanding menu banner contains four buttons that activate menus. Users then
choose from a menu and navigate to different locations on an advertiser's Web
site. This allows a campaign based on four key issues to "drill down" on each
of them in great detail. Once the user has found the issue he wants more
information about, a click of the mouse takes him directly to the page that
interests him.

            
               Streaming

               Video Banners
            

            Most
of the political/issue campaigns that will advertise on the Web will have
already produced TV ads. Those TV spots can now be compressed and delivered to
Web users from a banner ad: "Click here for my stance on free air time for
candidates!" This option becomes more attractive when combined with the
capability to deliver specific messages to targeted audiences or geographic
locations.

            Come November 2000, I
expect the question will no longer be whether Web-based political advertising
works, but whether it works too well.

         
      
   
