
   
   
      
         
            Free Shows

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               " " ' s disgusting letter concerning meal and
gift parity, along with her psychotically misguided ideas of the whys and
wherefores of giving gifts are a great deal more than "alarming." I found
myself deeply troubled by her fantastical notions and saddened by the
possibility that her children might be taught these same ideas. Needless to
say, I thought your response to RS was absolutely correct.
            

            
               Nevertheless, I must
take issue with your slander of mercenaries. A mercenary makes it clear he/she
is fighting for money, not attempting to hide the expectation of booty behind a
wedding invitation.
            

            

               --Cordially, ML III in Hong Kong
            

            Dear M,

            Prudie thanks you for
your support and regrets that she may have insulted official mercenaries. If
RS, our bride with the tally sheet, is by any chance reading this week's
Prudie, she may be interested to know that there was much mail essentially
calling her a woman with a cash register where her heart ought to be.

            
--Prudie, assuredly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               As a young man approaching 40, I am confused
about how I am supposed to react to women's fashions. At a recent conference of
professionals, we were seated around a U-shaped table--glass--with no
tablecloth. Several of these professional women across from me were wearing
Ally McBeal skirts. They spent the entire meeting pulling their skirts down so
their lingerie preferences were not so obvious. Am I supposed to look at the
ceiling the entire meeting, steal the occasional glance, or just assume it's a
'90s thing?
            

            
               Along these same
lines, I was recently in a retail store and the clerk had on a summer dress. As
she leaned over the counter to hand me my purchase, it became clear that her
lingerie preference was none at all. I didn't know whether to stare at the
ceiling, pretend I saw nothing, or thank her for the free show. In both
instances, these women had to know that everyone was getting an eyeful. I
missed the era of free love while in grade school and am wondering if we are
now in the era of free looks.
            

            

               --Somewhat Dazed and Confused
            

            Dear Some,

            You have nicely named our new era. Fashion is deep
into spandex and see-through, with the off-one-shoulder style occasionally
revealing a stray boob. Alas, the '90s motto, "Let it all hang out," has moved
from emotions to body parts.

             Clothing is meant to
cover or reveal. The look-at-me outfits say just that. As for your particular
question about Ally McBeal skirts and ladies minus underwear, Prudie feels
these people do not purchase their clothes in the dark, so whatever is able to
be seen is fair game for whatever response feels natural. You may even stare if
you like. Prudie gives you permission.

            
--Prudie, permissively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Maybe you can help with this problem. My wife
and I have a subscription to our city's symphony orchestra. Sometimes things
come up that prevent us from using our tickets. When this happens we give them
to friends who are also classical music fans. We have made it clear to this
couple we expect nothing in return, as we have already paid for the tickets
that would go to waste if they didn't use them. However, being polite people
and good friends, this other couple has, as a gesture of thanks, invited us to
be their guests at a minor league baseball game. My wife and I are not
enthusiastic about this, especially since getting there requires a drive of
close to an hour. But we don't want to appear ungrateful to our friends or hurt
their feelings. (We can't use the "We're busy" excuse, because they've given us
four different dates to choose from.)
            

            
               Is there a graceful
way of declining, or have you some suggestions for handling this
dilemma?
            

            
               
--In Need of Help in Ohio
            

            Dear In,

            Prudie sympathizes with your feelings of ix-nay on
the ballgame ... she, herself, having been briefly shown on national TV reading
the New Republic at a World Series game and the Sunday papers at the
Rose Bowl.

            It is best to be upfront, both to handle the matter
truthfully, as well as to scotch baseball invitations on into the next century.
Prudie therefore suggests you tell your friends: 1) you are most appreciative
that they wish to reciprocate; 2) neither you nor your wife is a sports fan; 3)
long car rides hurt your behinds; and 4) a leisurely dinner, just the four of
you, would be much more to your liking.

            Prudie believes there
are certain occasions when one plays along in order to spare someone's
feelings. This is not one of them.

            
--Prudie, decidedly

            
               
                  Hello,
Prudie,
               
            

            
               The tone of "" about
that "geezer" Hugh Hefner rather surprises me. Really Confused seems to want to
criticize Mr. Hefner because he is no longer a young man under 30, yet he still
manages to attract the attentions of three young attractive women. Would Really
Confused be less confused if Mr. Hefner were a Gen-Xer? Would you be less
critical of the three women if Mr. Hefner were under 30? In other words, it
appears that numbers are driving the argument here, and I can't tell if it's
the number 3, any number over 30, or an interaction effect.
            

            

               --Quantitatively Questioning the Quality of Life, a k a SB-B
            

            Dear Quant,

            Prudie can't speak for
Really Confused, so she will speak for herself. If Mr. Hefner were under 30,
the three, uh, companions would no doubt be an implied tribute to his
attractiveness. At the age of 70-something, however, this trio has about it the
barest whiff of self-serving motives. Without the mansion, the money, the
famous friends, and the publicity, Prudie thinks the object of their affections
would be just another eccentric old guy who stays in his pajamas. As Prudie has
wondered in the past, in other publications, why do geezers with young
girlfriends not know that they might as well glue an American Express Gold Card
to their foreheads? Oh, well. As for the Viagra component, let's not go there,
as the kids say.

            --Prudie,
appropriately

         
      
   
