
   
   
      
         
            No. 281: &quot;Sign Here&quot;

            
               Five years ago, at
a cost of $1,200, Vicksburg, Miss., erected two identical signs. Now one has
been spray-painted with the word "hypocrite," and the other has been smashed to
pieces. What do the signs say?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 280)--"Perturbed":
According to the Times of London, around the first of the year,
something will happen on Long Island that scientists believe has a small but
genuine chance of causing "perturbations of the universe" that could destroy
the world. What will happen?
            

            
( Question courtesy of Jennifer Miller.)
            

            "Hey!
Lay off Bernadette Peters. She's settled down now."--Al Petrosky
            

            
"According to Pierre Salinger, the U.S. Navy will resume testing of the same
missiles that brought down TWA Flight 800."-- Chris Thomas
            

            "The
Gimelsteins, of Lawrence, will order tastefully understated invitations to
their daughter's bat mitzvah."-- Jordan Kroop
            

            "Peggy
Siegel will list Mort Zuckerman as a 'confirmed arrival' even though he hasn't
RSVP'd."-- Hendrik Hertzberg
            

            "A
trumpet will sound and John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. will rise out of the Sound,
clothed in pure white, shining like the sun, surrounded by the hosts of
heaven."-- Richard A. DeCamp
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            One reason Long Island epitomizes boredom is
because of its ur-suburb, Levittown, tedium expressed as architecture. For one
thing, it's relentless--80,000 houses. (In 1949, you could get a four-room Cape
Cod cottage for under $8,000.) For another, you can't walk anywhere, and even
if you could, you wouldn't be any place once you got there--no civic center, no
parks, no shopping district. This was not an inevitable consequence of
suburbia--in his book City Life , Witold Rybczynski describes many
delightful suburbs built in America since the 1920s--this was simply bad
design.

            One thing these postwar
tract-home developments did have in abundance was kids, and considered as kid
cities, they were wonderfully designed. There were generous kid recreation
grounds, the unfenced backyards through which we swarmed. There were kid civic
centers where we met one another; they were called "schools." And you got to
them via the excellent kid transit system, bicycles. There was even a mobile
dessert van, the ice cream truck, that came around each evening, offering kid
food. In my suburb, Pennside, the ice cream man was Popsicle Pete--not
C
               rème Brûlée Pete, not Chocolate Mousse Pete. It was a kid's
world.

            
               End of the World
Answer
            

            Brookhaven National Laboratories will crank up its
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider, a nuclear accelerator designed to replicate
the Big Bang.

            When they do, ions moving at 99.9 percent of the
speed of light will smash into each other, generating minuscule fireballs of
superdense matter with temperatures of about a trillion degrees, 10,000 times
hotter than the sun, creating quarks and gluons and--fingers crossed--strange
quarks.

            Some physicists assert that there is a tiny but
real risk that the machine might create "strangelets," a new type of matter
made up of strange quarks, which might start an uncontrollable chain reaction,
converting anything they touch into more strange matter. An alternative, but no
cheerier, theory suggests that colliding particles could achieve sufficient
density to form a mini-black hole whose gravitational field would suck in all
surrounding matter. "The creation of one on Earth," the Times points
out, "could be disastrous."

            Brookhaven has convened
a committee to investigate the danger. Professor Bob Jaffe, director of the
Center for Theoretical Physics at MIT, who is on the committee, told the
Times , "There have been fears that strange matter could alter the
structure of anything nearby. The risk is exceedingly small but the probability
of something unusual happening is not zero."

            
               Death and Music
Extra
            

            This weekend, two events
drew huge crowds--the funeral of Morocco's King Hassan, and Woodstock '99. A
comparison:

            

               Capsule Description
Funeral: a moving tribute to a fallen leader
Festival: three days of peace, love, music, looting, arson, and riot 

               
                  New York Times Description of Crowd
Funeral: "hundreds of thousands of mourners"
Festival: "marauding bands of shirtless bellowing men"

               Distinguished Guests
Funeral: dozens of kings, presidents, and prime ministers
Festival: a sun-addled James Brown

               Most Moving Image
Funeral: gun carriage bearing a king's coffin
Festival: Metallica fans pushing over a Portasan

               Frequently Heard Cry
Funeral: "God is great!"
Festival: "Let's set fire to the pretzel truck!"

               Catalyst for Outburst of Emotion
Funeral: death of a longtime monarch
Festival: $4? For a bag of potato chips?

               Heartfelt Remarks From Ordinary Person in Crowd
Funeral: "He was like a father."
Festival: "I'm going to steal some more stuff."

               Lesson Learned
Funeral: Death comes to us all
Festival: "Should have spent the $60 for pay-per-view."

            

            

               Errata "charybdis.com does exist; carybdis is a misspelling, so it
is no surprise that it does not. (I'm afraid I've taken too much Latin for any
sane person.)"-- Jeff Newman
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Hillary and Amy.

         
      
   
