
   
   
      
         
            Bare Bones

            
               The Blair Witch
Project demonstrates that there's nothing scarier than nothing. The movie
has no ghosts or witches on display, and its lone bit of gore is a piece of
cloth containing a mottle of indeterminate organic material. It has no
surprises, either, since you know going in that the ending won't be happy. The
movie opens with a placard declaring that three film students went into the
woods near "Burkittsville, Maryland" to make a documentary and were never heard
from again, and that their footage was discovered a year after their
disappearance. The placard doesn't mention who edited the footage--the
ghost of Hitchcock? Cassavetes?--but that's a minor point. I could tell you the
story--give away every detail--and The Blair Witch Project would still
freeze your blood. Working on a budget that's chump change and a script that's
little more than a framework for actors' improvisations, directors Daniel
Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez have harnessed the most irrational fears of every
human alive. They have reanimated the genre not by adding to it but subtracting
from it--by cooking it down to its bare bones and then rattling those bones
like fiends.

            The first thing they've
done is remove the omniscient point of view. With the important exception of
that opening title card, there is no larger perspective. The film students--a
woman, Heather Donahue, and two men, Michael Williams and Joshua Leonard (the
characters bear the actors' names)--tote their own video and movie cameras, so
that we see what they see and no more. Actually, we see even less, since we
lack their peripheral vision and are cruelly limited to whatever passes through
their lenses. Thanks to first-rate sound equipment, though, we hear everything
they hear--especially a snapping of branches in the dark outside their tent
that escalates into an omnidirectional clatter. When they yell into the
darkness ("Hello?"), the darkness remains dark. A light illuminates the
foreground, but the blackness beyond that pool seems, if anything, blacker.
There might be no more irrationally terrifying shot in the annals of film than
the one in which the camera hurtles behind Heather--a hazy white streak in the
center of the screen--amid crackling sounds as she throws a look into the trees
and shrieks: "What is that? What the fuck is that? " We never see what
the fuck that is. If we did, some part of us would probably relax, because it
would look like a special effect. But no part of us is allowed to relax.
Ever.

            Is The Blair Witch Project a work of "art"? Not by
my definition. Art rarely tortures you so single-mindedly. After the first
half-hour, in which the students interview Burkittsville residents about the
history of the Blair Witch (one Elly Kedward, found guilty of sorcery in 1785
and lashed to a tree during a harsh winter), the remainder of the movie is
their increasingly desperate odyssey through the woods. They trudge one way,
double back, pore over maps and compasses, whine, trudge some more, come upon
mysterious piles of rocks or bundled twigs, and whine even louder. The action
unfolds in a season halfway between autumn and winter, and the washed-out tones
suggest that the Blair Witch took the forest's colors with her when she died.
The grueling monotony is broken only at night, when the students go into their
tents and the sounds come again and the very celluloid seems to shiver with
cold and fear. The camera twitches incessantly: The lone stationary shot is
when Heather sobs an apology to her parents for having dreamed up the project,
and the way she's framed and half-lighted she looks like Lon Chaney's Phantom
of the Opera with nostril hair. I don't apply the adjective "visceral"
casually: The shaky camera summons up our fight-or-flight responses. Leaving
the screening, my wife was convinced she had food poisoning from an earlier
meal; when we stopped and analyzed her symptoms, we realized that she had
motion sickness. The movie had literally made her sick.

            The power of that can't
be slighted, however. I love horror pictures and am a tough scare, but I
started having nightmares about The Blair Witch Project before I even
saw it--solely on the basis of its preview. I slept even less after I did see
it. When I caught an interview with the superbly nervy Heather Donahue on
television, the first thing I thought was, "Thank God, she's alive." Then she
said, "This movie must be working because people come up to me all the time and
say, 'Thank God, you're alive.' " The other day an envelope arrived at my door
with a bunch of sticks lashed together in the familiar form of the Blair Witch
talisman. I rushed to the phone and called the movie's publicists to make sure
this was a promotional gimmick. When they said yes, I started breathing again;
otherwise, I might have called the police--or an exorcist.

            What is it about The Blair Witch Project that taps
into such primal emotions? Consider its antithesis. The remake of The
Haunting has the bad fortune to open in the same month, and what might have
been dismissed as just a lame, overstuffed big-studio scare picture will now be
held up as a counterexample. Robert Wise's 1963 original, based on Shirley
Jackson's The Haunting of Hill House , is overrated, but it manages to
evoke the eeriest aspect of Jackson's fiction: the way the characters' neuroses
acquire an inexorable life of their own and threaten to eat them alive. Nothing
much happens in the empty mansion, but when something does--for instance, a
thunderous pounding on a pair of big doors, as if all the characters'
accumulated nervous energies had been focused on one spot--the movie's
reticence pays off like gangbusters (or ghostbusters). In the new version,
directed by Jan De Bont ( Speed , 1994; Twister , 1996), that
pounding comes early and serves as an overture for a bunch of
computer-generated special effects: ghosties that swirl around like Tinkerbell,
statues that spring to life and grab people. Everything is exasperatingly,
often laughably, overexplicit, and once a dread becomes material, a ghost story
becomes a monster movie--a different, far less terrifying beast.

            Here are sound effects so hammy that they might
have been borrowed from one of those old haunted-house party albums. Doors
don't creak, they CRRRREEEAAAKKK and then close with a reverberant
KER-CHUNGGGGGG. From the second Liam Neeson and his subjects--Catherine
Zeta-Jones, Lili Taylor, and Owen Wilson--set foot in the farcically garish
Hill House, it's clear that Something Evil is watching them: You can tell
because Something Evil respires so loudly that he's either Darth Vader or an
asthmatic. By the time poor Taylor stands up to the big, bad ghost on behalf of
a lot of little, good ghosts, people in the audience are holding onto their
stomachs to keep from retching with laughter. Writing, directing, acting--this
is one of the most maladroit ghost movies ever made.

            But even if the script weren't so tin-eared and the
direction so clunky, The Haunting still wouldn't come within screaming
distance of The Blair Witch Project . The reason is philosophical. De
Bont, a lavish materialist who thinks that movies can do anything if you throw
enough money around, wants to scare you by showing you stuff. Myrick and
Sanchez want to scare you by not showing you stuff--and by reminding you how
much you can't see and will never know. With all those cameras onscreen,
they've liberated horror from the realm of movies--from the realm of the
light--and nestled it back into the dark where it was born.

         
      
   
