
   
   
      
         
            No. 293: &quot;Sporting Life&quot;

            
               This weekend,
6,500 Canadians will jam Montreal's Olympic Stadium to share in a timeless
spectacle involving bravery, farm animals, and Velcro. What is it?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               
                  Wednesday's
Question (No. 292)--Military-Industrial Cineplex:
               
            

            

               
                  Porcine screenwriter John Milius praises it as "another link between
Hollywood and the military that seems to have broken down over the years." What
is it?
               
            

            "The
dismal failure of Planet USO."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Both
'institutions' are now 'forced' to 'admit' 'women.' "-- Seth Mnookin
            

            "Manly
homosexual love. If you don't believe me, watch any John Milius-written
screenplay, like Conan the Barbarian ."-- Dan Ricci
            

            
"Putting some teeth into the drug war, Colombia's right-wing paramilitary death
squads will now be aided by apple-cheeked American teen-agers. Wolverines!
Wooo!"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Bob
Hope."-- Brian Jacobsmeyer ( Colleen Werthmann had a similar
answer.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Chris' Wrap-Up
            

            There are three types of people in Southern
California: entertainment people, aerospace people, and everyone else. Oddly,
if you're an entertainment person, you never meet anyone from the aerospace
industry. That's always struck me as strange. They make death at places like
China Lake and Point Magu, we sell death at places like Sony. They're
conscienceless white guys with money, and so are we. Why don't we hang out? I
don't know, but I'll bet Joan Didion does.

            Hey, remember that
debate with Walter Mondale where Ronald Reagan said that the military needed
money for "wardrobe"? Oh, how I laughed. Of course, at the time I was living in
Canada.

            
               Infotaining
Answer
            

            Producing training material. This week, the Army
announced the creation of a $45 million Institute for Creative Technologies at
the University of Southern California. The institute will work with film
studios and video-game designers to create the next generation of military
simulators. The studios and designers will then be free to use the technology
they develop to create theme-park rides and special effects. "It's a win-win
for everyone," says Secretary of the Army Louis Caldera.

            It's good for the country, it's good for the
studios, and it's good for us. Like when Howard Hughes took all that money for
airplanes and shoved it down Jane Russell's shirt.

            The New York
Times asked screenwriter John Milius for his opinion, and the Conan the
Barbarian scribe said it sounded just fine to him.

            
               Quiz Extra
            

            In 1966, John Wayne sent a cable to Lyndon Johnson
to secure his support for The Green Berets . Johnson adviser Bill Moyers
responded that "it sounded like an exciting venture." Wayne followed up with an
eight-page list of the things he would need to make his movie.

            Which of these items did
Wayne really ask for, and which have I just slipped in for fun?

            

               5,800,000 rifles and carbines

               102,000 machine guns

               28,000 trench mortars

               53,000 field and heavy guns

               13,000 airplanes

               24,000 airplane engines

               50,000 ammunition wagons

               11,000 field kitchens

               1,150 field bakeries

            

            
               Answer
            

            I didn't add anything to
this list. Wayne received full military cooperation on his terms and was billed
$18,623.64.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            
               Red Dawn .

            
               Editor's Note
            

            Tim Carvell will be the guest host for next week's
News Quiz. Randy Cohen returns Aug. 30.-- C.K.
            

         
      
   
