
   
   
      
         
            Japanese Cultural Fallout

            

               Asahi
Shimbun blames last week's uranium accident in Tokaimura on misguided
Japanese cultural values. "In the United States, technical association codes of
ethics put the greatest emphasis on protecting public safety, health and
welfare. Loyalty to employers is fourth on the list. Quite probably the
Tokaimura accident could have been avoided if just one person among those
technicians, company executives and bureaucrats had applied such a philosophy."
Despite admissions that the plant had flouted government-approved guidelines
for the handling of uranium and comments reported in Hong Kong's South China Morning Post from Western scientists that
"safety practices in Japan are 'a bit lax,' " the Japanese government restated
its commitment to commercial generation of nuclear power Tuesday.

            The
seizure last week of the Myanmar (Burma) Embassy in Bangkok, Thailand, by
pro-democracy protestors "achieved precious little to advance the cause of the
hobbled pro-democracy movement in that benighted country," the Straits Times of
Singapore said in an editorial. The gunmen demanded that the Myanmar military
regime release its political prisoners and start a dialogue with dissident
leader Aung San Suu Kyi, and that the parliament elected in 1990 be allowed to
convene. Although the demands were not met, the 89 hostages taken at the
embassy were released unharmed, and the gunmen were allowed to escape.
"Myanmar, arguably one of the world's harshest military regimes, is bound to
crack down even harder on political dissidents after what happened," the paper
argued, adding that Burmese dissidents could now lose their safe haven in
Thailand since the sympathetic Thai government cannot be seen to support
terrorist groups. The editorial encouraged Asian governments to press Myanmar
to break its stalemate. It concluded, "It is far better that the military
regime drops its state of siege and deal with Ms Aung San Suu Kyi, who espouses
non-violent principles, than let the situation fester."

            The
Sydney Morning
Herald reported Tuesday that the head of the peacekeeping forces in
East Timor had called on pro-independence guerrillas to give up their weapons.
An editorial in Wednesday's SMH said, "In the overall
interests of peace and stability, Interfet [the international force in East
Timor] must have a monopoly of force for the foreseeable future." Admitting
that it will be difficult to persuade groups such as Falintil to disarm while
Indonesian troops remain, the paper said, "When the last Indonesian soldier has
left East Timor, the rationale for the guerillas remaining a fighting force
will be gone as well. It is then that Falintil should hand over its
weapons."

            At the
annual Conservative Party conference in Britain, former Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher made what the conservative Times called a "jingoistic" speech blaming all
Britain's problems in the last 60 years on continental Europe."[I]n my lifetime
all our problems have come from mainland Europe and all the solutions have come
from the English-speaking nations of the world that have kept law-abiding
liberty alive for the future," Thatcher said. A party spokesman told the
Times the flap was a "storm in a teacup ... in her lifetime World War
Two and the Soviet Union have been the major threats to Britain." An op-ed in
the same paper said that whereas Thatcher's legacy has proved "positive" for
the Labor Party, for the Tories it has been "little short of catastrophe." Once
the luster fades from the current Labor government, the column said, the
Conservatives "had better be standing in the centre ground. For if, when people
turn around to look afresh at this strange anachronism called the Conservative
Party, they find it where Labour wants it to be--clinging to Thatcher's skirts
on the far Right--they will simply turn straight back to Labour."

            Lino
Oviedo, who fled to Argentina in March after he was accused of involvement in
the assassination of Paraguay's vice president, was exiled to a remote
Patagonian island last week for violating the terms of his asylum, reports the
Buenos Aires
Herald . Oviedo, who had agreed not to make political pronouncements,
broke his pledge by declaring that he should be running Paraguay. Now from
Tierra del Fuego he's complaining that the harsh climate might endanger his
recent hair transplant. A Herald editorial said, "The
argument that his hair implant needs more time to take root was not only
legally flimsy but also highly unbecoming for his rugged martial profession and
his tough guy image." More berugged than rugged, perhaps.

         
      
   
