
   
   
      
         
            No. 313 &quot;What's That Smell?&quot;

            
               It was caused by
"a poisonous mix of greed, liquor, jingoism, and bad taste," writes Frank
Hannigan, the group's former executive director. What group? What
happened?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 pm. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 312)--"Ominous Anomalous":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           Hillary Clinton, Chelsea Clinton,
William Bennett, the president's staff, the American people, God. Which does
not belong? Why?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Hillary is the only one who's been rooting for the Mets since 1962."-- Alex
Balk
            

            
"Chelsea Clinton; I think everybody else is in agreement that Jedediah Purdy
would make the perfect first son-in-law."-- Julie Anderson
            

            
"Edmund Morris has never claimed to have attended a barbecue with William
Bennett."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            "The
president's staff, obviously, because ... oh, wait, that's not what you meant
by 'staff,' is it? Ick, what the hell is wrong with me thinking that? I blame
Ken Starr, Bob Barr, and those scary Hutchinson clones."-- Molly Shearer
Gabel (similarly: You're all thinking it.)

            "The
American people. Everyone on the list has been, at some point, taken in by
President Clinton. The American people are the only ones who have been taken in
by Clinton and Adam Sandler."-- Bill Scheft
            

            "God.
Does not buy clothes at Banana Republic."-- Steve Schecter
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-
               Up
            

            News Quiz participants
found common ground in their loathing for professional scold William
Bennett--his perpetual disapproval, his sanctimonious speechifying, his
humorless yelping, the way the sunlight turns his hair into an auburn cascade,
the kooky little songs he sings in the shower, his tousled amorous look first
thing in the morning, the way his knowing hands, so strong yet so gentle ...
no, wait, sorry ... I was thinking of the affair I've never had with family
values huckster Gary Bauer. I get a little mixed up when I miss
breakfast--flapjacks, sausages, prayerful boo-hooing. Most important meal of
the day, says William Bennett in his Eat Well or Burn in Hell: A Child's
Recipe Book of Virtues .

            
               Weepy

               Display of Religiosity Answer
            

            All but William Bennett are on the list of people
President Clinton believes have forgiven him. Even though he doesn't deserve
it.

            Posing coquettishly for the cameras at the annual
White House Prayer Breakfast, the president said, "I have been profoundly
moved, as few people have, by the pure power of grace, unmerited forgiveness
through grace. Most of all to my wife and daughter, but to the people I work
with, to the legions of American people and to the God in whom I believe, Miss
Ellen Barkin. And I'm very grateful to all of you who have had any role in
that."

            A review of the tapes indicates that the president
did not make any overt mention of Ms. Barkin. But we know, as few people do,
through the pure power of grace, what he was thinking.

            The president was
surrounded by a phalanx of spiritual counselors including the Rev. Philip
Wogaman. "I don't for one moment think that what he's been doing has been
simply for the public relations," said the reverend with unaffected simplicity.
"Camera crews? Really? Are those things on?" he did not add.

            
               E-Commerce
Extra
            

            With various seasonal
festivities fast approaching, why not consider gifts that say, "I like you from
a perspective far to the right of most Americans." Online reactionary giving is
as convenient as today, as barbarous as the Spanish Inquisition--like
Torquemada on some kind of laser sled. A few suggestions:

            
               Family
Research Council
               
            

            Virtuous Reality
T-Shirt: "Designed for FRC's Save-Sex campaign, this clever logo on a brilliant
red t-shirt is a subtle way to impart the positive message that a virtuous life
is the reality we need to strive for. 100% pre-shrunk red cotton t-shirt."
$10-- One so seldom sees the word "subtle" and the words "brilliant red
t-shirt" in the same sentence.
            

            "Save-Sex Hold Out for
the Ultimate" T-Shirt: "Designed for FRC's Save-Sex campaign, this is a great
shirt for counselors and mentors of teens! Purple, yellow, and green logo on
white, pre-shrunk, 100% cotton t-shirt." $10-- You can "hold out for the
ultimate," but remember: Gary Bauer is only one man. And married. And denying
everything.
            

            Ten Commandment Book
Covers: "Beautifully designed, these book covers reverently portray the
importance of a higher law in the lives of our school children. Allow your
children to make a strong yet subtle statement and order a set today. Comes in
sets of 10." $3-- If just one kid comes home from school determined not to
covet his neighbor's ox, that will more than make up for his utter ignorance of
science and history.
            

            
               American Opinion
Books
               , the online store of the John Birch Society

            Poster: "Three Cheers
for National Service." $5-- Features pictures of argument-stopping Hitler,
comical tyrant Mussolini, and not actually the leader of an Axis power Bill
Clinton.
            

            Poster: "The Experts
Agree: Gun Control Works!" $5-- With cartoon bad guys Hitler, Castro, Stalin,
and Qaddafi, just like the Gap khaki ads.
            

            United Nations "Peace Is
World Control" Sweatshirt. $25-- Features a scary skull in a blue U.N.
helmet. Available only in Size XXL, showing the Birch Society's commitment to
big, fat, superstitious guys.
            

            Red, white, and blue
"Get the U.S. out of the U.N." refrigerator Magnet. $2-- First they save the
lives of innocent civilians in East Timor, then they vaccinate some infants,
and the next thing you know, they're peacefully resolving international
disputes. For the love of God, stop them!
            

            
               Eagle
Forum
               
            

            Video: Radical
Feminism : "What feminism is and why it is destructive." $21.95-- I
believe this is the one where a bunch of women get liquored up and ask for
equal pay.
            

            Video: Tribute to
Phyllis Schlafly in Song and Pictures . $5-- Oh, right, like I don't
already have this on DVD.
            

            
               Elizabeth Dole Campaign Committee
               
            

            Low Profile Official
Dole Campaign Cap. Embroidered Sanded Twill Low Profile Cap New Shallow
Profile. $14.95-- I'm no fancy campaign strategist, but I 
               think I see
where they're going wrong with the tone of this thing.
            

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Loathing William Bennett, punning on "staff."

         
      
   
