
   
   
      
         
             Library Cad

            You'd think that a city would be thrilled to name
one of its streets after the most famous person who ever walked (or, in this
case, took a midnight "jog") down it, but that's not how it works in Little
Rock, Ark. Late last month, sign-wavers and activists mobbed city hall while
the city board considered whether to rename the street where the William
Jefferson Clinton Presidential Library will be located "President Clinton
Avenue." Hecklers offered derisive amendments: "Impeachment Avenue" was
proposed. But the city board eventually compromised, renaming just the few
blocks of Markham Street around the library after the president--a plan the
mayor said he came to embrace after asking himself, "What would Jesus do?"

            After a bit of fussing
from radio talk show hosts and newspaper columnists, the street-name dust-up
blew over, but it's one of the few controversies connected with the Clinton
Presidential Library that has. Since Little Rock beat out Hope and Hot Springs
for the library in November 1997, city policies from sales taxes to zoo funding
have been tangled up in Clinton and the building that will be his legacy. As
one local columnist noted, in Little Rock, even if they say it's not about
Clinton, it's about Clinton.

            Few Little Rockers dispute that a world-class library
building will be a boon to a town where the finest example of modern
architecture is the TCBY Tower, and the principal tourist attractions are quilt
shows and a building that had a cameo in Gone With the Wind (not to
mention the hotel rooms where Clinton propositioned women). But just as Little
Rock residents are embarrassed by Central High, the discomfiting monument to
desegregation and the town's other claim to history, some are queasy about
celebrating their not-so-favorite son.

            After all, Little Rock
had hardly won the library when the Lewinsky scandal broke and a vast new field
of inquiry revealed itself to Little Rock wiseacres: What's going to be in this
lie-brary anyhow? A cigar and a dress? Oral histories?

            But the library has provoked Little Rock not just because
it's a litmus test about Clinton. Even some Clinton fans have a bad taste in
their mouths about the way the Little Rock board of directors arranged to pay
for the 28-acre site. Private donors will fund the $80 million to $125 million
library, but city officials agreed to deliver construction-ready land. And
after recovering from the initial euphoria over winning the big prize, Mayor
Jim Dailey and Co. realized they had to find $15 million to buy and clear the
property.

            For a city with a $100 million budget, that's a
jawbreaker, but officials had made a commitment. They hit upon the idea of
issuing "parks revenue bonds," which didn't require voter approval, and
pledging revenues from the city's golf courses, parks, and zoo to pay them
down. The problem: Parks revenue bonds can only fund parks. Is a library a
park? That depends on your definition of the word "park." The city called the
library a "presidential park," and that took care of it.

            (The plan to take money
from the Little Rock zoo is another saga. For reasons too Byzantine to explain,
it's the only unaccredited big zoo in the nation, and it could use a cash
infusion. City officials are incredibly sensitive to the charge that they are
buying Clinton land with money that should go to feeding the giraffes. When the
city's newly hired zoo director came to town for a meet-and-greet recently,
reporters were warned in no uncertain terms that he was not to be asked about
the library.)

            Chamber of Commerce types welcomed this parks-bond trick,
but other members of the populace were not so gratified, among them 66-year-old
Nora Harris, a self-described "retired housewife." Harris sued the city,
claiming the library land deal is an illegal tax because the city will have to
raid the general fund to make up for lost parks revenue. A Pulaski County
Chancery Court judge ruled in the city's favor in June, but Harris plans to
appeal her case to the state Supreme Court. She has vowed to pursue the case to
the U.S. Supreme Court, or at least until she runs out of money.

            Harris isn't the only one
taking the city to court. Local developer Eugene Pfeifer III, a vocal opponent
of the library, owns a piece of property in the presidential park and promises
to fight the city's attempt to take his property by eminent domain.

            And then there's everyone else in the city. When the mayor
proposed a one-cent sales tax to shore up Little Rock's frayed budget, the city
revolted. Opponents such as Harris and Pfeifer argued loudly that the city was
forecasting a deficit because it is saddled with debt voters didn't approve, to
fund a library they didn't request, for the president who didn't inhale. City
officials squealed at that contention--the sales tax plan didn't mention the
"presidential library," and a deficit had been projected before the library
land grab--but Mayor Dailey was questioned about it everywhere he went, and his
answers didn't impress. The tax was walloped by more than two-thirds of voters
in a May referendum. Since then, the city has frozen hiring and chopped
programs to stave off a budget emergency.

            All this time, the land for the library has sat
undisturbed, covered with tall weeds and empty buildings, its intended purpose
marked only by a banner that has grown progressively more tattered. The mayor
originally hoped groundbreaking would take place six months ago, but it hasn't
happened yet. Still, the library is beginning to seem less of an albatross.
Earlier this month, Clinton finally picked the architects: James Stewart
Polshek and Richard M. Olcott of the Polshek Partnership in New York, along
with exhibit designer Ralph Appelbaum.

            One unanswered question is how much time Clinton
will spend in his home state once his library is completed. Perhaps he'll live
in an upstairs apartment and huff around town in jogging shorts as he did when
he was governor. The rumor of a Senate run seems dead, but a local satirical
revue proposes that Clinton capitalize on his legendary press-the-flesh skill
by working as a Wal-Mart greeter. Speaking of pressing the flesh, Clinton will
undoubtedly put the library to good use. No one expects that Clinton will spend
a lot of time in carrels poring over his papers, but even so, he has a good
track record of making the most of the stacks. It was in the Yale Law Library,
after all, that he first put the moves on Hillary Rodham.

         
      
   
