
   
   
      
         
            The New Death Penalty

            Last
Friday on Iowa Public Television, George W. Bush was asked to summarize the
message of his campaign. "I understand governments don't create wealth," Bush
began. "Governments create an environment in which entrepreneurship and
producers can flourish. That's why I support cutting the tax rates. That's why
I support getting rid of the death penalty."

            Hold
it right there. Did Bush just say he's against the death penalty? And what on
earth does that have to do with creating wealth?

            He did
say it, and it has everything to do with creating wealth. A few years ago,
Republicans not only supported the death penalty; they campaigned on a promise
to apply it more often. Days after the GOP's victory in the 1994 elections,
Speaker-to-be Newt Gingrich pledged to bring every plank of the "Contract With
America" to the House floor, including "an effective, enforceable death
penalty; beginning to phase-out the marriage penalty in the tax code; allowing
senior citizens to earn up to $39,000 a year without penalty from Social
Security; a capital gains cut and indexing."

            Along
the way, the two "penalties" merged. Republicans began to use the phrase "death
penalty," like the phrase "marriage penalty," to describe a tax pegged to one
of life's most sacred passages. The inheritance tax, which had been known as
the "estate tax," became the "death tax"--which in turn, by association with
the hated "marriage penalty," became the "death penalty."

            Two
years ago, Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., told the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce he would do something about "unfair" taxes, starting with the "death
penalty." Four weeks ago, House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, declared
on Fox News that Congress could use the surplus to address "a serious
unfairness in the tax code, such as the marriage penalty, the death penalty,
taxes on senior citizens." Last weekend, Bush adopted the same phrase.

            The
transformation of the inheritance tax into the "death penalty" provides more
grist for satirists who wonder whether Republicans, having condemned the
"marriage penalty" for discouraging marriage, now worry that the inheritance
tax is discouraging death. (For a head start on the satire, check out the work
of 
                  Slate
                necro-economists and .) But the true import of the new
"death penalty" is the demise of the old one. In 1994, Bush, Lott, and Armey
would never have called the inheritance tax the "death penalty," because the
death penalty meant something else. Today, they can speak out against the
"death penalty" without confusion or irony--and without being asked for
clarification--because the traditional meaning of that phrase is no longer
plausible. Capital punishment is no longer a live issue.

            What
killed it? Two things: Incomes went up, and crime went down. Americans stopped
feeling scared and started feeling comfortable. The GOP stopped talking about
saving your life and started talking about your life savings. As for Democrats,
they don't complain much about the death penalty anymore. The last guy who did
that was Michael Dukakis, and look what happened to him. Now every serious
politician either supports the death penalty and makes a show of it, as Bill
Clinton has, or keeps his mouth shut.

            The old death penalty
debate was profound and heated. Liberals called the practice murder.
Conservatives called it the only fitting punishment for unspeakable crimes. It
was a moral struggle of the highest consequence. But these days, unspeakable
crimes are no longer spoken of, murder is what happens to your portfolio on a
bad day, "family values" are debated through the Internal Revenue code, and the
"death penalty" is a tax issue. It may be a perfectly worthy topic in an age of
affluence. But it's hardly a matter of life and death.

         
      
   
