
   
   
      
         
            The Road to Beverly Hills

            On I-70 and I-15 between
Dillon, Colo., and Las Vegas. Thursday, Oct. 7, 1999

            Brutal day. We have to drive 14½ hours today to
stay on schedule, so I am being forced to write this dispatch from the car. Bob
is in a pissy mood. I think I know why.

            A few words in my defense. Re shopping: Let
the record show that I bought nothing at the outlet malls, while Mr.
Why-Are-We-Stopping-Here became slightly unhinged in the Le Creuset emporium,
acquiring several heavy cast-iron pots, which now burden our already
over-burdened car (see below).

            
               Re the East-European "flasher":
            

            His penis really did appear to just accidentally
fall out of his pants. That's my story and I'm sticking to it.

            
               Re the handsome 7-11 clerk:
            

            Bob is on to something there.

            Back to the drive: It's snowing in the Rockies
today, and the roads are slippery. Our car is laboring under the load of all my
worldly possessions and can't go very fast, even under favorable weather
conditions. In fact, every car on the Interstate seems to be making better time
than we are, even the pickup trucks towing large objects. Right now, we're
being passed by a house (or half a house anyway, being carted to a foundation
waiting somewhere), and a large tree is gaining on us.

            It doesn't bother me though. Colorado is so
beautiful, I could stay here forever. I can't believe Gary Hart, as senator
from this very state, was willing, at one point, to grind up the Rockies into
shale oil. Now, there was a case where sexual misbehavior was an accurate
indicator of poor overall judgement. Bob thinks Gary Hart must be the most
bitter man in North America because his peccadilloes pale by comparison with
Clinton's and yet Hart was driven from public life for them. But right now the
most bitter man in North America could well be Bob. He's barely talking to
me.

            
               Six hours later:
            

            We're halfway through Utah. Bob's mood has
improved. He sees a sign that says "Chain-Up Area Next Exit" and finds it
hilariously suggestive.

            I've had a recurring dream since I was a child. I'm
in a strange, barren, surreal setting and there are lots of snakes. Utah looks
like my dream come true. There are lots of enormous rocks, anyway, which in my
experience tends to mean lots of enormous snakes. I'm afraid to step out of the
car. Also the rocks are not quite as red as Bob claimed they would be. And we
haven't seen a single human being since we entered the state hours ago. How
could the Mormons have practiced polygamy? It seems like it would be hard to
find even one wife around here, let alone several.

            Total trip skunk count: Four (surprisingly
low).

            
               Seven and a half hours later:
            

            We arrive in Las Vegas, which is extremely
impressive for about 17 minutes. We visit Caesar's Palace and discover that the
fabled Noshorium (which Bob has been talking up for the last day) is no more.
We visit the much-hyped Bellagio too late to actually see its collection of
modern art, or its supposedly sensational water show "O." The hotel itself,
however, is almost unremittingly awful. Not just tacky, but uninteresting
tacky. Why doesn't somebody like casino mogul Steve Wynn spend the same amount
of money getting a good modern architect to design a hotel that would be truly
visually stunning and dispense with the imitation Renaissance clichés?

            I'm feeling sort of down. I'm going to get Bob to
take me out tonight.

         
      
   
