
   
   
      
         
             Talking About a Revolution

            Kelvin Lancaster died last month. He was an
economist's economist, famous within the profession (when an economist uses the
adjective "Lancastrian," he isn't talking about the Wars of the Roses), but
largely unknown beyond it. I can't claim to have known him personally: I was 3
years old when his famous paper on the theory of the "second best" was
published (click to read more about it), and we probably met only four or five
times. But nonetheless there was a time, a couple of decades ago, when we were
comrades-in-arms--when he and I, along with several dozen other people, helped
make a revolution in economic theory.

            That revolution went unnoticed among the wider
public, even among those who follow (or think that they follow) economic
thinking. David Warsh of the Boston Globe wrote an excellent series of
articles about some of the revolutionaries, and he's in the process of
finishing a book-length treatment. But other journalists ignored the story, or
if they did write anything got it wrong, preferring camera-ready fantasies in
which heroic outsiders challenged an obtuse Establishment. I've tried elsewhere
to correct some of the myths (click to read my article on the power of
biobabble and to read about the legend of Brian Arthur), but maybe Lancaster's
death is a good occasion for me to wax nostalgic, to recall what actually
did happen.

            To understand the
revolution, you need to grasp two related dichotomies. One is that between
constant and increasing returns; the other between perfect and imperfect
competition. Constant returns is the assumption that if you increase your
inputs, your output will grow by the same amount--e.g., if you double your
inputs you will also double your output. Increasing returns, on the other hand,
says that doubling inputs will more than double output. Perfect
competition is the assumption that producers are like wheat farmers, who take
the price of wheat as a given--and not like, say, Apple, which must decide what
to charge for an iMac and can choose within limits to raise that price if it is
willing to accept a reduction in sales.

            Perfect competition and constant returns go together like
cookies and milk; without constant returns, the assumption of perfect
competition becomes very hard to swallow. The reason, basically, is that when
there are increasing returns an industry will tend to become dominated by at
most a few large players, and these players are bound to realize that they have
some price-setting power. They are also likely to realize both that it is in
their common interest to agree, at least tacitly, to set prices high, and that
it is in their individual interest to cheat on that agreement and undercut
their rivals. Is the eventual result a stable cartel, a perpetual price war, or
an irregular alternation between the two? Hard to say. But what has long been
clear to economists is that increasing returns normally lead to imperfect
competition, and that imperfect competition can be a messy and intractable
subject.

            That recognition, in
turn, led the profession to spend about a century and a half--from David
Ricardo until the 1970s--concentrating its theoretical energy on models that
assumed constant returns and perfect competition, and economists tended to
avoid questions where increasing returns or imperfect competition were
self-evidently crucial. In so doing they were neither foolish nor dogmatic:
Most economists, I think, understood that increasing returns are sometimes
important, and a few people did try to take them into account. (In my
specialty, international trade theory, increasing-returns analysis is usually
dated from a 1925 paper by the Princeton economist Frank Graham; the first
fully worked-out mathematical model was published by R.C.O. Matthews in 1950.)
But useful theorizing in complex subjects such as economics is always a matter
of choosing the right strategic simplification, and for a long time it seemed
that the clarity of constant-returns/perfect-competition analysis justified its
violence to reality. Even now, one can say--and I did, back in 1995--that 95
percent of the time, it would be a blessing if politicians could understand
what's right about the constant returns model, not what's wrong with it.

            By the 1970s, however, patience with constant-returns
economics was wearing thin. Exactly why is hard to say. I don't think you can
claim that returns were less constant or competition less perfect in the real
world of 1975 than they had been in 1955, or even 1925. More likely, the
driving force was the field's internal intellectual logic: Economists had
answered most of the interesting questions they could ask in the old framework
and found that constant-returns economics was running into, well, diminishing
returns. And so they were finally ready to try something different.

            Kelvin Lancaster was one
of those who was driven to increasing returns. In the 1960s he had introduced a
seemingly obvious but highly useful twist to the analysis of consumer behavior
by pointing out that what consumers often want is not so much a specific
product as a particular bundle of characteristics. To take a modern example,
what business travelers care about in their notebook computers are low weight,
long battery life, and high computing power, rather than the logo on the case.
There are trade-offs among these good things; what differentiates one notebook
from another is where in this "characteristics space" they are located. But in
that case, why doesn't the market produce every possible notebook? (Much as I
love my Hewlett-Packard Jornada handheld, I'd prefer a machine with a slightly
better word processor, for which I would happily sacrifice something else.) The
answer, of course, is increasing returns: To proliferate varieties (and hence
to produce each variety at a smaller scale) means to increase costs.

            Now at this point Lancaster found himself up against the
usual problem: Increasing returns mean imperfect competition, and in general
imperfect competition is nasty stuff. But somehow, circa 1974, economists went
through a shift in mindset. My colleague Robert Solow likes to say that there
are two kinds of economists: those who look for general results and those who
look for illuminating examples. And more or less suddenly fell into the second
group; they decided that while a general theory of how imperfect competition
must work was never going to happen, it was OK to focus on interesting
examples of how it might work. How does the market for an industry with
Lancaster-type differentiated products function? It could be dominated by a
single firm that proliferates products to deter potential competitors--OK, Dick
Schmalensee wrote up that story. Or it could be "monopolistically competitive,"
each variety produced by a different firm--OK, Steve Salop wrote that up in one
version, Mike Spence in another, Avinash Dixit and Joe Stiglitz in yet another.
The point was to find stories that hung together, not determine once and for
all which was right.

            It's hard to convey, if
you weren't there, just how liberating this was. Once they decided it was OK to
tell illustrative stories rather than produce theorems, economists could write
about exciting topics that had been off limits: predatory pricing, strategic
investment to get the jump on competition, technological races, struggles to
define industry standards. By 1988, when Jean Tirole published his landmark
textbook The Theory of Industrial Organization , just about every idea
about the "new economy" that trendy writers proclaim as a radical departure
from conventional economic thought was, well, already in the textbook.

            Among other things, someone was bound to notice that the
interaction between increasing returns and product differentiation could help
explain some puzzles about international trade--like why most trade is between
seemingly similar countries. In the late '70s three people independently wrote
up that insight: the Norwegian economist Victor Norman, Lancaster himself, and
yours truly; and the "new trade theory" was born. A few years later economists
such as Paul Romer and Philippe Aghion applied related ideas to technological
change and economic growth, giving birth to the "new growth theory"; and the
ripples spread ever outward.

            Alas, golden ages do end. By the early 1990s, the
thrill of increasing-returns economics was fading. It wasn't just the
inexorable working of the law of diminishing disciples. There was a deeper
problem: The new ideas were immensely liberating, but at some point you can get
too liberated. In international trade, people started to joke that a
smart graduate student could come up with a model to justify any policy;
similar sentiments were felt in many fields. In short, we all got tired of
clever analyses of what might happen; and throughout economics there was a
shift in focus away from theorizing, toward data collection and careful
statistical analysis.

            But it was a golden age--a time of
innovation and intellectual excitement, when all of economics seemed up for
reinvention--and Kelvin Lancaster was one of those who made it so. Let us honor
his memory.

         
      
   
