
   
   
      
         
            The Road to Beverly Hills

            West Side of Beverly Hills, Calif.

            Just when I was planning a somewhat self-pitying
final entry (Working title: "Next Time, Less Stuckey, More Nookie"), Elizabeth
showed me a side of her I hadn't seen before, a warm, affectionate side. Out of
the blue last night, she asked if we could go out drinking, and--well, let's
say I think I finally broke through to her. It began with a point I made about
urban sprawl--how when you drive across the country, you realize the issue is
to a large degree phony. There's plenty of space! We should stop worrying! E.
seemed to loosen up right away. She even put her hand on mine. I always heard
you could score if you talked policy to her. Not that we had sex. But I will
say I have high expectations for the future. If only the trip had lasted one
more day.

            On the final drive across the desert into Los
Angeles, E. seemed as if she had blossomed. Suddenly, after wearing sweatpants
and T-shirts for five days, she put on this skimpy little black dress. Perfume,
too. We sped across the desert, the futon on the roof threatening to blow off,
in order to make an appointment she'd made at a ritzy hairdressing salon. She
said, "I feel so sad this is ending. I'm going to miss you so much." We even
had a road-trip bonding moment. She said she was tired of being an elusive
commitment-phobe, and was ready to start a long-term relationship.

            We pulled up to 2 Rodeo Drive only five minutes
late. E. didn't want me to use the valet, because, as she diplomatically put
it, "with all this stuff, we look like the fucking Clampetts." I told her I'd
see her later that night to unload her things. She said that "didn't work" for
her, but we arranged to see each other tomorrow morning--"late." I mentioned
again that I'd probably be driving back in a week or so, and that it would be
fun if she could come. She smiled. I think she may say yes.

         
      
   
