
   
   
      
         
            Boys Do Bleed

            Fight Club is silly
stuff, sensationalism that mistakes itself for satire, but it's also a brash
and transporting piece of moviemaking, like Raging Bull on acid. The
film opens with--literally--a surge of adrenalin, which travels through the
bloodstream and into the brain of its protagonist, Jack (Edward Norton), who's
viewed, as the camera pulls out of his insides, with a gun stuck in his mouth.
How'd he get into this pickle? He's going to tell you, breezily, and the
director, David Fincher, is going to illustrate his narrative--violently.
Fincher ( Seven , 1995; The Game , 1997) is out to bombard you with
so much feverish imagery that you have no choice but to succumb to the movie's
reeling, punch-drunk worldview. By the end, you might feel as if you, too, have
a mouthful of blood.

            Not to mention a hole in your head. Fight
Club careers from one resonant satirical idea to the next without quite
deciding whether its characters are full of crap or are Gen X prophets. It
always gives you a rush, though. At first, it goofs on the absurd feminization
of an absurdly macho culture. An increasingly desperate insomniac, Jack finds
relief (and release) only at meetings for the terminally ill. At a testicular
cancer group, he's enfolded in the ample arms of Bob (the singer Meat Loaf
Aday), a former bodybuilder who ruined his health with steroids and now has
"bitch tits." Jack and Bob subscribe to a new form of male bonding: They cling
to each other and sob. But Jack's idyll is rudely disrupted by--wouldn't you
know it?--a woman. A dark-eyed, sepulchral head case named Marla Singer (Helena
Bonham Carter) begins showing up at all the same disparate meetings for
essentially the same voyeuristic ends, and the presence of this "tourist" makes
it impossible for Jack to emote.

            Jack finds another
outlet, though. On a plane, he meets Tyler Durden (Brad Pitt), a cryptic
hipster with a penchant for subversive acts both large (he makes high-priced
soaps from liposuctioned human fat) and small (he splices frames from porn
flicks into kiddie movies). When Jack's apartment mysteriously explodes--along
with his carefully chosen IKEA furniture--he moves into Tyler's squalid
warehouse and helps to found a new religion: Fight Club, in which young males
gather after hours in the basement of a nightclub to pound one another (and be
pounded) to a bloody pulp. That last parenthesis isn't so parenthetical. In
some ways, it's the longing to be beaten into oblivion that's the strongest.
"Self-improvement," explains Tyler, "is masturbation"; self-destruction is the
new way. Tyler's manifesto calls for an end to consumerism ("Things you own end
up owning you"), and since society is going down ("Martha Stewart is polishing
brass on the Titanic "), the only creative outlet left is annihilation.
"It's only after we've lost everything that we're free to do anything," he
says.

            Fincher and his screenwriter, Jim Uhls, seem to think
they've broken new ground in Fight 
               Club , that their metaphor for
our discontents hits harder than anyone else's. Certainly it produces more
bloody splatter. But 20 years ago, the same impulse was called punk and, as
Greil Marcus documents in Lipstick Traces , it was other things before
that. Yes, the mixture of Johnny Rotten, Jake La Motta, and Jesus is unique;
and the Faludi-esque emasculation themes are more explicit. But there's
something deeply movie-ish about the whole conceit, as if the novelist and
director were weaned on Martin Scorsese pictures and never stopped dreaming of
recapturing that first masochistic rush.

            The novel, the first by
Chuck Palahniuk (the surname sounds like Eskimo for "palooka"--which somehow
fits), walks a line between the straight and ironic--it isn't always clear if
its glib sociological pronouncements are meant to be taken straight or as the
ravings of a delusional mama's boy. But onscreen, when Pitt announces to the
assembled fighters that they are the "middle children of history" with "no
purpose and no place"--emasculated on one hand by the lack of a unifying crisis
(a world war or depression) and on the other by lack of material wealth as
promised by television--he seems meant to be intoning gospel. "We are a
generation of men raised by women," Tyler announces, and adds, "If our fathers
bail, what does that tell you about God?" (I give up: What?)

            F ight 
               Club could use a few different
perspectives: a woman's, obviously, but also an African-American's--someone
who'd have a different take on the "healing" properties of violence. It's also
unclear just what has emasculated Jack: Is it that he's a materialist or that
the materials themselves (i.e., IKEA's lacquered particle boards) don't measure
up to his fantasies of opulence? Is he motivated by spiritual hunger or envy?
Tyler's subsequent idea of confining his group's mayhem to franchise coffee
bars and corporate-subsidized art is a witty one--it's like a parody of
neo-Nazism as re-enacted by yuppies. It might have been a howl if performed by,
say, the troupe of artsy German nihilists in Joel and Ethan Coen's The Big
Lebowski (1998). Somehow Brad Pitt doesn't have the same piquancy.

            Actually, Pitt isn't as terrible as usual: He's
playing not a character but a conceit, and he can bask in his movie-idol
arrogance, which seems to be the most authentic emotion he has. But the film
belongs to Norton. As a ferocious skinhead in last year's American History
X , Norton was taut and ropy, his long torso curled into a sneer; here, he's
skinny and wilting, a quivering pansy. Even when he fights he doesn't
transform--he's a raging wimp. The performance is marvelous, and it makes
poetic sense in light of the movie's climactic twist. But that twist will annoy
more people than it will delight, if only because it shifts the drama from the
realm of the sociological to that of the psychoanalytic. The finale, scored
with the Pixies' great "Where Is My Mind?" comes off facetiously--as if Fincher
is throwing the movie away.

            Until then, however, he
has done a fabulous job of keeping it spinning. The most thrilling thing about
Fight Club isn't what it says but how Uhls and Fincher pull you into its
narrator's head and simulate his adrenalin rushes. A veteran of rock videos,
Fincher is one of those filmmakers who helps make the case that MTV--along with
digital editing--has transformed cinema for better as well as worse. The syntax
has become more intricate. Voice-over narration, once considered uncinematic,
is back in style, along with novelistic asides, digressions, fantasies, and
flashbacks. To make a point, you can jazzily interject anything--even, as in
Three Kings , a shot of a bullet slicing through internal organs. Films
like Fight Club might not gel, but they have a breathless,
free-associational quality that points to new possibilities in storytelling. Or
maybe old possibilities: The language of movies hasn't seemed this unfettered
since the pre-sound days of Sergei Eisenstein and Abel Gance.

            An actress named Hilary Swank gives one of the most
rapturous performances I've ever seen as the cross-dressing Brandon Teena (a k
a Teena Brandon) in Kimberly Peirce's stark and astonishingly beautiful debut
feature, 
                  Boys Don't Cry
               . The movie opens with Teena
being shorn of her hated female tresses and becoming "Brandon," who swaggers
around in tight jeans and leather jackets. The joy is in watching the actor
transform, and I don't just mean Swank: I mean Teena Brandon playing Brandon
Teena--the role she has been longing for her whole life. In a redneck Nebraska
bar, Brandon throws back a shot of whiskey and the gesture--a macho
cliché--becomes an act of self-discovery. Every gesture does. "You're gonna
have a shiner in the morning," someone tells Brandon after a barroom brawl, and
he takes the news with a glee that's almost mystical: "I am????? Oh, shit!!!"
he cries, grinning. That might be my favorite moment in the picture, because
Swank's ecstatic expression carries us through the next hour, as Brandon acts
out his urban-cowboy fantasies--"surfing" from the bumper of a pickup truck,
rolling in the mud, and straddling a barstool with one hand on a brewski and
the other on the shoulder of a gorgeous babe.

            That the people with whom Brandon feels most at home
would kill him if they knew his true gender is the movie's most tragic
irony--and the one that lifts it out of the realm of gay-martyr hagiography and
into something more complex and irreducible: a meditation on the irrelevance of
gender. Peirce's triumph is to make these scenes at once exuberant
(occasionally hilarious) and foreboding, so that all the seeds of Brandon's
killing are right there on the screen. John (Peter Sarsgaard), one of his
future rapists and murderers, calls him "little buddy" and seems almost
attracted to him; Sarsgaard's performance is a finely chiseled study of how
unresolved emotion can suddenly resolve itself into violence.

            Though harrowing, the
second half of Boys Don't Cry isn't as great as the first. The early
scenes evoke elation and dread simultaneously, the later ones just dread; and
the last half-hour is unrelieved torture. What keeps the movie tantalizing is
Chloë Sevigny's Lana, who might or might not know that Brandon is a girl but
who's entranced by him anyway. With her lank hair, hooded eyes, and air of
sleepy sensuality, Sevigny--maybe even more than Swank--embodies the mystery of
sex that's at the core of Boys Don't Cry . Everything she does is
deliberate, ironic, slightly unreadable--and unyielding. She's could be saying,
"I'm in this world but not of it. ... You'd never dream what's
underneath."

            I n 
               brief: If a friend tells you
you'll love 
                  Happy Texas
               , rethink the friendship. This
clunky mistaken-identity comedy about escaped cons who impersonate gay pageant
directors doesn't even make sense on its own low farcical terms; it's mostly
one lame homo joke after another. The only bright spot is Steve Zahn, who could
be the offspring of Michael J. Fox and Crispin Glover if they'd mated on the
set of Back to the Future (1985).

            It's hard to make a serious case for Lawrence
Kasdan's 
                  Mumford
               , which has apparently flopped but
which you can still catch at second- and third-tier theaters. It looks
peculiar--a Norman Rockwell painting with noir shadows. And its tale of a small
town healed by a depressive (Loren Dean) posing as a psychologist is full of
doddering misconceptions about psychotherapy. I almost don't know why I loved
it, but the relaxed pacing and the witty turns by Martin Short, Ted Danson,
David Paymer, and Mary McDonnell surely helped. I can't decide if the weirdly
affectless Dean is inspired or inept, but my indecision suggests why he works
in the role. There's no doubt, however, about his even more depressive love
object, Hope Davis, who posseses the cinema's most expressive honking-nasal
voice and who slumps through the movie like the world's most lyrical
anti-ballerina. Even her puffy cheeks are eloquent: They made me think of
Mumford as the home of the psychological mumps.

         
      
   
