
   
   
      
         
            No. 275: &quot;Symbolic Logic&quot;

            
               
                  A federal
judge has ordered Republic, Mo., to make a change in its official city seal.
What change?
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
274)--"Chants Taking":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Over the past
few days, these demonstrators shouted: "Down with the dictator," "Oh Great
Leader, shame on you!" and "Jerks!" Who was protesting
what?
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "The
few disappointed members of 'John Kasich for President.' "-- Beth
Sherman
            

            "Wait,
has The Nation 's annual cruise left already?"-- Greg Diamond
            

            "Let
me guess: Cineplex Odeon has raised prices another quarter, hasn't it?"-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "Off
the Bermuda coast, student dolphins angrily picketed their corrupt undersea
government, before turning violent and eating the minister of
plankton."-- Steve Bodow
            

            "Wow,
I knew that Texas fans were upset about Juan Gonzalez not starting the All-Star
game, but they really have to chill out."-- Aaron Schatz ( Charles
Star had a similar answer.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Other people's chants,
particularly when chanted in translation, sound a little silly. But some of our
own anti-battle cries have been a little lazy, perhaps because of the too-easy
rhyming of "four" and "war"--as in "one, two, three, four/ we don't want your
stinking ..." well, you know. Indeed, anything that employs counting seems
cheap. As comfy as it is to be led from "two, four, six, eight" to "smash the
state," it is kind of the "Roses are red, violets are blue" of crowd inciting.
Disappointing, really. "No justice, no peace," barks out a fierce equivalency,
although to the uninitiated it may sound like a list of the two things the
crowd is rejecting: justice and peace. Paired phrases do have rhetorical vigor,
particularly in the call and response of "What do we want?" (something good!),
"When do we want it?"--there's the problem; the answer is so predictable. It's
not like we want it by mid-February. There was a briefly popular in-group
incantation (if by in-group we mean me), an acknowledgement of how crowded a
demonstration could be: "La Raza Unida Is Standing on My Feet-a!" but when I
chanted it--and I did--it was thought to denote a lack of seriousness, which it
did not. But I should have known better. If airy persiflage went down well at
street demonstrations, Noël Coward would have had a whole other career.

            
               Off the Pigs, Well
Maybe Not "Pigs," but Definitely Off Answer
            

            Pro-democracy student demonstrators at Tehran
University are calling for a faster movement of the government toward democracy
and the rule of law but still within the framework of an Islamic republic. And
they're not too happy about being beaten and killed by police and
vigilantes.

            Other chants included:
"Army brothers, why kill brothers?," a cry of the Islamic revolution two
decades ago, "Filthy Swine!" "Death to America!" "People are miserable! The
clerics are acting like gods!" and, if my Farsi is any good (and it's not),
"Giuliani, although uninvolved in Iranian affairs, sucks."

            
               Live Free or Lightly
Salted Extra
            

            A senator bolts the
Republican Party and a beloved advertising character is recalled to duty. Two
unrelated stories? Perhaps. Or maybe a single story about a place called
America and a company called Planters. OK, that's two things again, but the
challenge remains: Which of these remarks refer to Sen. Bob Smith of New
Hampshire, and which refer to Mr. Peanut?

            
               The Comments:
            

            1. He is "a leverage point to talk about the
quality, taste, and fun that separates us from other nuts."

            2. "There is a certain integrity to him, as amusing
as that sounds."

            3. Believes that Ronald Reagan's critics "weren't
qualified to kiss the hem of his garment."

            4. "Our research shows [him] to be seen as a
regular guy, everyman."

            5. His grandfather was "a died-in-the-wool
Republican. He said he'd vote for a gorilla on the Republican ticket if he had
to."

            6. He is considered "a party animal, but
dignified."

            7. "People, especially young people, realize that
his appearance is meant to be tongue-in-cheek, with a fun edge."

            8. At age 11, "bet a friend who lived down the road
and had a farm, a dollar versus a chicken that Eisenhower would win the
election."

            9. Makes frequent references to Mr. Smith Goes
to Washington .

            10. Thinks Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman are
"probably gay" but looks forward to seeing them have sex in Eyes Wide
Shut .

            11. Received letter from
GOP Chair Jim Nicholson and found it "petty, it's vindictive and it's
insulting."

            
               Their subjects:
            

            1. Mr. Peanut.

            2. Mr. Peanut.

            3. Sen. Smith.

            4. Mr. Peanut.

            5. Sen. Smith.

            6. Mr. Peanut.

            7. Mr. Peanut.

            8. Sen. Smith.

            9. Sen. Smith.

            10. I believe that was me.

            11. Sen. Smith.

            (Note:
All Mr. Peanut comments from some ad guys quoted in the Times . All Bob
Smith comments come from his speech Tuesday in the Senate.)

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The Katzenberg settlement.

         
      
   
