
   
   
      
         
            No. 306: &quot;Faintness, Nausea, Disneyness&quot;

            
               Something in
Disney World is irritating both Arabs and Israelis. What? (Question courtesy
of Dave Gaffin.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 305)--"Safe Sects":
            

            

               On Wednesday, the Xinhua news agency described a step China has taken
to ensure "social stability and safety" during their big 50 Years of
Revolutionary Rule celebration set for Oct. 1. What did China do?
            

            "No to
chopsticks. Yes to Sporks."--Jon W. Davis
            

            "Tanks
and plenty of 'em!"-- Judith Spencer ( David Mayer had a similarly
tankful answer.)

            
"Relaxed the age requirements on infanticide."-- Matt Sullivan
(similarly, Joy Nolan )

            
"Promised to unretire all the Beanie Babies."-- Brooke Saucier
(similarly, Sean Fitzpatrick )

            
"Increased funding to 'Just Say No to Acts of Counterrevolutionary Hooliganism'
campaign in elementary schools."-- Keith Kurtz
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Observational humor, that's what we trade in here.
I observe that 50 years ago Mad magazine observed the popularity of
Chinese restaurants with an elegant piece of satire called "Two Chinese Guys Go
Into an American Restaurant." They had some trouble pronouncing
ba-con-an-eh-guh-zuh and manipulating the "fork."

            Many News Quiz participants observed that around
the same time, when Sinatra was still a liberal and still alive, he made The
House I Live In featuring the moving and melodious: "That's What the
People's Republic of China Is to Me," a musical observation of China's many
restaurants, female infanticide, and brutal suppression of dissent.

            If I were running the moribund Hard Rock Cafe,
here's what I'd want to observe about Chinese life: restaurants + oppression =
potential theme restaurants, and a magnet for investments from the usual crowd
of Hollywood patsies.

            We're not just an
amusing topical quiz, we're part of America's robust economic growth in pop
culture crap! Ask your broker about us, or visit us online at ... well, I guess
you're already visiting us online. So just go ahead and type in your credit
card number. I'll be over here, not peeking.

            
               Preventive Detention
Answer
            

            China has rounded up 100,000 "criminals."

            In addition to the festive mass arrests, the
Chinese plan a parade of 140,000 people along with troops, tanks, rockets, and
90 floats, including one bearing 30 leading fashion models. In a first for
official celebrations, there will be handicapped people in wheelchairs and a
contingent of private businessmen, chairs unannounced.

            The parade will be
broadcast live on the Internet at www.china10k.com .

            
               Shallow Sloganizing
Extra
            

            The Web sites of each
major presidential hopeful feature an inspirational slogan that encapsulate the
candidate's vision for America. Can you name the candidate for each of these
rallying cries?

            
               Slogans
            

            1. Prosperity With a Purpose

            2. It's Principle That Counts

            3. The Best Prescription Is Knowledge

            4. A Man's Got To Know His Limitations

            5. Advancing America's Values

            6. Family, Faith, Freedom

            7. He Wants You To Win

            8. He Wants You To Mock Ron Perelman

            9. America First

            10. Now and Always

            
               Answers
            

            1. George W. Bush: That purpose? To fight the wave of evil flying
monkeys shooting up so many schools and churches, and to buy a nicer boat.

            2. Alan Keyes: I believe he bought up Nixon's old "Experience
Counts" buttons and did some deft Magic Marker work. The principle?
Thriftiness. And goofball economics.

            3. Dr. C. Everett Koop: Not a candidate, but always a front-runner
in the nation's heart, a part of the body for which he can suggest effective
(and surprisingly affordable) treatments.

            4. Clint Eastwood: Not running, but he's so lean and leathery
that if he did, he could count on big money from the skin cream PACs. Might
have to tweak slogan to "A Man's Got To Know His Limitations and His Gentle
Emollients." But politics is the art of compromise, for money.

            5. Gary Bauer: Chosen over the livelier: It's Like the Taliban,
Christian-Style!

            6. Family Research Council: Not a candidate. And not a family, and
not doing any research, but might be some kind of council.

            7. Steve Forbes: He wants me to win, and I want him to say more
about his father's sex life; we're both going to be disappointed.

            8. I believe that one's mine.

            9. Pat Buchanan: The scary thing, he undoubtedly knows the history
of that slogan and that movement.

            10. Coca-Cola: Not a
candidate, but could be just the thing Dr. Koop prescribes for a balky ticker.
I should check.

            
               Ongoing Shallow
Sloganizing Follow-Up
            

            Participants are invited to devise slogans for the
following candidates whose sites display no slogans or, in the case of Ms.
Dole, have been inaccessible for weeks. Replies to run Thursday.

            * John McCain

            * Dan Quayle

            * Al Gore

            * Elizabeth Dole

            
                 Common
Denominator
            

            Too much MSG, too many tanks.

         
      
   
