
   
   
      
         
            No. 292:&quot;Military-Industrial Cineplex&quot;

            
               Porcine
screenwriter John Milius praises it as "another link between Hollywood and the
military that seems to have broken down over the years." What is
it?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Tuesday's Question (No. 291)--"Ocelots": Researchers in Dallas
tried ocelot scent and rat feces but neither worked as well as Calvin Klein
Obsession for Men. What were they trying to do?
            

            
"Develop a pheromone so selective that Charlton Heston would have virtually no
chance to take home the prize in his own 'look-alike' contest."-- Gene
Cluster
            

            
"Determine whether or not obsession really does lie between madness and
delusion. Turns out it lies between cat piss and rat poop"-- Flloyd
Elliot
            

            "Give
Liddy Dole shivery fits so that she would muff reporters' questions about her
stance on Medicaid abortion. Obvious Bush campaign dirty trick--and it
worked!"-- Katha Pollitt
            

            "Find
a smell that evoked the atmosphere of lonely bachelors' homes."-- David
Ballard
            

            "Get
me all hot."-- Dennis Cass
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Chris' Wrap-Up
            

            I don't know how Randy does it (Chorus of voices:
"YOU'RE TELLING US!"). For the last three days I've been tempting carpal tunnel
while cutting and then uncutting very funny News Quiz answers. It's hard to
choose, because so many of them make me laugh and laugh until people who should
by all rights fear me barge into my office and tell me to get a grip. In the
end, of course, the Top 5 Quiz slots go to friends or people I owe money, but
that's no reflection on the rest of you. If you don't usually read the second
page of the Quiz you should, and I feel I've been only cheating myself all
these months by just looking for my own name and secret encrypted love talk
from Beth Sherman.

            Colleen Werthmann is
doing a show called "SHE HATES HER SUPERVISOR" next Monday at the Westbeth
Theatre, 151 Bank St., New York. It's free and if you want reservations you can
call (212) 603-1844.

            
               Stimulating
Answer
            

            Researchers at the Dallas Zoo have been looking for
a scent that will encourage their ocelots to breed. "We thought about what
would work with them and used things like rat feces and ocelot scent," says
research curator Dr. Cynthia Bennett. "Then on a lark my research technician
brought in cologne because a lot of other animals like it and we put Obsession
out and our ocelots went wild over it."

            Bennett's team isn't just doing this for kicks,
although I wouldn't put it past them, knowing Bennett, which I don't. They also
want to find a way to create "scent corridors" so that scattered packs of
ocelots, living in the wild, can find each other and mate.

            Sponsoring a highway has
proved to be such a cheap and effective way for corporations and celebrities to
generate good will; maybe these same groups could be encouraged to pony up for
a few miles of scent corridor. I'm just blue-skying here, but wouldn't you feel
a lot better about your phone bill if you saw a sign that said something like,
"The Next Two Miles of Horny Ocelots Are Brought to You by Sprint"?

            
               Quiz Extra
            

            There is no Quiz Extra.
I'm just a substitute. Sit quietly until the bell.

            
               Common
Denominators
            

            George W. Bush, the Dallas Cowboys, the rub of
love.

         
      
   
