
   
   
      
         
            No. 283: &quot;Storm Warnings&quot;

            
               The current issue
of a national magazine lists these warning signs: stain, unusual odor, the
sound of broken glass or plastic. What publication, what danger? (Question
courtesy of Jim O'Grady.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
282)--"It'll Take a Miracle":
            

            

               
                  An inquiry into Mother Teresa began in Calcutta, India, Monday, as
Pope John Paul II opted to fast-track her canonization, waiving the five-year
post-death waiting period. Beatification, the first step toward sainthood,
requires a confirmed miracle, and one has already been "authenticated." Name
that miracle.
               
            

            "Tears
streaming from the Time magazine cover of JFK Jr."-- Peter
Lerangis
            

            "Black
Hole of Calcutta now 'only a little gray, more like brown, really.'
"-- Andrew Staples
            

            
"Transformed Christopher Hitchens from semicoherent socialist into gibbering
right-wing tattletale."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            "Oh, I
know! She tortured Indians until they either converted or died! Or was that the
beatified Father Junípero Serra?"-- Greg Diamond
            

            "Since
Mother Teresa's death, there have been no movie sightings of Harvey Keitel's
penis."-- Alex Balk
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Something happened
between 1968 and 10 minutes ago that transformed the American flag from
hallowed symbol to fabric pattern. Thirty years ago, ABC would not televise
Abbie Hoffman's American flag shirt on the Dick Cavett Show ; last week
it was available at a street fair in my neighborhood in the form of silk
underwear. (Surprisingly comfortable.) This seems like increasing liberalism,
but it's only encroaching commerce, less a commitment to free speech than a
determination to sell paper plates, cups, and napkins for kicky Fourth of July
fun. Similarly, if more slowly, the term "miracle" has evolved from sacred
mystery to a substitute for mayonnaise. There is the Miracle Mile for shopping,
the Miracle on Ice for sports, Miracle-Gro for plants. But here it seems less a
chance to make a buck than something akin to grade inflation. Either way,
Mother Teresa is a shoo-in. And she'll look great on a medallion, boxers, or
briefs.

            
               Wondrous Answer
            

            Three miracles have already been attributed to
Mother Teresa, and the investigation has just begun.

            Henry D'Souza, archbishop of Calcutta, said a
patient in West Bengal claimed that a tumor disappeared after he was blessed by
Mother Teresa. D'Souza said the case has been authenticated by a doctor.

            A French woman in the United States who broke
several ribs in a car accident reportedly healed when she wore a Mother Teresa
medallion around her neck.

            A Palestinian girl suffering from cancer says she
was cured after Mother Teresa appeared in her dreams and said, "Child, you are
cured."

            It does not count
against Mother Teresa that she's concentrated all her miracles into one field,
medicine, failing to appear well-rounded. It does count against your HMO that
they are unlikely to provide any of these valuable services.

            
               Michael Jenning's Give
Me a Sign Follow-Up
            

            Near where I used to live in Australia, there is a
road along the bottom of a cliff where a series of signs says:

            FALLING ROCKS

            DO NOT STOP

            Driving past, we used to
comment, "Damn right they don't."

            
               Marc Cenedella's
Charybdis/Carybdis Follow-Up
            

            Apparently Jeff Newman
has taken too much Latin, since Homer's Odyssey is written in ancient
Greek. (P.S.: On the subject of Anglophone spelling, somebody should inform the
Greeks that they've misspelled Greece "Hellas.")

            
               Karen Bitterman's
Class-Conscious Vandals Follow-Up

            I don't know about your
'hood, but here, the prettier the car the more likely it is to be "keyed"--that
nasty, deep, full-length scratch (or scratches, if it is keyed by multiple
pissed-off proletarians) when one's car is parked on the street. Also, in a
sort of tribal downsizing, budding gangsters no longer have to steal your car
radio, they only have to steal the brand logo insignia from the hood or trunk
of your car (less likely to set off the alarm, which makes it more likely that
they can steal badges from all cars on a block) in order to prove their
inherent gangsterness. With all these options, spray-paint-wielding taggers are
free to concentrate on the stationary objects that will mark their turf, or to
defile the stationary objects in the turf of the other.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The affliction of Christopher Hitchens, the triumph
of various ball clubs.

         
      
   
