
   
   
      
         
            <EM>Veni</EM>, <EM>Vidi</EM>, Veto

            

               The United States is suing major tobacco companies. The suit
aims 1) to penalize the industry for concealing the risks of cigarettes and 2)
to recover billions of tax dollars spent on smoking-related health care. Last
year, Congress rejected legislation that would have settled the government's
claims against the industry for $516 billion. The industry's spin: The
government can't claim innocence after years of subsidizing tobacco and
promoting overseas sales. The government's spin: Even if our hands are dirty,
the industry should pay for the medical costs of its product. The industry
counterspin: Then we should pay nothing, since smoking saves money by
shortening lives.

            

               Tension is rising in East Timor. U.N. peacekeeping troops
exchanged gunfire with militiamen and renegade Indonesian soldiers. The U.N.
forces are securing the region to make way for relief efforts for refugees
facing disease and starvation. Monday's U.N. spin: This operation could be a
cakewalk. Today's U.N. spin: We brought the guns for a reason. (See the
Sydney Morning Herald for extensive
coverage of the crisis.)

            

               President Clinton vetoed the Republican tax cut. The bill,
narrowly passed by Congress, would have used the projected budget surplus to
eliminate $792 billion in taxes over 10 years. Both sides have hinted that a
smaller tax reduction would be acceptable. Clinton said the country could
not
afford a return to "the failed policies of the past." Republicans
charged that Clinton's tax-and-spend philosophy would do just that.

            

               A second man was sentenced to death for the Texas dragging
murder. A unanimous jury condemned avowed racist Lawrence Russell
Brewer for killing James Byrd Jr., a black man who was dragged alive for three
miles behind a pickup truck before his head was torn off by a concrete culvert.
Another defendant was found guilty in February, and a third is awaiting trial.
The prosecution spin: The jury sent a message that not all
Texans are racists. The defense spin: Juries should evaluate facts, not
send messages.

            

               Hope for more earthquake survivors is fading in Taiwan. The
death toll from the initial 7.6-magnitude quake has topped 2,000 and is
expected to rise as rescuers search for 2,300 people believed to be trapped in
the rubble. Hundreds of thousands remain homeless, and water, electricity, and
food supplies are cut off on much of the island. Experts warned
that Taiwan is a sign of things to come: Earthquake damage will increase
everywhere with urban development and population growth. (
                  Slate
               's
David Plotz Mother Nature's power.)

            

               Actor George C. Scott died. He was best known for portraying
Gen. George Patton and for refusing to accept the Best Actor Oscar for the
role. Film critic David Thomson said Scott was once "the great threat in
American acting--he had such drive and bite, such timing and authority."

            

               Ronald Reagan's biographer wrote himself into the story as a fictional
character. The forthcoming book portrays author Edmund Morris as
Reagan's contemporary. Historians called the technique dubious. Maureen Dowd
labeled Morris "barking mad ." Morris explained that "after several years of deep research I
was, in an almost occult sense, there when Reagan was younger."

            

               President Clinton defended his grant of clemency to Puerto Rican
nationalists. He denied Republican allegations that the move was aimed
at building support for his wife's Senate campaign. Separately, FBI Director
Louis Freeh revealed that he had "unequivocally opposed " the offer. The White House spin:
Clemency is about justice, and the prisoners' punishments did not fit their
crimes. The Republican spin: Clemency is about security, and the prisoners'
release sends the wrong message about terrorism.

            
               The Senate
reported that the United States is prepared for Y2K. The report says
that thanks to preparation by large companies and federal and state
governments, the computer bug will cause few disruptions in most Americans' lives. Last year's spin:
Confused computers could cripple basic services. This year's spin: Panicked
consumers could wreak havoc on banks and stores.
 

            

               The East Coast is recovering from Hurricane Floyd. The storm
killed at least 68 people and caused damage worth hundreds of millions of
dollars. Nearly a third of North Carolina remains shut down by flooding, and
the state now faces water pollution due to animal carcasses and sewage. Last
week's spin: Whew!--Floyd was milder than expected. This week's spin: North
Carolina is the new Atlantis. (
                  Slate
               's David Plotz the
weather reporting industry.)

         
      
   
