
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Double <EM>Dutch</EM></SPAN>

            
               
                  New
Republic , Nov. 15
            

            An
article traces the similarities between Edmund Morris'
Dutch and a 1994 short story by Daniel Voll. In both works, a drowning
narrator is saved by lifeguard Ronald Reagan. Both narrators eroticize Reagan
and reveal their secret debt to him on the final page. … The cover book review scoffs at the misplaced sympathy for
men in Susan Faludi's Stiffed . Faludi's poorly written tome ignores "the
resurgence of male bravado," which is evident in the candidacy of Donald Trump
and the popularity of Howard Stern. Her assertion that women have the upper
hand in the porn industry is laughable.

            

               
                  Economist, Oct. 30
            

            The
cover story says that corporate boards are firing CEOs
more often than they used to. Institutional investors insist upon sacking
nonperforming bosses, and board members fear that lackluster leadership will
damage their own reputations. … An editorial warns that the bombardment of Chechnya could
ignite a war in the Caucasus. Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Armenia are convulsed by
internal political turmoil. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe should press Russia to cease fire and grant Chechnya autonomy. …
An article tells what movies are popular in which
countries. Japan and Mexico dig thrillers. The United States, Sweden, Germany,
and South Africa crave romances.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Oct. 31
            

            The
cover story investigates the quest for justice by the survivors of school
shootings. The parents of Columbine victim Isaiah Shoels are suing the killers'
families for $250 million. The Shoelses have no sympathy for the perpetrators'
parents because, as Isaiah's father says: "Who else do we blame? I taught my
son right from wrong. My son wasn't shooting people up." Parents of West
Paducah, Ky., and Jonesboro, Ark., victims are also suing killers' parents.
… A writer takes consumer advocate Ralph Nader for a spin in the
$135,000, 3-ton Mercedes-Benz Gelaendewagen. Nader says the SUV is for
"knuckleheads." Arnold Schwarzenegger owns two of them. (For more on overgrown
cars, see 
                  Slate
               's for the Godzilla SUV.)

            
               
                  Time ,
Nov. 1
            

            The
cover story gives a mixed review to low-carbohydrate diets,
the latest weight-loss trend (Atkins, Sugar Busters, and Carb Addicts are the
best-known diets). Eating lots of fatty meat and few carbs forces the body to
meet its energy needs by burning fat. Many dieters have lost weight, but
doctors warn that low-carb, high-fat diets cause dehydration, constipation,
heart disease, and bad breath. ... In an interview Al Gore claims that Bill Bradley's health-care plan
would eliminate Medicare, drive up insurance premiums for federal employees,
and fail in its aim to insure all kids.

            
               
                  Newsweek,
Nov. 1
            

            The
cover story examines how the biblical story of the
Apocalypse catalyzed important historical events. The Crusades were launched to
prepare for the Revelation; the Reformation was inspired by Martin Luther's
identification of the papacy with the Antichrist; and Christian fundamentalists
support Zionism because they believe that Christ will return to earth only when
the Jews return to Israel. ... A related article reveals that 18 percent of Americans
expect the world to end during their lifetime. House Majority Whip Tom DeLay
has a plaque in his office that reads, "This could be the day." ... A
column questions the value of an Ivy League education.
Research indicates that after adjusting for SAT scores, parents' income, and
race, graduates of elite universities do not earn more than other college
grads.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report , Nov. 1
            

            The
cover story says 17 million workers are expected to change
jobs this year, 6 million more than five years ago. The piece attributes the
record job-jumping rates to the overheated economy and the ease of finding work
online. ... An article contrasts the "lost years" of George W. Bush and Al
Gore. Bush supported the war in Vietnam but signed up for the National Guard.
Gore opposed the war but enlisted in the Army. After his service, Bush lived
off his savings, lounged around a singles apartment complex, and drank to
excess. Gore, by contrast, smoked pot, worked construction, attended divinity
school, and muckraked at a Tennessee newspaper.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker, Nov. 1
            

            An
article condemns the Department of Justice's handling of the Waco controversy.
Justice fueled conspiracy theories by limiting access to Waco evidence and
stubbornly denying embarrassing facts. The FBI continues to deny it fired at
the Branch Davidians, despite videotapes that appear to show gunshots.
... In a column that stops just short of endorsement, Joe Klein admires
Bill Bradley's ability to disarm crowds and praises the candidate's
authenticity and "amiable cleverness." Al Gore is portrayed as "severely
synthetic." (For a different perspective, read 
                  Slate
               's ".")
... "Talk of the Town" drafts George W. Bush's inaugural address: "It is
time that we recognize that we are all Americanians, whether we be Caucastic,
Africanoodian, Asiadontic, or Hispanicky."

            
               
                  The
Nation , Nov. 8
            

            The
cover story draws parallels between the rejection of the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the impeachment crisis. Both issues were
driven by right-wing Republicans over the opposition of the American people.
Republicans are turning their backs on arms control because of the mistaken
belief that a pumped-up American military can unilaterally guarantee
international stability. ... An article calls George W. Bush "Big Tobacco's Best Friend." His
political guru, Karl Rove, worked for Philip Morris while advising Bush on tort
reform, one of the industry's top priorities. Bush, who backs tobacco price
supports, has already accepted about $300,000 from pro-tobacco donors.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard , Nov. 1
            

            The
cover story welcomes the defeat of the Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty. Arms control is an illusion. The strength of America's
military and nuclear arsenal ensures global stability, treaties can't.


            
               
                  Business
Week , Nov. 1
            

            The
cover story examines the revival of religion in the workplace. There are 10,000
workplace prayer groups, and the Dalai Lama's Ethics for the New
Millennium is a business best seller. Marketplace Ministries provides
workplace chaplains to firms such as Taco Bell franchises, which welcome
religion in the kitchen because studies show that spiritual programs increase
productivity and reduce turnover. ... An article explains why businesses
are not opposing a proposed minimum-wage hike. Republicans decided that passage
was inevitable and resisting a hike might hurt them in the next election. To
make the bill palatable, the House leadership loaded it with tax breaks,
including increased deductions for business meals.

         
      
   
