
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>The Oddest Men in the World, Siegfried and Roy</SPAN></SPAN>

            

               
                  
                     
                        Economist
                     
                  , July 17
            

            Not
one but two editorials compare Iranian President Mohammed Khatami to Mikhail
Gorbachev. Like Gorby, Khatami must muffle his reformist impulses in order to
avoid provoking hard-line conservatives. The first piece cautions him against alienating his core
supporters, but the other predicts that his regime will survive the
current uprising. The students who toppled the shah were both more alienated
and better organized than today's lot. ... The next Balkan war will take
place in Montenegro, predicts the magazine. The tiny republic is itching to
secede from Yugoslavia. Western diplomats, chary of further destabilizing the
region, are urging Montenegrins to bide their time.

            

               
                  
                     
                        New
                      Republic , August 2
            

            The
cover story complains about the pathologizing of normal
personality traits, a tactic used by pharmaceutical companies to drum up
business. The latest example: the classification of shyness as "social anxiety
disorder." Drug makers underwrite research into "social phobia" and stoke
public hysteria with slogans such as "Imagine Being Allergic to People." If
you, like Donny Osmond, are among the 1-in-8 distressingly diffident Americans,
a new drug can treat you. ... An article condemns the simplistic and snide cultural coverage in
the New York Times , which is corrupted by commercialism and the paper's
obsession with reporting news. The Times covers what Prozac might have
done for Willy Loman rather than the artistic significance of Death of a
Salesman .

            
               
                  Vanity
Fair , August 1999
            

            A
profile of eccentric German animal illusionists Siegfried and Roy describes
life inside their "Jungle Palace" on the fringes of Las Vegas. It is nearly
impossible to convey how breathtakingly weird they are. They live with 55 white
tigers, 38 servants, and 16 lions. Roy sleeps with the young tigers. Siegfried
has a mural of himself naked, with cheetahs, on his bedroom walls. They greet
people by saying, "Sarmoti"--an acronym for "Siegfried and Roy, Masters of the
Impossible." The couple deflect the question of whether they are gay but do
claim a friendship with Michael Jackson. Still, they draw 700,000 people a year
to their stage show. ... A profile of Patricia Duff traces her
career as a manipulative, self-destructive femme fatale . After she
failed at three marriages and at attempts to leverage wealth and connections
into a career as a political powerbroker, she wed Revlon CEO Ron Perelman. Now
that marriage is kaput, and she has run through 16 law firms during the divorce
and custody proceedings, and is now battling Perelman over issues such as
whether $36,000 is an adequate annual clothing allowance for her 4-year-old.
... An article on celebrated death-row inmate Mumia Abu-Jamal
condemns his admirers for ignoring the clear evidence of his guilt.

            
               
                  
                     
                        New York Times
Magazine,
                      July 18
               
            

            The
cover story explains how a con man peddled 200 forgeries of modern masters
through top auction houses. John Drewe "authenticated" paintings by
infiltrating museum archives and inserting documents about artworks'
provenance. This scheme corrupted art history and undermined the reputations of
auction houses, whose "experts" sold some obvious fakes. ...
An article describes how Ernest Hemingway began confusing himself with his own
heroes. While living in Cuba during World War II, he formed a spy ring and even
hunted for German subs in his fishing boat. His writing never recovered after
this series of misadventures.

            
               
                  Time and
Newsweek , July 19
            

            Both Time and
Newsweek celebrate the U.S. Women's World Cup win. The Time
cover
story says that "Soccer Mama" mania was carefully orchestrated by the
sport's steering committee and sponsors such as Nike but that the enormous
crowds shocked even organizers. ... The Newsweek cover story reveals
the gender-specific coaching strategy of the U.S. women's team. Assuming that
women internalize tough criticism, the male coach tried positive reinforcement
instead. He tacked inspirational quotes to players' doors, emphasized what each
player did right, and provided an "imaging" tape for each player, consisting of
her best moves set to her favorite music.

            A Time special
report revises the conventional wisdom about which foods are good for the
heart. Cholesterol isn't necessarily unhealthy, and margarine is as bad as
butter. Saturated fat is still evil.

            
               Newsweek explores how hate
groups are exploiting the Internet to recruit kids. Online games, comic strips,
and downloadable music, such as "Go Back to Africa," entice children. White
supremacists are developing their own Webmasters to spread their message on
2,000 sites. ... 
               Newsweek explains a new musical hybrid: Rock 'n' rap, a k a
"hick-hop," in which white performers such as Limp Bizkit and Kid Rock combine
hard rock with the violent themes and outlaw imagery of rap.

            
               
                  U.S. News &
World Report , July 19
            

            An
analysis
suggests that George W. Bush is just dimwitted enough to be president. Bush's
factual errors on the campaign trail are Reaganesque, underscoring that he is
not a detail-oriented drone like Al Gore. ... The cover story ranks
America's best
hospitals. The top three are: Johns Hopkins, the Mayo Clinic, and
Massachusetts General. ... An article agrees
that President Clinton's poverty tour brought necessary attention to the
genuine suffering of Appalachia but argues that his package of investment
incentives is not an economically efficient way to help the needy.

            
               
                  The New Yorker ,
July 19
            

            A
piece calls Hillary Clinton's campaign kickoff "cunning" and "brilliantly
staged." The cover cartoon, however, depicts her as a tourist ambling through
Central Park, about to be mugged by a truncheon-wielding Rudolph Giuliani.
... An article explains how Harvard Business School has remade itself
from corporate prep school into entrepreneurial boot camp. New offerings
include a course titled "Women Building Business" and field trips to Silicon
Valley startups. ... A profile of Andrew Cuomo argues that he has
brought his father Mario's brand of liberal zeal and moral grandeur to his post
as secretary of housing and urban development.

            
               
                  National Review ,
July 26
            

            The
cover story
declares that America is in the midst of a "Gay Moment." Homosexuals are
demanding cultural attention, and the debate over homosexuality has shifted
from morality to "is he or isn't he?" Pro- and anti-gay polemicists debate the
sexual proclivities of Jar Jar Binks and Abe Lincoln. (To read

                  Slate
               's authoritative evaluation of Tinky Winky's sexual
orientation, click .) ... A piece asks where
George W. Bush stands on affirmative action. The governor says he wants to
eliminate racial preference but to guarantee "affirmative access." His record
is equally wishy-washy. Even so, his Delphic statement of principles might
hoodwink conservatives and moderates.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard , July 19
            

            The
cover story concludes that Hillary Clinton is a deft campaigner. Her "listening
tour" effectively reinforces the perception that she was dragooned into running
for the Senate and makes it easier for her to deflect uncomfortable
scandal-related questions. ... The editorial defends Vice President
Gore. AIDS activists say the veep is doing the bidding of the pharmaceutical
industry by preventing South Africans from obtaining cheap AIDS drugs. But
evisceration of patent protections could slow the development of the drugs poor
countries need.

         
      
   
