
   
   
      
         
            <EM>Big Daddy</EM>'s Day

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Big Daddy
                (Columbia Pictures). Critics call Adam
Sandler's latest film immature, irresponsible, and only marginally funny. But
moviegoers couldn't have cared less: The film beat Tarzan for the No. 1
spot at the box office and had the second-largest opening ever for a comedy
(behind the recent Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me ). Its
premise: A thirtysomething slacker adopts a child to demonstrate his maturity
to his wary girlfriend. Since it's a Sandler film (he shares a writing credit),
this "daddy" teaches his young charge how to pee in public, spit, and trip
Rollerbladers and tells him that the only thing better than drinking Yoo-Hoo is
"smokin' dope." Like most critics, the Chicago Sun-Times ' Roger Ebert is
not impressed: "Big Daddy should be reported to the child welfare
office." It's not as funny as The Waterboy , it's not as sweet as The
Wedding Singer , and it fails at its only real goal: It "doesn't generate a
lot of big laughs" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ). (Click
here for info
on Sandler's earlier films.)

            

               
                  An Ideal Husband
                (Miramax Films). Rupert Everett
turns in a "brilliant comic performance" (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall Street
Journal ) as an idle and decadent bachelor in this adaptation of Oscar
Wilde's play, but the rest of the film gets mediocre notices. The chief
complaints: 1) Wilde's sharp edge has been dulled--it's "likable" and
"handsome" but "diluted" (Stephen Holden, the New York Times ); 2) the
story "unfolds with all the urgency of a dainty tea napkin" (Susan Wloszczyna,
USA Today ); and 3) the plot, a blackmail scheme with many moral
quandaries to resolve, ends too tidily and happily for its own good. (For loads
of dreamy photos of Everett, check out this fan
site.)

            

               
                  Return With Honor
                (Ocean Releasing). This documentary
about a group of U.S. pilots who were held as POWs in the Vietnam War wins
excellent marks from most critics: "engrossing and chilling" says Stanley
Kauffmann in the New Republic ; Entertainment Weekly 's Gleiberman
says, "You emerge shaken, with your perceptions--of Vietnam and of war in
general--permanently enlarged." A few carp about the film's cloying, overt
patriotism--and the avoidance of the politics and protests that surrounded the
war--with the most vocal dissenters saying it "restart[s] the John Wayne-ing of
Vietnam" (Michael Atkinson, the Village Voice ). For most, though, the
stories, told by some 20 captured airmen, speak eloquently and powerfully.
(Click here to read about the film's opening night at the National Air
and Space Museum.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Who's Irish
               , by Gish Jen (Random House). Jen switches
from novels (such as Mona in the Promised Land ) to stories, and the
critics are impressed. The collection covers the same ground as her two
previous books--the immigrant and biracial experience in America--and she
covers it with "equal measures of pathos and wry fun ... the collection, at its
considerable best, finds words for all the high and low notes of the raucous
American anthem" (Jean Thompson, the New York Times Book Review ). The
New York Times ' Michiko Kakutani is less enamored than most, noting that
a few of the stories "appear to be studies for [Jen's] earlier novels and stand
somewhat shakily on their own." (Read the first
story courtesy of the New York Times .)

            

               
                  Walker Evans
               ,by James R. Mellow (Basic Books).
Mellow, a National Book Award winner, died before completing this long
biography of the photographer and writer--making it this summer's third example
(after Ernest Hemingway's True at First Light and Ralph Ellison's
Juneteenth ) of an unfinished work by a deceased author published before
proper completion. The biography reveals fascinating details about Evans' life
and provides a new insight into his art, but critics say it gets weighted down
by superfluous material the author would likely have removed had he finished
the book, resulting in a somewhat "exasperating" tome (Margaret Loke, the
New York Times ). Even worse, the ending, which details Evans' final
years and death from drinking, is still in the form of unfinished notes by
Mellow. (Click here to see a sampling of Evans' photographs.)

            

               Snap Judgments
            

            
               Movie
            

            

               
                  My Son the Fanatic
                (Miramax Films). Critics love this
British film directed by Udayan Prasad about the life and dreams of a
downtrodden Pakistani taxi driver in the north of England. Their only quibble:
It's more of an extended character study than a full-fledged drama.

            
               Music
            

            
               
                  Electric
Honey
               , by Luscious Jackson (EMD/Capitol). Solid reviews for the
all-female group's third album. Riding on the success of their breakout
Fever In Fever Out (1996), they've turned in another smooth 'n' mellow
album, but this one is "a more eclectic mix of hip-hop, pop and rock sounds
wrapped around sensual vocals" (Tad Hendrickson, CMJ ).

         
      
   
