
   
   
      
         
            Guns Don't Kill Baptists

            

               A 
               gunman killed seven people in a Fort Worth, Texas,
church. The shooter, a "loner" with no criminal record, yelled
anti-Baptist rhetoric as he opened fire at a youth worship service. He then
killed himself. The Washington Post 
               criticized congressional inaction on gun control in
the wake of recent shootings. Texas Gov. George W. Bush countered that the
killings were "a wave of evil" that legislation could not stop.

            

               Hurricane Floyd drenched the East Coast. It came ashore in
North Carolina, causing floods and power outages throughout the Southeast, then
was downgraded to a tropical storm as it moved north. Most population centers
avoided major damage. Last week's East Coast spin: We're going to get hammered.
This week's East Coast spin: OK, we didn't get hammered, but we got really wet.
(
                  Slate
               's David Plotz the weather reporting
industry.)

            

               President 
               Clinton refused to disclose details of his
administration's deliberations over Puerto Rican clemency. Citing executive
privilege, he denied congressional Republicans' request for records relating to
last month's release of 12 imprisoned Puerto Rican nationalists. The Republican
spin: Clinton played politics with clemency and is trying to cover it up. The
White House spin: Congress is playing politics with investigations and is
harassing the president.

            
               The
United Auto Workers and DaimlerChrysler tentatively agreed to a new
contract. The four-year deal is believed to include a 3 percent annual wage
increase and a guarantee that the company will not block unionization of
additional plants. It must still be approved by DaimlerChrysler's 75,000 union
employees. The UAW had argued that workers deserved to share in automakers'
record-breaking profits. Industry analysts suggested that even with the
wage increases, labor costs per car will decline due to efficiency
gains.

            

               The House passed campaign finance reform. The bill, which was
opposed by the Republican leadership, would ban unregulated "soft money"
donations and curb "issue ads" by advocacy groups. Senate leaders may eliminate
the issue ad provision to overcome a promised filibuster. The New
York Times and Washington Post say the change will call the bluff of Senate
leaders who had objected to the bill on free speech grounds. Republican
opponents say that without additional limits on labor unions' political
expenditures, the revised bill remains unfair.

            

               The United Nations is sending peacekeeping troops to East
Timor. Australia and Asian nations will provide most of the forces,
and President Clinton has promised limited U.S. involvement. Indonesia said its
military would withdraw as international forces arrive. The United Nations
hopes to restore peace and bring back refugees. Others foresee a bloody conflict with
pro-Indonesia soldiers and militia members who are part of a nationalist
backlash against intervention. (
                  Slate
               's  "" explores
the prospects for intervention.)

            

               Another bombing rocked Russia. The fourth explosion in two
weeks killed at least 18 people, bringing the death toll to nearly 300. Russian
police, who suspect Caucasus rebels in the bombings, are sweeping the country
and interrogating darker-skinned people. President Boris Yeltsin says his
government has "the strength and resources to wipe out terrorism." But Moscow
skeptics are questioning Yeltsin's ability to govern in the wake of the
crisis, speculating that he may: 1) resign within days, 2) fire Prime Minister
Putin, or 3) delay parliamentary elections.

            

               Major airlines unveiled service improvement plans. The
voluntary changes were offered as an alternative to proposed "passenger rights"
legislation in Congress. Airlines claim their initiatives will greatly improve
baggage handling, ticket refunds, and information on flight delays.
Congressional critics say the plans are legal "gobbledygook" offering no new protections to passengers.

            

               Pat Buchanan may run for president in the Reform Party.
Despite pleas from Republicans to remain loyal, he's becoming increasingly
vocal about his frustrations with GOP moderates. Pundits variously
characterized the likely move as 1) politically astute, since Buchanan would
gain a platform for his views; 2) a sign of desperation, given his poor
performance in the polls; and 3) misguided, since a three-way race would hurt
the Republican nominee. (
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg that
the move would be good for the Republican Party.)

            

               FBI documents show that the use of incendiary tear gas at Waco was
disclosed in 1995. Records indicate that Congress and the Justice
Department received files detailing the devices used in the raid much earlier
than previously thought. Last week, former Sen. John Danforth agreed to head an
independent investigation of Waco in response to suspicions of a cover-up.
Pundits debated who was more damaged by the new information: Congressional
Republicans who cried "cover-up" while the information was under their noses;
or the attorney general, who was unaware of her own department's reports.

         
      
   
