
   
   
      
         
            John McCain's War of Attrition

            Monday
afternoon, Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., declared his candidacy for president. He
did everything by the book: highlighted favorable issues, exploited his
personal history, and portrayed his opponents' advantages as vices. But McCain
also defied the political playbook by deprecating himself in a shrewd effort to
pre-empt criticism and turn up the heat on his rivals. Here's a breakdown of
his tactics.

            

               1. 
               Focus on foreign policy. Each candidate has
expertise in a particular terrain of issues. The advantage will go to the
candidate on whose terrain the battle is fought. If the election is about
cultural concerns, George W. Bush has the advantage. If it's about economic
growth, Al Gore has the advantage. If it's about poverty, Bill Bradley has the
advantage. McCain, thanks to his military career, owns the terrain of foreign
policy. While Bradley can argue that poverty is the most morally pressing
concern, Gore can argue that growth is the most fundamental, and Bush can argue
that cultural decay is foremost in the minds of voters, McCain can argue that
military issues are the most grave. "The most solemn responsibility given the
president is the role of commander in chief," he declared Monday. Of the time
McCain spent discussing issues, nearly half was devoted to the military and
America's role in the world.

            

               2. 
               Emphasize biography. Since the end of the Cold War,
it has been difficult to get the public to focus on foreign policy. But McCain
can frame the election to his advantage in another way. He can bypass the
choice among issues by persuading voters to focus on the candidates'
biographies instead of their platforms. Every candidate launches his campaign
with a glossy account of his upbringing and career, but McCain's heroism in
Vietnam makes his story a far easier sell than Bush's, Gore's, or Bradley's.
McCain exploits this advantage by filling his speeches with the word "service."
"Serving my country is an honor, indeed, the most honorable life an American
can lead," he said Monday. "I have passed from a young man to an old one in the
service of my country."

            

               3. 
               Moralize the issues. Once he has convinced voters of
his superior character, McCain exports this advantage by describing every
subject in moral terms. In his announcement address, as in previous speeches,
he framed domestic issues in terms of "honor," "courage," "strength," "faith,"
"selfishness," "honesty," and "respect." He called trade protectionists
"cowards," accused the government of swindling taxpayers, and denounced
President Clinton for breaking his promise to protect Social Security. Two
months ago, addressing the National Council of La Raza, McCain said of Hispanic
voters, "Their support is my honor." Couching every issue in such language
maximizes the leverage of McCain's heroism.

            

               4. Stigmatize 
               wealth. The elite pedigrees of Bush and
Gore make them vulnerable to a populist underdog. Auditioning for this role,
Pat Buchanan uses economic issues, Bradley uses Midwestern humility, and McCain
uses the soldier's ethic of obedience, teamwork, and self-sacrifice. "I don't
begin this mission with any sense of entitlement. America doesn't owe me
anything," McCain proclaimed Monday. "I was born into America's service. ... I
want to return our government back to whom it belongs--the people. So that
Americans can believe once again that public service is a summons to duty and
not a lifetime of privilege."

            

               5. 
               Vilify partisanship. McCain, like Bradley, has
generated significant interest among independent voters and needs their help in
New Hampshire's open primary. Moreover, unlike Bradley, McCain has made
numerous enemies in his own party by promoting legislation that would restrict
campaign contributions and require tobacco companies to pay for health care and
anti-smoking education. To convert this adversity into an advantage, McCain
accuses his critics of subverting the national interest for the sake of
"partisan ambitions." He scolds "Congress" as well as Clinton, "Republicans" as
well as Democrats, and "conservatives" as well as liberals.

            
Conventional strategy dictates that having framed the election along these
lines, McCain should emphasize his superiority in each respect. Instead, he
proclaims his own inadequacy. McCain's favorite words are shame, blame,
failure, and disgrace. In every account of his POW ordeal, he absurdly
concludes that he "failed" to withstand the enemy's torture. In speeches, he
accepts "blame" for everything Congress does wrong, says he "failed" to prevent
it, and vows to "try harder" next time. He is "ashamed" of
everything--political pork, unwise military procurements, high-dollar
electioneering. "The people whom I serve believe that the means by which I came
to office corrupt me," he declared three months ago. "And that shames me. That
shames me. Their contempt is a stain upon my honor, and I cannot live with it."
Pundits choked up at McCain's words. Since then, he has repeated them verbatim
on at least five occasions. Shame has become his shtick.

            This
accomplishes two things. First, it pre-empts criticism from the media. It's no
fun whipping McCain when he's already whipping himself. Second, it establishes
a test no other candidate can survive. McCain is the only candidate with a
biography of steel. When he calls himself weak and corrupt, nobody believes
him. If Gore were to call himself weak and corrupt, his opponents would replay
his confession as a campaign ad.

            To
beat Bush, McCain has stripped character down to experience. Bush speaks the
language of character and has plenty of foreign policy counsel on which to
rely. McCain wants to take those assets out of the game, reducing the
comparison to what each man has done with his life. In military confrontations,
McCain warned Monday, "there comes a time when our nation's leader can no
longer rely on briefing books and talking points ... when the sum total of
one's life becomes the foundation from which he or she makes the decisions that
determine the future of our democracy. ... The president is a lonely man in a
dark room when the casualty reports come in. I am not afraid of the burden. I
know both the blessing and the price of freedom." With that, McCain began a
refrain--"I am not afraid"--designed to shame his rivals.

            
McCain's ultimate weapon is cynicism. He plays it up because it endangers his
opponents more than it endangers him. The central line of his speech proclaimed
a "New Patriotic Challenge. It is a challenge to each of us to join in the
fight against the pervasive cynicism that is debilitating our democracy." It
corrodes every politician except John McCain. "We who are currently privileged
to hold public office have ourselves to blame," he laments in his stump speech.
"It is we who have squandered the public trust, we who have time and again
placed our personal or partisan interest before the national interest, earning
the public's contempt with our poll-driven policies, our phony posturing, the
lies we call spin. ... We are all corrupted."

            The
first politician McCain wants to portray as corrupted is Bush. "At a time when
Americans are growing increasingly cynical about public service and
increasingly disillusioned about their political leaders," McCain charged
Saturday, "I was disappointed to see my fellow Republicans' reaction to recent
comments and writings by Pat Buchanan concerning our nation's role in defeating
Nazi Germany. By continuing to appease Buchanan, several of our candidates
appear to have put politics ahead of our party's principles. ... Like Gov.
Bush, I want to see a united Republican Party. But no political campaign is
worth sacrificing our principles."

            So
much for McCain's "war against cynicism." He hates cynicism like the Russians
at Stalingrad hated the snow.

         
      
   
