
   
   
      
         
            Leader of the Paks

            

               The Senate rejected the nuclear test ban treaty. The treaty,
which needed 67 votes for ratification, was defeated 51-48. Only four
Republicans sided with Democrats in favor of it. Although President Clinton
vowed to continue to fight for its ratification, Majority Leader Trent Lott
said it would not be reconsidered during his term. Other nations had promised
to follow the U.S. lead. The Democratic spin: Republicans let politics trump
international security. The Republican spin: A treaty that flawed would never
have worked. The Democratic reply: It certainly won't work now. Newspapers
variously said the vote hurt 1) Clinton's ability to set foreign policy
( Los Angeles Times ); 2) America's global leadership
( New York Times ); and 3) centrist, bipartisan politics (
                  Washington Post
               ).

            

               Pakistan's military ousted its elected government. Coup leader
Gen. Pervaiz Musharraf suspended the constitution and declared the country to
be under military rule, but did not announce plans to install a new government.
Musharraf accused former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of weakening the military,
crippling the economy, and tolerating corruption. Western analysts worried that
military rule would exacerbate: 1) the region's instability ( Los Angeles
Times ); 2) the fragility of Pakistan's democracy; and 3) the ascendancy
of Islamic militants ( USA
Today ). Pakistanis' reaction: After Sharif's regime, anything will be
an improvement ( Washington Post ).

            

               Basketball great Wilt Chamberlain died. "Wilt the Stilt,"
widely considered the best player of all time, is the only one ever to score
100 points in a game. He captured national attention in the 1960s through an
intense rivalry with Bill Russell and again in the 1990s with his claim to have
bedded 20,000 women. The Los Angeles Times said
Chamberlain's dominance as a center forever "changed the way basketball is
played." The 
                  Chicago Tribune
                declared that Chamberlain's skill
and popularity "saved the NBA. ... Had there been no Wilt, there would have
been no Dr. J or Bird or Magic or--perish the thought!--Michael."

            

               The world's population reached 6 billion. It has doubled since
1960, but growth is slowing as urbanization, education, and family planning
increase worldwide. Most of the continued growth will occur in the developing
world. The United Nations predicts that population will level off near 10
billion late in the next century. The rosy spin: Despite what doomsayers
predicted, overpopulation hasn't caused global catastrophe. The gloomy spin:
Well, not yet.

            

               The AFL-CIO endorsed 
               Al Gore's presidential
bid. The endorsement lets Gore use the union's resources and 13
million members for political organizing. The optimistic spin: Labor's support
gives Gore a great boost . The jaded spin: Labor's support for the
Democratic front-runner is a non-story. The AFL-CIO spin: Either way, the
attention shows we're a force to be reckoned with.

            

               Four teams remain in baseball's playoffs. The Red Sox and
Yankees are vying for the American League title. The Braves and Mets are
competing in the National League championship. Boston pitcher Pedro Martinez
threw six no-hit innings in the final game against Cleveland to make the Red
Sox only the fourth
team ever to overcome a two-game deficit in the playoffs' first round. The
Mets, who barely made the playoffs after a dismal mid-season performance, are
competing with Boston for recognition as the "Cinderella team." The Yankees and
Braves are fighting for recognition as the decade's best team.

            

               A Colorado grand jury issued no charges in the JonBenet Ramsey
case. After 13 months of investigating, the jury deemed the evidence
insufficient. Colorado Gov. Bill Owens said he would assemble a new team of
prosecutors to continue the investigation. Some critics charged that the lack
of an indictment revealed that the police work was botched. Others said that
the continued investigation of a rich, white victim's death showed that race
and class influence the justice system.

            

               A British court ruled that Gen. Augusto Pinochet could be
extradited. If his appeals fail, the former Chilean dictator could
stand trial in Spain on 35 charges of torture and conspiracy. Pinochet's spin:
The court is violating the rights of Chileans by imposing foreign laws.
Prosecutors' spin: Look who's
talking about violating the rights of Chileans.

            

               Margaret 
               MacGregor won the first man-vs.-woman boxing
match. The undefeated, 5-foot-4-inch 36-year-old unanimously won all
four rounds against male boxer Loi Chow, who is 5 foot 2 and has a record of
0-3. Some observers objected to a man hitting a woman. MacGregor's supporters
said she had landed a blow for 
gender equality. Detractors complained that she should have picked on
someone her own
size.

            

               Texas Gov. George W. Bush criticized congressional
Republicans. First he said House Republicans shouldn't "balance their
budget on the backs of the poor." Then he said his party often neglects the
disadvantaged by focusing on economic wealth. Democrats called Bush a 
wolf in sheep's clothing. Republican opponents accused Bush of running for
president on the backs of
congressmen. But Bush said his comments made a "positive case" for
Republican compassion, and some pundits said he was astute to recognize that
the Republican "revolution is dead" (Al
Hunt, Capital Gang ). (
                  Slate
               's "" analyzes
Bush's "triangulation" strategy.)

         
      
   
