
   
   
      
         
            No. 268: &quot;Pyramid Power&quot;

            
               Today a 180-nation
conference is to present the U.N. General Assembly with an action plan to
reduce world population growth by employing the Cairo Strategy. Which is
what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 267)--"You Be the Playwright":
            

            
               I set the stage
for a script based on an actual current event.
            

            
               Setting: The
courtyard of a monastery in Florence.
            

            
               Prop: A briefcase
containing $50 million.
            

            
               Female Lead:
KAETHE, a young Russian woman wearing hot pants and a bikini top.
            

            
               Male Lead: FATHER
CHRISTOPHER, a priest wearing something priestly.
            

            

               Question: What is the opening line of dialogue?
            

            
"KAETHE: Daddy!"-- Floyd Elliot
            

            
"FATHER CHRISTOPHER: You know, Kaethe, even though you are my sister, and this
money was legitimately inherited from our parents, and I'm giving it to you in
order that you may pay for a lifesaving sweat-gland-transplant, which will
finally enable you to dress properly, I'd bet, to an outsider, this whole scene
would look awfully fishy."-- Tim Carvell
            

            
"KAETHE (Offering the briefcase): NOW can you ordain me?"-- Justin
Warner
            

            
"KAETHE: Father Christopher, your parish does not need more scandal. Therefore,
no, I will not tell you where I bought the hot pants."-- Merrill Markoe
( Justin Warner had a similar answer.)

            "FATHER CHRISTOPHER
(ripping off his mask): Ah ha! It is not Father Christopher, but I, Bill
Clinton! And here are my plans to invest the budget surplus of ... $1
trillion !

            KAETHE
(ripping off her mask): Not so fast! For neither am I a comely Russian woman
but rather Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss. And we are interested in deeds not
words!"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            I'm no computer-porn sex-phone perversity
expert--well, not professionally--but the sex-crazed priest and the Russian
seductress seem an unlikely match. Father Sexpot is a stock character going
back to Rabelais, to The Canterbury Tales , and why not? If you're going
to have chastity, you're going to have jokes about the power of sex to
overthrow that ludicrous vow. Everyone enjoys a good hypocrite joke, and
everyone likes sex. (Note to Ben and Jerry: Humping Monk ice cream?)

            Even before the collapse of the Soviet Union, the
Red Hot Menace was not entirely persuasive. Ursula Andress made an unconvincing
Kremlin honey trap for Sean Connery in an early Bond movie. (Unconvincing as a
Russian; pretty persuasive as an object of desire.) But at least when those two
had sex across ideological lines they played out the traditional drama of Eros
as an anarchic force, tempting Bond from his vows of capitalism.

            The post-Soviet
seductress is unconvincing in a new way. This way: hot pants? Who wears hot
pants? Nobody wears hot pants. Hot pants and money. What she's really showing
off is all that creamy cash. This isn't sex as the irresistible life force that
mocks and demolishes vows of chastity; it's sex as consumer good. It's the kind
of thing Donald Trump would find appealing. It's profoundly conservative. I
don't know who Satan has doing his hiring, but no way you're going to take down
Father Christopher like that.

            
               Massive Insurance Fraud
Answer
            

            KAETHE: I've just flown in on the Concorde, Father,
in these tiny shorts with this huge bag of money. Want some?

            Or something like that. Kaethe Schuchter, an agent
for reclusive swindler Martin Frankel, flew to Italy to offer Father
Christopher a $50 million contribution to his Genesis Center if the priest
would use the charity to buy insurance companies on behalf of David Rosse, one
of Frankel's aliases. The priest rebuffed her. The briefcase, by the way, was
metaphoric; the money was to come from mysterious off-shore accounts.

            Frankel's scam,
involving prominent lawyers, businessmen, and church officials, has siphoned
off more than $300 million. Federal authorities have issued a warrant for his
arrest.

            
               Wild West/Wild Weasel
Extra
            

            Today in New York City, Will Smith's summer
blockbuster opens, and a new list of outlawed pets takes effect. Below, a
comparison of the newly taboo ferret and the just released Wild Wild
West .

            
               Ferret: Member of weasel family.

            
               
                  WWW : Product of Warner Bros.

            
               Ferret: Frightening features include
powerful scent glands and razor sharp teeth.

            
               
                  WWW : Frightening features include
Kevin Kline in a corset.

            
               Ferret: New law calls them part of a group
that is "wild, ferocious, fierce, dangerous, or naturally inclined to do
harm."

            
               
                  WWW : Some guy on Fox TV that nobody
ever heard of calls it "the hippest, funniest action movie of the summer."

            
               Ferret: Fear of ferrets derived from
misleading predator clichés.

            
               
                  WWW : Role of co-star Bai Ling derived
from creepy racist Asian clichés.

            
               Ferret: Piranhas are not in this restricted
class.

            
               
                  WWW : Piranhas are not in Wild Wild
West .

            
               Ferret: "You have a ridiculous, biased and
skewered view of this animal," said one angry ferret fancier.

            
               
                  WWW : He has a "knowing, newly hunky
presence," said one lovesick Will Smith fancier. And it was Janet Maslin.

            
               Ferret: Last year, there were fewer than a
dozen reported ferret bites serious enough to require hospitalization.

            
               
                  WWW : Last year, there were fewer than
one reported Will Smith bite serious enough to require hospitalization.

            
               Ferret: "There have been attacks reported
nationwide, and those attacks have become notorious for their severity and
their capriciousness," said hysterical Giuliani appointee John Gadd, not
referring to the NYPD.

            
               
                  WWW : Will Smith gets attacked by some
kind of mechanical spider, probably not affiliated with the NYPD.

            
               Ferret: "In Europe people just walk around
with them on their shoulders and in little packs! What is this administration
going to do next, ban calico cats?" asked some other ferret fancier.

            
               
                  WWW : In Wild Wild West Kenneth
Branagh uses a steam-powered wheelchair and a phony baloney Southern accent,
which isn't, strictly speaking, a parallel, but does kind of make you sick when
you think about how great he was in Henry V .

            
               Ferret: "Ferrets pose a threat when confined
indoors," said mayoral spokeswoman Sunny Mindel.

            
               
                  WWW :
"Especially when confined indoors at movie theaters," Sunny Mindel did not
add.

            
               Eternal Triangle
Extra
            

            Andrew Silow-Carroll
invites participants to devise a sequentially trumping topical triad along
these lines: NATO, Milosevic, Albanian refugees. (NATO planes crush Milosevic,
Milosevic drives out refugees, refugees give NATO fits.) Replies due by
Thursday morning.

            
               Jon Zerolnick's
Headline Haiku
            

            Gay market
Greenspan rule
Washington's urging
Love it.

            
               --Wall Street
Journal , June 29 1999

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Concupiscent priests, selling indulgences.

         
      
   
