
   
   
      
         
            No. 309: &quot;Lost in Translation&quot;

            
               " 'EIN Nod:
Bodlonrwydd Llwyr I Gwsmeriaid' is not the snappiest slogan to those who speak
no Welsh. Yet the banner inside General Electric's aero-engine servicing
department in South Wales--'_____________'--is a fair approximation of what GE
has been up to in Nantgarw since it bought the business from British Airways in
1991." 
               Fill in the blank in this lead from the
Economist by translating that slogan from Welsh to English. (Question
courtesy of Andrew Solovay.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 308)--"Praise With Faint Damns":
            

            

               According to remarks made Tuesday, it is characterized "by greed and
lust for power, by hot-blooded hatreds, and stone-cold hearts." Who was
describing what?
            

            "Janet
Maslin, both Hollywood and the New York Times ."-- Matt
Sullivan ( Ann Gavaghan had a similar answer.)

            
"Leonard Stern spotlights the selling points of the Village
Voice ."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            
"Anyone describing Pat Buchanan's new book."-- John Tyrrell
            

            
"Everyone, high school."-- Noah Meyerson
            

            
"Frankly, I think the Jamaican Tourist Board should go back to that old 'Come
Back to Jamaica' slogan."-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            If News Quiz responses
are any guide to popular taste--a ludicrous proposition, but play along--the
two most greedy and lustful and savage realms are backstage at the Miss America
pageant and inside Pat Buchanan's head. So here's my pitch to whomever replaces
Jamie Tarses (and I pray it will be well reviewed by whomever replaces Janet
Maslin, even though she reviews movies not TV shows). Beauty-contest time
travel: like the Jesse Owens story but in heels and with virgins. Berlin. 1936.
Miss Universe contest. The only two finalists with any kind of a shot are Miss
America--a surprisingly leggy Pat Buchanan--and Miss Germany--an unexpectedly
amiable Adolf Hitler. During the swimsuit competition, while helping Hitler
glue his modest one-piece to his modest ass, Buchanan learns that his rival is
a pretty nice guy who wants to do no more than conquer Europe and kill all the
Jews. Not such a terrible thing, thinks Buchanan, and certainly nothing to
start a war over. So World War II is avoided, millions of lives--you know, the
right sort of lives--are saved, and history is transformed in ways so utopian,
you'd never recognize the present. Two small samples: high-speed maglev trains
that run on water, Alan Sorkin TV shows that aren't sentimental twaddle. Brave
new world. Bold new ABC. (Did I mention that in the second season, Buchanan
travels back in time to kill Lincoln even deader? After a romantic interlude? A
three-way with Jefferson Davis?)

            
               Stepping on Some
Mighty Big Toes Answer
            

            President Clinton was describing the
20 th century. Apparently he doesn't like it. Or, more disturbingly,
does.

            Addressing the U.N.
General Assembly, the president moved beyond vague generalities and into
comforting platitudes as he discussed poverty (against it), health care for all
people (for it), and outbreaks of widespread killing (should do something to
stop them). Courting opprobrium, the president raised the touchy issue of
weapons of mass destruction and bravely declared that it would be bad if they
were used.

            
               Inspiring Yet
Empty Extra
            

            Participants were
invited to provide campaign slogans for these presidential candidates whose Web
sites lack such soul-stirring baloney.

            
               John McCain
            

            "McCain, McSaw, McConquered"-- Juris
Odins
            

            "You Want a Piece of This, Pal?"-- Tim
Carvell (similarly, Dwight K. Lemke )

            "Not an Idiot Like the Other
Republicans"-- Francis Heaney
            

            "Trust Me, After the
Viet Cong, Those Candy-Asses at Philip Morris Don't Seem So Tough"-- Andrew
Solovay
            

            
               Dan Quayle
            

            "No, really."-- Steve Gisselbrecht
            

            "Quayle 200!"-- Greg Diamond
            

            "Now with more tomatoes."-- Clyde
Gibson
            

            "Marilyn, Not
Hillary"-- Juris Odins
            

            
               Elizabeth Dole
            

            "I'm Giddy for Liddy!"-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Free me from that albatross around my
neck."-- Clyde Gibson
            

            "Spontaneous From 11:55 to 12:00 Every
Day!"-- Dwight K. Lemke
            

            "Blow-Free
Elizabeth"-- Ellen Macleay
            

            
               Al Gore
            

            "Hey, look, I only work for the guy."-- Clyde
Gibson
            

            "Ah, Why the Hell Not"-- Andrew Solovay
            

            "He didn't brand his fraternity brothers'
buttocks."-- Tom Crawford
            

            "So you think I'm dull
and cautious? I'll show you dull and cautious, you goddamn cocksucking
motherfuckers!!"-- Noah Meyerson
            

            
               Any Candidate
            

            "Meaningless Rhetoric
for a Better Tomorrow"-- Francis Heaney
            

            
               Historical Perspective
            

            "You didn't ask, but my
all-time favorite slogan comes from the 1991 Louisiana governor's race between
Republican (and former KKK grand wizard) David Duke and Democrat Edwin Edwards,
an (ahem) ethically challenged Democratic candidate who had been indicted--but
not convicted--for mail fraud, obstruction of justice, and public bribery. The
slogan? 'Vote for the crook--it's important.' "-- Andrew Staples
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Miss America, Pat Buchanan.

         
      
   
