
   
   
      
         
            No. 266: &quot;Booed and Hooted&quot;

            
               Fill in the blank
as Jimmy Riordan, an organizer of yesterday's Gay Pride parade in New York
City, explains why Mayor Rudolph Giuliani was heckled the length of the march.
"Nobody is barred from being in the parade. It's completely open to all people.
He's just not ______________."
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thursday's Question (No. 265)--"Serfs Up":
"In England, the rule was well established that 'no lord could be sued by a
vassal in his own court, but each petty lord was subject to suit in the courts
of a higher lord." This surprisingly relevant bit of medieval lore turns out to
be the philosophical foundation of what?
            

            "All
video games."-- Evan Cornog
            

            "It
means that Sean 'Puffy' Combs is free to beat up any producer who doesn't sell
as many records as he does."--Peter Carlin
            

            "Uh,
why my wife complains about me to my mother?"--Sean Fitzpatrick
            

            "It's
the reason why my sexual harassment suit against Sen. Dianne Feinstein had to
be termed 'ludicrous' and 'a travesty' in a federal court, instead of a state
one."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Orrin
Hatch's bid for the presidency. (No, it doesn't fit the question, but I laugh
every time I think about it.)"--Alex "I Hate It When Kennedy Gets It Right"
Pascover
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Saturday in
Massachusetts, just off I-91, in a restaurant, in the men's room, on the red
plastic screen that covers the urinal drain, were emblazoned these words: "Say
No To Drugs." Oh yes--you are now meant to take in social policy while you
piss. But isn't this ubiquitous propagandizing what we mocked and derided when
the Soviets did it? (And by "we," I of course mean, me, George Orwell, and the
gang up at Chiatt Day.) Perhaps this was a subversive act, the
urinal-drain-guard manufacturer inviting us to piss on the United States'
failed drug policy. Is that still a legal form of protest? Like Supreme Court
Justice Kennedy, I have only a tenuous grasp of constitutional law, but won't
this sort of thing be taboo once that flag-burning amendment passes?

            
               Articles of
Confederation Answer
            

            This is the legal underpinning of Justice Anthony
Kennedy's nostalgic embrace of states' rights.

            Writing the decision in the first of three 5-4
cases that undermine the rights of the individual to defend himself against a
state government, Kennedy argued that when a state violates a federal law, the
federal government can sue, but the individual victim cannot. "Our federalism
requires that Congress treat the states in a manner consistent with their
status as residuary sovereigns," he wrote, with a quill pen dipped in the blood
of Thomas Jefferson, or maybe it was a word processor.

            Writing the dissent,
Justice David Souter argued that this goofball invocation of states rights (Was
it "goofball"? No one has decent penmanship anymore.) leaves the individual
with little recourse when he's been wronged by sovereign Albany or that bastion
of liberty, Harrisburg. Quoting Chief Justice John Marshall, Souter wrote: "If
he has a right, and that right has been violated, do the laws of his country
afford him a remedy? The very essence of civil liberty certainly consists in
the right of every individual to claim the protection of the laws when he
receives an injury."

            
               Greg Diamond's
Cast Masters Extra:
            

            Participants were
invited to deflate the AFI's Greatest
Legends List of movie stars by devising a brief plot summary of a movie in
which any equally ranked pair--for instance Charlie Chaplin and Joan Crawford
are both rated No. 10--should have co-starred.

            

               No. 7 It Happened Every Night for a Week --Velvet (Elizabeth
Taylor) runs away from jealous father and must accept the help of a horse named
Pie (Clark Gable), really an out-of-work reporter looking for a big story.
Either Velvet trains him for the Grand National, or he'll tell Velvet's
father.-- Eric Nelson
               

               No. 8 White Sheet --A self-taught nightrider (James Cagney)
seeks increased stature by literally dancing on the shoulders of his Jewish
landlady (Judy Garland). Highlight is a musical number set in the tenement
basement where Cagney dances and screams, "Top of the girl, Ma!"-- Steven Davis
               

               No. 10 Modern Mommies --A bitter, alcoholic mother (Joan
Crawford) abuses her lovable scamp of a son (Charlie Chaplin) by trapping him
in comical machinery. --Justin Warner
               

               No. 13 The Gowns of Navarone --Marine Sgt. Buck Skidmore (John
Wayne) falls in love with a glamorous female general (Grace Kelly).-- Neal Pollack ( Matt
Sullivan had a similar submission.)

               No. 16 Citizen Scarlett --After Rhett (Orson Welles) dumps her,
Scarlett (Vivien Leigh) decides to run for president. Wealthy media baron and
Dick Morris-like campaign manager John Beresford Tipton (Welles) advises her to
change her name to Liddy. (Remade several years later as A Touch of Tara , with Chris Farley and Mary Elizabeth
Mastrantonio as the leads.) --Juris Odins
(similarly, Chuck Lawhorn )

               No. 18 Love Child --There is sure to be controversy as the
revisions of Lolita continue. Pederasty is just
a different form of love in this version of Lolita , starring James Dean and Shirley
Temple. --Charles Star
               

               No. 18: Rebel Without a Lollipop --Confused, rebellious teen
(James Dean) receives life lesson from poor orphan girl (Shirley Temple); the
teen's later, tragic death inspires girl to life in foreign service.-- Al Petroksy (similarly, Jordan Kroop , Doug Mose ,
and Francis Heaney )

               No. 20 The Luckiest Jews in the World --Three sisters (Rita
Hayworth, Lauren Bacall, and Sophia Loren) who have never before laid eyes on a
man, stumble upon a troupe of vaudeville performers (the Marx Brothers) after
escaping from a convent in Switzerland.-- Neal
Pollack
               

               No. 21 El General --During the Spanish Civil War, a dedicated
engineer (Buster Keaton) keeps his train running despite the distractions of
his gorgeous assistant (Sophia Loren). Great physical comedy when Sophia
mistakenly assumes Buster is dead and tries to tie him to the cowcatcher to
inspire the troops (well, it's funny if you've ever seen El Cid , which you probably haven't if you're like most
people).-- Cindy and Eleanor ("Proud To Be From
Eastern Kansas, Birthplace of Buster Keaton") Rivera
               

            

            
               New Ongoing
Extra--Andrew Silow-Carroll's News Roundelay
            

            Devise a trinity of
people or phenomena that trump one another rock-paper-scissors style. Example:
Rudy Giuliani, Tina Brown, Hillary Clinton (Rudy cancels Tina's party, Tina
trashes Hillary in magazine, Hillary beats Rudy in Senate election); or NATO,
Slobodan Milosevic, Albanian refugees (NATO planes crush Milosevic, Milosevic
drives out refugees, refugees give NATO fits). Replies due by Thursday
morning.

            
               Charles Star's
Vaguely Pornographic Headline Haiku
            

            Police at Orphanage

            Waits for Motions

            With Snake Oil

            Making it Harder

            
               New York Times ,
June 25, 1999

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The Microsoft trial.

         
      
   
