
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Happy 50<SUP>th</SUP> Birthday--Hope You Die Soon</SPAN>

             

            

               
                  New
                
               
                  Republic , Oct. 11
            

            The
cover story rues the 50 th anniversary of
the Chinese revolution. The expected horrors are invoked: the Cultural
Revolution, the Great Leap Forward, the continuing anti-religious brutality of
the Communist Party. ... As world population reaches 6 billion, an
editorial calls for more investment in international
family planning. Encouraging smaller family size will boost economic progress
in the developing nations whose populations are still exploding.

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Oct. 1
            

            The
cover editorial reiterates the magazine's frequent
warnings that the American economy is overheated. Rising consumer debt is a bad
sign. Weak commodity demand and a strong dollar are staving off inflation, but
the Fed should pre-emptively raise interest rates before the bubble bursts.
... An article remarks on South Africa's attempt to market
itself to libertine tourists. Apartheid-era South Africa repressed homosexuals
and suppressed the sex trade. Now Cape Town promotes itself as a gay-friendly
city and welcomes sex tourists.

            
               
                  
George
               
               , October 1999
            

            The
hagiographic John Kennedy Jr. tribute issue includes excerpts of his writing,
portraits of him with his interviewees, and an over-the-top photo of him bathed
in golden light. The issue is stuffed with tribute ads, including shoemaker
Kenneth Cole's: "How do we follow in his footsteps?" ... A countdown of
the century's 100 great political moments includes dubious picks, such as the
Brooklyn Dodgers' relocation to Los Angeles, and predictable ones: D-Day is No.
2 and Franklin Roosevelt's election is No. 1

            

               
                  Rolling
                
               
                  Stone , Oct. 14
            

            A
sympathetic profile of Bill Bradley concludes that he is more sincere and more
dignified than other politicians. For instance, Bradley refuses to offer
regrets for past drug use and does not coo-coo at infants. (
                  Slate
               
offers a less rosy view of Bradley's .) ... A biting narrative exposes
life at an Ohio State sorority. Despite paeans to sisterhood and philanthropy,
girls join sororities to binge-drink, hook up, and pursue their Mrs. degree.
(For another insider view, read 
                  Slate
               's sorority girl ".")

            

               
                  New
               
               
                  York Times Magazine , Sept. 26
            

            An
article describes the newest missile defense scheme--75-miles-per-minute space
cannonballs. "Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicles" orbiting Earth would be programmed
to collide with warheads. First step: Build the prototype. ... The cover
essay reflects on hate, describing it as a personal psychological reaction to
idiosyncratic experience. It cannot be outlawed. We can only overcome hate by
refusing to give haters the attention they crave.

            

               
                  Time
               
               , Sept. 27
            

            The
cover package tweaks second-wave Silicon Valley
entrepreneurs--business-school grads lured by lucre rather than a passion for
the Web. ... Yet another startup saga sketches how a 27-year-old M.B.A. student
developed a Web-business idea: He set up a site, which uses an algorithm to
tell guys where to take a date, by convincing venture capitalists to front
money, hiring tech experts to write code, working 17-hour days, and bedecking
his offices with inspirational quotes. ... An article alleges that envoys from the Bush campaign have
pressured Minnesota Gov. Jesse Ventura to obstruct Pat Buchanan's run for the
Reform Party nomination. Donald Trump is the preferred roadblock, because his
candidacy could attract Democratic supporters.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               
                  , Sept. 29
            

            Fetal
programming determines adult health, according to the cover story . Studies show that low birth-weight babies may
have a high risk of developing diabetes, and prenatal trauma can impede brain
development. The link between womb conditions and adult health undermines
studies that suggest disease has genetic roots. ... An article warns that Hurricane Floyd might be dwarfed by future
storms. The past 30 years of meteorological quiescence is giving way to a
period of hyperhurricanes because of a change in oceanic conditions and global
warming. (According to "," the British press blamed Floyd on excessive U.S.
consumption.)

            

               
                  U.S.
                
               
                  News & World Report , Sept.
27
            

            The
cover excerpt provides a reverent portrait of Pope John Paul
II. The pontiff is credited with inspiring the collapse of communism in Eastern
Europe, persuading liberal democracies that freedom must be girded by public
morality, and opening a dialogue with other religious leaders. (Click for a

                  Slate
                "Assessment" of the pope.) ... An article probes George W. Bush's vulnerability on the firearms
issue. Bush's pro-gun positions (he barred the prosecution of people who bring
guns to churches that don't specifically forbid arms-toting) might hurt him in
a nationwide election. ... A profile marvels at the campaign-trail candor of Sen. John
McCain. He recalls his Vietnamese captors as "goddamn gooks," tells gay jokes,
and reminds reporters that he once called Chelsea Clinton ugly.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  New Yorker , Sept. 27
            

            An
essay bewails the absence of "political pizzazz" in presidential campaigning.
Since the electorate is relatively sanguine, the candidates are relatively
lethargic. The public longs for a deft campaigner who doesn't seem prepackaged.
... A profile praises Nobel Prize-winning novelist Gabriel
Garcia Marquez's efforts to heal his country, as he struggles to overcome
lymphatic cancer. Colombia's most-beloved figure convinced his friend Fidel
Castro to push leftist guerrillas toward the peace table and convinced the
United States that Cuba's hidden hand was necessary.

            

               
                  Weekly
                
               
                  Standard , Sept. 27
            

            An
editorial skewers Pat Buchanan for betrayal. Buchanan is
shoe-horning himself into the Reform Party solely because of its eligibility
for $13 million in matching funds. If Buchanan bolts, Republicans will have a
golden opportunity to define themselves against Pat's brand of pitchfork
conservatism. ... A review of Buchanan's new book condemns its defense of
"America First" foreign policies. Buchanan honors Charles Lindbergh as a heroic
voice of isolationism and outrageously argues that the West instigated war with
the Nazi regime.

         
      
   
