
   
   
      
         
            Pretty Woman, Lame Movie

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Runaway Bride
                (Paramount Pictures). Director Garry Marshall
scored the first time he paired Julia Roberts and Richard Gere, in 1990's
Pretty Woman , but he flounders on this outing. Critics complain about
the trite story line--Roberts plays a young woman who has a habit of leaving
her grooms waiting at the altar--and the lack of chemistry between the stars.
Maureen Dowd notes in the New York Times that Runaway Bride marks
the "flatlining" of the traditional romantic comedy and the birth of a new
genre: the unsympathetic heroine comedy (see also: My Best Friend's
Wedding and Four Weddings and a Funeral ). A few critics come to its
defense. Janet Maslin (the New York Times ) serves up a remarkably bland,
neither-here-nor-there review: "[Mr. Gere's] and Mr. Marshall's reunion with
Ms. Roberts guarantees a comedy that's easy on the eyes and dependable in the
laugh department." The New Yorker 's David Denby also pronounces the film
passable: "Although the movie dawdles and repeats itself, it is often
charming." Denby even goes against the conventional wisdom, contending that
"the Gere-Roberts connection is still alive." (Click here to check out a site devoted to Roberts and here for one devoted to
Gere.)

            

               
                  Twin Falls Idaho
                (Sony Pictures Classics). This David Lynch-ian
film about a love triangle involving a pair of conjoined twins and a prostitute
provokes a fittingly dual response from reviewers. (Ratcheting up the weirdness
is the fact it was written and directed by a pair of non-conjoined identical
twins.) Some find it "spellbinding," with "a solemn eroticism [that] sometimes
recalls The Elephant Man " (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall Street
Journal ). Others say the "slapped-on eeriness peels away to reveal little
more than simplistic dramatic ploys" and that it is "neither weighty nor as
weird as it would like to think" (Dennis Lim, the Village Voice ). The
balance tips slightly in the film's favor: The New York Times ' Maslin
writes that the film "has style, gravity and originality to spare ... dwells as
hauntingly in loneliness as it does on never actually being able to be alone."
(Click here to visit the film's official site.)

            

               Magazine
            

            

               
                  Talk
               . Just about every possible media outlet covers
the premiere of Editor Tina Brown's new magazine. Time devotes more than
a page, Newsweek just less than one, each featuring a photo of Brown and
the cover of the first issue. The early response is surprisingly kind:
Conventional wisdom has held that everyone was waiting to knock Brown off her
cloud, but there are notably few scathing condemnations or laudatory pieces
about the magazine in the news today. Instead, reports focus on the phenomenon
of Brown's buzz machine and the celeb-studded party she threw Monday night,
which Madonna described as "so much fun, I loved it" in the New York
Post . As for the prospects of the magazine, most agree that "if anyone
could dust off the genre [of a general interest magazine], it's probably Brown"
(Margaret Carlson and Stephen Koepp, Time ). (Click here to check out
Talk 's official Web site. Click to read last week's "Summary Judgment"
on early Talk hype.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  A Certain Age
               , by Tama Janowitz (Doubleday). The
brittle, shallow, single, gold-digging, thirtysomething protagonist of
Janowitz's latest hate letter to Manhattan is pronounced so unpleasant as to
make the entire novel (which follows her search for a suitably rich and
connected husband) quite a drag: "A hateful heroine and a catalog of
conspicuous consuming do not an amusing read make" (Elizabeth Gleick,
Time ). "One of the least likable characters in modern fiction history.
More self-obsessed than Portnoy, more marriage crazed than Bridget Jones, this
skinny blond twit is truly horrid" (A.J. Jacobs, Entertainment Weekly ).
The closest thing the novel gets to a positive review is a one-line mention in
a National Review roundup of new books on single women: David
Klinghoffer writes that the novel is "darkly funny." (Click here
to read an excerpt from the book and here to listen to an interview with the author.)

            

               
                  Run Catch Kiss
               , by Amy Sohn (Simon & Schuster).
New York Press sex columnist Amy Sohn turns in a first novel about ... a
New York-based sex columnist and her wild shenanigans with men. Critics are
more amused than impressed: "One reads ... with equal parts astonished
admiration and mounting horror at the calculated brazenness of it all" (Mark
Rozzo, Los Angeles Times ). Clarissa Cruz ( Entertainment Weekly )
finds that parts of the dialogue are "laugh out loud funny," but overall it's
"a frivolous read that's far more titillating than scintillating." More biting
reviews say it's yet another in the recent rash of single-girl-in-the-city
novels, just a "wobbly attempt to follow in Bridget Jones's Manolo Blahniks"
(Yahlin Chan, Newsweek ). (Click here to read an interview with the author.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Get Skintight
               , by the Donnas (Lookout!). This
foursome of female juvenile garage rockers gets solid reviews for its third
album. "These bad-ass ladies roll out rude, Ace Frehley-inspired guitar hooks
at a feverish rate, capturing the rebellious, mischievous and instantly
gratifying rock 'n' roll spirit of teenage trash culture" (Glen Sansone,
CMJ ). As all members of the band are under legal drinking age, the
lyrics touch on subjects such as driving around on the neighbor's lawn, hanging
out by the Slurpee machine, and looking at cute guys. On the downside, the band
relies heavily on its predecessors, and some songs sound lifted directly from
the Ramones, the Runaways, and Mötley Crüe (they also cover the Crüe's "Too
Fast For Love"). But most critics don't sweat the album's derivative
tendencies, pointing out that this kind of music isn't supposed to be blazingly
original, it's supposed to be fun. "A timeless burst of renegade teen spirit"
(Steve Dougherty, People ). (Click here to find out more about the band on its official site, and
here to check
out the "I have a crush on The Donnas" Web site.)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Music
            

            
               
                  Out of
Business
               , by EPMD (Def  Jam). Critics praise the Long Island
duo's latest offering as "their best album since 1990's Business As
Usual " (Rob Hart, CMJ ). Erick Sermon and Parrish Smith's music is up
to their usual high standards, but even more impressive are their lyrics, which
"weave together tapestries of obscure pop-culture references and rap history
homages that could keep lesser rhymers in business forever" (Matt Diehl,
Entertainment Weekly ).

         
      
   
