
   
   
      
         
            No. 328: &quot;Hello, Wieners&quot;

            
               A study by the
Department of Health and Human Services shows that kids are four times as
likely to do it on Halloween as on any other evening. Do what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
327)--"Haider Go Seek":
            

            

               Two weeks ago, Jörg Haider led his far-right Freedom Party to a
stunning second-place finish in Austria's national elections; two weeks from
now, he's coming to America. To do what?
            

            "To
celebrate with the Atlanta Braves on yet another stunning second-place finish
in the World Series."-- David Lott ( Dale Shuger had a similar
answer.)

            "Find
a bride. Wacky high jinks ensue. Art Buchwald has already filed a
lawsuit."-- Tim Carvell (similarly, Steven Davis and Jon W.
Davis )

            "Buy a
ton of candy corn in the half-price Halloween sales."-- Merrill
Markoe
            

            "I
guess I should be paying more attention to this charter revision thing,
huh?"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Check
out Kurt Waldheim's old office at the United Nations; see if the swastika Kurt
carved into the desk is still there."-- Timothy Surdyk
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            This question generated,
by far, a record number of "similarlies" all focused on Pat Buchanan's
politics. Unavoidable, I suppose. Cartoons, sitcoms, and political campaigns
conjure up characters with a single, instantly recognizable characteristic.
Daffy Duck is, well, daffy; Phoebe from Friends is, OK, well she's daffy
too; and Pat Buchanan is ... OK, never mind. But to sustain him as a viable
comic foil through next November, we'll need to observe him in a more
particular and nuanced way, or pray that he develops webbed feet, like Phoebe,
and a quirky sex appeal, like Daffy. There's something about that duck. I
wonder if he's ever considered joining a new political party.

            
               Is It Hard To Run in
Those Jackboots Answer
            

            Jörg Haider will be in the States on Sunday, Nov.
7, to run in the New York City marathon. He will be wearing number 5777.
Despite protests, race officials have declined either to eject Haider or to
reroute the event to keep him out of Williamsburg, a Hasidic neighborhood in
Brooklyn.

            Although it is, of
course, impossible to know how the authorities will deal with this potentially
volatile confrontation, the mayor has already praised the police for their
wisdom, restraint, and all around good looks in handling the situation, and
dismissed those who disagree as "publicity-seeking idiots." Or perhaps he
hasn't.

            
               Not Pandering, Catering
Extra
            

            Under the slogan,
"Another Great Reason To Be a Woman" (feel free to make up your own jokes about
some of those other reasons), Oxygen Media (Marcy Carsey, Tom Werner, and Caryn
Mandabach, Gerry Laybourne, Oprah Winfrey) has launched its Web site and announced the shows
it will start airing on Feb. 2 on television (a box consisting of a cathode ray
tube, a receiver and ... oh, screw it). Some actual highlights along with some
actual snarky remarks.

            

               Inhale, 6 a.m.
"High-energy yoga?" Isn't that a contradiction? Well, no. We just won't stand
for doing anything the same old way.-- It's yoga with attitude. No, wait:
It's yoga for the new millennium. It's yoga, Cajun-style. Wait, wait, come back
...
               

               Oxygen.Comedy, 6-8 p.m.
"It all starts off with two unorthodox game shows including our take on the
classic I've Got a Secret ."-- Retread game shows? OK, as it turns
out, we WILL stand for doing some things the same old way.
               

               Pure Oxygen, 8-10 p.m.
At Pure Oxygen, we talk with women, not at them, in a fluid production style
that breaks down the wall between the viewers, the crew and the on-air
personalities.-- If you've ever broken down the wall between yourself and a
union stage hand, I'm not sure you'd cheerfully do it again.
               

               Exhale With Candice Bergen, M-F, 10-11 p.m.
Whew! Was that a day or what? Time for women to take a deep breath, reflect,
relax and get inspired with our nightly hour-long conversation (not a talk
show) between a celebrated woman and the most interesting people of the
day.-- And those leather things she's wearing on her feet? Not
shoes.
               

               shE-commerce, Weekends, 8 a.m.-2 p.m.
OK, we're women. We shop. Thank God for the Internet!-- This may seem sexist,
but it's not: It's gurrrll power, like at Sears.
               

               WeSweat, Weekends, 4-6 p.m.
Whether it's team sports, rock climbing or just strutting around the block,
there's an athlete burning inside every woman. Oxygen celebrates that spirit
with WeSweat, a two-hour weekend block.-- Strutting: I believe that's a
demonstration sport in the next Olympics. And incidentally, doesn't the suck-up
form require it to be shE sweat?
               

               X-Chromosome, Sat., 8:30-9 p.m., Sun., 7:30-8 p.m.
Breaking the rules and mining hot new talent--two things Oxygen does
best--collide head-on in an explosive new animation series for women.-- I
believe Kathy Lee Gifford said the same thing about working conditions in her
factory in Guatemala.
               

               Pyjama Party, Sat., 11 p.m.-12 a.m.
Think writers, artists and musicians, but don't think too hard--this is
fun!-- This is the listing that made Susan B. Anthony burst the confines of
her coffin, drive down to South Carolina to purchase an inexpensive and easily
obtainable handgun, take the red-eye to Hollywood, and clean house. (Not a talk
show.)
               

               Oprah Goes Online, 12-part series
She's the most powerful woman in television. An accomplished entertainer and
successful entrepreneur. Nothing gets in her way. Nothing, that is, except the
computer.-- And next season, a 24-parter, Oprah learns to set her
VCR.
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Soul kissing Pat Buchanan ... in Disneyland!

         
      
   
