
   
   
      
         
            The Bush Triangulation Strategy

            Last
week, House Republicans tried to postpone a fiscal squeeze by deferring payment
of the Earned Income Tax Credit to low-income workers. Their presidential
front-runner, George W. Bush, shot them down. "I don't think they ought to
balance their budget on the backs of the poor," said Bush. Tuesday, speaking in
New York about education reform, Bush spanked his party again, this time for
projecting pessimism, indifference, and "disdain for government."

            Bush's
broadsides have filled the talk shows and front pages with speculation that he
is "triangulating" against congressional Republicans, just as Bill Clinton
"triangulated" against left-wing rap artist Sister Souljah in 1992 and against
congressional liberals in 1995. But the media's one-dimensional understanding
of triangulation--that Bush is trying to "distance himself from the GOP's right
wing" and "stake out the middle ground" between two extremes--oversimplifies
the game. Bush isn't positioning himself on a straight line between Clinton and
the congressional GOP. He isn't even taking up a third position on their
two-dimensional battlefield. He is venturing into a third dimension, rejecting
the whole Washington debate, and defining his contest with Al Gore along a new
axis. He is trying to render Gore's three-point campaign message obsolete.

            

               1. 
               The country is doing well. Clinton and Gore
constantly recite statistics that reflect well on their administration: more
jobs, lower deficits, lower interest rates, fewer people on welfare, less
crime. They credit their own policies, particularly the 1993 tax hike, for
achieving these results by establishing fiscal responsibility. For years,
congressional Republicans predicted that Clinton's plan would ruin the economy.
Then they defied credulity by reversing their message, claiming that the
economy was in great shape and that their own policies were responsible for
it.

            This
is the biggest obstacle facing Bush: He is challenging the incumbent vice
president in a time of peace and prosperity, and the congressional GOP has not
made a persuasive case either that the prosperity is false or that it is true
because of Republican efforts in Washington. Clinton and Gore have spent seven
years telling Americans the story of how their administration revived the
economy. Whether or not this story is true, it is now deeply ingrained in the
public consciousness, and Bush can't look to his party in Washington for an
effective rebuttal to it.

            
Instead, Bush is attempting something far more bold and interesting: He is
weaving an alternative story. While focusing on Bush's criticisms of his party
in his speech Tuesday, the media overlooked the more important passage that
preceded them. He said:

            
               In state after state, we are seeing a profound shift of
[educational] priorities. An "age of accountability" is starting to replace an
era of low expectations. ... The principles of this movement are similar from
New York to Florida, from Massachusetts to Michigan. ... At the beginning of
the 1990s, so many of our nation's problems, from education to crime to
welfare, seemed intractable. ... But something unexpected happened on the way
to cultural decline. Problems that seemed inevitable proved to be reversible.
They gave way to an optimistic, governing conservatism. Here in New York, Mayor
Giuliani brought order and civility back to the streets--cutting crime rates by
50 percent. In Wisconsin, Gov. Tommy Thompson proved that welfare dependence
could be reversed--reducing his rolls by 91 percent. Innovative mayors and
governors followed their lead--cutting national welfare rolls by nearly half
since 1994 and reducing the murder rate to the lowest point since 1967. Now
education reform is gaining a critical mass of results. In the process,
conservatism has become the creed of hope. The creed of aggressive, persistent
reform. The creed of social progress.
            

            What's
important about this narrative is not what it says but what it doesn't say. It
makes no mention of anything that happened in the White House or in Congress.
Bush has decided that he can't win the federal policy debate that has consumed
Clinton, Gore, Newt Gingrich, and the national media for seven years. So he has
simply erased it. Yes, crime is down, fewer people are on welfare, and school
reform is gaining momentum. And yes, the incumbent party deserves credit. But
in Bush's story, that party isn't the Democratic White House. It's the state
and local GOP.

            

               2. 
               Congress is petty and mean. Republican congressional
leaders--Gingrich, House Majority Leader Dick Armey, and House Majority Whip
Tom DeLay--have spent their tenure in the majority denouncing government,
bickering with Clinton and the Democrats, impugning their integrity, and
blaming them for every problem. They have convinced many people that Clinton
and Gore are blameworthy. But they have convinced many others that
congressional Republicans are more interested in impugning integrity and fixing
blame than in solving problems. The negative portion of Gore's game plan,
therefore, is to lump Bush together with Armey and DeLay as the party of
carping and destructiveness.

            Bush's
game plan is to turn Gore's game plan on its head. He's not going to argue with
Gore over which party is destructive or blameworthy. He's going to reject the
whole Washington blame game--undercutting his own party as well as Gore--and
portray himself as a man who solves problems instead of complaining about them
or blaming them on his enemies. "Too often, my party has confused the need for
limited government with a disdain for government itself," Bush said Tuesday.
"Our Founders rejected cynicism and cultivated a noble love of country. That
love is undermined by sprawling, arrogant, aimless government. It is restored
by focused and effective and energetic government. And that should be our goal:
a limited government, respected for doing a few things and doing them
well."

            Some
House Republicans, including DeLay, have fired back at Bush, accusing him of
betraying them, meddling in their business, and distorting their ideas. This
counterattack has only helped Bush achieve the distance he sought in the first
place. Others, including Armey, have tried to spin Bush's comments, suggesting
that he's really siding with them against Clinton in the Washington budget
fight. They don't understand that they've lost that fight and that Bush is
willing to repudiate the fight and everyone in it--including them--in order to
ruin Gore's strategy and beat him.

            

               3. 
               The religious right is scary. Gore, like Clinton,
has often used cultural issues such as abortion to make the GOP look extreme.
The media and "moderate" Republicans, convinced that these issues are the
party's weakness and that its libertarian economic ideas are its strength, have
interpreted Bush's remarks as a rebuke to Republican "Puritanism." But a closer
look at Bush's comments suggests the opposite: He is concerned that the party
looks mean because of its economic policies, and he is using cultural issues to
soften that image by projecting Republican "compassion."

            If
Bush had felt a need to triangulate against the cultural right, he could have
joined others in repudiating Pat Buchanan for questioning the wisdom of
American intervention against Nazi Germany. He didn't. Alternatively, he could
have used his address to the Christian Coalition last Friday to criticize
religious intolerance. Instead, he gave a speech that bypassed traditional
moral issues such as school prayer and homosexuality and never mentioned the
word "abortion." The media inferred that Bush was ignoring moral issues because
the religious right has nowhere else to go. They missed the real story: The
reason why Bush doesn't have to talk about old moral issues that might make him
look mean is that he's introducing new moral issues that make him look warm and
caring.

            In his
speech to the coalition, Bush used the word "compassion" 16 times. He urged
Christians to pursue a kinder, gentler mission: "What we need are people who
live out their faith in every walk of life, in politics, but also working in
crisis pregnancy centers, drug treatment programs, and homeless shelters.
People who make God's work their own. ... Our compassion must extend to the
poor and to the fatherless. Our compassion must defend the disabled. ... I will
rally the armies of compassion to nurture, to mentor, to comfort, to perform
their commonplace miracles of renewal. ... I will involve them in after-school
programs, maternity group homes, prison fellowships, and drug treatment
programs."

            
Tuesday, Bush warned, "Too often, on social issues, my party has painted an
image of America slouching toward Gomorrah. Of course there are challenges to
the character and compassion of our nation--too many broken homes and broken
lives. But many of our problems--particularly education, crime, and welfare
dependence--are yielding to good sense and strength and idealism." He went on:
"Too often, my party has focused on the national economy, to the exclusion of
all else--speaking a sterile language of rates and numbers, of CBO this and GNP
that. Of course we want growth and vigor in our economy. But there are human
problems that persist in the shadow of affluence." On this view, the GOP's
problem is libertarian indifference in Washington, and the solution is to fix
"broken homes and broken lives" through "compassion" back home.

            Gore
recognizes Bush's strategy and is trying to drag him back into the Washington
fight. "He's now differed with [congressional Republicans] on one little
detail," Gore said on Face the Nation . "If he really wants to try to
break with them, he ought to endorse our health-care Patients' Bill of Rights.
He ought to endorse an increase in the minimum wage for the working poor. And
he ought to come out against this huge, risky tax scheme." But Bush isn't
biting, and congressional Democrats, more interested in beating their
Republican colleagues than in beating Bush, have welcomed and exploited his
indictment of the GOP. Bush doesn't mind. They can have the battle. He wants
the war.

         
      
   
