
   
   
      
         
            No. 310: &quot;Insight Out&quot;

            
               "I'm saying we
really do have to recognize that it's going to be difficult and take a while
for people to get this stuff," says Professor Shoshanna Sofaer of Baruch
College, an adviser to the federal government. "And for a significant
percentage, they're never going to get it because they're cognitively impaired,
they're too frail, or they just don't have the energy to invest in
understanding these things." Who's never going to understand what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 309)--"Lost in Translation":
            

            

               
                  " 'EIN Nod: Bodlonrwydd Llwyr I Gwsmeriaid' is not the
snappiest slogan to those who speak no Welsh. Yet the banner inside General
Electric's aero-engine servicing department in South Wales--'_____________'--is
a fair approximation of what GE has been up to in Nantgarw since it bought the
business from British Airways in 1991." 
                  Fill in the blank in
this lead from the Economist by translating that slogan from Welsh to
English. (Question courtesy of Andrew Solovay.)
                  
               
            

            "A
note: We apologize for Suddenly Susan ."-- Mac Thomason
            

            
"Working in the spirit of Marxism-Leninism under the party's tutelage to
achieve the Four Modernizations."-- David Lofquist ( Shany Mor had
a similar answer.)

            "Kill
All the Fish and Blame Somebody Else."-- Dave Gaffen
            

            "No
scrubs: A scrub is a guy who can't get no love from me."-- Dennis
Cass
            

            "Our
Goal: A Low-Wage Workforce Without the Brown People."-- Matthew
Heimer
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Anecdotal
Wrap-Up
            

            Before GE bought NBC, just outside each bank of
elevators at 30 Rockefeller Center was a direction sign listing each employee
who worked on that floor. It was exciting, albeit in a slightly childish way,
to see your name on that signboard, confirming that you still had your cushy
job in this historic broadcasting center. And the signs made it easier for
visitors to find their way around. After the takeover, one of the first hints
of the new corporate culture was the removal of all those convenient signs,
and--so the rumor went--the firing of the guy whose job it was to keep them up
to date. As he went from floor to floor removing the signs, did he realize what
was going to happen after he'd taken down the final one?

            A little while later,
the "RCA Building" sign that had been on 30 Rock since its construction was
replaced with one reading "GE Building," completing the eradication of the
individual employee and the rewriting of architectural history. Isn't this the
sort of thing we used to detest when the Soviets did it? That, and replacing
all the hall lighting with 40-watt bulbs and MIRV missiles?

            
               Total Electric
Answer
            

            "Our Goal: Total Customer Satisfaction"

            Says the Economist , the popular business
fanzine: "GE tops most polls as the world's most-admired company. This year it
may become the first firm to rack up net profits of $10 billion." Most people
still associate GE with making things. (And with mass firings, polluting the
Hudson, busting unions, scary nuclear power plants, scarier defense
contracting, and scariest NBC twaddle-- Ed. ) In 1980, manufacturing
provided 85 percent of the group's profits; now three-quarters come from
services. Around half of that comes from its two "pure" service arms, GE
Capital, which alone provides about 40 percent of its profits, and NBC. (But
even as a service provider, GE will always be known for mass firings, polluting
the Hudson, busting unions, scary nuclear power plants, scarier defense
contracting, and scariest NBC twaddle.-- Ed. )

            In addition to its shift from manufacturing to
service, GE is changing from an American company into a truly international
operation. Again, the Economist : "GE has redoubled attempts to pass
business to cheap hands and cheap minds. If you live in Texas and get a strange
voice asking why your credit-card payment is late, it is probably because the
call is coming from India (the operators assume western names and reportedly
pick up the twang of the region they cover)."

            Servicing aircraft
engines in Wales embodies both these aspects of GE's new philosophy. No wonder
they're so admired. By the Economist . The popular business fanzine not
known for its nude CEO centerfolds.

            
               Anecdotal Extra
No. 1: Ooh, It's the New Norma Kamalis, Your Grace
            

            When I called to renew
my New Yorker subscription, I asked the operator if she could offer me a
bargain. "Are you a priest?" she asked. A special low rate is listed for
priests but not for the clergy of any other faith. Presumably, Condé Nast is
courting Catholic clerics (coveted by advertisers?). "It's true at
Vogue , too," she said. "And if you're a bishop or above, we'll actually
pay you to subscribe to Mademoiselle ," she did not add.

            
               Anecdotal Extra
No. 2: Why John McCain Will Never Be President
            

            "John McC. was on my US
Airways flight from Orlando to Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport this
morning. He kept his head down and avoided eye contact. He pressed no flesh. He
was widely recognized, but it appeared he did not wish to be seen. Was it
because he was flying economy class? Because of his Mickey Mouse-logo polo
shirt? Did he pay for it, or was it baksheesh? Face it: He just doesn't seem
hungry."-- Leslie Goodman-Malamuth
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            A demigod walks (or rides around in a limo) among
us, and his name is Jack Welch.

         
      
   
