
   
   
      
         
            Drug Bust

            

               George W. Bush said he 
               hasn't used drugs since 1974. On
Wednesday he vowed never to discuss his drug history. On Thursday he admitted
that he had "made some mistakes" and "learned from those" but said he would
have passed a 15-year background check in 1989. The media debated whether
Bush's drug history should be probed. Timothy Noah called the inquiries "" in
"Chatterbox," but John Stacks argued in Time that past dabblings with
cocaine could make Bush's hard-line drug enforcement policy hypocritical.
Maureen Dowd denounced Republicans for protecting Bush's past after years of
investigating President Clinton's.

            

               Serbs rallied against 
               President Slobodan Milosevic. As
many as 150,000 people attended the rally in Belgrade. Speakers from the
various opposition groups disagreed over when and how Milosevic should be
removed. The unanimous spin: The democratic factions are still too divided to
unseat him.

            

               The Episcopal and Lutheran 
               churches are uniting. They
will keep separate creeds and structures but will share clergy, sacraments, and
missionary projects. The pious spin: "Oneness becomes a proof of the authenticity of the
gospel ," a Lutheran bishop told the Washington 
               Post . The
practical spin: The two churches need to pool their dwindling resources and
memberships.

            

               Three Japanese 
               banks will merge to create the world's
largest financial institution. Bank executives hope the union will
resuscitate the Japanese banking industry and thus the entire economy. The
New York Times hails the move as "a long-overdue effort to deal with the
realities of an overcrowded market, massive bad loans and woefully low profit
margins."

            

               A federal study reported that teen 
               drug abuse fell in
1998. The optimistic spin: The war on drugs is finally working. The
pessimistic fine print: drug abuse among young adults and minority groups is
rising steadily. A Washington Post editorial berates Elizabeth Dole for
her ditzy stand on drug policy.

            

               Kenneth Starr will resign before the 
               year's end. The
judicial panel that appointed him split over whether his work should continue.
Since the independent counsel statute has expired, no one knows whether Starr
can legally be replaced. A New York Times editorial urges him to stay on
but to finish the job fast.

            

               A former Los Alamos official 
               called the espionage
allegations against Wen Ho Lee racist. The former chief of
counterintelligence told the Washington Post that investigators targeted
Lee because he is Chinese-American and that there is not a "shred of evidence" against him
               . However,
an Energy Department official told the New York Times that the charges
of racism are bunk and that only three of the 12 initial suspects in the case
were of Chinese background.

            

               An earthquake in Turkey killed at least 10,000 and possibly as many as
35,000. The Turkish newspaper Hurriyet in effect charged
construction authorities with , and international papers roundly condemned
their shoddy building standards.

            

               Bosnian Muslim, Serb, and Croat leaders stole $1 billion in public
funds and international aid. The money was intended to rebuild
infrastructure and schools. The New York Times reports that the
corruption will chill private investment and charitable contributions to the
region.

            

               Vladimir Putin was confirmed as Russia's prime minister.
Indifferent to Yeltsin's latest pick and distracted by upcoming parliamentary
and presidential elections, the Duma rubber-stamped the appointment. Instead,
attention focused on former premier Yevgeny Primakov's announcement of his
alliance with a new political party.

            

               Russia attacked Islamic separatists in Dagestan and bombed neighboring
Chechnya. Newly confirmed Prime Minister Vladimir Putin vowed to crush
the rebels immediately, but Chechens girded for another drawn-out conflict.

            

               French prosecutors dropped their investigation of the crash that killed
Princess Diana. They concluded it was caused by the driver's loss of
control. The Guardian reported that former U.S. Sen. George Mitchell has
volunteered to act as a liaison between the Pentagon and Mohammed Al Fayed in
the dispute over British and American intelligence about the crash .

            

               George W. Bush won the Iowa straw poll. Steve Forbes placed
second, Elizabeth Dole third, and Gary Bauer fourth. "" reports on the
unanimous spins: Bush won solidly but not overwhelmingly enough to send other
candidates packing. Forbes spent his way into second place. Dole is once again
a vice presidential contender, and Bauer is the candidate-designate of the
Christian right. Jacob Weisberg rates the , the , and the in "Ballot Box."

            

               Lamar Alexander dropped his presidential bid. On Meet the
Press , he conceded that George W. Bush's nomination is assured by a
"powerful force." Jacob Weisberg called Alexander a worthy candidate but agreed
that "another moderate Republican with a famous name and far more money ."
Other commentators suggested Dan Quayle would be the next to go.

            

               Columbine High School reopened. Students attended a "Take Back
the School" rally, and parents made a human chain around the school. Some
parents of slain children complained about the day's "rah, rah, let's
forget about the kids that died " tone. On the second day of school,
swastikas were found scrawled on the building.

            

               Planet Hollywood filed for bankruptcy. The Wall Street
Journal blamed the chain's failure on bad management and worse food.

            

               Tiger Woods won the PGA Championship. He beat 19-year-old
Sergio García by one stroke. The Washington Post concludes that Woods is
finally fulfilling the hype that surrounded his 1997
Masters victory, but the Associated Press reports that García stole the show . Commentators salivated at the
prospect of a rivalry between the two youngsters.

         
      
   
