
   
   
      
         
            More <EM>Merde</EM>

            The
Mad Cow War between Britain and France is still the most interesting subject in
the international press. It has brought out a Francophobia in the British
newspapers that has to be read to be believed. The Times of London, once a
byword for dignity, has a regular feature called "Centre of Attention" about
the hot topic of the day. Wednesday's column, devoted to French food, plumbed
new depths of vulgarity. Beside a photograph of a French cow, the paper printed
the words: "Pity la 
               pauvre vache . Less succulent than her
British sister, she's been good only for cheese. Now we find she has been fed
the bodily by-products of Europe's least soap-conscious nation. Leaving her as
tasty as a draught from a mud-wrestler's jockstrap."

            
Despite French denials that their cows are fed on human excrement--"No cow in
the world would eat sewage," a French agriculture official protested Tuesday to
the Independent of London--this is the aspect of the dispute that
has captured the imagination of the British press. The symbol of the Daily
Mail 's campaign for a British consumers' boycott of French food is a
drawing of a cow with a beret on its head and a roll of toilet paper hanging on
a chain from its neck. "England expects every shopper to do their duty," the
paper proclaimed Wednesday on its front page--evoking Adm. Horatio Nelson's
signal to the British fleet at the Battle of Trafalgar, "England expects that
every man will do his duty"--but also reflecting the decline in grammatical
standards in England over the past 200 years. (Another Nelson exhortation to
his sailors--"You must hate a Frenchman as you hate the devil"--was not quoted
anywhere, but was being widely followed in the spirit.)

            The
Daily Mail 's front-page headline, above a picture of French farmers
halting British trucks with burning barricades at the Channel port of Calais,
was "Merde ! What a flaming cheek," and inside in an editorial it said,
"A million scientists proclaiming that beef from excrement-fed cattle is safe
will only reinforce the commonsense view that animals fed in such a disgusting
way cannot possibly be healthy." So much for scientists. The Mail also
quoted a French farmers' leader as saying, "England is an island--it is easier
to blockade than the Continent." He was presumably unaware of a famous prewar
headline in the Times : "Fog in Channel: Continent isolated."

            The
Times headed its anti-French editorial Wednesday with the kind of dreary
play on words that Fleet Street currently finds irresistible. "A reasonable
beef," it said, "The French should eat their words." The conservative Daily
Telegraph said
in an editorial: "If French farmers really think they can force
British consumers to buy their produce by blockading Calais, they had better
prepare for a long and unprofitable winter on the quayside. ... [T]rying to
annoy your target market lacks the flair and subtlety for which the French
traditionally pride themselves." It also noted that the French national rugby
team, currently in England for that sport's World Cup, had ordered a meal of
roast beef from room service at their hotel in Windsor with "absolutely no
stipulations as to where it came from." The paper wished the French team "all
the best" in its semifinal on Sunday.

            The
mass-circulation Sun , now reportedly dumping its famous Page-3 bare-breasted
pinups at the request of Rupert Murdoch's new Chinese wife, used the small
French farmers' protest at Calais as the excuse for an attack on Prime Minister
Tony Blair for his pro-Europeanism. "Is THIS what it means to be at the heart
of Europe, Mr Blair?" it asked, beside a photograph of the burning barricade.
"Come on, Mr Blair," it said in an editorial. "Start kicking backsides in Paris
and Brussels."

            The French press, by
contrast, was rather restrained. Le Monde Wednesday even seemed to support the idea of a
unilateral British ban on French food imports. It said Blair had the scientific
justification for such a gesture and that if he had decided to make it (which
he didn't), it "would without doubt have had the merit of calming the enormous
storm of Francophobia that is consuming the British Isles at the moment." Le
Monde separately reported that, according to European officials, the United
States is expected to lift its ban on imports of French Roquefort cheese, pâté
de foie gras, and mustards at the World Trade Organization conference in
Seattle at the end of next month.

         
      
   
