
   
   
      
         
            CREEP Show

            The delightful comedy
Dick defaces the memory of America's most cherished political scandal.
It's a mustache on the Mona Lisa--or maybe a big, crooked dick on the cover of
All the President's 
               Men . Simply put, the movie makes the charming
case that Deep Throat, Bob Woodward's pseudonymous high-level source, was not
(as recent "Chatterbox" columns have speculated) an FBI honcho such as W. Mark
Felt, but two bubble-headed 15-year-old blondes.

            According to the film,
Arlene (Michelle Williams) lived at the Watergate Hotel, and she and Betsy
(Kirsten Dunst) were the ones who put the duct tape on the stairway lock that
led security guards to the burglars. (The girls were slipping out to mail their
entry to a "Win a Date With Bobby Sherman" contest.) To keep Betsy and Arlene
quiet about having seen G. Gordon Liddy (Harry Shearer) at both the Watergate
and the White House, Nixon (Dan Hedaya) made them "Official White House Dog
Walkers"--in which capacity they stumbled on a room full of people shredding
documents and counting piles of payoff money. As Dick tells it, the
story got even weirder: Here at last is the druggy truth behind détente! And
you won't believe what was really on those 18½ minutes of erased Oval
Office tape!

            The amazing thing about Dick (directed by Andrew
Fleming from a script he wrote with Sheryl Longin) is that it manages to
burlesque the Watergate mythos without trivializing it. Under its slapstick
shenanigans, this modest movie offers a convincing vision of Nixon White House
operations as a sordid buffoon show undone by a couple of painfully earnest
innocents: It's nature's revenge on the overweening. The larger truths are all
there, and some of the smaller ones, too--like the idea that Nixon's paranoia
would extend even to his dog (another Checkers), or that Woodward and Bernstein
might seem as vain and as clumsily ambitious as the felons they're pursuing.
Post-Monica Lewinsky, it isn't odd to think of wide-eyed airheads wandering the
White House. (Post-Monica Crowley, it isn't even odd to think of wide-eyed
airheads drinking in the wisdom of Richard Nixon.) It's blissfully satisfying
to hear Arlene--who has replaced her Bobby Sherman posters with those of her
Dick and who fantasizes about romping on a beach with him in slow motion--come
to her senses and utter the immortal reproach, "You kicked Checkers and you're
prejudiced and you have a potty mouth!"

            Some critics have
compared Dick to Alexander Payne's great Election (1999), to
which it bears not the faintest resemblance. Payne employs multiple points of
view, probes his characters' psyches, and edits with a snap. By contrast,
Dick is rather limp. The pacing is purposefully slack--the gags just
dribble out. Fleming's poker face is perfect for making you giggle at offhand
insertions of Watergate minutiae or urban-paranoid compositions cribbed from
Alan J. Pakula's film of All the President's Men (1976). The movie's
sophistication hits you gradually. Maybe you have to be sophisticated to make a
picture so effortlessly, cheerfully facile about a subject so dark and
convoluted. Dunst and Williams make Betsy and Arlene simple in ways that go
beyond dumb, so that their budding awareness of Dick's mendacity has an
unexpected emotional kick. Like many Americans of that era they're crushed,
they get their own back, and then they leap into the age of roller-disco. The
Bogey Man goes down, and Dick sends you home boogeying.

            M ystery Men is one of those half-straight,
half-spoof comic-book extravaganzas that don't ever work, and what's neat is
that this one does--beautifully. The movie, based on the Flaming
Carrot/Mysterymen comics, unfolds in a dirigible-filled urban metropolis in
which superheroes routinely mix it up with supervillains, and in which there
exists an entire class of nerdy superhero wannabes, each of whom struggles to
concoct a persona that will fully embody what he or she does most ...
superheroically. The protagonist, Roy (Ben Stiller), calls himself Mr. Furious
because his anger supposedly gives him powers undreamt of by mere mortals. He
glowers and snorts like the Incredible Hulk--"I am a ticking time
bomb!"--except that he doesn't transform. He is joined in his crime-fighting
efforts by The Shovel (William H. Macy), who wields the same, and the effete
English Blue Raja (Hank Azaria), whose talent is for operatically flinging wide
his cape and hurling forks, most of which end up sticking out of his companions
instead of his foes.

            The first-time director,
who goes by the (superhero?) name of Kinka Usher, overloads the movie with
skewed angles and screwy lenses and grotesque special effects. What keeps his
work from becoming campily oppressive (like the last, dreadful Batman
picture) is his respect for the untranscendent flatness of ordinary life. These
nerds just can't quite get off the ground. More than that, they're inherently
suspicious of one another: They see through their buddys' superheroic
poses--and their own. Stiller, who struggles to turn his self-hatred into
other-hatred, makes a hilariously morose seether, and Azaria is poetically
twitty--he recalls Marlon Brando's Fletcher Christian. The earnest Macy, the
whitest man imaginable, has been given an African-American wife, to whom he
must constantly defend his unrealized ambitions: "I shovel well. I shovel
very well."

            These idiots can never measure up to the city's most
superheroic crime fighter, Captain Amazing (Greg Kinnear), a preening egotist
who soars around on a jet pack trashing supervillains, his uniform emblazoned
with product placements. When all the heavyweight bad guys are dead or in jail
(and his celebrity endorsements dry up), he contrives to have one of his old
nemeses, Casanova Frankenstein (Geoffrey Rush) released from the insane
asylum--a bad move, as it turns out, since Amazing has got rusty and
Frankenstein has had plenty of time to hatch a diabolical scheme. Among the
misfits who join up with our three would-be superheroes to liberate Captain
Amazing are Paul Reubens, who brings a glittery-eyed intensity to The Spleen, a
pustuled lisper with toxic flatulence, and the wonderful Janeane Garofalo as
The Bowler, who hurls a ball in which the skull of her murdered father is
ghoulishly embedded.

            The script, by Neil
Cuthbert, deftly juggles the fantasy of what our heroes want to be and the
reality of what they are. They don't show grace under pressure, but they
somehow rise to the occasion, and Mystery Men becomes a triumphant
celebration of nerdy aspiration. I might have complained that Stiller and
Garofalo--who instantly rub each other the wrong way--don't end up falling in
love, and that the film pairs Stiller instead with a conventional ingénue. But
since that ingénue is the meltingly gorgeous Claire Forlani, it would take
someone more superheroic than I to register a protest.

            The world didn't need a remake of The Thomas Crown
Affair (1968), an enjoyable piece of romantic fluff in which worldly
millionaire thief Steve McQueen matched wits with brittle insurance
investigator Faye Dunaway. We didn't need it, but we got it anyway--and it's
pretty terrific. The old script has been smartly overhauled, and the director,
John McTiernan ( Die Hard , 1988), works with a master-craftsman's
elegance. The climax, in which an army of men in trench coats and bowler hats
swap identical portfolios, is like a ballet designed by Magritte. (It's worthy
of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, in which it takes place.) True, there's the
hollow man, Pierce Brosnan, in the McQueen role, but he's not bad here: His
passivity is archly amusing. And then there's Rene Russo. She makes her
entrance in furs and a pair of sunglasses, with creamy lips and mussed red
hair--both sleek and sexily bedraggled. When she cottons (almost instantly) to
the fact that Brosnan is her art thief, she toys with him, happy with the chase
and entertained by his effrontery. You can't spot the moment when she falls in
love: It must be when it dawns on her that she's the mouse and not the cat.
Before you know it, she's roiling with doubt and heartbreakingly vulnerable,
and this slick thriller romance becomes more than an ultracivilized game. Russo
has never been less than agreeable, but here's she's something else: a movie
star.

         
      
   
