
   
   
      
         
            No. 323: &quot;Smooth Talker&quot; 

            
               "We deal in the
basics, and all those basics are necessary necessities," said a smiling CEO,
patiently explaining to some CNNfn reporter that the company would thrive even
in an economic downturn. Why was that CEO smiling?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question (No.
322)--"We Deliver?":
            

            

               According to Rep. John Doolittle, R-Calif., "Sometimes it's barbecue;
sometimes it's fried chicken, sometimes it's pizza; frequently it's more than
one of those things." What is?
            

            "The
shocking diet of talking animals."-- Andrew Staples ( Paul Frellick
had similar answer.)

            
"George W. Bush's favorite food, depending on where he's
campaigning."-- David Finkle
            

            
"Cigarette flavors Philip Morris tried while not targeting children."-- Chris
Kelly
            

            
"Dishes made out of euthanized babies at Peter Singer's new chain of
animal-friendly fast-food restaurants."-- Katha Pollitt
            

            "Look.
A martini should be gin and vermouth and a twist. That's it. There's no call
for 'secret' ingredients."-- Michael Manella
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            In News Quiz responses
and in the wider culture (if there is one), food is used as a metaphor for
ideology (bread and roses; let them eat cake) and for character: Their
attitudes toward eating reveal something, well, distasteful about President
Clinton and Calista Flockhart. It is also a metaphor for sex and never more
delightfully so than in the fowl-eating scene in Tony Richardson's movie of
Tom Jones . There is, however, only one place I can think of where the
equation is reversed so that sex is a metaphor for food. In Tampopo ,
when the incredibly attractive couple in white are not actually in a gourmet
frenzy, sex is simply food carried on by other means. And it really makes you
hungry. If that's the appetite I mean.

            
               Meals for Wheels
Answer
            

            Rep. Doolittle is listing the free eats Majority
Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, serves up at his office to fellow Republicans during
late-night sessions of the House, just one of the ways he has become, according
to Marshall Whitmann of the Heritage Foundation, "the most powerful majority
whip in the history of the House."

            And he's handing out more than ribs. The basis of
DeLay's power is ladling out cash to those who please him. The chief
fund-raiser for the National Republican Congressional Committee, he raises more
than half the group's money. And those who supply the funds are not neglected
either. As Alison Mitchell and Marc Lacey report in the New York Times ,
"DeLay has long had a kitchen cabinet of lobbyists who meet with him
regularly."

            DeLay is now launching a $25 million fund-raising
campaign to fight trade unions through the innovative method of establishing a
nonprofit corporation that can raise unlimited cash without disclosing donors,
a plan his fellow Republican congressman Chris Shays calls, "unbelievably
sick."

            In a rare case of
bipartisan agreement, David Obey, D-Wash., notes, "To me, the worst thing in
politics is anonymous, under-the-bedclothes money," he said. "Along with some
of the things I've seen in the House shower room," he did not add.

            
               Interfaith Extra 2--Can
I Hug the Dead Guy?
            

            I guess we've all had one drink too many and
embarrassed ourselves at a funeral. Or borrowed company funds that we had every
intention of returning, so there was really no reason to call the police. But
would you know how to treat the corpse at someone else's church, synagogue, or
prayer thingy?

            Name the Appropriate
Behavior Upon Viewing the Body for each of these religious faiths:

            
               The Religions
            

            

               Baptist

               Hindu

               Episcopalian

               Jehovah's Witnesses

               Lutheran

               Roman Catholic

               United Church of Canada

            

            
               The Behavior
            

            

               Join the line of viewers and view the body silently and somberly. ( No
cutting ahead saying, "I just have this quart of milk.")
               

               Look reverently upon the body and do not touch it. ( Especially not with
cooking utensils.)
               

               A moment of silent prayer. ( During which you can think about where to go
for lunch. Like he'd mind. He's dead.)
               

               Look upon it somberly for a few moments. ( Then look upon him with a big
goofy grin on your face and sing him a medley of Cole Porter tunes. He would
have wanted it that way.)
               

               Stand quietly and then move on. (Pretty much the way the mayor orders
all New Yorkers to behave in every situation.)
               

               A kiss is appropriate, but no tongue unless you were close before death.
OK, I just made that one up. But wouldn't that make the funeral weirdly
exciting?

               This is optional, but if it is a memorial service, there will be no body to
view. ( With their excellent system of national health, Canadians never
die.)
               

            

            (All actual facts from
How To Be a Perfect Stranger: a Guide to Etiquette in Other People's
Religious Ceremonies , Vol. I and II.)

            
               Signs That the '60s Are
Finally Over Ongoing Extra
            

            "We're both irreverent, hip and fun, but also
trusted and respectable brands."-- Robert Levitan, co-founder of some kind of
online gift certificate thing, describes his company and Whoopi
Goldberg.
            

            Participants are invited to submit other actual
news items that sound taps for that turbulent decade, if you'll accept the idea
that his pairing of "hip" and "respectable brands" travesties the spirit of
that era, which might be easier to accept if you thought that he was on acid
when he said it, or if you were right now.

            Results to run
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The plebian tastes of our gluttonous president.

         
      
   
