
   
   
      
         
            Brits as Corny as Iowa in August

            In the
run up to Vladimir Putin's confirmation as the new Russian prime minister
Monday, papers continued to speculate about the reasons for his predecessor's
removal. In the Sunday Times of London, Yeltsin biographer Leon Aron declared
that "the sole rational explanation [for the dismissal of Sergei Stepashin]
appears to be a sudden deterioration of Yeltsin's health and his expectation of
incapacitation or even death. ... It is reasonable to assume the president
wanted to see in the Kremlin someone he could trust in the interregnum to keep
a firm hand on the wheel."

            The
Jerusalem Post
said
that Stepashin "proved to be nicer and more honorable than the Yeltsin
entourage hoped or the opposition feared. ... In contrast, it is widely assumed
that Putin would be prepared to do whatever it takes to assure that the Yeltsin
family remains a commanding presence in Russian politics." The Post also
said that Yeltsin's attempts to "subvert or cancel" elections could backfire,
and added, "Even more ominous is the possibility that political infighting in
Moscow could shift the real power to regional governors, many of whom are even
less democratic and more self-serving than Yeltsin himself. The fragmentation
of a country with thousands of nuclear weapons could have terrible
repercussions far beyond Russia's borders."

            The
London Observer speculated that Yeltsin might try to hold on
to power by causing the cancellation of elections. "This could be done," the
paper said, "either by declaring a state of emergency or a hasty union with
Belarus, so that Yeltsin, who cannot by law have more than two terms, could
become Federal President--as Slobodan Milosevic did in Yugoslavia when his term
as Serbian President finally ran out."

            
Newspapers in Britain, Ireland, and Colombia fronted remarkably similar
photographs of impassioned gatherings this weekend. The European shots were
taken in Omagh, Northern Ireland, where thousands marked the one-year
anniversary of the bomb that killed 29 and injured more than 200; the Colombian
crowds protested the assassination of humorist and journalist Jaime Garzón,
probably by right-wing paramilitarists.

            
Regarding Omagh, Britain's Sunday People said that last year's bombing by the splinter
group Real IRA could easily have derailed the peace process, but "the desire
for peace was too strong for one breakaway IRA group to torpedo it. All sides
now owe it to the Omagh victims to make sure that, by next August, they are
signed up to a fair and lasting peace." The Sunday Telegraph took a less
positive view, saying, "Strip away all the talk about peace and progress and
look at what has actually happened in Northern Ireland since the Good Friday
deal. The brutal reality is that the only concrete changes are the weakening of
the forces of law and order and the simultaneous strengthening of the
paramilitaries whose ranks are now swollen by a number of former
prisoners."

            In
Colombia, El
Tiempo said Garzón was killed because of his attempts to bring an end
to the political fighting in Colombia, especially his negotiations with leftist
groups, and also because of his efforts to secure the release of many kidnap
victims. An article in the Guardian of London Saturday said that "Colombians have long
ago become desensitised to violence. Apathy is deeply ingrained and it is
unlikely things will change, despite the widespread repugnance and anger shown
by most of the country's citizens," but an editorial in El Tiempo
suggested otherwise. Echoing the cries of Colombians who lined Garzón's funeral
parade, the paper said, "NO MORE. NO MORE. NO MORE. ... Let the government,
FARC, ELN [the country's two largest leftist rebel groups], the paramilitaries,
and the extreme right end their deafness and understand that we are not
afraid."

            The
British papers took a field trip to the United States for the straw poll and
came back with stories that made Iowa seem more like a distant planet than a
Midwestern state. The Independent on Sunday puzzlingly described Des Moines as "a cross between 1930s Berlin and
Calcutta," and speaking of the poll's disproportionate influence on the U.S.
electoral process said, "It is as if the population of a Lincolnshire village
were pivotal in deciding the British government."

            A
leader in the Times said that even if media inquiries into Republican
front-runner Gov. George W. Bush's private life were to "uncover damaging
details" it might not put him out of the running, since " 'character issues'
have less power than they did to wreck candidates. The Clinton era has
rewritten the rulebook. Unless Mr Bush has committed some major sin very
recently, he is likely to survive any new revelations." The paper added that
Sen. John McCain of Arizona may have helped his chances by staying out of the
straw poll: "He has thus placed himself to emerge later as a new voice that
could win over voters who found beauty in none of those parading their
credentials at Ames, Iowa."

            If
electoral politics are indeed a beauty contest, and if a history of sinning is
no longer an impediment to electability, perhaps Warren Beatty could
become president. A story in Friday's Independent put a positive spin on
his possible run. Despite his lack of electoral experience, the paper said
Beatty had "several key qualifications": "He fosters instant name recognition.
He is good-looking. He is smart, charismatic and a good talker. True, he has an
infamous past as a skirt-chaser, but unlike Bill Clinton, with his taste in
big-haired trailer-park mistresses, he can honestly say he has slept with some
of the most beautiful women in the world."

         
      
   
