
   
   
      
         
            Turkey on a Roll

            The
Turkish earthquake continues to lead world newspapers, though the focus has now
shifted to the inadequacy of rescue efforts, the difficult conditions for
survivors, and the apportionment of blame.

            
Toronto's Globe and
Mail accused the Turkish government, which spends billions on
armaments, of not having "the forethought to stockpile the heavy equipment
needed to dig people out at quake sites." Similarly, the Independent of London
contrasted the armed forces' success in battling the
Kurdish separatists of Abdullah Ocalan's Kurdish Workers' Party with its
failure to help quake victims: "It turned out that while they could assault the
PKK with US attack helicopters, they could not even set up soup kitchens for
Turkish civilians 24 hours after the earthquake."

            A
leader in Britain's Observer took an unusual position, claiming that the carelessly erected buildings of the
1980s, which have been blamed for the quake's massive death toll, represent
Turkey's "attempt to escape from stagnation and backwardness by letting private
enterprise rip." During this building boom, "Many people got rich quick, many
corruptly. But Turkey had taken a great, stumbling stride towards 'modernity,'
towards the unprotected free-market economy which the European Union enforces
on nations hoping to join it." The paper defended the "fast-buck entrepreneurs"
as "the people who carry within them the potential to bring about real changes
for the better after this catastrophe." The leader concluded, "It's hard not to
conclude that Turkey needs an old-fashioned, democratic, middle-class
revolution, in which these new social forces would take the political power to
which they are entitled. Only they can complete the transformation of Turkey
into a law-bound, stable and open democracy of the European family. And the
earthquake of 1999 would be remembered as a beginning, not only as a
tragedy."

            Hong
Kong's South China Morning
Post praised the response of emergency services staff to the
crash landing of a China Airlines jet at the city's Chek Lap Kok Airport
Sunday. Although two passengers were killed and at least 200 injured in the
incident, the paper said that the prompt response undoubtedly saved lives. But
the same paper reported a contradictory sentiment from one passenger, a
former New York policeman: "I heard rescue teams talking on walkie-talkies
directing people to come to help. It sounded like they were not familiar with
the airport." According to the paper, more than 230 people have been killed in
accidents involving this model of aircraft--the McDonnell Douglas MD-11--in the
past year. In recent weeks the SCMP has warned about wind shear at the
airport, which opened last July.

            In
South Africa, the African National Congress-led government's hard-line stance
on pay raises has brought about its first showdown with public sector unions. A
one-day general strike has been called for Tuesday, Aug. 24, with the
participation of unions for nurses, courts and prison staff, police, and
teachers. Essential service providers who are forbidden to strike are expected
to come down with "white flu" on Tuesday. The government has offered a 6
percent wage raise for nonteachers and 6.5 percent for educators, while the
unions demand a 7.3 percent increase and more involvement in the budgetary
process. According to the Johannesburg Star , the government's refusal to negotiate "has
united unions across the ideological and race spectrum for the first time since
the 1980s."

            Citing
a group of U.S. lawmakers visiting East Timor, the Sydney Morning Herald
reported that there is strong evidence that the Indonesian
military has "worked with militia groups to sabotage" the upcoming vote for
autonomy there. Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, told reporters that he will call on
President Clinton to "support the sending of armed UN peacekeeping troops to
the former Portuguese territory," even though the Indonesian government has
refused to allow international peacekeepers into East Timor for the ballot. In
the Straits
Times of Singapore, Sen. Jack Reed, D-R.I., said the United States
should tie its Indonesian aid to the referendum. He told the paper, "[I]f the
election is full of intimidation and it is not fair and there is retribution
after the election, then I think we will have to re-evaluate our assistance to
Indonesia in a very negative way."

            Britain's Daily
Telegraph
reported Monday that thousands of racing pigeons sent out
in the week of the recent solar eclipse have gone missing. Owners believe the
birds were confused by the blackout. One pigeon fancier told the paper, "We
don't know for sure whether the eclipse has scrambled the birds' brains. But
whenever the sun and moon are in close proximity we have a very bad race with
lots of birds going missing." According to the Telegraph , this is the
worst disaster to befall the pigeon world since 80,000 British homing pigeons
were killed by torrential rain over the English Channel in June 1997.

         
      
   
