
   
   
      
         
            The Diced Islands

            
Britain's Independent on Sunday reports that pro-Indonesian militiamen fleeing from the
multinational peacekeeping forces in East Timor are setting up guerrilla bases
in Indonesia's sympathetic West Timor. "They have supplies, weapons, sympathy
and a population of supporters which they have moved into exile with them,"
says the paper. "The already tiny country will be, in effect, partitioned, with
the peacekeepers unable to secure the western areas of East Timor." The head of
Indonesian forces on Timor warned the international forces not to pursue
militiamen into West Timor. He told the Jakarta Post , "The Indonesian Army will not stand
still if our territory's borderlines are breached." (For a Timor primer, click
).

            On the
eve of Monday's withdrawal of Indonesian troops from East Timor, the
Straits
Times of Singapore reported that in their last days on the island,
Indonesian soldiers were seen selling what appeared to be either looted goods
or redirected foreign aid at "exorbitant prices" to "needy East Timorese." The
paper said, "Whatever the source, it was clear that food was being sold to the
highest bidder--and those with the right credentials. East Timorese who sided
with pro-independence militias were either ignored or sold goods at sky-high
prices."

            Less
than a week after the murder in Dili of a Dutch journalist, British member of
Parliament and former BBC war correspondent Martin Bell called on the press to
voluntarily reduce their numbers in East Timor. In a column in the
Independent on Sunday , he said, "The peacekeepers have better things to
do with their limited resources" than to protect journalists. He also claimed
that the number of news-gatherers in areas of conflict has become
"unmanageable. News events get distorted under the weight of them. They bring
an unacceptable increase in the risk of casualties from land mines, sniper fire
and brigandage."

            Many
papers around the world contrasted China's ambiguous response to last week's
earthquake in Taiwan with Greece's no-strings-attached aid to rival Turkey
after that nation's August temblor. The South China Morning Post of Hong Kong reported that Taiwanese officials accused China of slowing
international rescue efforts by refusing permission to fly through mainland
airspace. A Russian mission, for example, was forced to avoid China and to take
an air route via Siberia, causing a 12-hour delay. The paper also said that
Beijing has been asserting its sovereignty claim by "thanking foreign donors
for offering help to 'our country's Taiwan area.' " Another attack on China's
humanitarian response came in the Jerusalem Post , which claimed that when Taiwan told China
that it needed cash donations rather than rescue assistance, the mainland's Red
Cross offered a mere $100,000 in cash and $60,000 in relief goods: "small
indeed, when compared with the $50 million Taiwan has given to help
flood-victims in China in recent years."

            The
Russian air force bombed the Chechen city of Grozny over the weekend in what
the International Herald
Tribune described as an attempt to "destroy Islamic militants
based in Chechnya." The militants have twice invaded the neighboring Russian
region of Dagestan in the last month and are thought to be responsible for the
apartment bombings that have killed 300 people in Moscow and other Russian
cities. The Russian daily Kommersant said that the air raids show that
"Russia will no longer capitulate to Chechnya but will only speak in the
language of force" and concluded the raids have rendered the Chechen leadership
"less bellicose."

            An
op-ed in the St. Petersburg Times by a Russian academic proposed a bold
solution to the Russian-Chechen conflict: Grant the territory independence.
Calling the Chechnya uprising an "act of banditism" and a "civil war," Boris
Kagarlitsky said that independence for Chechnya would clarify the situation and
make it much easier to resolve. "If we do declare Chechnya independent, we can
create a real border between Chechnya and Russia, ... that we can give
international status. Such a border would be easy to fortify and control. It
would also be easy to close. ... Likewise, our government would have to
guarantee full equality and respect for the civil rights of Chechens who choose
Russia as their place of residence. Today, Chechens in Russia don't have any
clear status. Against such a background, there is an anti-Caucasian hysteria,
which holds any person from that region responsible for the actions of soldiers
in the hills of Dagestan. Racist paranoia doesn't distinguish between rebel
fighters and salespeople in the marketplaces."

            Microsoft co-founder Paul
Allen's forthcoming Experience Music Project in Seattle could be in trouble if its
British equivalent is anything to go by. The National Centre for Popular Music
opened in Sheffield in March but is already threatened with closure after
attracting fewer than half the visitors it expected. The Sunday Times
said the museum was seen as "vital in helping the city to shake off its Full
Monty image of dying industry and unemployment." However, the museum is
said to be too expensive and has been attacked for playing down the "sex and
drugs" aspects of rock. "It is all a bit innocent," Jenny Frankel told the
Times . "You can get round it in about an hour, and you expect a bit more
than that for £7.95 [$12.50]."

         
      
   
