
   
   
      
         
            Judd in Jeopardy

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Jakob
               
               
                  the Liar
                (Sony Pictures
Entertainment). As expected, no one has much positive to say about Robin
Williams' Holocaust drama, but the bad reviews are surprisingly mild. Yes, it's
"awkwardly executed and tedious," but Williams "does some of his best and most
honest work here"(Jack Mathews, the New York Daily News ) as a man who
brings hope to his Jewish ghetto by pretending to have good news from a hidden
radio. Many critics note that Williams' performance is remarkably restrained
and, if nothing else, acknowledge his good intentions: "This is the kind of
bogus production only completely sincere but misguided individuals can come up
with" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). (Click here to see clips from the film.)

            

               
                  Double
               
               
                  Jeopardy
                (Paramount Pictures).
Plot holes abound in this Fugitive knockoff about a woman (Ashley Judd)
framed by her husband for his (faked) murder. Once she gets out of prison, she
can theoretically murder him with impunity, because the Constitution protects
her from being tried twice for the same crime. Critics are harsh on the film's
premise and execution, but a few find bright spots in Judd's beauty and Tommy
Lee Jones' gritty turn as her parole officer. The stars make this "medium-grade
pulp" (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall Street Journal ) worth watching.
(Visit the Ashley Judd Shrine.)

            

               
                  Mumford
                (Buena Vista Pictures). This "slight, amusing
doodle" (Turan, the Los Angeles Times ) directed by Lawrence Kasdan is a
"Frank Capra-style social fable for the '90s" (Stephen Holden, the New York
Times ). The story follows a young psychologist of questionable credentials
who moves into a small town and begins helping out the local residents. Some
reviewers call it quietly affecting, others could barely keep their eyes open.
Many are dismayed at Kasdan's inability to match his acclaimed early efforts
such as Body Heat , The Big Chill , and The Accidental
Tourist . (Visit the official site to see stills and clips from the
film.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Hitler's
                
               
                  Pope: The Secret History of Pius
XII , by John Cornwell (Viking). Tempers flare over the validity of
British journalist Cornwell's claim that Pope Pius XII failed to speak out
against Nazi genocide because he was an anti-Semite. Some critics find the
entire book flawed: "a classic example of what happens when an ill-equipped
journalist assumes the airs of sober scholarship. ... Errors of fact and
ignorance of context appear on almost every page. ... This is bogus
scholarship, filled with nonexistent secrets, aimed to shock" (Kenneth L.
Woodward, Newsweek ). Others take his claims to heart: "By combining the
painstaking research of other scholars with his own new documentation,"
Cornwell "makes a case ... that is very hard to refute" (V.R. Berghahn, the
New York Times Book Review ). And Richard Cohen writes in the
Washington Post that "nothing I've read suggests he's concocted
anything." (Click here to read a point-by-point refutation of this book by Catholic
historian Peter Gumpel.)

            

               
                  An
               
               
                  Affair of State : The Investigation,
Impeachment, and Trial of President Clinton
               , by Richard A. Posner
(Harvard University Press). Posner, the chief judge of the Seventh Circuit
Court of Appeals, is generally hailed for his clearheaded analysis of the legal
aspects of the Lewinsky scandal. It is "by far the most legally sophisticated
account of the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal" and "brings scholarly rigor to a saga
so far dominated by journalistic accounts" ( Publishers Weekly ). In the
New York Times Book Review , Andrew Sullivan calls Posner's pragmatism
the perfect antidote to the hysteria that surrounded the scandal. But the
Weekly Standard 's David Tell fumes, calling the book "appalling. ...
Posner feels free to offer conclusions of fact that the public record either
cannot sustain or actually refutes." (Click here to read the first chapter.)

            

               Death
            

            
               George

               C. Scott (1927-1999). The actor died Sept. 22 after a long career packed
full of awards, many of which he refused to accept. Most notably, in 1971 he
turned down the Best Actor Oscar for his title role in Patton , calling
the Academy Awards "a two-hour meat parade." His roles in movies such as The
Hustler and Dr. Strangelove and on the stage, including a
performance as Richard III, earned him recognition as "an actor of
extraordinary range and daring" with an "almost volcanic intensity" (Mel
Gussow, the New York Times ). (This site includes a filmography, stills, and an interview with
Scott.)

         
      
   
