
   
   
      
         
            A Total Eclipse of the News

            In the
absence of a unifying international story, most of the weekend's papers led on
domestic stories, with one notable exception: The European media devoted
gallons of ink to the Aug. 11 total eclipse of the sun, which should be visible
Wednesday from northern Europe to the Bay of Bengal. The Irish Times observed
that "[e]clipses used to be about soothsaying and portents of disaster. Now
they are about tourism and commerce." Indeed much of the coverage revolved
around anticipated traffic jams, tourist rip-offs, entrepreneurs' complaints that there are
fewer eclipse-tourists than they planned for, weather worries, and gloomy predictions of ill-prepared
spectators permanently damaging
their vision. (For comprehensive eclipse packages, see these Web sites from
England's Guardian , France's Le
Monde , and Spain's El
Mundo . The Irish Times will provide a live Web broadcast of the
eclipse from 1 a.m. to 3:30 a.m. PT Wednesday here.)

            In a
story of economic eclipse, Saturday's International Herald Tribune fronted a report from Kuala Lumpur about the Malaysian government's forced
mergers in the financial sector. The moves will consolidate the nation's
current roster of 21 commercial banks, 25 finance companies, and 12 merchant
banks into six institutions by the end of next month, with the government
forming the new alliances rather than allowing market forces to bring them
about. ''If you're suddenly told, 'Here's the person you're going to
marry'--and all this irrespective of cultural differences and without knowledge
of your partner's business practices--it's a bit of a shock,'' a top official
banker told the paper. Although the new structure has not yet been revealed,
the IHT reported that "the central bank has already said that four of
the banks would be controlled by Malays, who make up slightly more than half of
the population, and two by Chinese. Ethnic Chinese make up about a third of the
population but control a disproportionately higher percentage of the country's
wealth." There is no word yet on how current shareholders will be compensated
for their equity.

            The
saga of former Chilean President Gen. Augusto Pinochet, who has been under
house arrest in London since October 1998 when a Spanish judge requested his
extradition to face charges there, took still more turns this weekend when the
Spanish attorney general called on Britain to release Pinochet because the
procedure has taken so long that it is no longer legal. Many Spaniards,
including the judge who originally demanded Pinochet's extradition, protested
the move. Swiss, French, and Belgian authorities have also asked that Pinochet
be extradited to their jurisdictions, so it is possible that if the Spanish
request is withdrawn, the proceedings will continue with one of those countries
as the petitioner. Also, the conservative Sunday Telegraph of London
reported, it is possible that Pinochet could face trial in Britain if Spain
withdraws its request. In Spain, El País reported that Chile has tried to persuade the United States to
find an "extrajudicial" solution to the Pinochet problem, perhaps referring the
matter to adjudication. A surprising editorial Monday in the conservative Spanish daily ABC came out against such a
solution. "It isn't a question of political ideology or of bilateral relations
with a friendly country. It's a question of what is or isn't right. Spain is a
friend of Chile and this matter ... is having a negative effect on bilateral
relations. But if our country is a friend of Chile, it is an even better friend
of justice," said the paper.

            The
alarming lead story in Sunday's Observer
claimed that Britain's BSE (mad cow disease) epidemic "may have been caused by
a scientific experiment that went wrong. The blunder has cost the country £4bn
[$6.4 billion], claimed the lives of 43 people, and triggered fears that the
death toll could eventually reach several million." According to the story,
"Experts believe that hormones, taken from the brains of slaughterhouse
carcasses, were injected into cows in a bid to create a new breed of
super-cattle. But the experiment ... backfired. The hormones, extracted from
pituitary glands, were transmitted in an agent that spread mad cow disease and
eventually infected humans as new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease." The
report received little attention in the other serious British papers.

            Both the Sydney Morning Herald and the
Age of
Melbourne gave prominent coverage Monday to aboriginal leaders' plans to use
the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games to bring global attention to the plight of
indigenous Australians. According to the Age 's story, "an Aboriginal 'embassy' will be set up in Sydney for the
duration of the Olympics to lobby visiting VIPs and media." This comes after
suggestions of an indigenous boycott of the games were rejected, in part
because several aboriginal athletes, such as track star Cathy Freeman, are
medal contenders, and after the Olympic organizing committee "did a back flip"
and decided to fly the indigenous flag at official venues. In an editorial, the Herald predicted that some Australians will
be angered by the "strategy of shaming ... Australian governments and
institutions in the eyes of the world for their mistreatment and neglect of
Aborigines" because "[t]hey will see it as calculated to tarnish the national
image at a time when all other efforts are directed towards polishing it and
showing Australia at its best." But, the paper claimed, "[s]uch anger is not
only futile but misdirected." The Herald placed hope in the
acknowledgment by some native leaders "that the presentation of Aboriginal
people as victims, though useful to win some political arguments, is ultimately
disempowering for Aborigines themselves. If international scrutiny shames white
Australia into necessary reappraisal of flawed policies, well and good. If it
also sharpens Aboriginal leaders' understanding of the need for greater efforts
on their part, even better."

         
      
   
