
   
   
      
         
             Elephants in Pinstripes 

            The kids page on George W. Bush's campaign Web site
explains that "Running for president is a lot like playing baseball. ... There
are two divisions in professional baseball--the American League and the
National League. In politics there are two large parties, the Republicans and
the Democrats." The Ames, Iowa, straw poll, the site advises, is like
baseball's regular season, the primaries are the playoffs, and the general
election is the World Series. (The Federal Election Commission, apparently, is
the umpire.) The implicit message of all this seems to be that because Dubya
was president of baseball's Texas Rangers, he certainly can be president of the
United States.

            If politics is like baseball, baseball can be a lot
like politics. This week's World Series, for example, is a political contest:
The Bronx Bombers are, well, the Yankees--the original Republicans. This begins
at the top with owner George Steinbrenner, who is the very model of the
Republican businessman. Steinbrenner recoils at the socialistic demands of the
poorer, small-market teams of Major League Baseball that want rich teams such
as the Yankees to give them a cut of their revenue. Steinbrenner loathes this
redistribution of wealth: He considers it a welfare program that rewards bad
teams for not trying and robs successful teams of their hard-earned riches.
Like all good Republicans, Steinbrenner's Yanks buck regulation: When other
owners tried to stop Steinbrenner from signing a separate endorsement deal with
Adidas, arguing it would undercut the entire league's endorsement plan, he told
them to get lost. It is no accident that the Yanks wear pinstripes. The
business of the Yankees is business. (Steinbrenner's Republicanism runs deep:
He funneled illegal campaign contributions to Richard Nixon in the early '70s,
winning himself a two-year suspension from baseball in the process.)

            Steinbrenner may be a
righty, detesting all who might intervene in his business, but he's happy to
bat lefty when it comes to government aid: He has eagerly petitioned New York
City to spend $500 million or more to build him a new stadium.

            The Braves, by contrast, are Dixiecrats. The Yankees' most
famous fan is New York City's Republican Mayor Rudy Giuliani; Atlanta's No. 1
fan is left-wing icon Jane Fonda, owner Ted Turner's wife. Steinbrenner's
charitable contributions go to orchestras; Turner is giving $1 billion to the
United Nations. (The Braves' Web site devotes almost as much space to the team's
community service projects--"Straight A" Program, the Atlanta Braves
Foundation, Opportunity Through Baseball, Neighborhood Revitalization Program,
Weekend of Caring, etc.--as it does to triumphs on the diamond.) Steinbrenner
spent the last years of the Cold War bidding on Navy contracts for his (now
defunct) shipyard. Turner spent those years organizing the Goodwill Games, his
squishy plea for Soviet-American friendship.

            The Braves are democratic
in their recruiting efforts. They reintroduced the "open tryout" to baseball,
an audition where any schlub has a chance to make the squad. They endorse an
open-door immigration policy. The Braves have eight foreign players on their
roster, compared to the Yankees' five. The Braves' foreign players hail from
the Dominican Republic and Venezuela. The Republican Yankees, by contrast, have
Cuban refugee Orlando "El Duque" Hernandez, the anti-communist, anti-Castro
pitcher, and Hideki Irabu, who comes from wealthy, capitalist Japan.

            The GOP Yankees, like all good Republicans, favor an
extremely strong defense: They are among the best fielding teams in the majors.
The Braves, who represent former Sen. Sam Nunn's state, are equally strong on
defense.

            The teams mimic their
parties' greed. The Yankees, like the GOP, brazenly take enormous
"contributions" wherever they can be found (fans, cable TV operators, Adidas,
etc.). The Yankees pull in close to $200 million a year, more than any team,
and own baseball's highest payroll, $87 million in 1999. Like the GOP, they
exhibit no shyness about raising and spending record amounts of cash to ensure
victory. Like the Democrats, the Braves are as rapacious as their rivals, but
subtler. The Braves collect tens of millions from their nationally broadcast
games and strong ticket sales, and they pay lavishly for players. They raise
and spend more than all but a handful of teams. As the Democratic Party claims
to speak for the little guy while dunning Fortune 500 companies, so the Braves
hold themselves out as a modest, small-market underdog.

            The Braves and Yankees resemble the Democrats and
Republicans in one more important way: In this World Series, as in most
American elections, too little separates the contestants. Elections match
corporatized, moneyed, and ideologically similar parties: The World Series
matches corporatized, moneyed, and athletically similar teams. Both the Yankees
and the Braves play highly competent, professional baseball. They rely on
careful teamwork and role-playing, eschewing superstars and flash. They are
impossible to dislike. (Here, again, the Yankees mirror the Republican Party.
Yankee-haters used to despise Bombers such as Babe Ruth, Mickey Mantle, and
Reggie Jackson, just as the American left abominated hard-core conservatives
such as Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan. Gradually, that conservatism has
been accepted and embraced by America. So too have the Yankees, who are no
longer the villains of the Bronx. Today's Yankees have assuaged the
Yankeephobes with their skill and modesty.)

            This similarity of style and talent between the
Yankees and the Braves flattens the World Series as it flattens politics. The
regular season and playoffs have eliminated more quixotic teams: The Donald
Trump-like Baltimore Orioles, willing to spend endless millions to prove their
incompetence; the Alan Keyesian Chicago Cubs, hopeless but mesmerizing; the
Reform Partyesque Boston Red Sox, erratic, crazy, but with just enough
brilliance to be dangerous. We are left with the wealthy, talented, mainstream,
likable achievers: George W. Yankee and Albert Brave.

         
      
   
