
   
   
      
         
            The Greatest American Zeroes

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Mystery Men
                (Universal Pictures). The critics get a
few chuckles out of this comic book-based tale of B-team superheroes (the
Shoveler, Mr. Furious, the Bowler), but nobody guffaws outright. The most
enthusiastic: It "triumphs by being its smart, shambling self, though it takes
a while to get there" (Richard Corliss, Time ). Most critics say the
tasty nuggets of fun are too few and far between: It "has moments of brilliance
waving their arms to attract attention in a sea of dreck" (Roger Ebert, the
Chicago Sun-Times ). (To check out the comic book the film was based on
and to watch the trailer, visit the official site.)

            

               
                  The Thomas Crown Affair
                (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer). This
"slick, gaudily suave guilty pleasure of a movie" (David Ansen,
Newsweek ) gets mainly good reviews. In its favor: 1) It's the first
movie in a long time to have a sexy and mature female lead, the 45-year-old
Rene Russo. 2) It's the first decent movie of the summer not aimed at teens, a
"highly pleasurable popcorn movie for adults" (Susan Wloszczyna, USA
Today ). 3) Its extravagance is fun (the story centers on a billionaire who
steals art for kicks). Not all critics are entranced by this remake of the 1968
Steve McQueen-Faye Dunaway film. Joe Morgenstern of the Wall Street
Journal writes that Russo and co-star Pierce Brosnan's sex scenes "spark so
little heat I found myself wondering if they'd give a damn for one another in a
down market." The New York Times ' Janet Maslin concurs, calling the
romance "papier-mache." Side note: Ebert uses the bizarre sexual euphemism
"rumpy-pumpy" for the sixth time in eight months in his negative review in the
Chicago Sun-Times . (Click here to watch the trailer.)

            

               
                  Dick
                (Sony Pictures Entertainment). Everybody loves
Dick , "a gaily funny, shrewdly inventive satire" (Lisa Schwarzbaum,
Entertainment Weekly ) of the Watergate scandal told from the point of
view of two teen-age girls. Much of the cast is plucked from TV comedy shows
such as Kids in the Hall and Saturday Night Live , so the humor
tends toward the broad and low. 
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein is
enchanted not just by the humor but also by the straight history: "Under its
slapstick shenanigans, this modest movie offers a convincing vision of Nixon
White House operations as a sordid buffoon show undone by a couple of painfully
earnest innocents." A handful of critics complain that the "nincompoopery is
difficult to sustain over the course of an hour and a half" (Michael
O'Sullivan, the Washington Post ). (Click to read the rest of Edelstein's
review.)

            

               
                  Sixth Sense
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Excellent notices
all around for this "psychological thriller that actually thrills" about a "sad
little hamster of a boy" (Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ) who sees
visions of dead people and the psychologist (Bruce Willis cast against type)
determined to help him. It is "virtually guaranteed to rattle the most jaded of
cages" (John Anderson, the Los Angeles Times ). One cage is left
unrattled, though: Stephen Holden of the New York Times delivers an
uncharacteristically nasty write-up, calling it "gaggingly mawkish supernatural
kitsch" that is "a garish hybrid of Simon Birch and What Dreams May
Come ." (Click here to visit the official site.)

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  The Autobiography of Joseph Stalin
               , by Richard Lourie
(Counterpoint Press). Critics find this novel, told from the point of view of
Russia's most famous and ruthless dictator, a fascinating, chilling, and
surprisingly humor-filled work: Lourie's "flat, ruthless prose ... is also
sometimes ruthlessly funny" (Lance Morrow, Time ). Some wonder at the
author's desire to explore the mind of a man who murdered so many, but most are
impressed with his results. One fault, though, is that "this supposed
autobiography is missing what often makes an autobiography great: the
memoirist's obvious self-deception"(Ken Kalfus, the New York Times Book
Review ). (Click here to read the first chapter.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Remedy
               , by Basement Jaxx (Astralwerks). Reviewers get
giddy over this British electronica duo's latest: "more fun than Fatboy Slim,
more creative than the Chemical Brothers ... takes house music to the next
level. Make that the level after next" (Rob Brunner, Entertainment
Weekly ). It's blessed with "post-cool happiness" (James Hunter, the
Village Voice ), which makes it "an antidote for ennui, using hedonistic,
ass-wiggling enthusiasm and 'ain't-no-mountain-high-enough' lyrical
proclamations" (M. Tye Comer, CMJ ). (Click here to buy the CD and to listen to audio samples from the
album.)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Book
            

            
               
                  Broke Heart
Blues
               ,by Joyce Carol Oates (Dutton). Good reviews for Oates'
29 th novel, which follows the way a small town remembers its
teen-age hero, John Reddy Heart. It "dramatizes how wanting and memory compete"
and explores how "lonely, unhappy people mythologize their adolescence" (D.T.
Max, the New York Times Book Review ). Many critics marvel at Oates'
prolific output: "It's a wonder she hasn't run out of that all-too-scarce
literary fuel, imagination. But she hasn't" (Linda Wolfe, the Washington
Post ).

         
      
   
