
   
   
      
         
            French Cows Eat <EM>Merde</EM> and Die

            
Biological horrors dominated the British press Monday. The main subject was the
food war with France, which has refused to import British beef in defiance of a
European Union decision that it is now safe and doesn't carry mad cow disease.
British anger with France was compounded over the weekend by the revelation
that French cows are partly fed on processed human excrement. The Sunday Times of
London reported that British Prime Minister Tony Blair is "furious" with
Agriculture Minister Nick Brown for his "personal decision" to boycott French
food. Blair is apparently worried this could precipitate a "full-scale trade
war."

            
According to the front page of Le Figaro of Paris Monday, Brits have already declared a "war
of the supermarkets" against France. This referred to a decision by some
British supermarket chains to ban French produce. Le Figaro , in a
front-page editorial, called for a compromise. It admitted that France's
flouting of EU rules is not "good for our image," and it said it would be in
the interests of neither country to embark on a new Hundred Years' War.

            The
Sunday Times , in an editorial titled "Down With the Baguette," pointed
out--as Le Figaro did--that the balance of Anglo-French trade in
foodstuffs is vastly in France's favor. Rejecting calls for an official British
ban on French food imports, the paper nevertheless urged consumers to buy
British. "We are well placed to win a trade war with the French if they do not
see sense," it said. "If we stop eating French apples, the pips will soon start
to squeak on the other side of the Channel." In an unusually outspoken editorial
Monday, the Financial
Times of London described the French practice of "mixing sewage into
animal feed, in defiance of European law," as disgusting--"[t]hat is the only
word for it." But the FT was also against bans on foreign food imports,
including American genetically modified foods. "[L]et the consumer decide," was
its conclusion. The Times of London's lead front-page story Monday said
that advice of independent British scientists to ban French meat had been
rejected by the government.

            The
main story in the Independent of London
Monday said top American and British law firms are launching a series of
class-action suits next month to demand "hundreds of millions of dollars" in
damages from the principal companies involved in the production of GM seed
crops. Targets of the actions on behalf of farmers in the United States,
Europe, Central America, and India are likely to include Monsanto, DuPont,
AstraZeneca, Novartis, and AgrEvo, the paper said. The actions would allege
"anti-competitive behaviour" in the seed market, "questionable corporate
behaviour," and abuse of dominant positions in the marketplace. The
Independent said in an editorial, "This legal action may be the best way
to force the food companies to do what they should have done from the start:
prove that their innovations are in the public interest."

            The
Daily
Telegraph of London led its front page Monday with the news that
British transplant patients who receive pigs' hearts or lungs will have to sign
a pledge never to have children. They will also have to agree to have their
current and future sexual partners registered and monitored by the medical
authorities, to "use barrier contraceptives consistently and for life," and
never to give blood. Because of a shortage of human organs, the government has
authorized research into the use of pigs for transplants, and Britain already
has a herd of "humanized" pigs at the ready. But the authorities plan to
introduce the stringent safeguards to ensure that pig viruses do not spread to
humans, the paper said. So far, nobody has applied for a pig organ transplant
in Britain.

            The
Guardian
of London led on efforts by Celera Genomics, a U.S. biotechnology company, to
patent segments of the human genetic code before British-led moves are
implemented to prevent the "human blueprint" becoming the private property of a
few corporations. It said the company "stunned the scientific world" by
claiming to have decoded about one-third of the entire blueprint--the human
genome--in little more than a month. "The unravelling of the billions of coded
sequences in human DNA (the chemical base of all genes) is expected to
revolutionise medicine, and pave the way to genetically based cures," the paper
said. "It could also open up limitless opportunities to influence human
evolution by manipulating genetic codes."

            The
visit of Chinese President Jiang Zemin to France proceeded with a similar
amount of protest to that which he encountered in Britain--and with equally
strong police efforts to protect him from it. French newspapers reported Monday
that Jiang spent three hours at dinner discussing human rights issues with
French President Jacques Chirac, but Jiang told Le Figaro in an
interview Monday that "in every country human rights should be managed by its
own government in full independence" and that the Chinese government opposed
any foreign interference in its internal affairs. The president reiterated that
China would use force if necessary against the Taiwan "separatists" and against
"foreign forces which try to impede the reunification of China." Jiang
estimated that China will need "at least 100 years" to become a developed
country.

            The shock success of
right-winger Christoph Blocher in the Swiss parliamentary elections led many
European newspapers Monday, since it came only three weeks after the triumph in
neighboring Austria of Jörg Haider, the Freedom Party leader who has praised
Adolf Hitler and called SS soldiers "decent men of character." Blocher, whose
Democratic Union of the Center appeared set to win 23 percent of the vote
(Haider won 27 percent in Austria), making it the country's largest party,
refuses to be identified with Holocaust revisionists but is in other respects
typical of the far right--he is against immigration and the European Union. The
daily Tribune de
Genève called his victory "unpleasant," but said in an editorial that
he might be "contained" by a coalition government.

         
      
   
