
   
   
      
         
            No. 312: &quot;Ominous, Anomalous&quot;

            
               Hillary Clinton,
Chelsea Clinton, William Bennett, the president's staff, the American people,
God. Which does not belong? Why?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 311)--"Dutch Treatment":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        Tuesday, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands
reopens one of Amsterdam's most popular tourist attractions after extensive
renovations. What attraction?
                     
                  
               
            

            "Her
warm, welcoming bosoms."-- Richard Nikonovich-Kahn ( Matt Sullivan
and Tim Carvell had similar answers.)

            "Queen
Beatrix's Mystery Spot."-- Merrill Markoe (similarly, Bill
Scheft )

            "The
house Anne Frank lived in with 'Diversity,' 'Trench,' and 'Otto' during MTV's
first Real World ."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            "Pat
Buchanan's Wonderful World of It's None of Our Business."-- Chris
Kelly
            

            "Dutch
World, where all sorts of fictional characters created by Edmund Morris come
out to play with children of all ages!"-- t
               he other Steven
Davis
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-
               Up
            

            Sex, drugs, and hidden
Jews! That's what I remember about Woodstock. Or perhaps that's what News Quiz
participants remember about the Dutch. Here's what they've
forgotten--Rembrandt, van Gogh, Spinoza, hydraulic engineering, silver skates,
Boswell's education, (I was sure there'd be many a smartass remark about his
law school days), treat, courage, uncle, rub, elm disease, those damned Spanish
Hapsburgs, that crazy Protestant Reformation (the long hair, the beads,
the--oh, wait, Woodstock again), the seizure of Sumatra, the wars with England
and their possible connection to the death of Christopher Marlowe (who never
got to see Gwyneth Paltrow naked, but might have if only he and she had been at
Woodstock), and the nation's new maturity in 1952 when it took its place among
other great nations as a member of the European Coal and Steel Commission.

            
               Despite

               Everything I Believe This Is the Answer
            

            "The house in Amsterdam
which hid Jewish teen-ager Anne Frank during World War II officially unveiled
its new look Tuesday after 10 years of renovation," Reuters reports. "The snack
bar, the gift shop, the new roller coaster--the entire place is just
Annetastic!" they did not add. "Makes other Holocaust museums look like a lot
of boring Holocaust museums," also went unsaid.

            
               Some

               Highlights
            

            

               Black-and-white photos of the neighborhood in the early 1940s have been
affixed to the windows for a sense of going back in time.

               The Anne Frank Foundation has re-created the atmosphere of the office as it
was in the 1940s, including the smell of spices.

               A visitors' cafe* and a virtual tour through the house on computer have
been added.

               The house remained open throughout the renovations. There were 822,000
visitors last year.

            

            

               *
               Rainy 
               Day Fun
Draw your own menu for the Anne Frank House visitors' cafe. Is there a
children's menu? Can you include the phrases "all you can eat" and
"fajitas"?

            
               Al

               Cloutier's Auto-Translation Extra
            

            What I have done is translate the last News Quiz
from English to German and from German back to English using the Alta Vista translator.

            Below, Randy's Wrap
Up:

            

               The RANDY
AUFRAEUMARBEITEN

               Tim Carvell I explain to
you, what I do not understand--why professor Shoshanna Sofaer of the university
Baruch cranky sounds in such a way. (necessities few sabbatical?) Or why
congress (necessities designate delimitations? Of approximately 30 seconds?) It
corresponds to labels strongly for the normal people for attaching a group
complaint however more simply, so that enormous oil companies pump free oil of
the general country and at a profit, probably at NBC sells it (necessities--OH
-, where one begins? With sentimentally nonsense Tom Brokaw over world war II?
O.k.. There!) those large turbines refuel, in order to expose studios for
telecasting the halfpopular Kaldaunen on the general Airwaves at the
considerable profits, for the maintenance of the bored oil platform workers out
in any as soon as-excellent national park. (you need a good book memory
beginning with a series author appearance, possibly with Susan Faludi? It is
full from understanding. And slogans) know you, whom would understand? Karl
Marx. Quite obviously to it. But like a large genius Marx its heading more than
350 Pound even weighed and with a special pig iron field to be fastened had,
evenly above he cannot not to understand, why love is a crime, the assortment
of the crime spells out in a provisional order of any judge (NECESSITIES ITS
GODDAMNED HEADING CHECKING!!!!) who OH is, thus ready for use, to ignore
everything a person it says and believes you simply that everything, which says
any other person even if it a liar is! Hypothetically speaking. Answer me this
professor Shoshanna Sofaer of the university Baruch! Where is your whole
government advice now?

            

            
               Our

               Corporate Philosophers Extra
            

            Three hundred corporate
titans are gathered in Shanghai for the Fortune Global Forum. Some big ideas
from these exemplars of capitalism:

            On Altruism

            "When you go into a
market like China, you recognize talented artists and give them an opportunity
for expression. That's an important public role. Companies like ours have a
role to play in creating world harmony."-- Gerald M. Levin , chairman of
Time Warner, said this with a straight face.

            On the Role of the
Press

            "Journalistic integrity
must prevail in the final analysis, but that doesn't meant that journalistic
integrity should be exercised in a way that is unnecessarily offensive to the
countries in which you operate."-- Sumner Redstone , chairman of Viacom,
said this and did not die of shame.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Legal drugs.

         
      
   
