
   
   
      
         
            2000 Bottles of Beer on the Wall

            We tried to hold off--honest we did. As a service
to civic sanity, 
                  Slate
                earnestly intended to delay launching our
heavy election-year political coverage until November 1999. That would be a
full year before the election, which ought to be enough time for citizens to
read 10-to-20 books on current issues, study the candidates' platforms, listen
to half a dozen debates, and make the kind of thoughtful decision our Founding
Fathers intended. Certainly no citizen outside the media-political complex has
been complaining that a year of presidential politics is not enough.

            But we give in. The
presidential campaign is going full-throttle and the nomination races, at
least, might well be over by a year before the actual election. Others in the
media are covering the election as if it were a mere, say, 11 months away. So
we will too, starting this week. (And if others in the media went and jumped
off a cliff, would we do it too? Yes, probably.) Although blame for this
development is ordinarily pinned on states like California, greedy for
attention, that have front-end-loaded the primary system, the media themselves
are also to blame, along with political consultants, pollsters, and so on, all
of whom have a vested interest in the "permanent campaign" (a concept used in a
book title, if not actually invented, by Sidney Blumenthal, but not necessarily
invalid for that reason alone). Thanks to the election industry, politics are
now available year-round, like strawberries. And if you remember politics
tasting sweeter before it got industrialized, that's probably just your
imagination.

            Our chief political correspondent, Jacob Weisberg, has
spent the past year writing cultural criticism under the rubric "The Browser."
He was hoping to spend a few more months gazing at paintings and reading novels
before lowering his sights, but now he has loyally abandoned art for life.
Jacob is already filing political analysis and reportage several times a week
under the rubric "Ballot Box" (the latest addition to our collection of Boxes).
If you missed his amusing dispatches from the Iowa Straw Poll this past
weekend, it's .

            Early next week, we'll be launching "Office 2000"
(catchy, don'cha think?), our official 
                  Slate
                election page. Among
its offerings will be:

            

               Links and an opinionated guide to the day's best political stories on the
Web.

               Links and shameless touting for all 
                     Slate
                  's current political
stories (whether they're the best or not).

               A daily joke, crafted by the finest humor artisans from the freshest
material available.

               Mark Alan Stamaty's weekly animated cartoon.

               Our daily chart of candidate prices in the Iowa Electronic Market, graphed
against 
                     Slate
                  's own Pundits Index. Not to be confused with last
weekend's bogus straw poll, the Iowa Market (a product of the University of
Iowa business school) trades "stock" in candidates. It's slightly complicated
(click here
for an explanation), but the point is to see if the invisible hand of
capitalism can beat the gasbags at predicting election results.

               Links galore to the campaign Web sites, media, and other useful stuff for
politics junkies.

            

            Shortly after Labor Day,
we'll be launching a new column, "Net Election," published by

                  Slate
                in conjunction with the Industry Standard , "the
newsmagazine of the Internet economy." 
                  Slate
                will supply a weekly
political analysis of the election as it's playing out on the Web, and our
friends at the Industry Standard will supply a weekly business
analysis--who's buying ads on what sites, and so on. By common consent, 2000
will be the Internet's first grown-up election: the first where the Web and
e-mail are expected to play a serious role. So maybe it's OK by us after all
that the whole thing is starting so early.

            
               Frayed Nerves
            

            "The Fray," 
                  Slate
               's reader discussion
forum, has been transformed, effective this week: new technology, new user
interface, new rules of the road. Our readers send us piles of clever and
insightful e-mail messages, responding to what they read in

                  Slate
               . Part of our purpose in redesigning The Fray is to get more
of this brilliance out where it can be shared with other readers and possibly
incite an even more brilliant response. To that end, we have 1) made The Fray
free of charge and available to all 
                  Slate
                readers; 2) created
discussion threads related to specific 
                  Slate
                departments and
articles rather than general topics; 3) provided links at the end of each
article allowing you to post a message reacting to that article and/or to read
how others have reacted or replied. Every posting can start a new discussion
thread, or extend an ongoing discussion, or "branch off" an ongoing discussion
to take it in a new direction. Especially wise or witty responses will be
reprinted or excerpted on the article page itself.

            The philosophical point
here is that many people (we hope) would enjoy engaging in a vigorous
discussion of something they have just read but have no special interest in
joining an online "community," which is the usual emphasis of Web site bulletin
boards. If you want to join our community, you're very welcome, and you can
treat The Fray like any other BBS. Here is a
link to all our current discussions, including a general discussion, a
discussion for Fraygrants (regulars in the "Old Fray"), and a discussion of
technical issues. But if you simply want to tell us how wrong we are about
something, you can skip all that and post a message from the offending page
itself.

            
               You E-Mail Us, We'll
E-Mail You
            

            We've also revamped our e-mail auto-deliveries to
give you more choices. To get your favorite parts of 
                  Slate
               
delivered to your inbox (without getting the parts you can't stand), you must
be a subscriber. But it's only $19.95 a year and you get a free gift and blah,
blah, blah. (Have I made the sale? Subscribe here .
Thanks.) Subscribers may choose
any or all of the following e-mail editions:

            
               News
            

            Daily delivery of "Today's Papers," plus a selection
from "International Papers," "The Week/The Spin," and "In Other Magazines."

            
               Money
            

            Monday through Friday delivery of James Surowiecki's
"Moneybox" column, plus other 
                  Slate
                economic and
financial articles.

            
               Culture
            

            A Monday through Friday e-mail of

                  Slate
               's take on the latest books, movies, and music,
including "Summary Judgment," our summary of all the other reviewers.

            
               Politics
            

            Monday through Friday, all our political stuff.

            
               News Quiz
            

            And only "News Quiz," Monday through Thursday.

            
               
                  Slate on Paper
               
            

            You want the whole thing?
OK, here it is as a Word document, formatted to look like an old-fashioned
paper magazine and e-mailed (as an attachment) every Friday.

            
               At Your Service
            

            Finally, in case you're having trouble keeping
straight all the wonderful things 
                  Slate
                is doing for you, our
readers, check out our new and improved "Reader
Services " pages. You will find it hard to believe that any single
magazine, let alone a Webzine, could be so profuse in its offerings and so
loving toward its readers.

         
      
   
