
   
   
      
         
             Trippin' at the GNC

            Throw out your dealer's
telephone number--why take risks when your supermarket is selling drugs? OK,
not real drugs, but nutritional supplements , which are winning over our
drug-abuse dollar. Corner stores now stock Saint Johnswort, Snapples come
spiked with ginseng, and juice bars sprinkle ginkgo on smoothies. Supplements
are an $8.9 billion annual business now, bigger than the domestic box office of
movies. Largely unregulated by the Food and Drug Administration, these
over-the-counter compounds are legal for 12-year-olds to buy. But can they get
you wasted? Over the summer I ran up a tab at my local General Nutrition
Center--a chain with booming sales growth largely because it rounds up the
usual supplements. After sampling GNC's wares, I checked my findings against
the wisdom of Ray
Sahelian, M.D. , a Los Angeles doctor who swears by supplements, has
tried them all, and has authored several books on the matter. Here's what I
learned:

            
               Saint

               Johnswort
            

            
               For
               : Mild to serious
depression.

            
               How 
               it works: It's a
flower. Studies suggest it (like everything halfway fun these days) plays with
neurotransmitter levels, boosting serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine.

            
               My 
               findings: The bottle
recommended one to three 300-milligram pills per day. I took three. On the
afternoon of the third day (it takes a while for the drug to rev up), I felt a
sudden rush of well-being. I was reading a good book and eating a great
sandwich, and admittedly this in itself may account for my good cheer. But it
felt more profound--what should have been just a sandwich was a

                  sandwich
               , what should have been just a book was a

                  book
               . Does that make sense? It did at the time.

            By Day 4 the manic rushes were kicking in. At
unpredictable moments I'd become hypersocial, expansive, and breathtakingly
productive. It was not unlike a cocaine high (er, I'm told). That is, a
surprise cocaine high that strikes at random. I'd be in a meeting with my boss
and suddenly I was Robin Williams circa 1980. These Wort flashes were sort of
delightful the first few times, but I grew to fear them--I couldn't predict
when the Wort would attack. And along with the manic highs came troughs of
fragility and moodiness.

            Hoping to push the envelope, I eventually doubled
my dosage. Result: a jaw-clenching headache of unfathomable depth, coupled with
horrid, abyss-gazing doubt and need. I quit the next day.

            
               The doc 
               says: Sahelian's a
big fan of the Wort. He thinks it works almost as well as Prozac, without the
side effects or high price. "Doesn't it add a little magic to the world? It's
great to take when traveling--the things you see become more special." I'd
guess he means something like my 
                  sandwich
                moment. Sahelian says
that since I wasn't depressed to start with, taking the maximum dosage of Wort
pushed me into mania. He starts patients off with one pill a day, and only goes
to three for extreme depression. Oops. Although I'm not depressed, I may try a
one-per-day regimen in the future--maybe I could be even happier .

            

               Cost
               : $7.99 for 60 pills--a two-month supply for me, a
20-day supply for Sylvia Plath.

            

               Melatonin
            

            
               For
               : Insomnia and jet lag.
It's "nature's sleeping pill."

            
               How 
               it works: Melatonin is a
natural hormone (produced by the pineal gland) that seems to regulate your
internal clock.

            
               My 
               findings: I get insomnia,
so I was excited about melatonin. The bottle suggested one 3-milligram tablet
before bedtime. I obeyed, but nothing happened: I was still sleepless. Instead,
I felt sluggish the entire next day. Results were no better on subsequent
nights. A few nights in, I had a vivid nightmare. I was at a picnic where
people played a game--a game in which they attempted to flay each other using
hand-held metal hooks, stripping skin away from their ribs and spines. I quit
the next day.

            
               The 
               doc says: 3 milligrams a
night is waaaaay too much. He recommends a half-milligram to 1 milligram, one
hour before bed, no more than once a week . Vivid dreams are common
("dreams like you've never dreamed before," says the doc, and I concur), but so
is restful sleep.

            

               Cost
               : $3.69 for 60 tablets of 3 milligrams each.

            
               Kava

               Kava
            

            
               For
               : Anxiety.

            
               How 
               it works: Who knows?
It's a plant from the pepper family, and its roots may affect your limbic
system.

            
               My 
               findings: I bought kava
in liquid extract form, to be taken with an eyedropper. The label said 3
milliliters three times daily. I took 9 milliliters all at once. No dice. Then
I took 12 milliliters all at once. Less dice, if that's possible. Finally, I
took 15 milliliters all at once--five times the suggested dosage. Beyond a
teensy sense of detachment and some mild balance problems, I still felt
nothing.

            
               The 
               doc says: Sahelian
(author of Kava: The Anti-Anxiety Herb ) tells me that with kava the
brand makes a huge difference. Indeed, on the Lycaeum "Trip
Reports " page, one "psychonaut" recommends "Waka-grade Kava from Fiji."
Mine came from Nature's Way Products in Springville, Utah. Sahelian says: "If
you're not anxious, you won't notice much. But those who like it really
like it. It's great if you're nervous going on a plane or to the dentist, or
before a party. Some use it as an alternative to the evening martini." A
mischievous friend swears that if you slug back a whole bottle you'll act like
Dopey dwarf for a few hours, but I cannot confirm at this time.

            

               Cost
               : $9.75 for 59 milliliters of extract.

            
               SAMe
            

            
               For
               : Depression. And
arthritis.

            
               How 
               it works: Again with the
dopamine. Like melatonin, SAMe is found in the body.

            
               My 
               findings: I don't have
arthritis. I also don't have depression, but that never stopped me before. The
bottle said one to four 100-milligram pills per day. I took four every day. I
felt nothing.

            
               The 
               doc says: Despite the
slobber of media excitement dripped all over SAMe in the last few months,
Sahelian prefers Saint Johnswort. The Wort is much less expensive and he thinks
it works better. When I sounded disappointed about SAMe, he offered this tip:
"If you want to feel something, try taking three or four pills in the morning
on an empty stomach." I tried the next morning. More nothing.

            

               Cost
               : Yow! $24.99 for 30 100-milligram tablets. At four
a day, that's 25 beans for little more than a week's worth.

            

               Gi
               nseng, Ginkgo Biloba, and Echinacea
            

            
               For
               : Ginseng's for
"vitality," ginkgo's for "mental alertness," and Echinacea's for stopping
colds.

            
               How 
               they work, allegedly:
Ginseng improves adrenal gland function, ginkgo helps circulation, and
Echinacea boosts white blood cells. They're all herbs.

            
               My 
               findings: I bought
Siberian ginseng gum and chewed a bunch but felt no particular vitality. So,
Pros: none. Cons: acrid aftertaste, acrid duringtaste, zero vitality increase,
and I had to find somewhere to spit it out. If you want to try ginseng,
Siberian is supposedly the best (as opposed to Asian or American). I also took
ginkgo. I also felt nothing. As for Echinacea, I've used it successfully a few
times, though not in a controlled study. The key is to take it just as you're
getting a cold--it appears to head it off. Friends have reported similar
success.

            
               The 
               doc says: Sahelian
seemed less enthusiastic about these. He says effectiveness varies dramatically
between brands, and that ginkgo shows more impact on older people, improving
focus and alertness.

            

               Cost
               : $1.29 for a pack of ginseng gum, $15 for a few
months supply of ginkgo, and $19 for a big bottle of Echinacea.

            

               Conclusion
            

            The Wort can be fun, and it might save you a bundle
on your Prozac bill. I'm willing to give melatonin another shot, too--at
reduced dosage. But basically this stuff is all weak sauce. If you're looking
for drugs to improve your "mood" or "mental alertness," don't throw out your
dealer's number just yet: The drugs that come closest to achieving these worthy
goals remain highly illegal or must be prescribed by a doctor. The success of
GNC and the nutritional supplement industry illustrates how eager our culture
is to embrace mood-altering drugs--as long as they don't actually work.

         
      
   
