
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>The Godfather of Compassionate Conservatism</SPAN></SPAN>

            
               
                  New
York
               
               
                  Times Magazine , Sept. 12
            

            In a
cover book excerpt, Angela's Ashes author Frank McCourt recounts his
first year as a public-school teacher. McCourt captured the imagination of his
rambunctious class by having them transcribe essays written by kids a
generation earlier. ... An article introduces the father of
compassionate conservatism, Jewish-Communist-turned-evangelical-Christian
Marvin Olasky, who penned a book arguing that faith-based charities could
supplant the welfare state. He now chairs Gov. George W. Bush's religion-policy
committee. To practice what he preached, Olasky opened an ex-con ministry and
adopted a black infant.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , Sept. 27
            

            The
cover package debates whether the ETS plan to adjust
SAT scores on the basis of a student's socio-economic and racial background
threatens meritocracy. One piece argues that "striver" scoring is a rational
statistical tool for achieving the worthy goal of admitting more non-Asian
minorities to elite colleges. An opposing opinion claims striver scoring would
entrench the fallacy that "demography is destiny." ... A piece assesses George W. Bush's foreign policy,
arguing that he covers up his ignorance of foreign affairs by deferring to
experts from his dad's administration, including Condoleezza Rice and Brent
Scowcroft. The neorealist Bushites believe that the United States should
intervene abroad only to protect vital national interests. W.'s tutors opposed
American involvement in Kosovo and support constructive engagement with
China.

            
               
                  The
Nation
               
               , Sept. 20
            

            A
special issue focuses on new ideas for drug reform. An article redefines drug abuse as a public health problem.
Treatment on demand and the abolition of criminal penalties for nonviolent
users is the solution. ... A piece deems drug courts a cheap and
promising approach to rehabilitating addicts. Nonviolent drug offenders can
avoid prison sentences by undergoing treatment and monitoring. ... A
pharmaceutical company is promoting a prescription alternative to medical
marijuana, according to a story . Marinol controls nausea and appetite loss, the same
symptoms that lead cancer patients to smoke pot. The manufacturer's minions are
loudly opposing marijuana legalization to improve the pill's sales.

            
               
                  American
Prospect
               
               , September/October 1999
            

            The
cover story condemns the increasing use of convict labor by corporations. Among
the 80,000 prisoners employed by private companies for a fraction of the
minimum wage are TWA's reservation takers and Microsoft's software boxers.
Prison employment circumvents labor laws and hurts regular workers.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , Sept. 13
            

            The
cover excerpt from Susan Faludi's much-ballyhooed book says
men have been emasculated by feminism and the new economy. Men should learn to
replace media-manufactured masculine ideals that emphasize appearance and
dominance with ungendered ideals of social responsibility and liberty.
... A profile slaps Bill Bradley for hypocrisy. He
fund-raises madly while assailing the role of money in politics, and he attacks
finger-in-the-wind politics even though he spent three times more on polling
than any other candidate during his last Senate campaign. ... In an
interview , Kevin Costner laments Hollywood commercialism and
gripes that Universal butchered his soon-to-be released For Love of the
Game . (
                  Slate
                predicted it would be a weeks ago.)

            

               
                  Time
               
               , Sept. 13
            

            The
cover story , rehashing last week's discovery that smart mice
can be genetically engineered, predicts that the bioengineering of human
intelligence will soon be possible. ... A profile crowns Chris Rock "The Funniest Man in America." The
comedian is making his mark with middlebrow movies, smart standup specials, and
his own eclectic HBO show. Rock is taking his stereotype-bending routine global
by staging his next standup special in Africa, à la Muhammad Ali's "Rumble in
the Jungle." ... A piece cringes at the new trend of body modification--or
"bod-mod"--in which people mutilate themselves by searing their skin and
splitting their tongues.

            

               
                  U.S.
                
               
                  News & World Report, Sept.
13
            

            The
cover story reviews the latest research on how babies think.
Neuroscience suggests that by the third month infants are mature enough to
reason and process language. Psychologists warn against overstimulating babies'
brains, but that has not slowed the boom in lapware--educational software for
6-month-olds. ... An item reports that high-end preschools now offer French and
theater classes. For $14,000 a year, parents get daily progress reports while
their toddlers are served salmon for lunch.

            

               
                  The
               
               
                  New Yorker , Sept. 13
            

            An
article explodes the fallacy of safe sex. Sex with a condom does not prevent
transmission of the papilloma virus, the most common sexually transmitted
disease in the United States. Papilloma causes 95 percent of cervical cancer,
and pap smears miss up to 40 percent of infections. New DNA tests may help
detect the virus, but there is no treatment. A vaccine is needed. ... A
profile of comedy icon Richard Pryor salutes his transgressive artistry. Unlike
earlier black comedians, Pryor never tried to ingratiate himself with white
audiences or cloak his rage.

            

               
                  Weekly
               
               
                  Standard , Sept. 13
            

            The
cover story argues that the complementary campaign platforms
of George W. Bush and John McCain represent a coherent governing philosophy for
the GOP. Bush wants to revive citizenship through energetic local government
and strengthened neighborhood institutions. McCain promises to fight cynicism
by reforming campaign finance and embracing a broader role for America abroad.
... An article cudgels the claim that there is a farm crisis. American
agriculture is triumphant, growing more than ever and growing it more cheaply.
Even though free-market farming kills family farms, the nation cannot afford to
prop up unprofitable agricultural businesses.

         
      
   
