
   
   
      
         
            High Fidelity

            It has been heartening to
see some of my fellow survivors of mid-'70s adolescence (post-Vietnam,
post-Watergate, pre-punk, pre-Reagan) finally clear their heads of all the
drugs and bad music and put those "lost" years into perspective. But how can
any filmmaker nowadays convey the nihilistic embrace of dope and booze and
pills and do justice both to the way it felt at the time--blissfully gonzo,
liberating--and the way it came to feel after everyone did too much--like
quicksand? The comedy Outside Providence treats those dark years after
Nixon got flushed away with just the right amount of gleeful nostalgia and
horrified incredulity. The film is so free of cant that it's positively
cleansing: It leaves you both cleareyed and high.

            The movie is based on a
terse, bleakly funny 1988 novel by Peter Farrelly, who, with his brother Bobby,
wrote and directed Dumb and Dumber (1994) and There's Something About
Mary (1998). It tells the story of a poor Irish kid named Tim Dunphy who
lives in Pawtucket, R.I., "a rotting city bleeding off an anemic river just
north of Providence." That description is more bitter than anything in the
film, but it does suggest how Farrelly kept life among the urban unwashed from
crushing his soul: He cultivated a caustic sense of humor. The movie, directed
by Michael Corrente from a script he wrote with the Farrellys, is not in the
whacking, gross-out school of the brothers' other projects, but it shares with
them a tender regard for the scruffy outsider, the yearning misfit. (In the
novel, a headmaster actually refers to the hero and his friend as "Dumb and
Dumber.") More important, it has the Farrellys' characteristic mix of misery
and brightness: Whenever the view of the working poor threatens to become
oppressively self-pitying, the filmmakers pull something nutty out of their
hat--a scam, a bit of stoner dialogue, a jolt of rock 'n' roll--to prove that
this particular end only looks dead. OK, maybe it is dead, but
sometimes you can plow through a brick wall and come out the other side.

            The other side, in this case, is a fancy Connecticut prep
school, where "Dunph" (Shawn Hatosy) gets sent when he rear-ends a police
cruiser after an evening with his buddies and their bong. (It's thanks to the
murky intervention of one of his dad's poker pals, a gangster, that he ends up
there and not in juvenile detention.) At Cornwall (a k a "Cornhole"), Dunph's
stoner lifestyle proves more of a challenge to maintain. It's not that the rich
kids don't party as determinedly as the poor ones, it's that the dorms are
prowled by sadistic faculty watchdogs such as Mr. Funderburk (Tim Crowe), as
well as by students happy to rat out their peers if it means getting into an
Ivy League school. It's also that Dunph falls for the blond WASP Jane Weston
(Amy Smart), who, if not a goody-two-shoes, is determined not to let drugs
overwhelm her course of self-improvement. As his Pawtucket buddies die in car
crashes or face the prospect of lives scrambling for a dwindling number of
factory jobs, Dunph has a vague inkling that his level of consumption is not a
design for living.

            
               Outside

               Providence is hardly an anti-drug picture. That would be hypocritical,
since its most meaningful (and hilarious) connections happen over (and with a
large assist from) booze and pot. Its impulses are divided--which is just, I
think, as they should be. The movie says that getting high all the time can rot
your brain and even kill you, but it's not above going for Cheech &
Chong-style laughs or blithely wallowing in the sense of community that drugs
can instill. In Pawtucket, the kids get stoned and hang out at the water tower.
Over bong hits, they talk of moving to a West Coast utopia where "they got
babes, they got weed, they got cars that don't rust." When Dunph tells them he
likes the girl he's seeing so much he doesn't think about banging her, they say
she "sounds like a cool mule." I wish that the Pawtucket scenes hadn't been
shot on a special film stock--they're bleached a toilet bowl blue--but they
still have a powerful comic hum. Even Jackie (Tommy Bone), Dunph's
wheelchair-bound brother ("He had a freak accident at touch football and fell
off a roof," explains Dunph, in a voice-over), gets to be in on the jokes
instead of the object of them: In one scene, he feigns extreme cerebral palsy
so that he and his brother can have great seats at a football game.

            The charm of Corrente's direction comes as a shock. The
Rhode Island native made his debut in 1994 with a mannered, Mean
Streets -style, Italian-guys-from-the-neighborhood picture called Federal
Hill and followed that with a strenuously boring adaptation of David
Mamet's American 
               Buffalo (1996). In Outside Providence , he
stops trying to wow us with indie-auteur smarts. The details are right. Songs
that I hoped never to hear again--"Hold Your Head Up," "Take It Easy," "Band on
the Run," "Free Bird"--sound, in context, startlingly fresh, and Dunph's brown
corduroy jacket looks like the one I persisted in wearing into the late '80s
when a girlfriend finally took the initiative to drop it down a garbage chute.
Better, Corrente brings out the natural radiance in his young actors. The
snaggletoothed Hatosy has a soft, agreeable presence. Early on, he makes Dunph
seem a tad stupid, but when he's picked up hitchhiking by Jane and her rich
parents, you glimpse the sneaky undercurrents of his rube act. He passes her a
Coke, which turns out to be spiked with rum, and the two have a magical
collusion. (Amy Smart must be the nicest, most down-to-earth Southern WASP
goddess in history--if F. Scott Fitzgerald had met her, he'd have lived into
his 90s.)

            Like its title,
Outside Providence hints at a godless universe--as well as a motherless
one. (Dunph's mom shot herself when he was much younger.) You learn from your
peers--for better or worse--and not your elders. The movie might have been
unbearably depressing if Old Man Dunphy had been the thug of Farrelly's novel.
(In one of the book's first scenes, he kills his sons' mutt by crushing it in a
door after it tears apart a neighbor's cat.) But Alec Baldwin brings an outsize
comic spirit--and outsize vulnerability--to the film. He drops his voice an
octave and bellows lines like "Drag your pimply ass in here and say hello to
the guys--show some class f'r chrissakes" in a way that transcends caricature.
He's so frightened of communicating with his children that he has to caricature
himself . The source of his comedy is also what makes him tragic.

            In The Very Thought of You , three shallow,
London-based mates coincidentally meet and fall in love with the same pretty
blond American flake (Monica Potter), thus filling the one she likes best
(Joseph Fiennes) with guilt and shame. If watching the bug-eyed and irritable
Fiennes wrestle with this nonissue for 90 minutes sounds like fun to you, then
don't hold back on my account. The movie isn't awful. It pulls a couple of
amusing tricks with its narrative (the second act doesn't come until after the
fourth, whereupon everything starts to--sort of--make sense), but this kind of
flimsy romantic confection is either utterly charming or it collapses into a
heavy slab of obviousness. It doesn't help that Potter looks and sounds as if
she has just stepped out of a lab where someone was laboring to clone Julia
Roberts. She has the same wide eyes, turned-up nose, and vaguely glassy
hysteria, but everything is smaller-scale: Honey, I shrunk Julia Roberts.

            
               The 
               Astronaut's Wife is one of the
classiest terrible sci-fi movies you're likely to see. The tale of an astronaut
(Johnny Depp with a drawl) who comes back from a space accident somehow
different is cut from the same paranoid cloth as Invasion of the Body
Snatchers (1956), I Married a 
               Monster From Outer Space (1958)
and, midway, Rosemary's Baby (1968). But someone forgot to tell the
writer-director, Rand Ravich, that a genre movie can't survive on fancy,
high-toned portent alone--especially when the audience knows what's being
portended before they even buy their tickets. It's a testament to the lovely
Charlize Theron that she can hold our attention even when we're 10 steps ahead
of her character and only waiting around to see the big slimy outer-space
monster--which never comes. Even Samuel Beckett would be yelling, "Get to the
damn point!"

         
      
   
