
   
   
      
         
            Barak's Hard Place

            What a difference a plane ride makes. The Israel I
left on Sunday was a nation queasy about peace talks and anxious about its new
prime minister, Ehud Barak. Barak's governing coalition was already squabbling
viciously, a party allied with Barak had splintered and collapsed, the
opposition had called for a no-confidence vote, West Bank and Golan settlers
were readying PR campaigns against Barak's peace schemes, and my in-laws were
shouting at the television every time Barak came on the screen: "He wants to
give it all away!"

            But landing in
Washington on Monday, I touched down in the middle of Barak Euphoria. During
his U.S. visit this week, Barak is traveling not by limousine but on a cushion
of perfumed air. The Israel Policy Forum's new poll of American Jews finds
almost universal support for Barak and his peace proposals. His American visit
includes a triumphal march through the Sunday talk shows, backslapping meetings
with the U.S. president and vice president, and glowing newspaper profiles.
Washington has rarely seemed giddier about a foreign visitor: American papers
have suggested that "peace is just around the corner," that Israel is united
behind its new chief, that final rapprochement with the Palestinians, Syrians,
and Lebanese is just a matter of proofreading the treaties and scheduling a few
ceremonial handshakes in the Rose Garden.

            This discontinuity between the thrill in the air here and
the "facts on the ground" there (to use a favorite Israelism) is striking and
worrisome. America seems to be mistaking the opportunity of peace talks for the
reality of a peace treaty. "The challenge facing Barak in the face of this
euphoria is the danger of unrealistic expectations," says Tom Smerling,
director of the Israel Policy Forum's Washington office.

            True, Barak's election is
a welcome event for Israel and its Arab neighbors. Benjamin Netanyahu was
widely mistrusted and despised by Israelis, and universally mistrusted and
despised by Arabs. A majority of Israelis (admittedly a narrow one) favors
peace talks, and Barak is the best negotiator Israel could send to the table.
He has constructed a broad coalition of pro-peace parties. He has assuaged
Israelis by presenting a hard vision of peace: Barak's peace with the
Palestinians will be a divorce, not a marriage (as former Prime Minister Shimon
Peres imagined). But while Barak may be the best prime minister to bring peace,
that does not mean peace will come. Enormous obstacles remain, obstacles that
an exultant America should stop and remember.

            1 The chasm between Israeli and Palestinian visions of
peace. Peace with Syria is a (relatively) easy matter for Israel. Israel
will surrender the Golan (except for a surveillance base), the territory will
be demilitarized, and Syria will stop Hezbollah guerillas from operating in
South Lebanon.

            The Palestinian problem is much more difficult.
Barak and Arafat are willing to conduct final negotiations, but that
does not mean their positions can be reconciled. Barak may have been elected
largely because he was not Netanyahu, but Barak's publicly stated peace
proposals are similar to Netanyahu's. The Palestinians demand: all the West
Bank, Jerusalem as their capital, the right of 1948 and 1967 refugees to
return, full statehood, and Israeli withdrawal from settlements. Barak rejects
all these conditions, except perhaps statehood.

            Even the most optimistic
Middle East analysts succumb to paralysis when they try to resolve these
disagreements. Barak is likely to concede the Palestinians a capital just
outside Jerusalem and to allow some refugees to return to the West Bank (though
not to Israel proper), but he certainly won't give up all the West Bank or even
a square inch of Jerusalem. The Palestinians, who grabbed the moral high ground
when Netanyahu sabotaged negotiations, have so far shown little willingness to
moderate their demands. The Israelis and the Palestinians (understandably)
delayed resolving these issues until final status talks because they were
intractable. Now final status talks have arrived and, lo and behold, the issues
are still intractable. Already some are predicting the "final" talks won't be
final at all: Israel and the Palestinians will again kick the questions of
Jerusalem and refugees down the road.

            
2 Heightened Arab-Jewish tension. The
mutual loathing and mistrust that divides Israelis and Palestinians is bad
enough already, but the peace process promises to exacerbate it. Serious peace
negotiations are expected to spark anti-Jewish terrorism by Palestinian
extremists bent on sabotaging a half-a-loaf agreement. Jewish extremists will
be no happier. Israeli withdrawals from the West Bank may leave Jewish
settlements encircled by Palestinian territory. Surrounding well-armed and
enraged Jewish settlers with Palestinian land is a recipe for disaster.
Anti-Jewish terrorism during the peace talks of the mid-'90s contributed to the
Peres government's defeat. Barak's fragile coalition is equally vulnerable if
terrorism or settler violence surges. Support for peace could dissolve.

            3 Heightened Jewish-Jewish tension. The peace process
also endangers intra-Jewish relations, which are already fraught. Religious
Jews are feuding with secular Jews. Sephardic Jews are battering the Ashkenazi
establishment about decades of discrimination. Russian immigrants are fighting
with the Orthodox rabbis. Any Palestinian agreement will probably require Barak
to remove or consolidate West Bank settlements. Any Syrian agreement will
undoubtedly require Barak to remove all Golan Heights settlements. There are
170,000 Jews on the West Bank and 17,000 in the Golan. Most of them strongly
oppose any plan to uproot them.

            Israel had a nervous
breakdown when Menachem Begin evicted just 5,000 settlers from the Sinai during
the early '80s. Today's settlers, especially West Bankers, are far more
militant than their '80s counterparts. Some religious settlers deny the
authority of the Israeli government and believe it is their biblical duty to
populate the West Bank ("Judea and Samaria"). They will not leave quietly. It
is difficult to conceive how Barak can remove 17,000 folks from the Golan and
thousands more from the West Bank without fracturing his government.

            4 The instability of Syria and the Palestinian
Authority. Syrian strongman Hafez Assad is old and ailing. His son and
heir, Bashar, is inexperienced (he's an ophthalmologist by training). Assad's
ruling Alawites are a tenuous minority, only 11 percent of the population.
Syria's former patron, the Soviet Union, is dead. Syria's economy is totally
broken. As long as Assad lives, he can manage these troubles and keep an
agreement with Israel. But if he dies, it's not clear that Syria can control
Lebanon or that the Golan border will remain peaceful.

            The Palestinian situation is more perilous. Arafat
is also ailing and has no clear successor. His authoritarian rule has prevented
the emergence of future leaders and the development of strong civic and
political institutions. Extremists (such as Hamas) and moderates are already
jockeying for power. The Palestinian economy is a disaster, devastated by
Israeli limits on Palestinians working in Israel. The return of hundreds of
thousands of destitute Palestinian refugees from camps in Lebanon and Jordan
will only compound the economic misery.

            So if Barak gets his final deal with the
Palestinians, Israel may find itself with a new kind of problem: an autonomous
Palestinian state, a stone's throw (literally) from sacred Israeli territory,
that is sinking into Third World poverty, anarchy, and civil war. This could be
a peace, even a good peace, but it won't be cause for euphoria.

         
      
   
