
   
   
      
         
            Middle East Peace Hopes

            As
Ehud Barak met Tony Blair in London Wednesday on his way back to Israel from
Washington, Middle East peace hopes sprang afresh in the European press. "The
sky brightens," declared the Guardian of London over an editorial saying that "after the negativity of Binyamin
Netanyahu, Barak is a confidence-building measure all by himself." It said
peace, if it comes, will be "a peace of the pragmatists" with "no outright
winners--but, just possibly, a collective victory." The Independent of London
proposed that European troops--including British
forces--patrol the new peace lines if the Golan Heights are returned by Israel
to Syria.

            

               Le Monde of Paris
said that Barak's "calm realism"--as shown in his admission that the
Palestinians already have a de facto state--is a good omen for the future.
Describing Barak as a man in a hurry, under pressure from the United States to
produce results, the paper pointed out that "nothing would delight Mr. Clinton
more than a beautiful ending to his second term with a diplomatic success in
this part of the world where he has invested so much." The Times of London was
rather less cheerful. "The outlook is too complicated to permit of excessive
expectations," it said. For example, an entente with Syria would make Barak's
life more difficult elsewhere. "The paradox of the Arab-Israeli dispute is that
it has often served as a distraction from several inter-Arab differences of
scarcely less intensity," it said.

            In
Israel, Ha'aretz supported Barak's plan to speed up the peace
negotiations. "Fifteen more months are more than enough," it said in an
editorial. "The disputed points have been debated to death, the
conditions for compromise are known, and many of them have already been agreed
upon. ... Since the inception of the peace process, no peace-seeking prime
minister has had such a rare opportunity to end the Arab-Israeli conflict. The
combination of a solid mandate at home with ripe regional conditions, and now
also the renewed and energetic support of senior American and international
leaders, creates a diplomatic and security base that must not be wasted."
Elsewhere, Ha'aretz reported mixed reactions in Israel to Syria's
reported turnaround on terrorism. It said there was optimism among Israeli
diplomats, who hadn't expected President Hafez Assad to make such a pro-Israel
gesture before the Golan Heights were returned to Syria, but skepticism among
others who saw it as a psychological tactic to soften up Israeli public opinion
into accepting territorial concessions.

            Two
themes preoccupying the Arab press Tuesday were America's air raid on southern
Iraq Sunday, in which 14 Iraqi civilians reportedly died, and Turkey's recent
airstrike on Kurdish rebel bases close to its border with Iran. The
London-based daily al-'Arab deplored the lack of Arab response to the
U.S. action, which it said was an indication of the utter subservience of Arab
rulers to the United States. "If the American air raids that killed and injured
tens of people near Najaf cannot arouse the Arab conscience from its ten-year
slumber, it would be best to consider that conscience dead," the paper said.
Al-Khaleej , a United Arab Emirates daily, said the Turkish attack, which
Iran claimed was within its territory, "underlines the increasingly aggressive
and militaristic attitude Ankara has adopted toward its neighbors since it
forged its American-sponsored strategic alliance with Israel." The Turkish
daily Hurriyet said Iran fabricated the incident to divert attention
from its student unrest.

            In
Italy, La
Repubblica of Rome ran an interview Wednesday with Manouchehr
Mohammadi, president of the Iranian national students' association, who said
that although the students' revolt was "bloodily repressed in the name of Islam
and of so-called national interests which were really only those of a corrupt
clergy," the days of the Islamic Republic of Iran were numbered. Mohammadi also
disowned Iranian President Mohammed Khatami, whom the students originally
supported, saying he listened less and less to the people who voted him in and
was now only concerned with hanging on to power. "He no longer represents his
electors of two years ago and therefore ought to resign," Mohammadi said.

            

               Corriere
della Sera of Milan reported a hardening of the Italian government's
line toward illegal immigrants from Kosovo, now that the war is over. It said
recent immigrants are mainly gypsies fleeing persecution by the Albanian
Kosovars, who claim they collaborated with the Serbian regime (541 gypsies
landed in Apulia Tuesday). They will be expelled from Italy, the paper said,
because the government's guarantees of food and lodging for Kosovo refugees
were conditional upon there being a war in the province.

            China
is keeping up its pressure on Taiwan, with the official China Daily reporting
Wednesday that the Central Committee of the Communist Party once again strongly
condemned Taiwan's abandonment of the "one China" policy. The paper also had
foreign ministry spokeswoman Zhang Qiyue vaguely hinting at the possibility of
military action by saying that the People's Liberation Army "shoulders the
sacred mission of safeguarding national sovereignty and territorial integrity."
In Hong Kong Tuesday, the Beijing-backed newspaper Wen Wei Po reported
troop movements in Chinese provinces facing Taiwan, but this was later denied
by Chinese military authorities.

            In
Australia, the Sydney
Morning Herald reported a little victory for Beijing--a decision by the new
prime minister of Papua New Guinea to withdraw diplomatic recognition from
Taiwan. In Hong Kong, the South China Morning Post reported that the Chinese Communist
Party has decided to speed up privatization of the textile, electrical,
electronic, and construction industries by giving up majority control of them.
"The state--through various holding companies--holds 60 to 70 per cent of
shares in the bulk of mainland listed companies, making it hard for minority
shareholders to ease out ineffective managers and enforce strict corporate
governance," the paper said. In Russia, where the government has announced plans
to cut spending on social welfare programs, which are largely notional anyway,
Segodnya published an upbeat interview with First Deputy Prime Minister
Viktor Khristenko predicting that the country will get its promised loans from
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank "if nothing political
happens again."

            On the
Kennedy front, the Times of London's New York columnist, Joanna Coles,
wrote Wednesday that Americans are surprisingly dry-eyed about the tragedy.
"The real mystery of John F. Kennedy Jr's death is why it hasn't unleashed the
national hysteria that greeted Princess Diana's fatal car crash two years ago.
Notwithstanding cable TV's frenetic electronic vigil, with station editors
clearly hoping for a Di-like bounty of extra viewers, the attempts by a series
of anchors to launch a national wave of emotion has failed. Not even CNN's
Christiane Amanpour sobbing on air (she once roomed with him) was able to shake
the nation's uncharacteristic stoicism."

         
      
   
