
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>How Much Would <I>You</I> Sell For?</SPAN></SPAN>

             

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Aug. 28
            

            The
cover editorial accuses the United States of covering
up Russia's economic misbehavior. The New York money-laundering probe destroys
the illusion that the Russian economy is becoming civilized. The West should
admit that loans to Moscow are a naked effort to avert Russian implosion.
... A piece reports that workers are auctioning their
services on Internet sites such as www.bid4geeks.com.

            

               
                  New
               
               
                  Republic
                  , Sept. 13
            

            The
cover story calls for an end to racial profiling.
Eliminating racial profiling will make policing more difficult, but the cost is
worth bearing because profiling burdens targeted groups, engenders rage against
the police, and undercuts the ideal of a colorblind society. ... An
article exhorts George W. Bush to answer the cocaine
question. Americans don't want another president burdened by explosive
secrets.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Aug. 29
            

            The
cover story condemns the "Milosevic Generation." Serb twentysomethings are both
despairing and corrupt. "Sponsor girls" trade sex for pilfered designer
clothing. Most young Serbs are plotting to emigrate because there are no
opportunities at home. All deny atrocities occurred in Kosovo.
... A profile hypes Marc Anthony as the next Frank Sinatra.
The crooner followed Ricky Martin's footsteps from Menudo to Latin pop stardom,
but Marc Anthony's angelic voice and passionate presentation will trump
Martin's bubblegum appeal. His English-language debut should finally bring him
crossover success.

            
               
                  Mother Jones ,
September 1999
            

            

               Mother Jones joins the New York Times Magazine (above) in
focusing on Serbia's lost generation. A sympathetic article about Serbian draft
dodgers says tens of thousands of them crossed into Hungary to avoid serving in
Kosovo. Only 2 percent have been granted political asylum, and few are
authorized to work. Visas to Western countries are rarely granted.
... A piece denounces Alexander Haig for parlaying his brief
stint as Ronald Reagan's secretary of state into a career as an international
influence peddler. The former general helps defense manufacturers sell weapons
to dicey countries such as China and Pakistan.

            
               
                  U.S.
News
                
               
                  & World Report , Aug. 30
            

            
California Institute of Technology vaults from fourth to first in the
magazine's annual university rankings . Its three-to-one
student-faculty ratio is much praised, as is its annual spending of $192,000 on
each student. (The magazine revised its methodology to reward high spending on
instruction.) Cal Tech's 900 undergrads are so hard-working that one computer
science lab is scheduled from midnight to 2 a.m. ... Harvard, MIT,
Princeton, and Yale fill out the top five . Swarthmore is the top liberal arts college . ... An article claims that research universities are refocusing on
undergraduates in response to charges that they take students for granted.
Boston University, for example, forced its three Nobel Prize winners to teach
undergraduates.

            

               
                  Time
               , Aug. 30
            

            The
cover story is a baby boomer's first-person account of taking
care of her elderly parents. ... A poll finds that 84 percent of Americans don't think cocaine
use should disqualify Bush from office. A related article says the cocaine flap may have exposed W.'s campaign
as ill prepared. ... A piece reports on anti-drug Mormon youths who are
terrorizing Salt Lake City. The "Straight Edgers" get their high from fighting.
Three are on trial for murder, and a vegan Straight Edger just finished
probation for firebombing a McDonald's.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , Aug. 23
            

            The
cover story presents a kinder, gentler portrait of Bill
Gates. The man whom competitors call the "Satan of Software" may throw temper
tantrums and compete fiercely, but he's basically a fun-loving family guy who
prefers sedans over limousines and breaks into mini-golf courses for kicks. The
article reveals that he recently transferred a huge chunk of stock to his
charitable foundation, boosting its endowment to $17 billion. ... An
excerpt from a book based on a survey of 1,000 kids reveals
that children don't want more time with their working parents, they want mom
and dad to make more money.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  Nation , Sept. 6 and 13
            

            The
cover story counters the conventional wisdom that the Iowa
straw poll boosted Steve Forbes and hurt George W. Bush. Forbes' second-place
finish proves that his support has a low ceiling, and Bush's victory
demonstrates that the GOP is jerking the party back into the mainstream and
successfully co-opting Clintonian themes. ... An editorial applauds the
Clinton administration for abandoning its singular focus on drugs in United
States-Colombia policy. More resources for economic development and alternative
crops are the only way to quell guerrilla violence, ensure political stability,
and cut drug production.

            

               
                  Weekly
                
               
                  Standard , Aug. 30 and Sept.
6
            

            The
cover
story crowns Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas as America's leading
conservative. He is especially lauded for his loyalty to "originalism," the
theory that the Constitution should be interpreted in accord with original
intentions of the framers (as channeled by the judge). ... An editorial
laments the presidential campaign's substance deficit. Only Al Gore is
presenting policies for voters' consideration. Bill Bradley, George W. Bush,
and Elizabeth Dole are wooing voters with charm, biography, anodyne rhetoric,
and "calculated haze."

         
      
   
