
   
   
      
         
            No. 265: &quot;Serfs Up&quot;

            
               "In England, the
rule was well established that 'no lord could be sued by a vassal in his own
court, but each petty lord was subject to suit in the courts of a higher lord.'
" 
               This surprisingly relevant bit of medieval lore turns out to
be the philosophical foundation of what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 264)--"The $156K Problem":
            

            

               
                  
                     Overheard at Sotheby's Tuesday: "My intention is to do
whatever he indicates to me he wants done with them. He may want them returned.
He may want me to destroy them. He may not care at all." You make the
prediction: Who will want whom to do what?
                  
               
            

            "J.D.
Salinger will want the buyer of his letters to return them to him. Then
Salinger will send them back to Joyce Maynard, and she'll auction them off
again, and once again, they'll split the take in one of the most elaborate
swindles ever devised."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Rudy
Giuliani will want Randy Levine to destroy the entire print run of the first
issue of Talk . That'll stop people from voting for her!"-- Daniel
Radosh ( Peter Carlin , Dave Gaffen , and Douglas Wolk
had similar answers.)

            "That
scientist is still waiting for Al Gore to let him know about those test
rabbits."-- Karen Bitterman
            

            "This
is Jeb Bush's wife's response to the question of what she should do with the
'over budget' collection of clothes she tried to sneak by customs in
Miami."-- Gene Geer (similarly, Mac Thomason and Greg
Diamond )

            
"Justice Kennedy does not care what law librarians across the country do with
all the Supreme Court Reporters from 1790 through 1998. Apparently, for
all those years the justices were just kidding around."-- Charles Star
(similarly, Greg Diamond )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Once "auction" invoked the incomprehensible
high-speed chatter of a tobacco dealer, building to the giddy crescendo, "Sold
American!" Then some Virginia farmer slipped a bag of cash to his senator, and
we all went out and drank bourbon until we puked all over the store-bought
shoes of a Philip Morris lobbyist. Lordy me, I'm as nostalgic for the old South
as Justice Kennedy.

            Now "auction" invokes eBay and the sort of human
progress that means an unsociable collector of original animation cells from
prewar Warner Bros. cartoons will now have even fewer occasions to socialize
awkwardly with others, in their pretty-boy footwear.

            And even nowier, it
means Dutch auction, which has dismal connotations, but so does everything with
a Netherlandish prefix--Dutch treat, Dutch courage, Dutch Schultz. This is, of
course, because a Dutch treat is no treat, Dutch courage is no courage, and
Dutch Schultz is no Schultz at all. Or maybe he is, but undoubtedly a very
inferior sort of Schultz. However, as 
                  Slate
               's own James
Surowiecki explains with admirable clarity, the Dutch auction is quite a fine
idea. You see, the way this thing works is if someone bids $100 and someone
else bids $5, the low bid takes it--can that be right?--but in some
sophisticated way that makes it great for everyone except the staff of
Salon . Although the fun of calling David Talbot a sap must be diminished
by the fact that last week his assets were zero, this week he's got $3 million.
What a loser. In his fancy schmantzy store-bought shoes.

            
               Beholdin' to You
Answer
            

            J.D. Salinger will want Peter Norton to return
those letters--that's my prediction--and on the way over, maybe pick up a pizza
and some beer--no, malt liquor--and some pornographic magazines, and some
30-weight motor oil, and that cute girl at the 7-Eleven. That's what I
forecast. Time will tell.

            On Tuesday, at a Sotheby's auction, Norton, creator
of the popular software Norton Utilities, paid $156,500 for 14 letters Salinger
wrote to Joyce Maynard 27 years ago.

            In other
80-year-old-recluse news, Simon & Schuster announced the impending
publication of The Dream Catcher , the memoirs of Salinger's 43-year-old
daughter, Margaret.

            
               Fun With Fordice
Extra
            

            Caught in an adulterous
liaison, Mississippi Gov. Kirk Fordice, a flamboyant champion of family values,
resigned Tuesday as co-chair of Dan Quayle's presidential campaign. ("I said,
'I'm going to do what's best for you, Dan.' ") No pesky blanks to fill in, no
messy matches to, erm, match. Simply join me in kicking a Southern governor
when he's down.

            "Fordice's Four Principles
of Good Government" (for more official Fordice twaddle, click here):

            
               

                  

                     Is it pleasing in the eyes of the Lord?

                     Is it good for the people of Mississippi?

                     How much does it cost?

                     How are we going to pay for it?

                  

               
            

            Fordice answers a reporter
about that vacation with a Memphis widow:

            "Let me tell you
something, you invade my privacy this way, six months from now, I'll whip your
ass."

            Fordice explains he's not
a hypocrite:

            "You say somehow I've
betrayed the idea of family values? To me, the idea of family values has to do
with a father and a home with a mother and father and children and
nurturing."

            After pleading memory
lapses for weeks, Fordice admits that it was indeed lover Ann Creson who was
with him at the wine-heavy lunch that preceded his car crash:

            "Of course it was. Did
you ever doubt it? I told you the absolute truth I had no clue what was going
on. I still don't, other than what I was filled in on. Later on, of course, I
found out that's who I was having lunch with."

            Fordice explains that when
the president has an affair, it's bad, but when the governor of Mississippi has
one, it's OK:

            "I have never lied
before a grand jury. I have never lied to the people, wagging my finger on TV
and telling blatant lies about my conduct."

            
               Dance in America
Extra
            

            " 'Hockey,' performed to
Cole Porter's 'Every Time We Say Goodbye' and to music by Alkistis
Protopsaltis, is a gliding in-line skating duet for the deliciously goofy Tony
Guglietti as the Player and Cheryl Lewis as the Elusive Puck who tames
him."-- New York Times , June 24, 1999

            
               Lois Ambash's
Headline Haiku
            

            Delegates vote to
unionize
approval of politicians' lies
as the world heals
at a nude beach.

            
               --New York
Times , June 24, 1999

            
               Greg Diamond's
Ongoing Extra
            

            Last chance to mock the
AFI's
Greatest Legends List of movie stars by devising a brief plot summary of a
movie in which any equally ranked pair--for instance Charlie Chaplin and Joan
Crawford are both rated No. 10--should have co-starred. Replies due by
Sunday.

            Inspirational example:

            No. 17 I Am
Spondylosis! --A brash young man (Kirk Douglas) plots to marry a rich
heiress but finds himself smitten instead with her mute widowed grandmother
(Lillian Gish).

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Leftover Lewinskiana.

         
      
   
