
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=350300619-12101999><SPAN class=350300619-12101999>Weak <EM>Hearts</EM>, Potent <EM>Pu-239</EM></SPAN></SPAN>

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Random
               
               
                  Hearts
                (Columbia Pictures).
Sydney Pollack directs Harrison Ford and Kristin Scott Thomas as two
middle-aged strangers who discover, after a plane crash kills their respective
spouses, that their loved ones were having an affair together. In their grief,
they start an affair. Despite the strength of the star power, the reviews are
uniformly weak: "[T]he movie ... sputters and sprawls, breathtakingly unaware
of how ponderous it is" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ). The
problem? The relationship that blossoms between Ford and Scott Thomas is
unrealistic and boring, "the sexual equivalent of Easy Listening" (Janet
Maslin, the New York Times ). (Click here to
find out more about Ford and here to find out more about Scott Thomas.)

            

               
                  Boys
               
               
                  Don't Cry
                (Fox Searchlight
Pictures). Outstanding reviews for this independent film based on the life of
Teena Brandon, a Midwestern girl who passed as a boy and was raped and murdered
when her secret got out. Critics can't say enough good things about the film:
It is "audacious, accomplished" (Emanuel Levy, Variety ), "a delicately
conceived, fearless film" that is like "a long tragic poem" (David Denby,
The New Yorker ), "one of the year's best" (Roger Ebert, the Chicago
Sun-Times ). The New York Times ' Maslin calls it a "stunning debut
feature" for director Kimberly Peirce, and Entertainment Weekly 's Owen
Gleiberman calls Hilary Swank, a Beverly Hills 90210 veteran who plays
Brandon, "extraordinary." (Watch the trailer on the official site, and an article in 
                  Slate
                on how well
the film reflects the facts of the actual story.)

            

               
                  Superstar
                (Paramount Pictures). "If Superstar
were meatloaf--and that would be an improvement--the recipe would be 4 pounds
bread crumbs to 3 ounces sirloin. Make that chuck," opines John Anderson in the
Los Angeles Times . Most reviewers agree with this assessment, saying the
Saturday Night Live sketch featuring Molly Shannon as nerdy, horny,
tortured Catholic schoolgirl Mary Katherine Gallagher--with a signature
pratfall that exposes her large white underpants--does not translate well to
the big screen. The biggest problem: The character is "so sad and helpless, so
hard to like, so impossible to empathize with, that watching it feels like an
act of unkindness" (Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ). A few concede that
the film is "amusing if uneven" (Dennis Harvey, Daily Variety ), and
Stephen Hunter gives the film a decidedly upbeat review: "The character works
because Shannon so precisely gets the dank weirdness of the truly alone. And
because she shows her underpants a lot." Reading further, one questions his
motives when he describes her thus: "her legs askew, her too-tiny schoolgirl
kilt aflutter and the little white delta of her panties flapping before the
world, we sense someone profoundly disturbed yet poignant at the same time."
(the Washington Post ). (Click here to
find out more about Shannon and here
to listen to an audio clip of her in character.)

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  Pu
               
               
                  -239 and Other Russian Fantasies: A Novella
and Stories
               , by Ken Kalfus (Milkweed Editions). Strong reviews for this
collection of stories set in Soviet Russia: These "crafty, nerve-rattling tales
are among the most unusual and interesting now being written" ( Kirkus
Reviews ). Characters range from a nuclear reactor employee who tries to
steal and sell the plutonium of the title in order to support his family after
he gets radiation poisoning, to a girl who is convinced there is a link between
her onset of puberty and the death of Stalin. The only sour note comes from Jim
Shepard in the New York Times Book Review , who writes in an otherwise
laudatory review that "a surplus of sobriety may account for what weaknesses
the collection has." (Click here
to read the first chapter.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  The
               
               
                  Fragile
               , by Nine Inch Nails
(Nothing/Interscope). Excellent reviews and a debut at No. 1 on
Billboard 's pop chart (it then dove down to No. 16) for Trent Reznor's
first offering in five years. The double album is "a musical treasure trove.
... Hard rock simply doesn't get any smarter, harder, or more ambitious than
this" (Jim DeRogatis, the Chicago Sun-Times ). What sets Reznor (who
records under the name Nine Inch Nails) apart from the techno/goth-rock pack?
His knack for pop hooks and appealing beats in the midst of all the aural
chaos: "[W]hen you listen up close you get engrossed in the buried sonic twists
and turns; when you turn it up loud Reznor bangs your head with great rockers"
(Rob Sheffield, Rolling Stone ). (Watch the video
from the album on the official Nine Inch Nails Web site.)

            

               
                  Garth
               
               
                  Brooks in ... the Life of Chris
Gaines
               , by Garth Brooks (EMD/Capitol). Garth Brooks shocks the world by
putting out a pop album under the fictional persona of Chris Gaines, giving
himself a radical makeover complete with soul patch, eye makeup and, most
startling of all, no cowboy hat: "[H]e looks a bit like Trent Reznor crossed
with a guy who eats a lot of cheese steaks" (Christopher John Farley,
Time ). The music, though, is anything but shocking. It's "drab,
anonymous pop" (Robert Hilburn, the Los Angeles Times ) with a few
Babyface-style R&B numbers thrown in for good measure. The consensus: "It's
neither a great pop album nor a great Brooks album" (Brian Mansfield, USA
Today ). (Visit
Garth Central to find out more about
Brooks and his alter ego.)

         
      
   
