
   
   
      
         
             Grade Expectations

            Next month, college students around the country
will return to campus, hoping, among other things, to achieve high grades. Of
course, "high" is a moving target. I remember when C meant "average"; today,
whenever I turn in my students' final grades, the dean's office instructs me to
treat C as the "minimum acceptable grade." This side of Lake Wobegon, we call
that grade inflation.

            It's a cliché that when grades are inflated they
convey less information. The cliché is only half true. On the one hand,
inflated grades fail to distinguish between the merely above-average and the
truly superior. But on the other hand, inflated grades do a super job of
distinguishing among fine gradations of weakness. When the average grade is B,
the strong students are all lumped together with A's, while the weak ones are
sorted into C's, D's, and F's.

            That's still a net loss
in valuable information, because employers care more about making distinctions
at the top than about making distinctions at the bottom. Therefore, college
degrees, which derive their value from the information they carry, become less
valuable on average. Here's a quick example: Mary the A student is worth
$40,000 to an employer and Jane the B student is worth $30,000; if grade
inflation makes it impossible to tell them apart, you might expect an employer
to offer them $35,000 apiece. But the inability to distinguish Mary from Jane
makes it harder to assign them to appropriate tasks. That lowers their average
value to, say, $32,000, which is what they both get paid. Jane wins and Mary
loses, but Mary's loss exceeds Jane's gain.

            Does that mean that above-average students should object to
grade inflation? Not necessarily, because students do not live by starting
salaries alone. There are advantages to living with less competitive pressure,
and those advantages could more than offset the financial losses.

            Besides, students don't
bear the full burden of those financial losses. As degrees become less
valuable, colleges must cut tuition or lose enrollments. (Or, more precisely,
they must sacrifice some growth in tuition or in enrollments, both of which
have been rising for reasons that have nothing to do with grade inflation.) A
college that can distinguish itself from the pack by maintaining high standards
should be able to reap substantial rewards in the marketplace, because its
degrees are worth more.

            If colleges pay the price for grade inflation, why do they
allow it? Partly, it's because colleges don't assign grades. Professors assign
grades, and professors face perverse incentives. Being human, they tend to take
a special interest in their own students and are therefore tempted to give
those students a boost at the expense of the anonymous strangers who signed up
for someone else's class. Besides, easy graders are more popular on campus. The
costs of leniency--measured in lost reputation--are spread over the entire
school, while the benefits are concentrated in the professor's own classroom.
Therefore the professor is biased toward leniency.

            The problem, then, is in
the gap between the professor's interests and the college's. Any solution must
involve narrowing that gap. That's where tenure comes in. An untenured
professor is like a corporate bondholder--as long as the institution stays
above water in the short run he's happy. A tenured professor is like a
corporate stockholder--he has a permanent stake in the fortunes of the
institution. Professors should have job security for the same reason Alan
Greenspan should have job security: It instills a healthy respect for the long
run.

            According to a widespread belief, grade inflation took off
during the Vietnam War era, in response to the idiosyncrasies of the Selective
Service System. According to an equally widespread belief, the late '60s and
early '70s were also a time when tenure became far more elusive. Professors
began moving from one school to another every few years, with little reason to
care about the reputational damage they left in their wakes. So perhaps the war
was irrelevant; grade inflation was the inevitable consequence of upheaval in
the tenure system.

            But tenure is at best a
partial solution to the incentive problem, because even a tenured professor
shares only a fraction of his institution's successes and failures. Let me
propose some improvements. First, college transcripts could show each
professor's overall grade distribution, allowing employers to interpret each
individual grade in context. Then, instead of damaging his colleagues'
credibility, the easy grader would damage only his own. Second, the dean's
office could assign each professor a "grade budget" consisting of a certain
number of A's, B's, etc. Once you've awarded, say, 10 A's, you can't award any
more till next year. (To cover extraordinary circumstances, I'd be willing to
allow horse-trading among professors--three A's for five B's, say--and perhaps
occasional borrowing against next year's budget.)

            A grade budget is not exactly the same thing as a mandatory
curve, because it would allow professors the flexibility to give more high
grades in one class if they're willing to give fewer in another. Still, every
now and then, a professor would have four genuine A students and only three A's
to give out. One of those students would suffer unjustly. But the A students
are precisely the ones who suffer unjustly from grade inflation. The question
is not how to eliminate injustice--which is, as always, impossible--but how to
minimize it.

            For the individual professor, a grade budget is a
stifling constraint. That doesn't make it a bad thing. Economic theory tells us
that when everyone is polluting a communal stream, everyone can benefit from
enforced moderation. It always hurts to be constrained, but sometimes it's
worth it if your neighbors are constrained too. With grade budgets, professors
would be forced to give fewer A's, but the A's they gave would be more
valuable.

            If grade budgets are such a good idea, why don't we
have them? That's a question about politics, not economics, so maybe it's best
directed to a different sort of expert. In cases like this, it's the
economist's job to explain where we ought to be headed, and the political
scientist's job to explain why we can't get there from here.

         
      
   
