
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Coke and Porn</SPAN></SPAN>

             

            

               
                  Economist , Aug. 14
            

            The
cover story assails the widening health gap between
rich and poor countries. Of kids who die before age 5, 98 percent live in the
developing world. Alliances between nongovernmental organizations and drug
companies could catalyze research into the diseases that plague poor nations.
... An article endorses an antitrust crackdown on Coca-Cola.
Italy's competition authority has concluded that Coke abused its dominant
market position by preventing retailers from selling Pepsi. ... A
profile of porn mogul Steven Hirsch says that his
Vivid Video dominates Silicone Valley because he recreated the studio system
that used to govern Hollywood. Vivid cornered the market on porn queens by
signing them to package contracts, promoting them heavily, and sending them on
incredibly lucrative strip-club tours.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Aug. 30
            

            A
piece blasts environmentalists for ginning up controversy
over "endocrine disrupters," man-made chemicals that allegedly disrupt human
reproduction even in trace amounts. The research into endocrine disrupters has
been wildly distorted, and there is no compelling evidence of the most
spectacular claim: that the pollutants have lowered sperm counts. This hasn't
stopped greens from using endocrine disrupters to raise money and grab
attention. ... The cover story on the creepy marriage of Slobodan Milosevic says the
Yugoslav chief is largely ruled by his wife Mira Markovic, a fervent Communist.
Both believe that they alone stand against American world domination.
... An article describes DigiPen Institute of Technology, a Seattle
college sponsored by Nintendo where students learn nothing but video-game
programming. The best students drop out and take high-paying jobs with game
manufacturers.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Aug. 15
            

            The
cover story asks: "Who Lost Russia?" Some blame the Clinton administration's
blind support of Boris Yeltsin and International Monetary Fund loans or
America's insistence on economic "shock therapy" for Russia's deterioration. In
fact, Russia was never America's to lose: It has declined because of the
corrosive legacy of communism on civil society. ... An article attacks
the insular Washington establishment. Bob Woodward's latest book typifies the
"lie-free, alcohol-free, womanizing-free" standards of the establishment. The
moralistic reaction of the press to Clinton's foibles demonstrates Washington's
elitist insularity.

            

               
                  Newsweek
                
               and Time , Aug. 16
            

            
               The Blair Witch
Project takes both covers; Time 's package is meatier. Both

                  Time
                and 
                  Newsweek
                concur that the horror vérité flick's
success will prompt Hollywood to imitate Blair Witch 's guerilla
marketing tactics: They include an amazing Internet site, fake "missing"
posters for the film's actors, and leaked previews. Time says the
$35,000 movie will have the highest profit margin in film history. Both mags
rehash now-familiar Blair Witch trivia: The filmmakers sent the actors
into the woods for eight days with cameras and only a thin plotline for
direction, then spooked their stars with nighttime raids. Time
reports that some fans refuse to believe that the story is
fictional.

            
               Time wonders how the United States will handle "hard to place"
recipients when the five-year welfare limit comes up in 2001. Persistent
welfare cases don't get jobs because of mental illness, substance abuse,
transportation obstacles, child-care difficulties, and simple lack of interest.
Liberals think more job training could help. Conservatives concede that some
safety net may be necessary.

            
               Newsweek notes that while the Dalai Lama promotes religious understanding
and meditation, he opposes abortion, contraception, and homosexual acts.
... An essay on the Atlanta shooter argues that he epitomizes the
malaise of modern men disassociated from the bonds of fraternity and patriarchy
that shaped their fathers' lives.

            
               
                  U.S. News &
World Report
               
               , Aug. 16-23
            

            A
double issue examines life in 1000 A.D. The Islamic and Chinese empires were
world powers, but the conversion of the Magyars, Russians, and Vikings to
Christianity was setting the stage for Europe's ascent. A piece hints that China lost the massive technological
advantage it held in 1000 because its mandarin bureaucrats imposed too many
regulations. An article says that if you were alive in 1000, you probably
would have been a miserable peasant. ... A story says that there is still virtually no evidence linking
the Sudanese pharmaceutical plant bombed by the United States last year to
chemical weapons production or terrorist Osama Bin Laden. Officials in charge
of the bombing never consulted the experts who could have told them that the
plant was legit.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , Aug. 16
            

            An
article reprises the Microsoft antitrust trial. The software giant belatedly
realized the importance of courting politicians and the press, but the
Microsoft charm offensive is too late: The company has already been tarred as a
bully in the court of public opinion. Bill Gates feels so embattled that he
can't contain his anger or make rational choices about how to settle
Microsoft's no-win predicament. ... A piece speculates about the IPO
potential of online pornographers. The sponsor of pussy.com is preparing to go
public. Despite huge profits, many e-pornographers have a hard time finding
bankers willing to represent them. ... A profile of Oscar Goodman
suggests that Las Vegas elected the mayor it deserves. The former mob-lawyer is
crowd-pleasing, casino-friendly, and proud of his colorful past, just like the
city he serves. ... An item condemns the indictment of Linda Tripp as
spiteful and politically motivated.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , Aug. 16
            

            The
cover
story joins the chorus against the Iowa straw poll and attacks the Iowa
caucus, too. The straw poll is bogus because the candidates pay their
supporters' participation fees and the horserace-hungry media overblows its
significance. The state is a poor bellwether, because it is disproportionately
old, white, rural, and conservative. ... An article details
the desperation among the second-string candidates. Lamar Alexander sent out a
press release to announce that Joe Klein was writing an item about his
campaign. Steve Forbes allegedly attempted to hire temps to vote for him and is
offering straw-poll supporters free balloon rides and face-painting for their
kids.

         
      
   
