
   
   
      
         
            Two Wild and Crazy Guys

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Bowfinger
                (Universal Pictures). Great reviews for
this Eddie Murphy-Steve Martin comedy about a low-rent movie-maker (Martin) and
his ragtag stable of actors: "Perhaps the funniest movie for grownups so far
this year" (Richard Schickel, Time ). Martin, out of desperation, hires a
painfully awkward nerd (Murphy) who has no film experience other than being "an
active renter at Blockbuster" but who bears a striking resemblance to action
star Kit Ramsey (also played by Murphy). "It's one of those comedies where
everything works," writes Roger Ebert (the Chicago Sun-Times ). A few
find the film spotty ("likable albeit hit-and-miss"--Kenneth Turan, the Los
Angeles Times ), but most agree this ranks with Martin's and Murphy's best
comic works. (Click here to find out more about Murphy and here to find out more about Martin.)

            

               
                  Brokedown Palace
                (20 th Century Fox Film
Corp.). In a strikingly similar plot to last year's Return to Paradise ,
Kate Beckinsale and Claire Danes star as two recent high-school grads who
travel to Bangkok, Thailand, on a whim; they get mixed up with an Australian
con artist and wind up in jail with 33-year sentences for drug smuggling. The
critics are unmoved: "just another lurid, contrived, xenophobic tale about
Americans trapped in hideous foreign prisons" (Kevin Thomas, the Los Angeles
Times ). A few call Danes' performance better than the rest of the film but
concede that even her nice turn can't save the film. (Click here to see a
boatload of pictures of Danes.)

            

               
                  Illuminata
                (Overseas FilmGroup). John Turturro
directs, co-writes, and stars in a story set in turn-of-the-century New York
about an acting troupe whose onstage and offstage lives intertwine. Most
critics report mixed reactions: "[T]his handsome, airtight meditation on art,
celebrity, love, and rampant repertory-group horniness indulges in a lot of
very American navel gazing" (Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ).
Janet Maslin gives the film its most upbeat review, calling it an "enormously
fond homage to the world of acting, beguilingly presented and filled with
knowing backstage humor" (the New York Times ). Two stars get special
note for their performances: Christopher Walken as a flamboyantly foppish
critic and Susan Sarandon as an aging but still dynamite diva. (Click here to
visit the John Turturro Shrine.)

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  The Woman Who Cut off Her Leg at the Maidstone Club
               ,
by Julia Slavin (Henry Holt). In Slavin's debut collection of fantastical and
surreal stories, characters fall in love with trees, swallow their lawn-care
professionals, disintegrate (literally), and--as you may have guessed from the
title--cut off their legs at chi-chi country clubs in the Hamptons. Critics
respond positively for the most part: "even at their most outlandish these
stories never feel forced ... Slavin's uncluttered, room-temperature prose
renders the monstrous familiar, even beautiful" (Charles Taylor, the New
York Times Book Review ). Others note that "[i]t seems to be a common,
almost universal, tactic in American literature to depict the suburbs as a
duplicitous world where a safe, materialistic, blandly cheerful surface
conceals a dark secret life" and that the stories' predictable outlandishness
verges on becoming "precious" (Judy Budnitz, the Village Voice ). Or as
Kirkus Reviews writes, "Slavin has a warped sense of humor and enjoys
rubbing the reader's nose in it." (Read the first chapter here.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Introducing Dorothy Dandridge
                (HBO; Saturday, Aug.
21; 9 p.m.). Halle Berry's pet biopic (she stars and executive produces) of
Dandridge, the first African-American to earn an Oscar nomination for Best
Actress, gets a lukewarm reception: "a devoted but ultimately dull hagiopic"
marred by "a flat script and uninteresting narrative" (James Poniewozik,
Time ). Some of the more sordid parts of Dandridge's life have been left
out, and several critics say that while Berry captures Dandridge's beauty and
glamour, she lacks her heat and sensuality. Berry has said she hopes this movie
will launch her into the kind of leading roles that are (as in Dandridge's day)
unavailable to black women; Variety seems to think it will, weighing in
with a great review: "an enthralling biopic ... her most heartfelt performance
to date" (Laura Fries). (Click here to find out more about the movie and here to
find out more about Dandridge.)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Movie
            

            
               
                  Detroit Rock City
                (New Line Cinema). Pans for this
tale of four high-school boys and their quest to watch a Kiss concert: "loud,
vulgar, cartoonish, obnoxious, dizzying, disposable and more than a little bit
shrill" (Jim DeRogatis, the Chicago Sun-Times ). Highlight: a tongue-cam
point of view from inside Gene Simmons' mouth.

         
      
   
