
   
   
      
         
            The Road to Beverly Hills

            Dillon, Colo.; Wednesday,
Oct. 6

            We were somewhere around Kansas when the drugs
began to take hold. Benadryl, Prednisone, and Cimetidine make a potent little
combination. I was out for three hours, during which Bob violated our carefully
negotiated cassette agreement by playing two of his loud Germanic rock tapes
back-to-back. In the middle of my drugged-out stupor, I believe I heard
something on the radio about how Jenny Craig is paying Monica Lewinsky $10,000
for each pound she loses on Jenny Craig's weight-loss program. But wait a
minute. Why would this convince an average overeater that the Craig program
works? The average person isn't going to be paid $10,000 for every pound she
sheds. The McSalad Report: Since Hagerstown, I've been unable to find a
McDonald's that sells the McSalad Shaker. In fact, most McDonald's staffers
look at me like I'm an escaped lunatic when I ask for the product. (It doesn't
help that I'm still wearing my hospital identification bracelet.) Using the
power of the Internet, I calculated the chances that any given McDonald's will
carry this major dietetic innovation. The news is grim. There are approximately
12,000 McDonald's outlets in the United States. There are only 900 outlets that
carry the McSalad Shaker, and 550 of them are concentrated in Southern
California. That leaves only 350 for the rest of the nation. Even if those are
equally distributed, this means I only have a 1-in-32.8 chance of walking into
a McDonald's that serves the McSalad Shaker. Good grief. The odds that I'll
sleep with Bob are better than that!

            New thought: I've noticed that nobody in the United
States says "You're welcome" anymore. In Canada, where I'm from, "You're
welcome" is still the customary follow up to "Thank you." But here, when you
say "Thank you," the best response you can hope for is, "No--thank you ."
Sometimes you get total silence. And the most common response is "Yup" or worse
yet, a low, honking "Uh Huhhh."

            Is there any deep social meaning to this shift? Is
it that Americans are becoming more sensitive and "You're welcome" sounds
immodest, even aggressive, as if a huge favor has been done and is owed?
(Indeed, the only accepted use of "You're welcome" seems to be as an actively
hostile reminder of ingratitude--"You're welcome," as in "You forgot to say
thank you, you asshole.") Or does it just sound too formal? My own theory
(which I admit may be a stretch--but remember, I'm on drugs) is that it is part
of a large anti-community trend: People want to have as little to do with other
people as possible. Elaborate exchanges of respect imply a degree of
entanglement Americans now wish to avoid.

            Another disturbing trend: Bob has taken to removing
progressively more of his clothing in my presence. The first night, he was
walking around the hotel room without his shirt on. Then, the next morning, he
casually mooned me. And yesterday, I looked up into the large mirror on our
hotel wall only to see Bob emerge from the bathroom en déshabillé . "It
was an accident," he claimed. "Who knew the mirror was there?" The man is so
transparent.

         
      
   
