
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Preparing for a United Korea</SPAN></SPAN>

            

               
                  
                     
                        Economist
                     , July 10
               
            

            The
cover story forecasts that North Korea is doomed to
imminent collapse. South Korean President Kim Dae Jung must strengthen that
country's democracy and institute more market reform to prepare for a single
Korea. ... The editors urge a halt to the coddling of Kim Jong Il.
The North Korean leader's plan to test another long-range missile is proof that
Kim can only be persuaded to back down by the threat of economic sanctions.
... An article worries that American banks are shakier than
they look. Though U.S. banks boast mounting profits, the credit quality of
their loan portfolios has declined precipitously. ... Another
piece advocates new measures to discourage the trend
toward recruiting kids into armed conflict, including raising the U.N.
Convention minimum age for soldiering from 15 to 18 and pledging to withhold
recognition from rebel groups that recruit kid fighters.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine, July 11
            

            The
cover story concludes, as previously predicted, that the abortifacient RU-486
will revolutionize the politics of abortion. The pharmaceutical company that
plans to market the drug won't name its manufacturers, lest pro-lifers hound
them out of business. RU-486 will make abortions less invasive and more
politically tenable, since it can be administered early in a pregnancy by a
wide range of practitioners in the privacy of a doctor's office. ... An
article describes how Epinions.com, a new Internet company offering an online
"Zagats-for-everything," started up in 12 weeks. Typical of "second-generation"
Web firms, the company was founded by Silicon Valley veterans who abandoned
fortunes in unvested stock options to pursue their entrepreneurial dreams. The
firm quickly coalesced based on professional connections and recruited capital
before writing any code. ... A photo essay, pinpointing where executions
and incinerations took place, documents the destruction Serbs wreaked on one
Kosovar street.

            
               
                  The
Nation , July 19
            

            The
cover story assails the avarice of drug companies for
developing lucrative lifestyle drugs to treat impotence, baldness, wrinkles,
and toenail fungus, while ignoring unprofitable deadly diseases. Since 1975,
only 1 percent of new medicines were developed to treat tropical diseases.
Meanwhile the pet drug market is exploding, producing pills to alleviate
separation anxiety in dogs. ... A sidebar castigates the
Clinton administration for championing the interests of drug companies to the
detriment of public health by trying to prevent the sale of generic substitutes
in developing nations. ... An editorial condemns the Supreme Court's spate of decisions
that have sacrificed individual rights to protect state rights.

            
               
                  Newsweek , July
12
            

            The
cover story forecasts that within six years Latinos will
become the predominant minority in the United States, due to booming
immigration and birth rates. Hispanics will alter the country, since they are
heavily Catholic, concentrated in important electoral states, and vote in
increasing numbers. ... Latin Gen-Xers--called Generation Ñ --cling to their Hispanic heritage and shape
popular culture through their artistic contributions. ( Time beat
Newsweek to this conclusion with its recent Latin pop cover story
featuring Ricky Martin.) ... Political handicappers claim Elizabeth
Dole's anal-retentiveness will hinder her campaign, according to an analysis . Her attention to detail might be what the GOP needs
if George W. keeps confusing Slovakia and Slovenia. ... An article counsels that Hillary Clinton must overcome the
carpetbagger question and press-phobia to win the New York Senate race. Mayor
Giuliani has his own problems: He will be weakened by a tough primary
challenge, and if a GOP challenger runs in the general election under the
Conservative Party banner, Hillary will cakewalk back to Washington.

            
               
                  U.S. News &
World Report , July 12
            

            The
cover story assesses HRC. By protesting Medicare cuts,
Hillary signaled her distance from her husband, but she still needs to
establish a rationale for her candidacy. ... A piece maps the minefield of New York state politics. Hillary
must energize blacks and Hispanics without alienating white ethnic suburbanites
who favor Giuliani. Rudy plans to consolidate his lead in the burbs by pushing
school vouchers, while Hillary will tap into health-care frustrations and make
the election a national contest. ... An article argues that projected budget surpluses rest on the
shaky assumption that Congress will maintain budget ceilings by slicing popular
domestic programs.

            
               
                  Time , July
12
            

            The
cover story condemns the culture of child's play. An
estimated 40 million American youths participate in organized sports. Parents
send their kids to costly summer clinics and hire professional coaches. The
ultracompetition is spoiling the fun, squeezing family schedules, and
increasing sports-related injuries. ... A piece asks how best to topple Slobodan Milosevic. Washington
wants the pope to condemn Slobo, and the White House might offer humanitarian
aid to Serb cities that oppose him. But the current coalition of opposition
groups is too factious to stage a coup. ... An article condemns President Clinton for ingratitude toward his
loyal vice president. Clinton openly criticizes Al Gore's political skills and
privately claims that he could do a better job campaigning than Gore has.

            
               
                  The New Yorker ,
July 12
            

            The
cover story warns that smallpox poses a catastrophic threat to the United
States. The highly contagious virus was declared eradicated in 1979, and
routine vaccinations ended. But the CIA suspects some nations of stockpiling
the virus for use as a biological weapon. An uncontrolled smallpox epidemic
could be more deadly than a hydrogen bomb attack because the United States
maintains only about 7 million doses of vaccine. ... A piece echoes
speculation that Hillary Clinton's Senate run might be motivated by her
ambition to one day run for president. Its only evidence is a chorus of rumors,
none traceable to the Clintons. An accompanying illustration pictures Hillary
taking the oath of office for the presidency while Bill watches in the
background.

         
      
   
