
   
   
      
         
             Remembering Herb

            "A reviewer once said that I was the master of the
'Don't Know' school of economics," wrote Herbert Stein in his last book,
What I Think . And then he added, "I don't know that I am the master of
it, but I surely avow membership in it more openly than most other economists
do."

            That mixture of wry humor and openness to further
argument endeared Herb to the many friends and admirers who mourn his death
today at the age of 83. His embrace of don't-knowism was real. ("I have always
been mystified by international finance since I took a course in it at the
University of Chicago 62 years ago," he wrote in a 
                  Slate
                ""
exchange a year ago--almost, but not quite, embarrassing me out of a
disquisition on the International Monetary Fund and the sad state of the
Russian and Japanese economies.) But his reticence was not grounded in false
modesty. Herb well knew how keen was his intellect and how sharp his wit. And,
especially in his earlier years, he did not suffer fools gladly--at least if
they were stubborn in their foolishness. "Most people--even those who read
editorial and op-ed pages--do not want to encounter opposing views," he mourned
in What I Think . "They want to be massaged not informed."

            But mind-massages were
not for Herb. He recognized, perhaps better than most of his economist
colleagues, how complicated and fast-changing the world can be. And so he kept
his mind open to new facts, new ideas whether about , , , or ("what produces
them for most people has very little to do with politicians").

            Unfortunately one of Herb's all-time great pieces of
parody, written for the Wall Street Journal , on whose Board of
Contributors he sat for more than two decades, is not available on the Web. But
anyone with access to back copies of the Journal should consult "The
Full Marriage Act of 1977," in which Congress, having expressed its ranked
preference for marriages made in heaven, arranged by the participants, arranged
through the personals column of New York magazine, or arranged by
mothers, undertakes to provide "spouses of last resort."

            Herb was as ready for new
adventures as he was for new ideas. How many economists of Herb's distinction,
accomplishments, and years would, for example, undertake to write for an online
magazine startup? Yet, even before 
                  Slate
                moved from Kinsleyspace
to cyberspace, Herb signed up to moderate the magazine's "." And how fewer
still would be those with the daring (and the sense of humor) to top off that
taxing experiment with an even bolder venture: "." 
                  Slate
               's
original adviser to the public on matters of morals, manners, and
macroeconomics was, in fact, none other than Herbert Stein, former adviser to
presidents. Herb did it anonymously, of course (though a sharp-eyed reader
might have guessed from the drawing of "Prudence" that accompanied the column
if they hadn't already been tipped off by the tone). But Herb enjoyed it so
much--and he did it with such flair--that I don't think he would mind my
revealing the secret.

            And he did enjoy it. "One cure for unrequited love,"
Prudence reminded a lovelorn reader, "is requited love. There are other cures
also, such as devotion to the study of the Finnish language." To a reader
worried about being bad at small talk, Prudence counseled, "You are making too
much of this. What everyone wants in a conversationalist is not a good talker
but a good listener. You could be Oscar Wilde and no one would go home from a
party saying, 'Gee, Oscar was witty tonight.' Many would go home saying, 'Gee,
I was witty tonight.' " In the day of automatic door unlockers, should a man
still walk around a car to unlock the door for the woman he is escorting?
Absolutely, Prudence replied, noting the opportunity thus afforded for "sweetly
kissing her on the cheek. Modern gadgets will not do all that and real men
don't want them to. Something has to be left for the men to do." As for the shy
advice-seeker worried "about the possibility of having to kiss a girl,"
Prudence replied, "If that situation arises, you will have no problem. Perhaps
you will 'have' to kiss her because she has kissed you. In that case your
spontaneous, unpondered reaction will be to kiss her back. Your problem will
not be hesitancy about kissing but addiction to it."

            Herb was deeply saddened by the death of his wife,
Mildred, a few years ago. He wrote about his loss only indirectly, in what was
surely the most popular of his "It Seems to Me ..." columns in

                  Slate
               , "." Why, he asked, as he watched husbands and wives
walking up the hill to the Kennedy Center for a performance, "is this basic
woman so valuable to the man whose hand or arm she is holding?" And in his
exploration of the question, it was clear that he had in mind the wife with
whom he had "walked up that hill to the Kennedy Center many times."

            Herb once set down a list of "," sayings that you
won't find in Bartlett's but that "resonated" with him. The authors
ranged from Milan Kundera and Dante to , whom he served as chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisers. He also included an aphorism of his own: "If
something cannot go on forever, it will stop." Sadly, that was true of Herb
himself.

         
      
   
