
   
   
      
         
            
<P>Is the &quot;Sensation&quot; Art Worth the Fuss?</P>

            

               
                  Click here to view the entire "Sensation" show
online.
               
            

            I think you may be aware, Deborah, that "Sensation"
had outings in Europe before arriving in the New World (you rap my knuckles for
a supposedly unseen critique). I saw the show more than enough times at
London's Royal Academy in 1997 to form an enduring impression of it, and you
will note that I confined specific criticism in my letter to a painting ;
unlike sculptures or installations, a painting is essentially the same object
wherever it's exhibited. Ofili's work was featured in depth last year at the
Tate Gallery's exhibition for the 1998 Turner Prize, which the artist won.

            I like your suggestive angle on the negritude of
Ofili's Madonna. And your anger at Giuliani for picking on a black artist may
well be justified. (You'd think he'd have learned a lesson about taking
pot-shots at Africans in the outer boroughs.) But even if we accept that
Ofili's dung motif is not to be read as shit but as an exotic artefact, what
about those porno-cutouts? Of course, we don't want to get caught up in the
intentional fallacy, and a work of art of strength should be open to a variety
of interpretations, but I think there's a danger of missing the plot (and
incidentally patronizing African culture) if we deny Ofili's Madonna its
subversiveness, iconoclasm, and sheer naughtiness.

            It's good, too, that we should get straight on the
case of national differences between U.K. and U.S. neo-conceptualism. You are
quite right that the Brits are dead against coming over as theoretically
highbrow. If anything, they veer in the opposite direction--"dumb enough to be
a conceptualist," to paraphrase Duchamp--but is banality the only antidote to
aridity? Almost as painful to my sensibility as the pomposity of
Derrida-quoting Whitney Program graduates is the smarmy, too-clever-by-half wit
of the YBAs. What on earth is one supposed to get out of Simon Patterson's
The Great Bear , which appropriates the London Underground map (a classic
of '30s graphic design incidentally), replacing the tube stops with a seemingly
random array of celebrities, historic and current? I don't think that
meaningless pretension is any less offensive than the over-meaningful
variety.

            "Damien as dangerous" is a new one on me. In London
he is known as an affable restaurateur. (His urinal in the gents at
Pharmacy,which he owns, a vitrine stuffed with detritus, is a masterpiece of
interior décor with attitude .) He is, for sure, the leader of the YBA
pack, even if he has been surpassed in sheer nastiness by his colleagues, the
Chapman twins, Sarah Lucas, Alain Miller. Hirst's is a stylish
nihilism--abjection on ice. Sure it references American minimalism, and sends
it up, but that's hardly his unique achievement: American avant-garde art has
been doing that almost since Judd and Morris, the pioneer minimalists, hit the
scene. And do we really think Hirst's shark in the tank would have been
possible without Jeff Koons?

            You say there are some
dogs in this show. I say there are a few pussy cats. I take some credit for
writing the first review of Jenny Saville, in the London Times , which
brought her work to the attention of Mr. Saatchi. I'm also on record as a fan
of Fiona Rae, and even have a soft spot for Keith Coventry, irritating though
he is. But the cats' gentle purring is drowned out by the dogs' hysterical
yapping. At least that was so in the way the show was packaged in London. I'm
ready for a miraculous transformation at the Brooklyn Museum, however. And to
be converted by your enthusiasm.

            
Best,

            
David

         
      
   
