
   
   
      
         
            Pushing Politics and Prozac

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I didn't think Jerry
Springer should , so I'm glad he decided not to. I do think you should run for
Congress. Not only does Congresswoman Prudie have a nice ring, but your
constituents/readers would definitely benefit from all the sound advice you
could impart to all those bozos such as Tom DeLay currently taking up space in
D.C. Some friends and I have collected $23 to get your campaign started. So
think about it.
            

            
               --Electorally
yours,
            

            

               Neil
            

            Dear Elect,

            If Prudie were paranoid
she would think some of her readers were trying to get her out of the advice
business, what with one fellow, "," wanting Prudie to run for president, and
now you suggesting Congress. Prudie, however, is not paranoid, so she thanks
you for the ... well, vote of confidence. As for the $23, why don't you start
PrudiePac and see if you can't straighten out the dolts in Washington?

            
--Prudie, politically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Two of my friends
have begun taking anti-depressants. One for depression, I guess, the other to
quit smoking. Because they are on anti-depressants now, they think EVERYONE
needs them and have literally been making appointments for their whole
families! Both have told me I definitely need them. I have a professional
therapist with whom I discussed this, and she disagrees. (My therapist is not
against medication, and in fact recommends it for some patients.) When I
explained this to these two ladies, they both shook their heads--like they know
better than my therapist. One came right out and shouted that I was in denial.
Wouldn't it be nice if people restricted their opinions to those areas in which
they had professional expertise? What do you think?
            

            

               --Christine, Rochester, N.Y.
            

            Dear Chris,

            The last time Prudie
checked, girlfriends could not prescribe drugs. It is a rule of human nature
that people often, when they add or subtract something from their lives, think
everyone else should do the same. Tune out the suggestions of these amateur
shrinks. You are right that it would be nice if people only spoke of things
about which they were expert. It would also be nice if every female over the
age of 16 had a $5,000 gift certificate at Tiffany's. Alas, my dear, neither
one is likely to come to pass.

            
--Prudie, realistically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Do we as a society
need a refresher course on what things to say (or not to say) to a pregnant
woman? My best friend is 37 weeks pregnant with her second child. She has been
getting comments about how large she is for the past three months. Worse than
even the comments, one woman just stood in front of my friend and gaped,
saying, "Oh my God!" Why would people feel the need to point out a pregnant
woman's size? And is there an appropriate response to these people that would
remind them their comments are not appreciated?
            

            
               --Sincerely,
            

            

               Annoyed in Omaha, Neb.
            

            Dear Ann,

            As for why people say
inappropriate things, it usually has to do with the connector cable between
brain and mouth being on the fritz. These rude and unappreciated remarks just
slip out; the verbal equivalent of being a klutz. The way Prudie knows this is
that she, herself, has made this mistake a time or two ... well, maybe three or
four. If your friend with the belly spanning two ZIP codes wants to have a
comeback, she might try looking down, then remarking, "Pretty good, huh? And
I'm only two months along." Prudie promises you the thoughtless person will
have nothing more to say.

            
--Prudie, pointedly

            

               
                  Prudie,
               
            

            
               My girlfriend is a
staunch supporter of Patrick Buchanan for prez. I feel Buchanan is way too
liberal for my taste (I have been a big Pat Robertson fan for years). The
girlfriend also listens to Rush Limbaugh, but I know that Rush has been a
running dog lackey of the liberal Republican news media for years. A typical
liberal country club Republican! I was going to support Sen. Bob Smith of New
Hampshire in his new Conservative Taxpayers Party, but now that he's withdrawn,
there seems to be no one true to the Reagan legacy. The question is, should I
dump the girlfriend?
            

            

               --Redmond, Wash.
            

            Dear Red,

            You're kidding, right?
The part about Buchanan being too liberal supplied the hint. And Redmond is
home base for 
                  Slate
               , so Prudie will offer a choice of answers
allowing for all contingencies. 1) If the political chasm is legitimate, and as
wide as you describe, yes, undo from the girlfriend. If you guys have such
different outlooks now , future differences have the potential for major
fireworks. 2) If you are a fellow Microsoftie pulling Prudie's leg to kill time
before a Jolt Cola-break, why don't you get back to work, hmmm?

            --Prudie,
constructively

         
      
   
