
   
   
      
         
            
<P><SPAN class=760110315-12101999>Mark Sikorski</SPAN></P>

            Captain's log: 2100 hours, underway in the South
Atlantic Ocean. Forward is heaving hypnotically to the gentle ocean
swells as we glide beneath a canopy of brilliant points of starlight. The
evening watches are set--on the bridge, combat information center, engineering
control center, and communications room; the smell of fresh pastries from the
galley is wafting throughout the ship. Most of the crew of 90 men and women
have settled in for the evening, taking advantage of a well-deserved lull in
activity. We are steaming northeast off the coast of Uruguay in position 35
degrees south latitude and 54 degrees west longitude, which is about 2,100
miles south of the equator. It has been three months and nearly 13,000 miles of
ocean since we've seen our homeport of Portsmouth, Va.; it's hard to believe
our families are still in another hemisphere.

            While not always thrilling, shipboard life uniquely
blends tradition and customs with modern technology and comforts. For example,
as the captain, I enjoy many of the perks traditionally offered in the early
days of sail. I have my own cabin (which is the largest stateroom in the ship),
I'm saluted as I walk on and off the bridge, and when I speak, people listen.
Flogging, I think, has been left off the modern perk list! In simple terms, the
buck stops with me. All actions and decisions are my responsibility--even if I
didn't make them. While my authority is absolute, so is my accountability; 90
lives depend on it. I can't think of too many job descriptions that carry
similar weight. I love my job, not because of personal gain, but for the
personal growth I see in my shipmates and for the service we provide our
country. I relayed a story to the crew one evening: We were traveling down the
Rio de la Plata River from Buenos Aires, Argentina, to Montevideo, Uruguay; the
river has a fairly narrow channel that required a navigational pilot to assist
us during the nine-hour transit. After a few short hours on the bridge, the
river pilot told me that I had a very well run and professional crew; he went
on to say that is why "America is the No. 1 country in the world." You can't
get much better than that.

            In the fast-paced, Internet-woven world we live in,
it's nice to take refuge in the simple aspects of being a sailor. I enjoy my
morning workouts on the stationary bike in our helicopter hangar--ocean
sunrises are as close to heaven on earth as you can get. I like to see the
gleam in the eye of a young officer when she handles the ship well alongside
the pier; mastering the effects of wind, tide, and current. I tell my wardroom
of 13 officers to eat "three squares" a day--mealtime has always been an
important aspect of shipboard life, more for its social aspects than anything
else. Plus, I have many of them convinced that my sunny disposition is due to a
well-fed stomach. I still get chills when my most junior crewmembers snap sharp
salutes when I approach them on the bridge. I can sense they are happy to
serve; America is truly blessed with the young Coast Guard men and women I have
the pleasure to serve with.

            Let me set the record straight before I leave you
with the illusion that life aboard a Coast Guard cutter is one step removed
from a cruise liner. A typical day underway is consumed with eight hours of
watches and eight hours of ship's work. There are boats to launch, helicopters
to land, training to conduct and guns to shoot. Throw in your three squares and
you've got an hour and change of free time. This ship is alive 24 by 7. When
the weather kicks up, fatigue accelerates tenfold: Your bones ache; stuff flies
loose; keeping a steady footing is hard work; sleep is nearly impossible. And
yet we persevere; it becomes personal--to weather a storm is one of the
ultimate challenges of the sea; to see it calm from its fury is like emerging
from the dark side of the moon; euphoric moods erupt only to be outdone by the
euphoria of returning home.

         
      
   
