
   
   
      
         
            The Gary Bauer Scandal

            Did
Gary Bauer commit adultery with a campaign aide? Rumors to that effect have
circulated for weeks. Monday, a New York Daily News gossip column asked, "What presidential
candidate is praying that a former secretary doesn't go public with her claim
that he's been having an affair with a twentysomething woman? Many on the
married Republican's campaign staff are already jumping ship." National
Journal 's Hotline broadcast that teaser, and radio host Don Imus linked
it to Bauer. The San Francisco Chronicle asked Bauer about the rumors
and published his denial Tuesday. At a news conference Wednesday, Bauer denied
that he had violated his marital vows or inappropriately touched anyone, and he
challenged the dozens of reporters on hand to produce evidence or a specific,
on-the-record allegation that he had done so.

            If
reporters had the evidence, they could have produced it. If not, they could
have closed their notebooks and walked away. Instead, they interrogated Bauer
for half an hour in front of eight TV cameras and wrote articles suggesting
that whether or not he had had an affair, he was wrong to have left open the
possibility that anyone might have thought he had done anything wrong. The
scandal isn't that Bauer committed adultery. The scandal is that without
proving that charge or even making it, the media have found ways to spin
lesser, derivative, and empty insinuations about him into a national story.
Let's examine the charges against him.

            

               1. Bauer committed 
               "the appearance of impropriety."
Unable to produce allegations of impropriety, reporters asked Bauer in
accusatory tones whether he had "met behind closed doors" with the aide,
Melissa McClard (answer: yes), and whether Bauer's aides had told him "that
people are asking questions [about it] and it's making people uncomfortable."
When Bauer challenged a reporter to define the alleged "inappropriate
behavior," the reporter replied, "That you were seen too often with a woman on
your campaign, who is described to me as being 26 years old and blond." Another
reporter accused Bauer of being "ambiguous, because you're not really telling
us ... can you understand the perception that you may have had an affair?" How
Bauer could refute such perceptions, questions, and discomfort was equally
ambiguous.

            Two
alleged Bauer accusers, former aides Charles Jarvis and Tim McDonald, finally
went on the record Wednesday. Jarvis said he had no proof of a sexual
relationship between Bauer and McClard, and McDonald said he believed Bauer's
denial of such a relationship. Rather than conclude that there was no story,
the Washington Post published an article, headlined
"Ex-Aides to Bauer Speak Out," which paraphrased the two men as saying Bauer's
meetings with McClard "looked" inappropriate and "lent themselves to gossip and
rumor." The Post quoted Jarvis as saying Bauer "has no business creating
that kind of appearance of impropriety."

            

               2. The 
               appearance of impropriety by a Christian
conservative is itself improper. A Post reporter pressed Bauer about
his closed-door meetings with McClard: "Billy Graham doesn't do it, James
Dobson doesn't do it. So [among] the people who you are close to, actually,
there is a sensitivity about meeting with women behind closed doors. I'm
not saying there should be one. I don't think there should. But there is
one." Thursday's Post reported that Jarvis and McDonald "said Bauer
spent hours behind closed doors with her and traveled alone with her, violating
the strict rules they believe govern conservative Christian married men in
their dealings with women." By framing the issue as "sensitivity," the
Post avoided taking responsibility for deeming Bauer's closed-door
meetings an important issue.

            

               3. Bauer 
               appeared to ignore allegations of the appearance
of impropriety. "Is it possible," a reporter asked Bauer, "that you may
have been engaging in behavior that was perfectly innocent [but] in the minds
of the people who work for you and respected you was inappropriate, and that
perhaps you--as it was put by someone to me--you appeared a little arrogant in
refusing to recognize, according to them, their complaints?" In other words,
Bauer's offense is that he dismissed a perception he knew to be false.

            

               4. Bauer 
               is covering up allegations of the appearance of
impropriety. Reporters asked Bauer whether aides had told him they were
"uncomfortable" about the appearance of his relationship with McClard. One
reporter asked whether Bauer's former secretary had told him, "I wish you
wouldn't behave this way with this woman." When Bauer challenged the reporter
to explain the meaning of "behave this way," the reporter admitted, "I don't
know."

            Bauer
denied that his aides had alleged actual impropriety: "No one leaving my
campaign has said, 'Gary, I am leaving your campaign because I believe you're
having an affair.' " He also denied that any perception of impropriety could be
justified: "I cannot imagine that anybody in a campaign would object to me
having a meeting behind closed doors with a professional woman." The
Post , seizing on the latter remark, reported that Jarvis "sharply
disputed Bauer." The sad truth, Jarvis told the Post , was that "people
have confronted Gary about the appearance of impropriety." Similarly,
USA
Today quoted Jarvis as saying, "Gary Bauer just went on national
television and refused to tell the truth." And what was that truth? That Jarvis
and others had quit the campaign because of their "concerns about the
relationship"--whatever that means.

            

               5. Bauer 
               improperly failed to confront the person who
apparently alleged the appearance of impropriety. "One would think," one
reporter lectured Bauer, "when you found that the source appeared to be [the
Forbes] campaign, that you would go directly to the head of that campaign and
say, 'Is this happening? Are you people doing this?' " Another reporter chimed
in, "For folks who are not presidential candidates, if somebody was spreading
rumors like that about them, I think the first instinct would be to go to the
suspected source and say, 'Are you doing this? And if so, please stop it.' Why
didn't you do that?"

            

               6. Bauer 
               failed to disprove the possibility of
impropriety. Unable to formulate a precise allegation, one reporter asked
Bauer whether his behavior with McClard had been "flirtatious or in any way
different from how you interact with other aides" (answer: no). When Bauer
challenged another questioner to explain what he meant by "inappropriate
behavior," the questioner replied, "How specific do you want to get? I'm not
sure I understand what you want." Responding to Bauer's assertion that he had
never violated his wedding vows, another reporter cracked, "President Clinton
said that too." Thursday's Chicago Tribune reported that Bauer "would not go much
further than indicating he was faithful to his wife." The collective
implication is that Bauer's denials must have been couched to protect some
unspecified kind of dalliance.

            

               7. Every 
               a
               llegation is a political
fact. Horse-race journalism ignores whether charges are true and focuses
instead on whether they're damaging. The first question to Bauer Wednesday was,
"Don't you just give this story more momentum by doing this?" Another reporter
asked, "How do you think your supporters are going to respond to all this?" The
Post , too scrupulous to say whether Bauer had done anything wrong or
even whether the perception that he might have done so would hurt him
politically, found one political scientist who "warned that Bauer could be
fatally wounded, in political terms, by the dispute" and another who "said
Bauer could help himself by saying, 'I wish I wouldn't have put myself in this
kind of situation, I'm sorry and I apologize.' " Whether the "situation" was a
misdeed or a perception was left unexplained. The Los
Angeles Times told readers that "the real news was the wall-to-wall
press throng" at the news conference.

            

               8. Bauer 
               showed bad judgment by letting the allegations of
an appearance of impropriety become a political problem. A Salon
reporter told Bauer, "A lot of us have heard this rumor. But to be quite
honest, I think most people in this room are never going to mention it and
probably didn't take it very seriously. But you've now elevated it to a point
that it will be on the evening news. And a lot of Americans, when they are
first introduced to you ... it will be for that--for denying an affair. What
does that say about your political judgment?" Within hours, Salon
published the reporter's derisive story about the press conference, titled
"Bauer: I am not a slut!"

            The
problem isn't that the media are malicious or are out to get Bauer. I know and
like at least two of the reporters who asked some of the most loaded questions
at the press conference. The problem is that they can't resist a hot story. A
sex scandal on the religious right, no matter how flimsy, seems too good to
pass up. Reporters think they have to ask the killer question or advance the
story, never mind which way it's going. The campaign is in overdrive, their
prey stands before them, and the heat of the moment carries them away. They
wonder whether Gary Bauer is strong enough to resist the urge. They should ask
the same question of themselves.

         
      
   
