
   
   
      
         
            No. 324: "Mad About Beef" 

            
               Fill in the blank
as Donald Gregg, a former American ambassador to South Korea, comments on some
recently declassified documents by offering this personal anecdote: "My
residence had just been broken into by six students angry about beef quotas.
They tried to burn my house down. And I thought, 'God Almighty, if they get
this mad about beef, what will they do when they learn we have _________ here?'
"
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
323)--"Smooth Talker":
            

            

               
                  "We deal in the basics, and all those basics are necessary
necessities," said a smiling CEO, patiently explaining to some CNNfn reporter
that the company would thrive even in an economic downturn. Why was that CEO
smiling?
               
            

            "Tina
honestly believes Talk will still be around in January."-- Daniel
Radosh
            

            
"Prozac? No, Saint Johnswort?"-- Al Cloutier
            

            
"Because he knew he'd never have to answer another question from that bitch Lou
Dobbs."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "I
like to smile also but not when I have to be patient. Then I frown a
little."-- Jon W. Davis
            

            "Hey,
what a CEO and a CNNfn reporter do in the privacy of a live broadcast is none
of our business, you know?"--Floyd Elliot
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            CNNfn and its more
appealing counterpart CNBC (more anchors who look like Harrison Ford, more
hints of futility and world weariness, fewer catchy names for segments--I
believe CNNfn has something called "Margin Monkeys") are the ESPN of business
news for an audience that watches the economy as if it were sports. Both sports
and the stock market are essentially dramatic events, that is, events whose
outcomes are unknown. Yanks or Braves could win; IBM could go up or down. Both
ESPN and CNBC offer an infinite supply of statistics that give the viewer the
illusion of deeper understanding. Many people, particularly many retired
people, begin their day by checking the box scores of yesterday's action on
their holdings. These one-day fluctuations make absolutely no difference in
one's financial circumstances, but watching them offers a fan's pleasure. How
did the team do last night? And following the market gives that intensified
enjoyment that all sports gamblers know: It's a lot more exciting to watch when
you've got a little money--or the savings of a lifetime--down on the game. I'd
certainly go to the track a lot more often if Ron Insana were running against a
big, mean dog.

            
               That's a Good
Thing Answer
            

            CEO Martha Stewart had just become an elegant,
tasteful billionaire through the IPO of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia
Inc.

            Offered at $18 a share, the stock climbed to 35
7/16, a gain of 96.9 percent, raising $129.6 million for the company.

            Incidentally, that CNNfn guy maintained the
station's usual hard-hitting standards by concluding their conversation this
way: "On a personal note, I'd like to say that for the last four Thanksgivings
we've done your balsamic glazed onions, and they were fantastic."

            Also going public Tuesday, World Wrestling
Federation Inc. closed up 49 percent, at 25 1/4 after its $17 open.

            Coincidentally, the CNNfn guy said, "On a personal
note, I'd like to say that for the last four Thanksgivings we've pummeled each
other into ersatz insensibility, and it was fantastic." Or perhaps he
didn't.

            The one-day IPO winner
was Indian Internet service provider Satyam Infoway Ltd. closing up 17 1/2, or
97.2 percent, at 35 1/2. The CNNfn guy had no personal anecdote for sucking up
to Satyam.

            
               Feelings, Nothing
More Than Extra
            

            I give the
self-assessment; you name the self-assessed.

            
               Feeling
            

            1. "I feel really great. Everyone welcomed me back
and has treated me so well."

            2. "I feel OK, I feel comfortable, so we'll just
see what happens really."

            3. "At times I feel as if I am cornered, as if I
can never make an approach."

            4. "I feel good about it."

            5. "I feel so much healthier."

            6. "I feel some frustration that there isn't more
happening in this field."

            7. "I feel it closing in
on me."

            
               Feeler
            

            1. Tonya Harding is back on ice, this time as a
pro, after a five-and-a-half year layoff for that whole clubbing Nancy Kerrigan
thing.

            2. Sir Paul McCartney is not looking for another
woman, more than a year after the death of his wife, but he's open to the
possibility of a new relationship, although probably not with Tonya Harding,
whose name didn't actually come up in the interview.

            3. Megawati Sukarnoputri doesn't feel other
political parties welcome an alliance with hers but, if I can read between the
lines--and I can't--worries that Paul McCartney wouldn't return her calls even
if she did get up the nerve to phone him.

            4. President Clinton feels good about working with
Republicans on the budget bill, and encourages you to make up some kind of
sophomoric joke about his yen for Megawati Sukarnoputri and Tonya Harding.

            5. Ms. Flores lost 75 pounds. She is among hundreds
of people who have responded to "Walk El Paso!" a fitness media blitz that
began in June 1998. President Clinton did not participate.

            6. U.N. human rights envoy Thomas Hammarberg (I'm
not sure what he weighs) feels Cambodia could be using recent political
stability as a chance to make progress on human rights. But is it? No.

            7. Frank McCourt feels
that Ireland is a great career move and a nice place to visit, but after just
three weeks ...

            
               Signs That the
Sixties Are Finally Over Ongoing Extra
            

            The Beatles' "All You Need is Love" now used in
commercial for "Sugar Coated Toxic Waste and Baby Seal Bits" breakfast cereal.
Or perhaps that was just an acid vision I had. Either way, bummer.

            OK, that one I made up. Participants are invited to
find similar but genuine bits of evidence that this magical (and turbulent)
decade has ended yet again.

            Replies to run
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Necessities, in ascending order: water, air,
pornography, toilet paper.

         
      
   
