
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Wine Whine</SPAN></SPAN>

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Sept. 24
            

            The
cover editorial applauds General Electric CEO Jack
Welch and the management trend of "creative destruction" he popularized.
Creative destruction creates tauter companies that can quickly respond to
market changes. ... In an essay , U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan urges U.N.
members to reach a consensus that the United Nations should intervene anywhere
human rights are being abused, regardless of territorial boundaries. ...
Winemaking is being corrupted by numerical review ratings, according to an
article . Vintners are providing unrepresentative
samples to rig the system and underproducing good but low-rated wines.

            

               
                  New
                
               
                  Republic, Oct. 4
            

            An
education cover package. One article argues for vouchers and disputes studies
critical of them. Private schools do not skim off the best students from
struggling public schools, and voucher students are not suspended at higher
rates. ... A piece touts the benefits of charter schools. Studies
indicate that the 1,684 charter schools are providing a better education to the
350,000 public school students they serve. Five studies suggest that charter
schools also stimulate conventional public schools to innovate and improve.
... Online continuing and executive education programs are a rip-off,
according to an article : Brand-name bricks-and-mortar universities
receive lots of revenue from them, but the quality of instruction is poor.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine, Sept. 19
               
            

            In the
fourth of six millennium issues, artists depict the millennium with predictably
burlesque results. ... Cockroaches devouring a tomato
symbolizes the destruction of the new world by European conquistadors.
... The environmental consequences of the industrial
revolution are caricatured by a picture of a bear and a coyote tethered, like
cliffhanger heroines, to a pile of logs in the path of an oncoming train.
... A collage of Bill Gates costumed as a Medici together with
Michael Eisner outside a fairytale castle represents the way "culture rode the
coattails of money" in the Renaissance and in the 1990s.

            

               
                  Time
               
               , Sept. 20
            

            The
cover story marvels at the Harry Potter phenomenon. The
best-selling British book series about an orphan who transcends the tedium of
suburban life through his adventures as a wizard-in-training has enchanted both
children and adults. In upcoming books, Harry will take an interest in girls,
and the villain will kill a favorite character. (Click for

                  Slate
               's "Book Club" exchange on the Potter books.) ... An
article trails Bill Bradley around his home town. He shows
off his basketball trophies and his black friend from Little League.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , Sept. 20
            

            A
special issue examining "the dawn of e-life" rehashes
conventional wisdom on the transformative potential of the Internet:
Commerce will be revolutionized by Amazon-like companies and
by online auctions that enable individuals to sell oddball items to distant
buyers or bid for services from companies with excess inventory. E-mail is making the workplace more egalitarian by enabling
minions to send suggestions to higher-ups. Campaigns are using the Internet as an organizational and
fund-raising tool.

            

               
                  U.S.
                
               
                  News & World Report , Sept.
20
            

            In a
late addition to the media fuss about the 25 th anniversary of
Richard Nixon's resignation, the cover
story highlights his achievements, including creating the Environmental
Protection Agency, increasing Social Security benefits, opening China, and
seeking détente with the Soviet Union. (
                  Slate
                discounts claims
that Nixon has been rehabilitated in ".") ... An article reports that NATO eliminated only a fraction of the
mobile targets it claimed were destroyed in Kosovo. Russia's withdrawal of
support for Yugoslavia and the bombing of power grids and transportation
networks are what really caused Slobodan Milosevic to cave.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  New Yorker , Sept. 20
            

            The
"Style" special issue lionizes Elsa Klensch, CNN's fashion correspondent, who
was the first person to "bring cameras to the catwalks" and force designers to
explain their clothes for a TV audience. Unlike fashion magazine editors, she
doesn't accept freebies from designers in exchange for product placement.
... An essay celebrates the emergence of Nobrow culture. The
mass-marketing of well-designed consumer products collapses the distinction
between highbrow and lowbrow. Now we are all "Banana Republicans." ...
An article warns that Slobodan Milosevic might be massing troops to brutally
subdue Montenegro, the democratic Yugoslavian republic struggling to separate
itself from Serbia.

            

               
                  Vanity
                
               
                  Fair , October 1999
            

            Bill
Gates tops the magazine's annual ranking of the new media establishment,
followed by Rupert Murdoch and Sumner Redstone. ... In an interview, the
68-year-old Murdoch details his overdue midlife crisis: divorce, a move to a
downtown Manhattan loft, a nubile new wife, and an avowed attempt to dress like
his twentysomething sons. ... A book excerpt condemns Pius XII,
"Hitler's Pope," for his complicity in the Final Solution. Before ascending to
the papacy in 1939, Eugenio Pacelli neutered German Catholic opposition to
Nazism, campaigned to remove black troops from the Rhineland, and
contemptuously declined to help persecuted Jews. As pope, he placated Hitler,
never protested the Holocaust, and didn't complain when Rome's Jews were sent
to certain death.

            

               
                  Talk
               
               , October 1999
            

            A
profile of Liz Taylor focuses on her bizarre relationship with Michael Jackson,
who showed up to meet the diva for the first time holding his chimp's hand. The
Gloved One adoringly describes Taylor as "a warm, cuddly blanket that I love to
... cover myself with." ... A self-congratulatory seven-page spread
celebrates the Talk launch party: "In the distance, beneath Madame
Liberty, feline Kate Moss, fearsome Robert De Niro, bronze-bodied Pierce
Brosnan." ... A profile peels away George Pataki's Gomer Pyle exterior
to reveal the New York governor's Machiavellian core. He ruthlessly spread
rumors about the sanity of a 70-year-old mentor when he sought to take her
state Senate seat. Pataki is finally blessing the Senate candidacy of Mayor
Rudolph Giuliani, but only because he is maneuvering for the GOP
vice-presidential nomination.

            

               
                  Weekly
                
               
                  Standard , Sept. 20
            

            In a
review of two revisionist books, the cover
story rethinks the U.S. role in Vietnam. Intervention was necessary
because the United States could not abandon a nation resisting communism. Had
the United States maintained its support of the South Vietnamese regime after
1974, South Vietnam would not have collapsed. ... An editorial worries that the election of George W. Bush is no
sure thing. Clinton fatigue will be a less compelling reason to vote for Bush
if Bill Bradley wins the Democratic nomination. A Pat Buchanan Reform Party run
would undercut Bush's support.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  Nation , Sept. 27
            

            The
cover story condemns schoolhouse commercialism. Sponsored
educational materials ask students to count Tootsie Rolls or plan how many
Domino's pizzas are needed for a party. Districts lease advertising space in
school hallways and collect a percentage of vending machine revenues.
... A poem explains why mainstream Republicans wish to
prevent Pat Buchanan from bolting to the Reform Party: "Folks who hate what's
foreign/ And like their neighbors white/ Are vital to the party/ In any race
that's tight."

         
      
   
