
   
   
      
         
            The Net's 1960?

            The
last time a new medium transformed American politics was 1960. The medium was,
of course, television, and the signal event was the Kennedy-Nixon presidential
debate, the first to be broadcast live to a national audience. Radio listeners
polled afterward gave the victory to Nixon. But Kennedy won the debate--and
arguably the election--because he came off better on television. Kennedy looked
cooler, more confident, and more handsome. He also knew something Nixon
didn't--how to project himself through the new technology. In office, JFK took
further advantage of the medium, using television to shape the public
perception of his administration. After press conferences, he would replay his
films in private, critiquing the lighting and camera angles.

            It is
already a cliché that the 2000 election signals the advent of another new
medium, the Internet. As is often the case with the Web, predictions of
dominance come in two flavors: utopian and apocalyptic. Utopians think the Net
has the power to undo the damage wrought upon American politics by television.
In their view, it stands to increase the power of ideas and diminish the
importance of 30-second attack ads. It will disenfranchise unelected elites and
give democratic power back to individuals. It will reduce the power of money.
Gloom-and-doomsters, on the other hand, assert that the Net will do just the
opposite, reducing genuine participation, threatening personal privacy, and
lending itself to new forms of manipulation by amoral operatives and moneyed
interests.

            My
prediction: This election will be more important to the Net than the Net will
be to the election. Just as 1960 conferred legitimacy on TV journalism,
Campaign 2000 promises to put the Net on the political map. It's less of a
given, though, that the Net will actually affect the campaign. In terms of the
TV analogy, 2000 may be 1956 or 1948 rather than 1960. Television existed in
those elections and was spreading rapidly into millions of homes. But for a
variety of reasons, it wasn't yet a decisive or central factor.

            So,
how can we know how important the Web is this time around? Only by casting a
skeptical eye on the ambitious claims being made on its behalf and evaluating
them against reality. 
                  Slate
                and the Industry Standard have
joined forces for a continuing real-time examination of the 2000 campaign as it
happens on the Web. In this column, we'll follow the topic where it takes us.
But to start out, here are some of the subjects "Net Election" is likely to
consider and reconsider over the next 14 months.

            
               Net

               Fund Raising
            

            One
way those goofy can quickly establish their value is by raising gobs of money.
So far, they've helped a bit. According to its most recent filing with the
Federal Election Commission, Bill Bradley's campaign so far has received
$330,000 from its Web
site . This is only about 3 percent of what Bradley has collected
overall. But there are reasons for Bradley and his rivals to like Web money
more than other kinds. One is that the cost of raising money on the Net is very
low compared with sending out direct mail or throwing a gala. A Web site is
basically an electronic collection plate, which consumes few of a candidate's
resources. For this reason, Net-based political fund raising is destined to
grow--and probably just as quickly as other forms of e-commerce.

            Web
fund raising may also point the way toward campaign finance reform. Last week,
George W. Bush initiated a practice that will surely become the norm:
declaring contributions immediately online , instead of
waiting for quarterly FEC deadlines. You could do worse than the system of
campaign finance that is evolving on the Web, where contributions limited to
the less-than-influential amount of $1,000--approximately
one-50,000 th of what Bush has raised so far--are immediately
disclosed. To be sure, there remains the problem of many times larger soft
money donations. But thanks to the Web, it's at least easy to discover which
special interests are supporting which candidates. The best disclosure site,
FECInfo, puts at everyone's
fingertips information that used to require trips to the FEC office in
Washington and hours of poring over dim microfiches.

            
               Net

               Organizing
            

            
Another advantage of Web contributions is that they often come with a promise
of volunteer time. The grass roots group MoveOn.org, which was formed to oppose impeaching President
Clinton last year, quickly gathered pledges of $13 million and 500,000
signatures on a petition, just by pinging e-mail back and forth. What's more,
30,000 people pledged 750,000 hours of volunteer time to defeat pro-impeachment
legislators in the 2000 election. You can't trust politician-haters, but if the
volunteers live up to their promises, they stand to become a significant factor
in the contest for control of the House.

            
Republicans targeted for defeat may harness the same techniques in
self-defense. Rudy Giuliani's Senate campaign reports that he has already
signed up 11,000 volunteers on the twin Web sites RudyYes.com and HillaryNo.com. Those with little inclination to hand out leaflets
at rainy commuter stations at rush hour can become "e-volunteers." By using the
Web in this way, a campaign can convert mass support into grass roots support.
Steve Forbes' Internet guru Rick Segal tried to work the Iowa straw poll this
way. He set up a national e-mail tree designed to get people to send their
friends in Iowa to Ames as Forbes supporters. How great an effect it had is
hard to say.

            
               Net

               Advertising
            

            Like
Net fund raising, Net advertising isn't destined to replace the older method
(i.e., television) overnight--or ever. But it is certain to grow as a share of
the total. TV ads are dumb, both in the sense that they tend to be crudely
demagogic appeals, and because they can't target segments of the electorate
with any degree of accuracy. Web advertising is smart, in the sense that it can
be far more detailed and specific and because it can reach a target with
surgical precision. Already, Al Gore has plans to focus on women-oriented
sites. Steve Forbes intends to advertise on day trading and investment sites,
where people who might vote for him are likely to be found. One possibility is
that these ads will develop into a new form of micro-pandering, but the process
will be interesting no matter where it leads. Techniques and conventions that
will come to seem eternal and inevitable will actually be invented in the
coming months.

            
               Net

               Issues
            

            In
1998, several congressional candidates campaigned against Internet
pornography--an issue of greater interest to people off-line than to those
online. This time, you're more likely to hear candidates vowing to protect
electronic privacy or block taxes on e-commerce. One way to gauge how important
the Web is in 2000 is by watching how seriously candidates take the Net's own
special interest issues. What we have yet to see, but can expect fairly soon,
are politicians who fit the computer industry's political profile. Internet
politics are basically soft libertarian--liberal on social issues, anti-tax,
and anti-regulation (but pro-environment and pro-gun control). The tech
industry's dream candidate would combine Bill Bradley's views on abortion, gay
rights, and guns with Steve Forbes' dedication to lower capital gains taxes.
That person doesn't seem to be running in this campaign, but he or she may
emerge in the course of it (possibly occupying the body of a current candidate
expressing somewhat different views).

            
               Net

               Coverage
            

            The
campaign news cycle has grown shorter with each successive election. Thanks to
the Web, it may be entirely repealed in 2000. These days, everyone has a Web
site and a big established news organization can drop an election-transforming
scoop into the mix at any hour of the day or night, just as Matt Drudge can.
And candidates won't have much luck with a traditional stratagem such as
semi-suppressing a story by not responding until after the evening news
deadlines. Rapid response will become more rapid than ever, with several
volleys being fired in the course of what used to be a campaign day.

            
There's lots more that we intend to chew over here: Web voting, Net gossip, and
cybersquatting. Perhaps the most interesting question will be the extent to
which the 2000 campaign will happen in cyberspace as well as in meat space. One
role model may be Minnesota Gov. Jesse Ventura, who integrated the real and the
virtual to an impressive degree in his Web-savvy 1998 campaign. Ventura
organized his original effort by e-mail, tracked his bus tour with digital
pictures, and encouraged a lively bulletin board discussion of it. To a
considerable degree, his Web site was where his campaign actually happened. As
bandwidth increases, more candidates will be able to bypass the press by
producing C-SPAN-style coverage of their own races. Whether anyone will be
watching is yet another question.

            
               Click

               
                  here to
visit the Industry Standard .
            

         
      
   
