
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Jamaica's Coke Problem</SPAN>

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Oct. 8
            

            The
cover story on Communist China's 50 th
anniversary argues that the hardest part of its economic liberalization is to
come. China can only save itself from its current stagnation by fixing its
banking system, addressing environmental hazards, controlling government debt,
and democratizing. ... An article condemns "positive discrimination" in South
Africa. Well-educated blacks are "mercilessly head-hunted" for high-paying
jobs, while uneducated blacks suffer from high unemployment and poor public
services. ... A piece says Jamaica is being destroyed by drug
trafficking. A trans-shipment haven for Colombian cocaine, the island nation is
in an economic tailspin, drug violence is rampant, the army patrols the
beaches, and tourism is stagnant.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , Oct. 18
            

            
Tuesday's resignation of Editor Charles Lane and the appointment of Peter
Beinart to replace him are not mentioned. ... A cover profile of financial guru Suze Orman, author of
the best-selling The 9 Steps to Financial Freedom , argues that her
simplistic philosophy--be thrifty--is good advice in an age of escalating
consumer debt. ... An article applauds Al Gore's call for a
"21 st Century Teacher Corps." The corps would offer money toward
college tuition in return for a commitment to teach after graduation. A similar
program successfully improved teacher quality for 17 years, until President
Reagan killed it in 1981.

            

               
                  New
                
               
                  York Times Magazine , Oct. 3
            

            The
cover story explains why Jerusalem could be the tripwire for World War III and
profiles the delusional extremists who could ignite it: Jewish fanatics who
want to retake the Temple Mount by force, Christian apocalypse-awaiters who
want to see the temple rebuilt, and seething sheiks who will wage war before
ceding authority over the Dome of the Rock. ... A pig could save your
life, according to an article. Swine engineered with human DNA and birthed by
surrogate sows could serve as spare-parts factories for people with failing
organs. Pig farms await regulatory approval of cross-species transplant trials.
... A piece profiles a group of white-hat hackers called "Lopht," the
Ralph Naders of the online world. They crack computer systems of companies and
agencies to reveal their security holes. Crackees, including Microsoft,
appreciate the warning.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , Oct. 4
            

            The
cover story excerpts the controversial Edmund Morris
biography of Ronald Reagan. Morris initially found his subject a "shatteringly
banal" cultural "yahoo." He was "miserably blocked" until he thought of
inserting his fictionalized self into the narrative. Revelations: Reagan lost
half his blood after John Hinckley's assassination attempt, and he approved the
arms-for-hostages deal while woozily recovering from cancer surgery. Other
highlights: In Chapter 1 , Morris gushes with schoolboy crush describing his
first fictional encounter with 15-year-old "Dutch" Reagan: "His purposeful body
moved on, exuding liniment. I dropped the candy wrapper I had been holding--and
as I reached for it, his wet sleeve brushed my hand." One excerpt , in the form of a screenplay fragment, floats Nancy
Reagan's view that Jane Wyman roped the Gipper into marriage by feigning a
suicide attempt.

            

               
                  Time
               
               , Oct. 4
            

            The
c over story rehashes the conventional wisdom about
Bill Bradley. He calls for bold liberal reforms. Though he abstains from
showbizzy campaigning, he markets his virtue and "exploits his legend." His
proud reserve--a product of 40 years in the spotlight--is refreshing but does
not bode well for his capacity to shepherd big ideas through Congress.
... An article marvels at the revival of religion in China, now used
by the Communist Party to control a restive population. Christians, Taoists,
and Buddhists may practice as long as they support the state. The party still
feebly pushes secularism: It just inaugurated an annual Hero of Atheism
award.

            
               
                  U.S.
News
                
               
                  & World Report , Oct. 4
            

            The
cover story explores modern treasure-hunting. Entrepreneurs
now use cheap new technology, such as remote-operated vehicles, to salvage
artifacts from ancient wrecks. "Salvors" sell their finds online, stage
exhibitions for profit, and auction film rights. Archaeologists argue that
treasure-seekers wreck artifacts. ... An article notes that roughly half today's female juvenile
offenders were raised by mothers who were arrested or incarcerated. Many of
those mothers were casualties of the '80s crack epidemic.

            
               
                  
The
                
               
                  New Yorker , Oct. 4
            

            An
article argues that patients have too much control over their treatment.
Doctors used to dictate treatment, but in the past decade the pendulum has
swung too far toward patient autonomy. Physicians should inform patients of
their options but step in when patients make bad choices or are too distressed
to choose rationally. ... An essay in the fall books section praises
"collaborative filtering" as a substitute for the independent bookseller. You
enter your preferences and a software programs spits out the favorites of folks
who share your interests. This "doppelganger search engine" will help sleeper
books thrive in the era of superstores.

            

               
                  Business
                
               
                  Week , Oct. 4
            

            The
70 th anniversary issue looks forward to the Internet age, predicting
that the U.S. economic boom is just the start of a period of massive,
technology-driven global growth. ... A piece touts the Web as a tool of
revolution. Grassroots movements fund raise, recruit, and plan mass protests
online. When China bullied service providers into blocking pro-democracy sites,
cyberactivists tapped into off-shore servers.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  Nation , Oct. 11
            

            An
article concludes that courts cannot be counted on to end racial profiling.
Judges have upheld traffic stops that are mere pretexts for searches and
erected evidentiary boundaries to ending profiling. Only political action will
eventually end racial profiling.

            

               
                  Weekly
                
               
                  Standard , Oct. 4
            

            The
cover story earnestly deconstructs pro wrestling, mourning it as evidence of
America's moral decline. The disappearance of the traditional Soviet or Arab
villain symbolizes the weakening of the nation-state and the spread of moral
relativism. The popularity of narcissist wrestler Hulk Hogan presaged the
election of unprincipled rogue Bill Clinton. ... An article excoriates
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan's "power grab." Annan argues that any use of
force in international affairs is illegitimate unless authorized by the
Security Council. This specious doctrine could hamstring American national
security.

         
      
   
