
   
   
      
         
            Where Are All the Online Ads?

            After
months of dullness, the Democratic presidential primary now looks like a
contest. With Donald Trump preening and Jesse Ventura backpedaling, the Reform
Party is enjoying its widest media exposure since Ross Perot's '92 run.

            
Normally, presidential candidates try to build on momentum created in the "free
media" by purchasing ads. Some campaigns, notably Bill Bradley's, have jumped
into the ad game--but not on the Web. So where are the online ads?

            The
2000 presidential race was supposed to be the time that political advertising
splashed across the Web. One virtue of virtual ads, said political and
advertising experts, is the cost relative to a typical TV spot. Also, online
ads can be more compelling than print or radio spots. Moreover, because the Net
is a distinct medium, candidates could experiment online with targeted ads that
might not suit other media.

            So
far, though, that's all theoretical: As well as can be determined, no major
party candidate has yet run a Web advertisement. The Seattle-based ad-tracking
firm AdRelevance
(which this week was bought by Media Metrix) is trying to measure Web traffic
for all presidential advertising in this race. "We've seen nothing to date,"
says Marc Ryan, AdRelevance's director of media research.

            That's
not because the candidates have avoided advertising altogether. On Sept. 26,
for example, Bill Bradley's campaign conspicuously took out half-page print ads
in the Des Moines Register and the Manchester Union Leader , major
dailies in the crucial early states of Iowa and New Hampshire. Both papers also
offer Web sites, but the Bradley campaign apparently saw no value in extending
the ad campaign into cyberspace. Sara Howard, a Bradley press aide, said, "As
far as I know, we have not purchased space on any Web sites, whether they are
associated with the papers running the ads in print version, or otherwise."

            
AdRelevance's Ryan says that, at least at this stage of the presidential cycle,
campaigns seem to be clinging to more traditional promotional channels. "I
don't think [the candidates] will start [Web] advertising until after the
Christmas season when they start their television campaigns," Ryan said. "There
is also the likelihood that some may not advertise on the Web at all."

            One
source close to Al Gore's campaign said that the Gore organization had
tentative plans to advertise online in New Hampshire as far back as July. But
the plans were shelved when it became too time-consuming to coordinate the
campaign's online messages with its offline messages.

            A Gore
press aide said that the campaign is interested in online advertising, citing
an arrangement back in June with RealNetworks for a Web ad that announced the
Internet availability of the audio of Gore's announcement speech. Any further
details, he said, were "not something we're willing to talk about at this time.
We tend not to talk about our advertising strategy until we do the ads, because
we don't want our competition to know."

         
      
   
