
   
   
      
         
            Beauty, Eh?

            

               ARTICLE
               : : "American Beauty" is blooming but
rank

            
               SUBJECT:
"Nihilism"? Try Tragedy.

            
               FROM:
Dave Zimny

            

               DATE: Mon Sept 20

            The heart of Edelstein's
negative assessment (and "rank" seems to be a negative word indeed to summarize
a movie that draws a great deal of praise in the course of the review) seems to
be his assertion that "American Beauty" is:

            
               ... [S]aying
that our only hope is to cultivate a kind of stoned aesthetic detachment
whereby even a man with his brains blown out becomes an object of beauty and a
signpost to a Higher Power. But to scrutinize a freshly dead body and not ask
how it got that way--or if there's anyone nearby with a gun who might want to
add to the body count--strikes me as either moronic or insane or both. The kind
of detachment the movie is peddling isn't artistic, it isn't life--it's
nihilism at its most fatuous. In the end, American Beauty is New Age
Nihilism.
            

            I suggest that Mr.
Edelstein take a closer look at the end of the movie. He might notice that ONLY
Ricky Fitts, a seriously damaged character, is shown regarding the body with
aesthetic detachment. The daughter is frozen in fear when she enters the room;
Lester's wife, who also apparently sees the body, is consumed with horror and
revulsion at her own murderous intentions. Other characters are only shown
reacting to the sound of the gunshot. Nor does the film suggest that Lester
shares Ricky's world view. The montage of Lester's memories at the end of the
film is hardly nihilistic: He remembers the closest relationships in his past
life with wonder and gratitude. At the moment of his death he is looking
lovingly at a photograph of his former self and his young family, not at a
plastic bag whirling in the wind.

            In short, I see no evidence that the filmmakers
wanted to endorse Ricky's nihilistic detachment. As a matter of fact, his eerie
self-possession is depicted as a tragic dislocation from life itself, a
pitiable response to his father's brutality. Edelstein, a critic of unusual
sensitivity and sophistication, simply fails to realize that the makers of
"American Beauty" show an appreciation of moral and ethical complexity that
equals his own.

            I hope he will
reconsider his harsh conclusion.

            (To
respond, click here.)

            

               ARTICLE
               : : Too True To Be Good

            
               SUBJECT:
Medical Science v. the Dismal Science

            
               FROM:
Robert Cook-Deegan

            

               DATE: Fri Sept 17

            There is a huge difference between a fast-moving
experimental science and a more theoretical field. In molecular biology, which
I know best, the editorial process is nothing like that described for
economics. An article cannot take more than several months to transit from
first writing until publication or it will be completely out of date, as there
are a half dozen groups working on closely related experiments who will have
reported *their* results. Moreover, new information is new; it does not have to
knock over a theoretical predisposition to be "news" and thus publishable.

            In the clinical literature, this kind of
examination of "hypothesis confirmation" is fairly common, and there is
certainly some wobble. A series of clinical trials can reach different
conclusions, and a meta-analysis that pools information from multiple trials
can lead to a conclusion different from a large "definitive" clinical trial.
But that's a signal for further empiricism, not a theoretical point that there
is no way to get better evidence or improve certainty that one is "right."
There is certainly publication bias in that the probability of publication is
higher for positive results (improved clinical outcome, for example) than no
results.

            But what has this got to
do with Alan Sokal? I can't make the leap from a largely rhetorical field of
analysis to experimental fields that report new data. The line of argument
seems to be that since hypotheses in academic economics have not been confirmed
means that the same would be true for all fields whether theoretical or
experimental, and therefore fields that rest on empirical evidence must be
castles in the sky. The analogies are not strong enough to allow leaps of faith
that long.

            (To
respond, click here.)

            
               ARTICLE:
Everyday Economics: Too True To Be Good

            
               SUBJECT:
"Reporting" Science

            
               FROM:
Edward Stein

            

               DATE: Thu Sept 16

            An interesting phenomenon related to that discussed
in Steven Landsburg's article concerns the truth of hypotheses published in
scientific journals that are then reported in daily newspapers, weekly news
magazines, and discussed on television news shows. Although I don't have any
systematic data on this, I suspect that the trend that Landsburg describes
would be amplified in the following way: if you read in the newspaper about a
theory that has been published in a prestigious scientific journal, it is even
more likely to be wrong than an article that is published in a prestigious
scientific journal that is not widely reported. Reporters and editors decide
what hypotheses are newsworthy and likely to evoke interest in their readers
and, for the same reasons discussed in Landsburg's article, this selection
criteria are not especially effective at selecting the true scientific
hypothesis.

            An example of this can be seen in the scientific
research program that I discuss in my book The Mismeasure of Desire: The
Science, Theory and Ethics of Sexual Orientation (Oxford University Press,
1999). Three studies concerning the origins of male homosexuality done in the
last decade garnered a great deal of attention in the media (LeVay's
neuroanatomical study, Hamer's genetic study and Bailey and Pillard's twin
studies). Together the three have been widely understood as establishing that
sexual orientation is genetically determined. However, LeVay's study was done
on a small and perhaps atypical sample and it has not be replicated, Hamer's
study has been disconfirmed by other labs, and Bailey's latest and more
systematic twin study undermines his early ones. Although the original studies
received a great deal of attention and are widely accepted, the serious
problems with them have not been discussed in the media.

            Although it is easier to
disconfirm a hypothesis than to establish one, disconfirmations are much less
likely to be deemed newsworthy. Readers of media reports of scientific
hypotheses need to read with especially critical and skeptical eyes.

            (To
respond, click here.)

            
               ARTICLE:
: Miss America

            
               SUBJECT:
"Miss Hip"?

            
               FROM:
shindorim

            

               DATE: Tue Sept 21

            You'll all have to
forgive me but I just don't seem to understand what is so "hip" about some
white woman with a name like "Heather Renee French," who comes from Kentucky
and works for charities based on a concern for her father. Kind probably,
average definitely, attractive moderately, but hip? I've been living in South
Korea for a few years now, so perhaps I'm not as on the ball when it comes to
such matters but if this woman is "hip" in the USA then I may seriously
consider citizenship right here where I am.

            (To respond, click
here.)

         
      
   
