
   
   
      
         
            Look for the Union Doctor

            Last
week, when the Department of Justice filed an antitrust suit against the merger
of two HMO giants, the American Medical Association applauded the suit and took
credit for urging the government to file it. Insurers were "intent on capturing
the medical marketplace," seeking "too much power to dictate the health care
options offered patients," said AMA Chairman Randolph Smoak.

            Two
days later, the AMA voted to set up a doctors' union and to lobby Congress for
an antitrust exemption allowing all physicians to bargain collectively. Cynics
suggested that doctors were abandoning the Hippocratic oath for hypocritical
politics. To deflect this criticism, the AMA associated itself with favorable
images of organized labor while dissociating itself from unfavorable ones.

            

               1. We're on your side. Chip Kahn, president of the Health
Insurance Association of America (HIAA), which lobbies for HMOs, accused
doctors of seeking bargaining power to raise their incomes "at the expense of
American consumers and taxpayers." To thwart this charge, the AMA portrayed
HMOs as the true enemy of consumers, implying that doctors were taking on the
HMOs in defense of consumers. AMA President Nancy Dickey said doctors would
"battle insurance companies and managed care plans that put healthy profits
ahead of healthy patients." "Patient care is not at the top of health plans'
list of priorities," Smoak asserted. "Our objective here is to give America's
physicians the leverage they now lack to guarantee that patient care is not
compromised or neglected for the sake of profits."

            

               2. We're the little guy. HIAA officials depicted doctors as a
cartel, accusing them of pursuing "collusion" and "price fixing." At a House
hearing last week, Justice Department and Federal Trade Commission officials
argued that exempting doctors from antitrust laws would stifle "competition,"
limit "consumer choice," raise costs, and reduce "quality." The AMA ducked this
critique by casting itself not as a business group but as an underdog alliance
of working folks. Doctors are waging a "David versus Goliath" battle against
the "abusive and unfair practices of insurance company giants" in a valiant
effort "to level the playing field between patients and insurers," said Smoak.
HMOs treat doctors like "ditch diggers churning through patients," added
Dickey.

            

               3. We're not greedy. Unions have a reputation for shutting
down important services and ignoring public inconvenience for the sake of
greed. The AMA wants to avoid this reputation. "I don't really believe [the
AMA's unionization] is being done for patients," one academic health care
analyst told the New York Times . "This is happening because doctors'
incomes, doctors' sense of autonomy, are getting killed."

            To
sidestep this complaint, AMA officials promised never to strike (though Dickey
conceded doctors might resist bad employers by "being a little slow in
completing some of the paperwork" required by HMOs) and avoided the word
"union," instead calling their proposed alliance "an affiliated labor
organization." The AMA's disclaimers underscored the liabilities of the "union"
label. "This will not be a traditional labor union. Your doctors will not
strike or endanger patient care," Smoak assured the public.

            The
basic political equation in medicine is that patients expect better care than
they're willing to pay for. When they're deprived of options and benefits that
exceed what they've paid for, or when they're obliged to pay premiums
sufficient to cover the options and benefits they expect, they figure some
special interest is ripping them off. The AMA's goal this week was to increase
its bargaining power without appearing to be that special interest.

            And what is the media's
verdict? Unionization shows "how aggrieved many doctors feel," says the
Washington Post . It changes the image of physicians who have "sometimes
arrogantly presented themselves as part of an elite profession as opposed to
members of a workers' group," says the New York Times , and it "may turn
out to be a strong force against health plans that unfairly use their market
power to limit quality of care." Whether the doctors' latest prescription will
cure their ills remains to be seen. But they look great.

         
      
   
