
   
   
      
         
            No. 288: &quot;Futurific&quot;

            
               Wal-Mart's present
is rosy, with second quarter sales up 15 percent and profits up 21 percent to
$1.25 billion. And its future is even better. Marketing consultant Burt
Flickinger sees something coming that is "the best possible thing that can
happen to Wal-Mart and the worst thing that could happen to every major
competitor." What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 287)--"First-Class Male":
            

            

               When Fred Fournier, a health insurance broker in Novato, Calif., goes
to the post office, the employees gather round: "They say, 'Boy, that's neat!'
" What do the postal workers admire?*
            

            

               (*a gun-free question)
            

            "The
envelopes he made himself from soy noodles."-- Merrill Markoe
            

            "His
smoking package, if you know what I mean, and I think you do."-- Tim
Carvell ( Eric Fredericksen , Al Petrosky , and Alison
Rogers had similar answers.)

            "The
first form of postage in 70 years that has nothing to do with Warner
Bros."-- Cliff Schoenberg
            

            "I
went to high school with Fred Fournier, and believe me there's nothing to
admire."-- Dennis Cass
            

            "Well,
since you outlawed the obvious gun jokes, it must be his double-barreled
penis."-- Michael J. Basial
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            It is easy to mock the
postal service, but--33 cents! Anywhere in the country! In just a few days! And
you don't even have to lick the stamps anymore, which frankly, for that one
about prostate cancer, is kind of a relief. Indeed, headline-grabbing diseases
seem to make up an increasing proportion of our stamps, along with
noncontroversial nature and beloved pop culture figures. Coincidentally, these
three categories describe most of the programs on public television lately.
(Last night, the PBS outlet in New York ran a two-hour special on the Bee Gees
followed by a 90-minute special on Jose Feliciano. Then somebody got ripped
apart by a diseased ferret, but only, alas, in my 90-minute dream. ) Perhaps a
joint venture is possible: The post office can issue stamps that promote the
snoozy PBS programming, and both organizations can share the profits. The only
obstacle: To be on a stamp you must actually be dead; to be on PBS you need
merely seem dead.

            
               Priority
Answer
            

            All admire Fournier's digital postage, which he's
been using since December when it was only a crazy experiment.

            On Monday the U.S. Postal Service announced the
nationwide availability of stamps that can be downloaded from the Internet. For
a 10 percent fee on top of the postage, customers can pay with credit cards and
print out a special bar code, the first new method of supplying stamps since
postal meters went into service in 1920.

            Two private companies,
E-Stamp.com and Stamps.com, offer the service; Pitney
Bowes and Neopost may soon be approved to compete. Incidentally, former
Postmaster General Marvin Runyon is a director of Stamps.com. Which is
completely legal.

            
               Prince Philip's
Peoples of the World Extra
            

            I give the country, you
give the racist remark made about it by Britain's Duke of Edinburgh.

            
               The Nations
            

            1. India

            2. Scotland

            3. China

            4. China II

            5. Hungary

            6. New Guinea

            7. International Bonus:
the jobless

            
               The Prince Speaks
            

            1. Touring a high-tech company in Scotland Tuesday,
he noticed a poorly wired fuse box: "It looks as though it was put in by an
Indian."

            2. He asked a driving instructor: "How do you keep
the natives off the booze long enough to get them past the test?"

            3. During a visit in 1986, he said Peking was
"ghastly" and told a group of British students: "If you stay here much longer
you'll all be slitty-eyed."

            4. He said at a World Wildlife Fund function: "If
it has got four legs and it's not a chair, if it has got two wings and it is
not an aeroplane, and if it swims and it's not a submarine, the Cantonese will
eat it."

            5. He told a tourist: "You can't have been here
long, you've no potbelly."

            6. He asked a Duke of Edinburgh Award-winner who
had just returned from Papua: "You didn't manage to get eaten then?"

            7. At the height of the
recession in 1981, he grumbled: "Everybody wanted more leisure. Now they
complain they're unemployed."

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Guns.

         
      
   
