
   
   
      
         
            Fray of Light

            
               
                  A note from
the Fraymaster: Welcome to the first installment of "Best of the
Fray," a weekly column featuring the sharpest posts from our new reader
feedback forum. If you'd like to comment on a Slate article, we
encourage you to do so in "The Fray," and if it's especially good, we'll
excerpt it here (though we may edit it for length). You might also get a reply:
Many Slate writers visit the Fray to read the posts about their stories,
and some respond there. (For instance, Robert Pinsky, our poetry editor, will
be participating in The Fray's "Poem "
topic at 12 p.m. PST, Friday, Oct. 29.)--Michael Brus
            

            
               SUBJECT: Love Diary
... but it's not edgy enough

            
               FROM: Will Juntunen

            

               DATE
               : Thu Sept 9

            This is purely an opinion. I really like reading
the diary feature. But I see the writing of high
achievers, but I'm not seeing people who are on the edge. For example, you had
a great feature on a real estate agent. But she was a very successful real
estate person. Likewise, the lawyer who went to China was a very successful
lawyer.

            Now in the Lewis and
Clark diaries, the possibility of disaster always loomed. Could we read the
diaries of a man or a woman who is a little closer to the edge?

            (To respond, click
here .)

            
               SUBJECT: Tabloids
and Baloney Sandwiches

            
               FROM: King
Arthur

            
               DATE: Fri Sept
10

            I would like to take a moment to put Tabloids in
perspective, and challenge anyone to make a different observation.

            My job takes me to dozens of grocery stores, which
distribute a great number of these offensive babble-on-ion manuscripts, and
where a large number of employees read them in the break room. Not once in my
37 years have I heard anyone admit that they believe in the content.

            Why read this crap,
then? Well, why read any type of fiction? I believe it is because there is a
time for rape, murder, hurricane, political treachery-types-of-reading, and a
time to just amuse yourself while you're scarfing down a baloney
sandwich-type-of reading.

            (To respond, click
here .)

            
               SUBJECT: Response
from the author

            
               FROM: Jennifer
Mendelsohn

            
               DATE: Mon Sept
13

            Thank you to everyone in the Fray who's taken the
time to comment on this month's "" ["Enquiring Minds in Slovakia"].

            I've enjoyed all your comments immensely,
especially Mr. Heaney's suggestions that I am "used to wallowing in this
type of pigslop" and that I should return my fee for writing the column. As to
the former, while I'll confess that my office is a huge mess, I'll have to
steadfastly disagree that it's quite reached the pigpen level; the latter I'll
just politely overlook.

            There seems to be a huge misunderstanding
underlying many of your posts, though, and I'd like to clear it up. "Enquiring
Minds in Slovakia" is not meant to be an essay on the socio-cultural
implications of the use of the National Enquirer in a Slovakian
classroom. Nor is it a serious critique (or celebration for that matter) of the
tabloids, or a Hollywood gossip column lazily cribbed from the pages of other
magazines. The article you saw was this month's edition of Keeping Tabs, a
lighthearted monthly column I write for 
                  Slate
                that sums up--and
pokes fun at--what the supermarket tabloids have been writing about for the
previous month. (Get it? We're trying to have a little fun here.)

            I'm sorry to disappoint all of you who've
complained that I haven't done anything but sum up what's in the tabloids, but
that's precisely what I'm here to do every month. I don't do any independent
investigation of the veracity of the tabloid stories, I just let them speak for
themselves, in all their ludicrous glory--hopefully in a way that's as amusing
as the tabs themselves. (But that's why I'm not at all surprised that the
poster calling him or herself "Too Embarrassed I Read This Crap " didn't find "rumpology" in
the dictionary.)

            You can read back issues of "Keeping Tabs," which
might help give a little perspective, by clicking here . Next month's column, covering the best (and
worst) of September's Globe , Star , and Enquirer , will be
online around Oct. 5 or so.

            Thanks again for all
your insight.

            All best,

            
Jennifer Mendelsohn

            (To
respond, click here .)

            
               SUBJECT: Bradley
speech

            
               FROM: maureen

            
               DATE: Tues Sept
14

            Sure, "a young girl's
smile, the pleasure of helping someone in need, friendship," etc., etc., may be
both hard to measure and extremely corny, but let's not get carried away. There
is no doubt that those things are all indirectly but absolutely affected by
those who govern, via economic and social policy. If elected, Bradley might
even use (unlike Clinton) the bully pulpit to remind us of the critical
importance of those intangibles in creating responsible and compassionate adult
citizens. It is more than empty rhetoric.

            (To respond, click
here .)

            
               SUBJECT: you think
this is a joke?!

            
               FROM: outraged

            
               DATE: Thu Sept
9

            A few things to say about the ["Trippin' at the
GNC"]:

            1. If you don't have an illness, say depression or
arthritis, why on earth do you expect to feel any effects from a drug which is
intended to treat said illness? Side effects, sure, but I would doubt any
primary effects would be felt.

            2. Depression is a serious illness. Why must you
treat anti-depressants as party toys?

            3. If you think herbal products are necessarily
safer or have less side effects than commercial pharmaceuticals, where do you
think those pharmaceuticals came from in the first place? Many, if not most,
common drugs were originally a substance that occurred in nature, such as
various plant extracts.

            4. Ever heard of a self-fulfilling prophecy? Or the
placebo effect? The author could conceivably have convinced him/herself that
because a product is supposed to make one feel less depressed (and therefore
happier??!!), he/she will therefore feel better. The mind is a powerful thing,
and sometimes may be as effective or even more effective in treating a physical
or mental malady, than pharmaceuticals (herbal or otherwise).

            5. Anti-depressants are not meant to make one
happier , per se, but rather to make one feel normal and better able to
deal with everyday details that most people take for granted. (I suffered
clinical depression for several years; I know.) So why should it be a big
surprise if a non-depressed individual does not notice any effects from taking
an anti-depressant medication?? Put another way, anti-depressants don't make
you happy, they just help lift you to a plateau from which you are able to seek
your own happiness, whatever that may consist of.

            6. Severe depression is
not a joke. Why must the treatment of this illness always become one? Don't
treat it so lightly unless you've been there.

            (To respond, click here .)

         
      
   
