
   
   
      
         
            The Road to Beverly Hills

            Grand Junction, Colo.
Thursday, Oct. 7, 1999

            Yesterday, we began the best part of our journey,
the stretch between Denver, Colo., and Moab, Utah. E seemed to be buoyant, even
exuberant. As we climbed into the Rockies out of Denver, she sighed, "I love
the mountains. I think I could even live here. Why would anyone not want to
live here?" We cruised through the tunnel that replaced the Loveland pass, and
floated down a long, steep grade. The mood was mellow. Multicolored pines lined
our path. "I'm so happy now," she said. In the distance, a storm sent the
twilight careening at crazy angles. Snow glistened on a perfect peak. I noticed
a billboard that said, "Coach Factory Outlet. Left at Next Exit." I laughed and
pointed it out. "Look at that. Isn't that ridiculous? What a cheap commercial
thing to put into this fabulous natural scene."

            E looked at the billboard, then barked "Turn left.
Now!"

            E wasn't mellow anymore. She was possessed, a look
of stony purpose on her face. As we approached the Coach store, she spotted the
Donna Karan in the distance.

            "Oh, my goodness."

            This said quietly, reverentially, as if she were
Balboa discovering the Pacific. As it turns out, E had never seen a factory
outlet store before. The next three hours were lost. But E seemed ecstatic.

            I fear, however, that I may not be the beneficiary
of E's new mood. I admit the warning signs are subtle.

            Have I mentioned yet that E attracts perverts and
molesters like a magnet? It must have something to do with her deceptively
childlike look. We were once neighbors in Washington, living across the street
from the chancery of an Eastern European nation that will go unnamed. Various
surly young men attached to this diplomatic outpost spent their afternoons
working on old Buicks in front of the building. One day, one of these men
exposed himself to E while she was walking to the store. Oddly, E argued for
giving this guy the benefit of the doubt. She said his penis might have just
fallen out of his pants by accident. I thought otherwise. On this trip already,
a strange, long-haired man in a West Virginia parking lot where we were making
a U-turn has struck up a gratuitous conversation. And two nights ago, the motel
night clerk phoned our room "just to check and see if everything is all
right."

            The point is, E realizes she's prey, and is usually
afraid to be alone for a second. Last night, we went to a 7-Eleven down the
block from the motel. The guy behind the counter, a slightly dissolute ski-bum
type, seemed disturbingly interested in E. And E seemed disturbingly interested
in him. Later, she insisted on returning to the 7-Eleven, alone, "for
coffee."

            "But I thought you'd sworn off coffee."

            "I think I'm going to need it if I'm going to post
anything tonight."

            "Do you want me to go with you? It's dark."

            "Oh, no. Thanks. What could happen to me?"

            She's also been checking her e-mail obsessively. In
the glow of the screen, I can see her chuckling to herself. And once when she
made a phone call, she asked me to leave the room. Toward me, she's pleasant
and friendly, but nothing more.

            I admit, I expected something else. Was I crazy?
I've transported her and looked after her for 2,000 miles. I took her to the
hospital. I do all the manly, driverly things. I check the oil and I tighten
the straps that are holding her fucking sofabed onto the roof. We have good
times in the car. Then, nothing. Nothing.

            I'm tired. I'll be damned if I'm going to stay up
for her to get back from the 7-Eleven.

         
      
   
