
   
   
      
         
            No. 301: &quot;Army Men&quot;

            
               Fill in the blank
as Professor Charles Stevenson of the National War College assesses a new study
of military and civilian beliefs. It is "scary," he said, to have "an officer
corps so overwhelmingly _____________."
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
300)--"First Sight":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           "I've never seen one of these,"
President Clinton said Monday, as he used something for the first time.
Apparently he enjoyed the experience: "Now that I'm a homeowner, I better get
one of these." What was it, and what did he do with
it?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Handgun. Shot at the dark outline of an 'intruder.' "-- Norman Oder
            

            "A
crotchless barbecue apron with the words 'Fellate the Chef' printed on
it."--Floyd Elliot
            

            "An
electric screwdriver. Pass it on to the Puerto Ricans, and maybe they can get
their own way out of jail."-- Ian O'Henley
            

            "It
was his family ... and he loved them ... <sob>..."-- Al
Cloutier
            

            
"Clinton used a floor mop to clean up the dirt he had tracked onto the shiny
floor of an elementary school. 'If prison is going to be my next home,' he did
not quip, 'I'd better get used to this.' "-- Sean Fitzpatrick
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            When you live an isolated life at the White House
or in a maximum security prison or in Patricia Duff's head, you are bound to be
out of touch. That's one argument against letting money buy access to power.
Even if he remains uncorrupted, the president will be immersed in the concerns
only of the wealthy and will lose all feeling for the lives of everyone else.
It is an argument for requiring those who run the subway system to come to work
on the train and not in a limo, for public officials to send their kids to
public school, and for dentists to work on their own teeth with some kind of
complicated mirror system and a stiff shot of bourbon. Some of these arguments
make sense.

            One measure of attachment to ordinary life: Does
the president carry a wallet? I wrote to Jimmy Carter in August 1980, asking
this question. Daniel M. Chew, director of presidential correspondence,
couldn't--or wouldn't--say.

            "However, you might like to know that the President
and his family pay for all of their personal expenses. I would imagine they use
checks rather than cash for such purposes.

            "Since President Carter's appearance in stores
would attract undue attention, merchandise is sometimes brought to the White
House by invitation. In an effort to avoid appearing to be partial to selected
competitors, no details about brand names or companies are made public."

            Gentler times.

            

               Hand
               -Tooled Answer
            

            President Clinton used a cordless electric
screwdriver to help assemble a computer desk at the Coleman Place Elementary
School in Norfolk, Va., to demonstrate--I dunno--cordless electric
screwdriving?

            It was Labor Day; he was laboring--indeed he wore a
hard hat to assemble what was basically IKEA furniture--and he wanted to
dramatize his call to Congress to fund the building or upgrading of 6,000
American schools.

            The president spent about five minutes at his task,
failing to complete it; the desk was finished by volunteers from a construction
trade union.

            "I'm pro-business, but
I'm pro-labor, too. I don't think you can help the economy if you hurt the
working people," he said. "But I'll try. I've hurt them pretty bad so far. By
continuing Reagan's policies, the richest 1 percent--folks like me--now have as
much after-tax income as the bottom 100 million!" he did not add.

            
               Meet the

               Candidates Extra
            

            Wednesday in his
hometown of Crystal City, Mo., Bill Bradley formally opened his campaign for
the Democratic presidential nomination by ladling out the traditional fatuous
twaddle. Take this test to learn just how well you know his core beliefs and
your own capacity for absorbing lackluster clichés.

            
               The 
               Q
            

            1. Now, above all, is not the time for something.
What?

            2. What does he "feel an urgency" to do to the
weak?

            3. For him, there is only one thing deserving of
hate. What?

            4. What kind of moment are we at in American
history?

            5. What is happening to the nature of work?

            6. At what rate is the world changing?

            7. Does the Dow Jones measure a young girl's
smile?

            8. Does the Dow Jones measure a young boy's first
handshake?

            9. Does the Dow Jones measure a grandmother's
pride?

            10. How many kinds of politicians are there?

            11. Which kind is Bill
Bradley?

            
               The 
               A
            

            1. Complacency.

            2. Strengthen them.

            3. Hate itself. (But partial credit if you said the
ABC fall lineup.)

            4. A special moment. (Not that you could tell from
those jerks at ABC.)

            5. It's changing. (But don't expect anything better
from CBS or NBC.)

            6. A dazzling rate. (Unlike a certain form of mass
entertainment.)

            7. No.

            8. No.

            9. Yes. Oh, wait, no. (Sorry. I dozed off there for
a second.)

            10. "There are two kinds of politicians, maybe
more." (Maybe a zillion?)

            11. The good kind. I
think that's No. 1. (And those little upstarts Fox and the WB and UPN:
innovation, my ass.)

            

               Clarification
            

            While nothing in the
CBS-Viacom merger compels the establishment of a Dan Rather-Angela Lansbury
Love Ranch in the high desert near Newhall, Calif., to breed "the next
generation of network stars," nothing in the deal expressly forbids it, nor
does the above use of quotation marks mean that anyone is actually being
quoted.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Masturbation with various household appliances.

         
      
   
