
   
   
      
         
            No. 291: &quot;Ocelots&quot;

            
               Researchers in
Dallas tried ocelot scent and rat feces but neither worked as well as Calvin
Klein Obsession for Men. What were they trying to do?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 290)--"Fighting Crime ... With Science!":
            

            

               According to the Cambridge, Mass., Police Department, the list includes
Mexican-Americans, Pakistanis, Indians, and Cajuns. List of what?
            

            "Those
who are looking to 'whup Don Rickles' ass' after his last-minute substitution
for the Indigo Girls at Lilith Fair."-- Tim Carvell
            

            
"Little brown people who dance around naked in your face, while ranting like
imbeciles, just to get you to shoot a squirt of pepper spray at them. Because,
you know, they eat it for breakfast. Or is that Tom Green I just
described?"-- Molly Shearer Gabel
            

            
"People who cannot be subdued with pepper spray alone, but require repeated,
severe beatings. Lamar Alexander is also on this list."-- Charles
Star
            

            "
'Native speakers of an Indo-European language. Some forget the large number of
Dravidian language speakers in India. Grade: B-.' Signed, 'Prof. Chomsky.'
"-- Matthew Singer
            

            
"Minorities to be cruelly caricatured in Star Wars: Episode II ."-- Ted
Barlow
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Chris'
Wrap-Up
            

            It's hard to know where to draw the line when
you're making a joke about race, especially when it comes to those shifty,
no-good Cajuns. I have nothing against them myself, but you know what happens
when they move in next door. First they turn all the washboards and jugs into
musical instruments, and the next thing you know all the neighborhood crawfish
start to disappear. Dennis Cass was not the only New Quiz entrant who suspected
he was being tricked into saying something he'd regret later. But that's not
why I'm here. That's not what I'm all about. What kind of person would write a
question about race and then get all shirty on people who were just trying to
have a little fun? Not yrs. trly.

            The trick is to think of
me less as the new sheriff in town and more as one of the nannies the von Trapp
children killed before Maria.

            
               Spicy
Answer
            

            Ethnic groups with a natural resistance to pepper
spray.

            As Training Officer Frank Gutoski explained to a
reporter for the Cambridge Chronicle , "The people [pepper spray] doesn't
affect are people who have consumed cayenne pepper from the time they are small
children, and this generally breaks into ethnic categories. Mexican-Americans
tend to be pickers. So with Cajuns, Mexican-Americans, Pakistani, Indian ...
[w]hat happens is that [pepper spray] is effective for a much shorter
time."

            In an apology Friday,
Cambridge Police Commissioner Ronnie Watson admitted, "There is no scientific
evidence to support these statements." "We're not scientists, we're police
officers," added department spokesman Frank Pasquarello.

            
               Parallax
Answer
            

            The people at 
                  Slate
                remind
me that Randy never made anyone wait a whole day for the answers to the
"extras." Fine.

            The question, if you recall, was about Warren
Beatty's age as opposed to the age of some U.S. presidents and politicians who
you probably thought were older than Warren Beatty because they weren't as well
lit.

            The trick was to
rearrange the list by the age they were--or would be--when they became
president. Here's the solution:

            Orrin Hatch--66

            Liddy Dole--64

            Warren Beatty--63

            Pat Buchanan--62

            John Adams--61

            Warren Harding--55

            Calvin Coolidge--51

            Chester Arthur--50

            James Polk--49

            Teddy Roosevelt--42

            Did I have a point? Not really. I just wanted to
take a cheap potshot by pointing out how old Warren Beatty is, and how old
Liddy Dole is. Liddy really is old, you know; she just looks young standing
next to Bob. Of course, so do the Adirondacks. Lenny Bruce said his problem
with Eisenhower was that he wouldn't vote for a man who couldn't get life
insurance.

            The other charming thing
about the five presidents at the bottom of the list? Like FDR, Garfield,
Kennedy, Lincoln, McKinley, and Grant, by the time they were Warren Beatty's
age, they were dead.

            
               Common
Denominators
            

            Pat Buchanan, doughnuts, Harvard.

         
      
   
