
   
   
      
         
            Cold Coffee

            

               Russia lied to the International Monetary Fund. The country
overestimated its currency reserves by $1 billion in 1996 while applying for
support, and IMF money may have been used for profiteering. The IMF is
considering lending Russia $4.5 billion more. The Washington Post suggested that the IMF won't give up
on Russia but that Congress may give up on the IMF.

            
               The
United States intercepted two Russian bombers over Iceland. Western
officials were bewildered by Russia's first probe of Western air defenses since
the end of the Cold War. Moscow denied that the flights were unusual.

            

               Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak formed a government. He is partnering
with secular, ethnic, and religious parties that support the peace process. A
Los Angeles Times editorial points out that the coalition members share little else.

            
               A
cable car crash killed 20 people in the French Alps. All were working at a
space observatory. Authorities were unsure of the accident's cause.

            
               The
Federal Reserve raised interest rates. The .25 percent hike is the first in
two years. The ever-hawkish Fed warned of "the emergence, or the potential
emergence, of inflationary forces that could undermine economic growth."
Inflation doves argued that the hike will cut jobs. The 
                  Washington Post
                approves, but William Greider
argues in the Washington Post that the Fed is
needlessly punishing the masses; instead, it should discipline only banks that
lend promiscuously.

            

               Congress limited Y2K liability. Potential plaintiffs must grant
businesses 90 days for repairs before suing and will be able to collect only
limited punitive damages. Spins: 1) The bill will save computer companies from
financial ruin. 2) The bill will expose their clients to financial ruin. 3)
It's a slippery slope to leaving consumers unprotected in product liability
cases.

            

               Kurdish rebel Abdullah Ocalan was sentenced to death. A Turkish court
found him guilty of treason for waging a bloody drive for Kurdish self-rule.
But his execution may not win the requisite parliamentary approval, because
Turkish politicians fear martyring him and sparking Kurdish unrest. (Listen to
the chorus of pleas for leniency in ".")

            

               Kosovo update: 1) Thousands of Serbs rallied for Slobodan Milosevic's
resignation. More protests are scheduled in coming weeks. 2) Ethnic Albanians
continued to loot and torch Serb villages. Kosovar Serbs continued to flee. 3)
Evidence that directly links Milosevic to Serb atrocities was found. The
British paper the 
                  Observer
                unearthed a trove of documents that
recount how Milosevic planned to systematically eliminate Kosovar
Albanians.

            

               President Clinton proposed using federal budget surpluses to shore up
Medicare and Social Security. The larger-than-anticipated surplus
would be used to cover prescription drugs for Medicare recipients and to
partially fill the projected gap in Social Security coverage. House Republicans
countered with a tax-cut plan. The Wall Street Journal forecasts that
Clinton will partially yield to Republican calls. The Washington Post entreats Clinton to stand firm,
warning readers not to believe in "an accounting mirage to finance a misshapen
tax cut that the country can't afford."

            

               President Clinton presented his plan for overhauling Medicare. His
proposal introduces prescription drug coverage and eliminates payment for
preventive services but aims to cut costs by stoking price competition among
HMOs and requiring patients to chip in for some services. The New York
Times 
               deems the plan "sensible" and "prudent," and a
Washington 
               Post editorial observes that Clinton deftly "changed the subject from
the solvency of Medicare to its adequacy." But the New Republic

               laments the plan's "gross generational inequity" and
instructs President Clinton to spend the money on education instead. A
Post 
               news analysis asks "whether Clinton can use his talent
for political positioning to actually implement policy."

            

               HMOs will cut back treatments to the elderly. A survey reported that the
industry will force Medicare recipients to chip in for treatment and may ditch
250,000 recipients outright. The HMOs contend the government doesn't contribute
enough to allow them to provide adequate care. Patient advocates argue that
HMOs can't produce the lavish benefits they used to drum up business.

            

               Physicians will unionize against managed care. The American
Medical Association voted to form a union to negotiate for better wages and
working conditions but promised never to strike. Spins: 1) Collective
bargaining will win doctors more control over the type and quantity of
medication they prescribe, resulting in better care for patients. 2) Collective
bargaining will win doctors higher pay, resulting in higher costs for patients.
(Read William Saletan's "" to see how the doctors cultivated their common
touch.)

            
               The
independent counsel statute expired. The power to initiate investigations
will once again reside with the attorney general. The 
                  Washington Post
                warned that the law may be
resurrected "the next time Congress becomes dissatisfied with the way the
Justice Department conducts a politically charged investigation" and urges that
it be replaced with a rule "that would give the attorney general wide
discretion on when to seek an independent counsel and some say in who that
investigator is."

            

               Webster Hubbell will plead guilty. In return for Hubbell's
confession that he covered up his and Hillary Clinton's role in a crooked
Arkansas land deal, Kenneth Starr's office will recommend that Hubbell not
return to prison. Hillary Clinton had been named a potential witness in the
trial. Click here for Robert Novak's explanation in the Chicago
Sun-Times of why legal woes could still cloud her Senate run.

            

               George W. Bush broke fund-raising records. He has raised more than $36
million. Al Gore has almost $18.5 million and Bill Bradley $11 million. The

                  Washington Post
                recounts the unanimous spin from
Gore, Steve Forbes, and others who intimate that Bush will be beholden to his
donors.

            

               The Supreme Court barred lawsuits against states for violating federal
laws. Individual plaintiffs will no longer be able to sue states that
violate federal laws; only the federal government may do so. Observers called
this a coup for the court's Reagan- and Bush-appointed states' rights faction.
Liberals protested that the ruling emasculates Congress' power to bind states
to federal law. Law Professor Erwin Chemerinsky opines in the Los Angeles Times that the decision is
"the height of conservative judicial activism" because it "invented new rights
for state governments at the expense of individuals." But David Ignatius
tells 
               Washington Post readers that the court
"is only ratifying a power shift that has already taken place" from the bloated
and hamstrung federal system to the more effective state level.

            
               The
Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating Microsoft. The company
is accused of failing to disclose all its cash reserves in order to smooth out
fluctuations in its earnings. The SEC strongly prefers full disclosure of cash
flow. The Wall Street Journal 
               dismisses the seriousness of the investigation but
calls it "one more headache for Microsoft."

            

               Starbucks profits dipped. The coffee business is fine, but earnings were
sapped by investments in online ventures, including a retail store and an
magazine. CEO Howard Schulz's spin: "We are not just another company adding a
'dot com' to our name." The Wall Street Journal 's retort: "Earth to
Howard Schultz: Return from cyberspace. Your coffee needs you."

            

               Timothy Leary was an FBI informer. Newly available records show that he
ratted on a radical leftist group in 1974 in an attempt to reduce his prison
sentence. The documents were published by The Smoking Gun .

            
               A
headmaster staged a false boycott of the sitcom The Family Guy . The
Rev. Richardson Schell deluged advertisers with letters from a fake group,
leading some to cancel potential spots. The show was created by one of Schell's
former pupils, who gave some of its characters the surname of Schell's former
assistant. Schell said he was irked first by the name and then by "obnoxious,
objectionable" content such as presidential, urination, and flatulence jokes.
Fox rejoined that "an irreverent comedy that can't raise a clergyman's eyebrows
isn't doing its job."

            

               The San Antonio Spurs beat the New York Knicks for the NBA
title. The 
                  New York
Post
                grew misty over the "playoff run that almost became the
impossible dream," but the 
                  San Antonio Express News
                crowed that "New York's
Cinderella story was little more than the final chapter in the Spurs' own
fairytale."

            

               The U.S. women's soccer team advanced to the World Cup
semifinals . Fans rejoiced at the team's success. Oganizers rejoiced at
the 600,000 tickets they have sold. Boston Globe columnist Alex Beam
effuses that the team is "the most exciting
professional sports franchise in the country."

         
      
   
