
   
   
      
         
            CuteFella

            After his notorious arrest
by the Hollywood vice squad in 1995, Hugh Grant showed up on talk shows to
promote a new film and--it couldn't be avoided--offer an explanation for his
"crime." Well, not an explanation precisely. Asked about the incident, he'd
wince, bite his lip, bat his eyelashes, shrug sheepishly, and look adorably
abashed. His contrition was so winning that one cartoonist suggested he could
make big money as a spokesman for governments accused of human rights abuses.
(On Saddam Hussein's gassing of the Kurds: "Rather a bad move ... terribly
sorry." On the Serb-led slaughter in Sarajevo: "Most embarrassing ... frightful
lapse in judgment.")

            In the gangster farce
Mickey Blue Eyes , Grant takes adorable abashment to delirious new
heights. He plays Michael Felgate, an English executive for a Sotheby's-like
New York auction house, who proposes to his girlfriend, a teacher named Gina
Vitale (Jeanne Tripplehorn), and then discovers she's the daughter and niece of
powerful crime bosses. Suddenly forced to keep company with men named Vito and
Vinnie, to bury a corpse beside the East River, and to make like a gangster
with a voice that's a cross between John Wayne and Tweety Bird, the squeamish
Englishman winces, bites his lip, bats his eyelashes, shrugs sheepishly, and
looks--yes--adorably abashed. The shtick would be irritating as hell if it
weren't so ... adorable. Grant does abashed the way Bogie smoked, the way
Marilyn flared her lips. He's not an actor of range (to say the least), but his
charismatic discomfort--his breezy uneasiness--makes him a marvelous
romantic-comedy star.

            And the first two-thirds of Mickey Blue Eyes give
him an excellent pedestal. It's the stuff of classic farce, which puts the
wrong man in the wrong place at the wrong time and then fiendishly ups the
ante. Pressured by Gina's spooky uncle (a superbly restrained turn by Burt
Young) into auctioning off a paranoid son's painting--a resurrected Jesus
putting holes in disloyal disciples with a submachine gun--Michael must
simultaneously keep the gangsters happy, his fiancee (who'll pull the plug on
the engagement if she finds out he's enmeshed in the family business) in the
dark, the FBI from discovering the collusion, and--most important in farce--a
semblance of dignity. His upper-crust boss is forever escorting a potential
investor around the company, so that the two can walk in on him in poses that
the Hollywood vice squad would find suspect. The director, Kelly Makin, hits
the gags hard--he turns punch lines into slug lines--but his timing is
crackerjack. The trick in pulling off this kind of comedy is to wind a lot of
jack-in-the-boxes in full view of the audience yet still make it a surprise
when they start--at moments of peak pandemonium--springing up. The
screenwriters, Adam Scheinman and Robert Kuhn, have boned up on their Feydeau
and Fawlty Towers --not to mention the slew of mobster movies to which
they cheerfully make reference (and from which the filmmakers have hired most
of the supporting cast).

            What goes wrong? In the
last half-hour, the farcical pulse gets lost amid the crosses and
double-crosses and triple-crosses and erupting blood squibs and dud psychology.
James Caan begins hilariously as Gina's hearty, lunkish father, but then has to
get all noble under the weight of the picture's dumb, melodramatic
contrivances. Worse, Grant's linguistically hapless gangster--Mickey Blue
Eyes--never makes a climactic reappearance, so the filmmakers waste their best
invention. As long as I'm carping, even the movie's first third has problems. I
found the basic setup--that Michael has no inkling of Gina's family
ties--implausible, since where I come from you don't ask a woman to marry you
(you don't even get past the first date) until you've explained to her the ways
in which your family screwed you up and have expressed tender sympathy for the
ways in which her family did likewise. Am I the only one who thinks Alice
Miller's The Drama of the Gifted Child is the dating manual of the
'90s?

            While I was on vacation, several readers wrote to say that
The Blair Witch Project hadn't scared them but, oh boy, did they freak
out at The Sixth Sense . Here, they said, was one skeeery movie!
Backlash, shmacklash ; The Blair Witch Project messed up my head
more than anything since Night of the Living Dead (1968), so The
Sixth Sense had me shivering in anticipation from its opening credits. Two
hours later, I emerged with tear-stained cheeks and a lot of admiration for the
"gotcha!" ending (the clues are there, but one shakes them off as arty
mannerisms) but not especially frightened. The ghosts were seen too clearly--I
could practically smell their greasepaint and mascara. The larger point is that
the movie, directed and written by M. Night Shyamalan, belongs to a different
genre than Blair 
               Witch , which traffics in the irrational, the
unseen, the terror of malevolent nothingness. The 
               Sixth Sense
uses the supernatural for reassurance. For all its bogey-man shenanigans, it
wants to leave you with faith in a higher order--in the possibility that even
after death wrongs may be avenged, innocents protected, and the loose ends of
one's life tied up. Ultimately, it has less in common with Blair Witch
than with such quivering lumps of sentiment as Ghost (1990) and Field
of Dreams (1989). The film could be subtitled Field of
Nightmares .

            It's often wrenching
anyway. Bruce Willis' damaged child psychologist wanders through an autumnal
universe from which the warmth has been bleached (the pale yet deep-toned
cinematography is by Tak Fujimoto), social intercourse is vaporous, and sounds
seem piped in from another dimension. (A bus accelerating and decelerating is
like a lonely groan.) As the haunted boy in his charge, Haley Joel Osment
regards the therapist sadly, as if seeing into his (lost) soul. Osment's
pinched, old-young face suggests an ancient's insight without an ancient's
defenses--a sensitivity so exquisitely morbid that you worry more for his
emotional than physical well-being. You worry, too, for his mom, played with
tremulous fierceness by the wonderful Toni Collette. "Look at my face," she
says, when her child ventures the idea that she must think he's crazy. "I
would never think that. " Maybe I've spent too much time with The Drama
of The Gifted 
               Child , but that part reduced me to a puddle of
mush.

            More post-vacation catching up: The rave reviews for
Twin Falls Idaho and Bowfinger made me eager to see them, but
neither really floated my boat. The first is an absorbing, low-budget art movie
about conjoined twins, the weaker of whom is dying and mordant, the other torn
(so to speak) between loyalty to his brother and a tenuous connection to the
external world--embodied in part by a prostitute (Michele Hicks) who looks like
Bridget Fonda as Vampira and acts like a slightly less wooden porn star. You
can't exactly say, "Ho-hum, another sentimental Siamese-twin flick," but
somehow I felt as if I'd been here before. It isn't just the willful echoes of
Basket Case (1982) and Dead Ringers (1988). It's the way the
twins (played by co-writers Mark Polish and Michael Polish, who also directed
the film) are photographed to look so wanly beautiful and dear , like the
hero of the play (not the David Lynch movie) The Elephant Man . They seem
enigmatic when whispering in each other's ears, but when you actually hear what
they're saying it's so humdrum that you wonder why they even bother to talk.
There are brilliant moments--a flickering, black-and-white dream, in which
they're separate and riding bicycles, is like a gorgeous home movie from the
'20s unearthed from someone's basement--but the mixture of Diane Arbus
freakiness and heart-tugging bathos finally feels a little cheap.

            Cheaper still is most of Bowfinger , a
one-joke movie that's like Ed Wood (1994) without the poetry or emotion
that Tim Burton managed to coax out of re-creations of Grade Z genre flicks.
The one joke--a bunch of untalented, impoverished filmmakers devise a movie
around a paranoid action star (Eddie Murphy) who has no idea that he's even in
it--is occasionally a hoot, but it also requires Murphy to act like a
scaredy-cat Negro out of a '30s ghost movie. I laughed, but I came out
depressed. On the basis of his script and performance, Steve Martin's vision of
moviemaking is of a scam perpetrated by hustling morons. Has he been spending
too much time with David Mamet?

         
      
   
