
   
   
      
         
            Indonesia Still on the Fence

            The
Jakarta
Post led Wednesday with a pledge by the Indonesian military to support
the U.N. peacekeeping force in East Timor. Military spokesman Maj. Gen.
Sudrajat told opponents of the force that Indonesia should accept it to avoid
international condemnation. But in an opinion piece, Makmur Keliat, a lecturer in international
relations at the University of Indonesia, said the Indonesian government still
seems to be playing for time and that its acceptance of the force does not mean
it will recognize East Timorese independence.

            In
Australia, which is to lead the peacekeeping force, the Sydney Morning Herald said,
by contrast, that Australia intends "to respect the will of the East Timorese
people and their clearly stated choice of freedom." It said in an editorial, "Indonesia stands shamed before the world for its
armed forces' encouragement of, and participation in, the killings and
destruction in East Timor." The paper led its front page on the U.N. Security
Council authorizing its peacekeepers "to use all force necessary" to rein in
the East Timor militias.

            In
Britain, the Times of London led Wednesday with a disclosure that 130
million pounds (some $210 million) in public money has been spent within the
past year to help Indonesia buy British Hawk fighters. The Guardian front-paged
the news that British Trade Secretary Stephen Byers overruled Treasury
officials by allowing financial help to Indonesia only weeks before militias
started massacring people in East Timor: A $1.1 million loan helped Indonesia
buy British engineering products. The government is already under attack from
the left wing of the Labor Party for breaching its own much-vaunted "ethical"
foreign policy in its relations with Indonesia.

            In
Russia, where terrorist bombs have killed more than 200 people in the past
week, Izvestiya said that strongman Gen. Aleksander Lebed, a former
presidential candidate, is hoping to take power as acting prime minister if
President Boris Yeltsin loses office. It said he appears to have the support of
Boris Berezovsky, the financial and media tycoon, who recently visited Lebed in
Krasnoyarsk, where he is regional governor. "Apparently, Berezovsky holds the
opinion that Lebed is capable of coping with the chaos in the country," the
paper said, adding that "many American congressmen hoped that Lebed would be a
future president of Russia." Reporting on the tightening of security following
the Moscow bombs, Rossiskaya Gazeta said Wednesday that 24,000 personnel
had checked 26,560 apartments, 180 hotels, and 415 hostels and dormitories
during the previous 24 hours.

            The
Times of London, in an editorial expressing "heartfelt sympathy" for the
people of Moscow--and also for the Russian administration "lumbered with yet
another crisis"--warned, nevertheless, against an abuse of power. It said there
is no need for a further law on full emergency rule, "nor should Moscow police
fall prey to the traditional temptation to arrest every dark-skinned man in the
capital." The editorial concluded: "A survey this week shows that fewer than 6
per cent of Muscovites want a draconian state of emergency. Russia's leaders
must heed their wishes and refrain from going too far." In India, the
Hindu said in
an editorial Wednesday that U.S. Defense Secretary William Cohen's offer to
help Russia fight terrorism is "a cheering indication of how close the two
world powers have come since the end of the Cold War less than a decade
ago."

            In
Japan, Mainichi Shimbun said that North Korea's agreement with the
United States this week to suspend plans for further test-firing of long-range
missiles "by no means constitutes a fundamental solution to the North Korean
missile problem." Noting that North Korea hadn't agreed to refrain from
missile-launching in the future, the paper said Wednesday in an editorial that Japan shouldn't lift economic sanctions against
the country until it has. Asahi
Shimbun 's editorial was about parents killing their children to claim
insurance money. There have been six such murders in the past 15 years, four by
fathers and two by mothers, it said. "The lamentable moral degradation that
leads some people to exchange human lives for money has its roots in our
materialistic society, characterized by badly swollen egos," the paper claimed.
In London, the Financial
Times ran an editorial sharply criticizing Japan for letting the yen
strengthen "dangerously" against the U.S. dollar. It called on the Bank of
Japan "to act decisively, now," and asked, "Why on earth does the Bank not buy
the dollars itself, allowing the domestic money supply to expand in the
process?"

            The
South China Morning
Post called on Hong Kong "to think hard and decide slowly" before
starting a gambling casino in the territory. "The goal is to offer something
quite different from the rather tawdry centres of Macau," it said Wednesday in
an editorial. "The model is Las Vegas. There, some of the
world's most pretentious and absurd architecture beckons visitors from around
the world to see such sights as in-house acrobats or an art museum, a battle of
full-size pirate ships, or to tour an ersatz Paris, Egypt or other improbable
replication. Near such fantasies, of course, the casinos' main line of business
always beckons, ready to extract huge sums from the unwary." The paper noted
the findings of the United States National Gambling Impact Study Commission:
that while gambling produced $34 billion in government revenues and created
some 700,000 jobs, it also cost Americans $50 billion last year. "Three million
people suffer from pathological gambling addiction, causing costly social
problems, especially for the poor and the young," it added.

         
      
   
