
   
   
      
         
            Swann Song

            Last week, a federal judge ordered Charlotte, N.C.,
to stop busing students to integrate schools. Newspapers noted the perfect
symmetry--busing had begun with the Supreme Court's 1971 Swann vs.
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education decision--and the
neoconservative-dominated commentariat cheered the demise of what it deemed a
failed experiment. But while busing did great damage in many cities, in
Charlotte it was widely considered an against-the-odds success. That fact makes
last week's news all the sadder.

            The landmark Swann suit had its origins in
the 1955 Supreme Court decision known as Brown II . Brown II
gummed up the initial 1954 Brown ruling--which had decreed segregated
schools unconstitutional--by saying, in a now-infamous oxymoron, that
desegregation should proceed "with all deliberate speed." By 1965, Charlotte
had seen more deliberation than speed. Only 2 percent of black schoolchildren
attended integrated schools. To maintain this racial separation, 60 percent of
all students were actually bused to schools far from their homes, a form of
busing that raised no outcry from the white community.

            With the injustice self-evident, the NAACP and
other civil rights groups trolled for parents to challenge the system, finding
Vera and Darius Swann. The Swanns wanted their 6-year-old son, James, to attend
Seversville Elementary School, one of the few integrated schools in the city.
Seversville Elementary happened to be closest to their home, but the school
board refused to admit James.

            The Swanns filed suit
but lost. They continued to appeal until their case reached the desk of Federal
District Court Judge James McMillan in 1969. The grandson of two confederate
soldiers, McMillan was on record deriding "the folly ... of requiring that
pupils be transported far away from their natural habitat so that some
artificial ... racial balance be maintained." But when he examined the Swann
case he realized that Charlotte's school board was plainly in violation of the
law and that it wasn't going to desegregate unless forced by the courts. The
precedent had been set with the 1968 Supreme Court decision Green vs. County
School Board of New Kent County , Va., in which the court ruled school
boards had an "affirmative duty" to ensure "racial discrimination would be
eliminated root and branch." McMillan ordered the Charlotte board to draw up a
plan to take steps--not necessarily busing--to do so.

            At first, school board officials refused to implement
desegregation plans and then submitted plans that failed to address the
problem. All McMillan could do was reject them. After a year of school board
stalling, McMillan appointed an outside referee to devise a desegregation
strategy, which entailed the busing of black kids to previously white schools,
and vice versa.

            The buses began rolling
on Sept. 9, 1970. Enraged, many whites protested, sometimes violently. McMillan
received death threats and was hanged in effigy. The office of the Swanns'
attorney was fire bombed. Black students were beat up at school. Some white
parents withdrew and sent their children to private schools, while others
formed citizens' groups to agitate against busing.

            In 1971, the high court unanimously upheld McMillan's
decision. But the school board, split between busing supporters and foes,
continued to produce half-hearted integration plans that McMillan had to
dismiss as not "in good faith," and busing continued according to the court's
prescription.

            Meanwhile, a previously
apolitical 33-year-old housewife named Maggie Ray began convening local
activists, black and white, pro- and anti-busing, to work out an alternative
solution--and also endeared herself to the judge at a backyard barbecue. Her
informal committee, called the Citizens Advisory Group, finagled an end-run
around the school board and persuaded McMillan to put it in charge of the
busing plan. In 1974, the board compromised with the committee on an
arrangement that won McMillan's approval, and a year later he withdrew the
court from supervision of Charlotte's desegregation plans, trusting the
citizens to do it fairly.

            After the initial round of white flight, Charlotte
maintained for the next two decades a mix of roughly 60 percent white and 40
percent black students. The presence of whites, especially affluent ones, in
once all-black schools lifted those schools' quality, since white parents'
complaints about outdated textbooks, sub par teachers, and dilapidated
facilities were heeded by school officials. Blacks' test scores rose too, after
a special effort led by a pro-busing superintendent. Students, parents, and
local officials found new pride in their integrated schools, generating more
goodwill. Political reform followed too, creating a city government that better
represented both blacks and poor whites. Finally, a solid educational system
provided a foundation for the economic growth the region has recently
enjoyed.

            Charlotte's busing
success hinged on several things. Unlike the earlier schemes, Ray's plan didn't
exempt the wealthy whites in southeast Charlotte. As a result, some lower-class
whites no longer felt singled out to carry the burden of integration.
Acknowledging the situation's class dimensions blunted the racial
animosity--and created a coalition of blacks and less affluent whites. Also,
the white flight that doomed busing in Boston and elsewhere was not really an
option. Charlotte's whites could flee to private schools (and some did), but
because the county had consolidated its school system in 1960 the outlying
areas as well as the inner cities were embraced in the busing blueprint. (A
1974 Supreme Court ruling exempted suburban school districts from busing,
meaning few metropolises experienced wholesale integration
Charlotte-style.)

            Equally important--and I admit this sounds kind of
cornball--success required the civic spiritedness of pro- and anti-busing
parents alike, who saw their way clear to hammering out compromises. This meant
shelving the belief that a single, foolproof plan could be implemented once and
for all. Citizens got involved with adjusting the busing plan (and refighting
painful battles) year after year after year--a demanding but inescapable
burden. The 1990s even saw a major overhaul, when Charlotte introduced magnet
schools devoted to excellence in a single area, such as math, and open to
students from all neighborhoods--to give whites extra incentive to travel long
distances to school.

            Unfortunately, the
magnet schools began the undoing of desegregation in Charlotte. To remain a
tool for continued desegregation and not just for excellence, the magnet
schools had to maintain set-asides for black students. A newcomer to
Charlotte--Bill Capacchione, who had not witnessed the city's efforts in the
'70s to surmount mutual distrust--sued to enroll his daughter into a magnet
that officials didn't want to "tip" all white. This year, the case came before
Judge Robert Potter--a former Jesse Helms aide, a Ronald Reagan appointee, and
a sworn enemy of busing since he fought against it on the front lines in 1969.
Calling bused students "cogs in an experimental machine," Potter declared that
all vestiges of harm wrought by the Jim Crow-era dual school system have
evaporated. This despite a recent Charlotte Observer study that found
that without busing, segregation would return for more than half of the
district's students.

            Charlotte and the nation have come far, and we can hope
that integration may someday endure without a conscious effort to preserve it.
But it's dishonest or naive to claim that that moment has arrived. Thirty years
may seem like a long time to someone nursing a grievance since the pitched
battles of the late '60s, but in the sweep of history--on the heels of 90 years
of Jim Crow and 200 of race slavery--it's nothing. Ironically, busing will
become unnecessary only when no one seems to have a problem with it
anymore.

            Now Charlotte's civic leaders, and other proponents
of continued desegregation efforts, have to reckon with Potter's ruling. While
not carrying the weight of a Supreme Court decision, it does point the way for
other judges, if they want to follow. As the city decides in the next weeks
whether to appeal, it also has to scramble to make sure its denser (largely
black) areas will have enough schools to house the kids who can't be bused
across town anymore to less crowded institutions.

            The most distressing part of Potter's decision was
his swipe at social experimentation. As all great social reformers have known,
fixed formulas, one-size-fits-all policies, and judicial fiats rarely solve
intractable problems. The only thing that does is what FDR called "bold,
persistent experimentation," as the example of Charlotte nobly attests.

         
      
   
