
   
   
      
         
            The Campaign on the Web

            By their Web sites ye
shall know them. The presidential candidates have staked their places on the
Web to raise money, to distribute speeches and position papers, and to show off
their cybersavvy. Some sites are better than others. Here's a quick guide.

            
               Democrats
            

            
               Bill
Bradley  
            

            Bradley pitches himself as
a reformer disdainful of big money. The site even offers a copy of his personal
financial disclosure statement. However, you'll soon discover that clicking
around the site causes an unsolicited "Make a Contribution" box to pop up
repeatedly on your screen.

            

               Bottom line: Large, confident, and dull
            

            
               Al
Gore
            

            Lest anyone associate Gore
with Bill Clinton's sex life, two of the departments you can click to from any
page are "The Gore Family " and "Tipper
Gore ." And while other sites gloss over the legal rules for giving
money, this
contribution form requires donors to check boxes stating, "I am not a
foreign national who lacks permanent resident status in the United States" and
"The funds I am contributing are my own personal funds and not those of
another."

            

               Bottom line: Cybersprawl
            

            
               Republicans
            

            
               Gary
Bauer
            

            Bauer's site lets you
pledge to write a check but, unlike other sites, doesn't let you use your
credit card online. There's also an "Online Internship
Application ," which offers students experience in "correspondence,
grassroots organization, volunteer coordination, fundraising, events planning
and coordination, and media events." Hurry--the deadline for the fall term is
Aug. 6.

            

               Bottom line: Low-tech, high dudgeon
            

            
               George W.
Bush
            

            This site takes
personalization to the next level, asking for information in
return for an individualized pitch. An "Issues " page focuses on Bush's favorite topics, such as
"Faith-Based Initiatives ." The "En
Español" section offers several pages in Spanish, including this item , which touts Bush's corazón y
visión . An audio message of the day communicates directly to
supporters. The "Youth Zone " explains Bush's view of politics--it's
just like baseball! The parties are leagues, the primaries are playoffs, and
the general election is the World Series.

            

               Bottom line: Prosperity with a surface.
            

            
               Steve
Forbes
            

            Calls itself "America's
first full-scale Internet campaign" and is by far the most technically
sophisticated site, with an array of slide shows, videos, and a "personal control panel " that repackages his position
papers, speeches, and press releases as links from an icon symbolic of
high-tech, individual empowerment.

            

               Bottom line: The gold standard
            

            
               Orrin
Hatch
            

            Uncharacteristically hip
in appearance, the home page features Hatch silhouetted against a black
background. Supporters are encouraged to stuff virtual ballot boxes by a
vote
online page, which links to Internet polls. A page of media
links invites disciples to write editors and create the illusion of a
groundswell for their favorite dark horse. Weekly Hatch Toons attack the
senator's opponents: A cartoon of a wayward youth smoking something quotes the parents'
impression that their boy is "presidential material. ... If we can just hang on
'til he's 40."

            

               Bottom Line : Spare and strange.

            
               Alan
Keyes
            

            The site is utterly
disorganized but lovingly maintained by Keyes' acolytes. Its audio and
transcript archive of his speeches and radio shows is amazing.

            

               Bottom line: Grassroots 
               fire and brimstone
            

            
               John
McCain
            

            A special page for the
Bush
campaign exposes Bush's server as the largest single source of visitors
to McCain's site and offers 10 reasons why Dubya staffers should browse (Reason
No. 1: to contribute). A link to a campaign-finance
petition underscores McCain's reformist position. His "Campaign Store" offers
"Official Campaign Material" that "may be ordered for a small contribution." A
biographical video costs $25. Clicking "John McCain on the Issues"
takes you not to his position papers (which requires a further click) but to
the "McCain Poll," which invites you to weigh in on a rigged question. Since
McCain is presumably too principled to change his mind based on this "poll," it
seems to be a participation device for the gullible.

            

               Bottom line: Curious George gets caught
            

            

               Reform
            

            
               Pat
Buchanan
            

            When Buchanan switched
parties, he also switched his Web site and logo. For a Reform candidate, he's
surprisingly upfront about his pro-life plank, though "Cleaning Corruption Out of Government " is (more suitably) his
No. 1 issue. His new book, which prompted critics to call him soft on Nazi
Germany, is proudly displayed on his home page, so you can judge it for
yourself (but first you'll have to buy it). The low-tech site lets Pat's
peasant army contribute , join an
e-mail list, and browse speeches, press releases, and policy statements.

            

               Bottom line: Peasants with PCs
            

            
               Donald
J. Trump
            

            The home page calls Trump
"the experienced, decisive can-do businessman America needs as President." The
"How Can I Help Donald?" page claims "you can convince Donald to
run" by giving him $25 or more. Every page ends with a prominent link to a
donation solicitation. The "People Are
Talking About Trump " button takes you to the comments of great thinkers
such as Cindy Adams. And check out his bio :
"Donald J. Trump is the very definition of the American success story,
continually setting the standards of excellence. … He is the archetypal
businessman--a deal maker without peer."

            

               Bottom Line: Too autoerotic for underage viewing
            

            

               Libertarians
            

            
               Harry Browne
            

            When you enter the site, a
pot leaf signifying medical marijuana pops up on your screen. If you click the
link to join Browne's exploratory committee , you get a form that
begins, "Due to the complexity of FEC regulations, we are unable to accept
on-line donations at this time." If you click "Join the Libertarian Party,"
you're required to check a box affirming that you "do not believe in or
advocate the initiation of force as a means of achieving political or social
goals"--just to make sure you're not Tim McVeigh.

            

               Bottom line: Wild, Wild Web
            

            

               Unannounced
            

            
               Warren
Beatty
            

            A pretty logo with
literally nothing behind it.

            

               Bottom line: Inauspicious metaphor
            

            
               Criticism and
Parody
            

            
               All Gore
            

            Clever parody site that
captures Gore's ticks and shticks. Headline on the "Goretopia" page:
"Envisioning a post-present future for the generations that will follow the
children of our parent's generation." The "Socialized
Medicine" page exults, "New treatments are slowing the development of
acne." Gore also vows to "give each child a talking Chihuahua" and "reduce class sizes to
0."

            

               Bottom line: If only Gore had such a light touch
            

            
               Bore 2000
            

            The graphics bear an
uncanny (and possibly actionable) resemblance to Gore's official site, but the
content is weak. All jokes, all secondhand. Includes a "Bulletin
Bored."

            

               Bottom line: Stiffer than its subject
            

            
               
                  The Bush
Watch
               
            

            A serious site, light on
graphics but heavy on content, with links to dozens of articles scrutinizing
Bush and several plugs for itself from major news organizations. Calls itself
"a non-advocacy site" and claims to be the "First George W. Bush Site on the
Web."

            

               Bottom line: Opposition research headquarters
            

            
               GWBush
            

            Excellent
libertarian-oriented, anti-drug-war site. Its theme is "Hypocrisy with
Bravado." A stamp on the home page boasts, "DRUG-FREE SINCE 1974." A mock
press
release has Bush promising "to raise the age at which minors can be
tried as adults ... to age 40." Best joke: Every picture of Bush includes a
digitally-added white streak under his nose.

            
               Bottom line: Best
parody site of the campaign
            

         
      
   
