
   
   
      
         
            Unclogging House Guests

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Last weekend a
friend and her husband came to visit me for a few days. This is a friend I have
known for 25 years, and although we've lived in different cities for the last
23 years, we've always kept in touch and stayed fairly close. We had a great
weekend--saw the sights of the city, ate out, etc. But the day after they left
for home, I found some damage had been done that they hadn't told me about. The
turntable in the microwave was chipped, and the toilet in their bathroom was
clogged. Neither of these things in and of themselves bothers me. What does
bother me is that this lifelong friend didn't have the courtesy to let me know
what had happened. Should I just let these things go in the name of preserving
the friendship? If not, what are my options?
            

            

               --C.S.
            

            Dear C.,

            The chums took the easy
way out. It was not classy or first-rate, but it saved them what they perceived
to be embarrassment. Avoidance is a rather common behavior ... some people
decide it's easier to skitter away than to 'fess up. Granted, it's left-footed
social behavior; Prudie is not going to argue with you there. Your options,
however, depend on how strongly you feel about letting them know you know. If
you just can't stand to let it ride, then write a non-accusatory note saying
you were sad they didn't feel close enough to have mentioned the microwave or
the sluggish toilet. To lighten it up, you could add that all the repairs have
been made, and you look forward to their return visit. Think about it for a few
days, then decide how you want to play it.

            
--Prudie, tactfully

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               A year ago my husband's cousin and his wife
moved in with us. They were relocating from another state and needed a place to
live "for a few months" while they got to know the area, and found jobs and a
place to live. They agreed to pay half the rent and attendant bills.
            

            
               Well, they're still
with us, and they never pay anything on time. They seem to think that junk food
qualifies as their half of the groceries. My husband and I keep the house
supplied with good food, but we can't afford to support two grown adults. We
also cannot stand their dog. (It's not housebroken, and it's full-grown.) We
have made subtle hints and mentioned that they need to start looking for their
own place. But they aren't catching on. How do we tell them to get out of our
house without causing family problems? We've always been close and don't want
to lose the friendship. They are using us, and I need help with this.
            

            

               --T.M.
            

            Dear T.,

            The "visitors" are,
indeed, using you, but you've permitted it. Family problems seem a small price
to pay for evicting two junk-food-eating freeloaders with a dog that uses your
house as a fire hydrant. Subtle hints won't cut it, guys. You've got to insist
that the "temporary" situation--now at 12 months and counting--has run its
course. They have overstayed their welcome and must be told to leave. Unless
the name of your house is Ritz-Carlton, bag the subtle approach, and give them
a deadline for their departure. And do ask for a settling of accounts, as per
the original agreement. Prudie is sputtering on your behalf and wishes you tons
of luck.

            
--Prudie, insistently

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               How long is a fair amount of time to date
someone before getting engaged? My girlfriend, the love of my life for the last
five years, recently broke up with me because she felt our relationship had
gone on too long without any sign of future commitment. I always intended to
marry her and always reminded her of this when the topic came up. She feels
that if I truly loved her I would take her now before anyone else did. Since we
are both only 24 years old, I felt we shouldn't rush things, since we have the
rest of our lives to be together.
            

            
               What do you
think?
            

            

               --Left Long Before the Altar
            

            Dear Left,

            Ah yes, which came first
... the chicken or the engagement ring? Five years with the love of your
life--whom you've always planned to marry--suggests that this would not be a
rush job. Prudie thinks a fair amount of time to date someone before getting
engaged would be ... oh, five years. So hop to it and get her back with
whatever kind of engagement ring you can afford.

            
--Prudie, romantically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I just bought a
seersucker suit and was wondering if you could give me some fashion tips on the
types of shoes, ties, shirts, and belts I should wear with it.
            

            

               --Hot in Florida
            

            Dear Hot,

            You obviously have
Prudie confused with some other columnist, but just so it shouldn't be wasted
bandwidth, by all means wear any shoes, ties, shirts and belts that don't clash
with the suit.

            
--Prudie, nattily

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am 45 years old and a former accomplished
gymnast in Texas. During my years as a devoted gymnast, I experienced several
damaging landings and falls during practice. Multiple surgeries have left me
somewhat "ambulatory impaired" and unable to wear skirts/dresses with high
heels. I am short in stature, wear a brace on my right lower leg, and have four
stainless-steel implants in my right ankle. Wearing a skirt or dress without
pumps looks pathetic on me, and people tend to stare. Well-designed pantsuits
and formal pant-wear allow me to attend professional and social functions
without the appearance of an obvious handicap. My question: Why do so many
people take offense at my wearing pants to the many functions I must
attend?
            

            
               Thanks!
            

            

               --Female Athlete
            

            Dear Fem,

            Anyone who believes
women wearing pants is incorrect is antediluvian. Even the stuffy dining rooms
in Boston's most WASPy clubs allow them. Plus, Katharine Hepburn and Prudie
have been wearing them for years, so you are in good company.

            --Prudie, stylishly

         
      
   
