
   
   
      
         
            Nuclear Terror in Japan

            Japan's major nuclear
accident was the world's top story Friday and reignited the debate about
nuclear safety. In Japan, Asahi
Shimbun painted a picture of great confusion and official incompetence,
prominently reporting the government's admission that it reacted too slowly and
that there wasn't enough staff at the site to handle the crisis. In one report,
Asahi Shimbun said villagers close to the Tokaimura uranium processing
plant heard on television they had been told to stay indoors when in fact they
had received no instructions whatsoever. When they telephoned local government
offices in a panic, asking to be checked for radiation in the homes they had
been ordered not to leave, they were told the checks were being done only at
the village community center.

            
In another story, the paper said the disaster would deal "a serious blow" to
the nation's much-criticized nuclear energy policy. It quoted officials as
saying that the Tokaimura plant wasn't equipped to handle a critical mass
accident and lacked automatic controls over the flow of nuclear fuel. In an
editorial, Asahi Shimbun noted that Japanese civilians had never before
been exposed to such radiation from a nuclear facility. Calling for an
exhaustive inquiry, the paper said, "The future of the nation's nuclear energy
program now rests in large measure on how the government responds."

            
In European comment, it was often recalled that Japan is the only country to
have suffered the effects of an atomic bomb. In La Repubblica of Rome, the
paper's Washington correspondent, wrote: "The Japanese century ends with the
return of Hiroshima ... to undermine the dominant belief of Japanese culture,
the certainty that it's enough to obey one's mother and one's superiors for
everything to turn out all right. It crushes the heart of someone who knows
Japan a little and loves it a lot to see technicians and workers from the
Tokaimura plant come out of the building infected by the out-of-control chain
reaction, bowing and apologizing for their betrayal of their company, like the
soldiers abandoned on Pacific islands for 30 years who asked the emperor's
pardon for having lost the war."

            
The 50 th anniversary of the People's Republic of China was the
world's second story Friday. In Hong Kong, the South China Morning Post
said China has changed beyond recognition over the past
half-century: "A backward and semi-feudal nation has been transformed into the
world's fastest-growing economy, and is well on the way to achieving superpower
status." But the paper deplored the country's continuing "intolerance of
dissent" and said that until it reverses its official verdict on the Tiananmen
massacre "it will be hard for China to take its place among the ranks of the
world's great nations." Calling for political reform and free elections, the
paper said: "Standing still is not an option. China has achieved much in recent
years. The challenge now for the leadership is to build on these achievements
and prove that it can win a popular mandate through the ballot box."

            
In Australia, the Sydney
Morning Herald led Friday with the death of a 5-year-old East Timorese
boy after he was hit by a U.N. food parcel. He was struck during the same
emergency aid drop that caused a 3-year-old boy to have his leg amputated.
Airdrops to refugees were cancelled after these incidents, and the United
Nations has started taking food into remote regions by road, the paper
said.

            
A claim by two scientists--one French and one American--to have found proof
that Neanderthal man was a cannibal was fronted in Le Figaro of Paris Friday.
In a cave in the Ardeche near Valence, Alban Defleur of the University of the
Mediterranean in Marseilles and Tim White of the University of California at
Berkeley discovered 100,000-year-old human bones mixed up with those of
animals, all of them looking like the leftovers from dinner. Searching for
meaning in this discovery, the Times of London concluded in an editorial that "[a]t the very
least the wary Brit might understand the feral roots of French cuisine--of the
steak tartare seeping blood onto the Limoges, of ortolans devoured in one
bone-shattering mouthful. One might even dare at last to enter a Paris
restaurant and order a waiter."

            
The Independent reported the launching at Cambridge University of a student
campaign to fire the duke of Edinburgh from his position as the university's
chancellor on the grounds that he is a "bigot and racist." He caused outrage
during a factory visit last August when he said that a defective fuse box "must
have been installed by an Indian." In India, the Asian Age fronted
Forbes magazine's disclosure that three American entrepreneurs of Indian
origin have achieved billionaire status.

         
      
   
