
   
   
      
         
             The Party of Buchanan

            Before Republicans toss Pat Buchanan for saying
that the United States should have stayed out of World War II, they should
listen to some of their own rhetoric about more recent foreign policy
controversies. No one but Pat is saying in 1999 that we were wrong to help stop
Hitler, but leading Republicans are saying things today that lead you to wonder
what they would have been saying in 1939.

            Buchanan's new book, A Republic, Not an
Empire , chronicles how generations of woolly-headed idealists repeatedly
dragged the United States into pointless overseas conflicts. Buchanan contends
that Nazi Germany posed no real threat to America's vital interests after 1940
and that Franklin Roosevelt either bumbled his way into the world war or
deceitfully conspired to get the country embroiled in a war it need not have
fought. (Click for 
                  Slate
               's assessment of the book's historical
accuracy.)

            Sen. John McCain of
Arizona declared that "anyone who repudiates our involvement against Nazi
Germany obviously does not reflect the views of America, much less the
Republican Party" and invited Buchanan to leave the GOP. Elizabeth Dole said
she was "appalled." Over the past week or so, many Republicans have concluded
that Buchanan's threat to join the Reform Party was no threat at all: His views
are too extreme and unconscionable for him to remain a Republican. (George W.
Bush believes Buchanan's views are extreme and unconscionable but thinks he
should stay in the party anyway.)

            What's really striking, though, about Buchanan's ideas is
not how different, but really how very similar they are to the foreign policy
thinking that dominates the congressional Republican caucus. If you start with
the foreign policy assumptions held by most Republicans on Capitol Hill,
Buchanan's central argument--that Nazi Germany didn't threaten America's vital
national interests after 1940--is not that far off the mark.

            What Buchanan actually
says is this: By the end of 1940, after the worst of the Battle of Britain, it
had become clear that the Germans would not be able to mount a cross-channel
invasion of Britain. If the Germans couldn't invade the United Kingdom,
Buchanan asks, how could they credibly pose a threat to the United States
thousands of miles across the Atlantic? FDR, who had a broad conception of his
country's national interests, did not have much trouble answering that
question. But if you agree with Buchanan's highly constricted view of the
national interest, it's not a bad point.

            Buchanan's premise is as a continental nation America has
few vital national interests beyond our own shores and still fewer outside our
own hemisphere. A corollary is that America's membership in international
organizations imperils the national interest by threatening to drag the country
into needless conflicts overseas. Another corollary is that mere humanitarian
considerations should play little or no role in decisions about when to
intervene in faraway places. America can't be the world's policeman or its
"911."

            All this sounds a lot
like what congressional Republicans have been saying since the end of the Cold
War. Just a few months ago neo-isolationist Republicans were arguing that the
United States should stay out of Kosovo because we had no vital interests in
the peace and stability of southeastern Europe. Texas Sen. Phil Gramm insisted
that the Kosovo war "should not have been fought [because] the President [had]
never made a convincing case for putting the lives of Americans at risk in a
war where we have no vital national interest at stake." House Majority Whip Tom
DeLay of Texas fulminated on the House floor that "NATO is starting to resemble
a power-hungry imperialist army," and he claimed that "the crisis in Kosovo
poses no security threat to American people, our territory or our welfare."
Many of these same legislators routinely declare that American liberties and
"sovereignty" are being stolen by bow-tied bureaucrats at the United Nations
and the World Trade Organization, and even by foreign generals in NATO.

            Beyond situational sound bites, Buchanan and the Republican
leadership share the same underlying theory of the nation's foreign policy.
Liberal internationalists believe that there is a moral dimension to our
leadership in the international community. They also believe that international
organizations, on balance, reduce future threats to our vital interests. This
often means anticipating future threats at one or two stages of remove and
recognizing that our values and our interests, though not identical, are not
wholly separate either. But many prominent Republicans prefer a policy of
avoiding international commitments and keeping a robust national defense in
store for any power that directly threatens our territory or our citizens.
Genocide in another part of the world may be tragic. Regional instability on
some other continent may be something to keep an eye on. But unless our access
to strategic natural resources is threatened or bullets actually start flying
our way, it's simply best not to get involved.

            As Buchanan's book
accurately notes, this isolationist mentality has deep roots in the Republican
Party. Sen. Robert Taft tried to keep the United States out of World War II in
the late 1930s and then sought to restrain America's overseas commitments in
the early Cold War years. Before the advent of modern weaponry, one of the
central tenets of the isolationist catechism was that America's status as a
continental nation, flanked by two great oceans, gave us the luxury of doing
without all the treaties and alliances that countries such as France or Great
Britain had to bother with. At mid-century, when internationalism was at its
zenith, it was commonly thought that a mixture of technology and America's
great power status had made such thinking obsolete. But the impulse remains. It
is actually one of the key motivators behind the conservative obsession with a
national missile defense--a technological fix that would conveniently replace
the oceans in allowing the United States to avoid a lot of pro-active foreign
involvement.

            The case for not acting until you have to was put most
vividly by Senate Assistant Majority Leader Don Nickles of Oklahoma, in a
remark that also captures the hard-nosed attitude regarding humanitarian
concerns. During Kosovo, Nickles said publicly that he had told President
Clinton, "I don't think that we should begin bombing unless and until the Serbs
really begin a very significant massacre."

            Isolationist sentiments
don't prevent DeLay and Co. from saber-rattling; and given the belligerent
stands they often take toward countries like China or Cuba, "petulant
unilateralists" might be a better term for them. Whether or not this attitude
is morally vacant and ultimately self-defeating, as its critics charge, it's
hard to see how anyone who seriously holds these views, whatever you call them,
could really have had much to argue about with the America Firsters in the late
1930s.

            Not all Republicans think this way. The Weekly
Standard has been eloquently critical of Republican neo-isolationism and is
pushing something called "National Greatness conservatism," a program of
muscular American engagement around the globe. The mainstream GOP foreign
policy establishment (Eagleburgers and Scowcrofts and the like) still espouses
a trimmed-down, "realist" variant of internationalism. And some of the GOP's
increasing anti-interventionism can be ascribed to hysterical dislike of
President Clinton, rather than to principled belief, and is likely to wane when
he is gone. But as of now, the majority of the congressional party--the
Republicans who actually run for office and get elected--embraces a theory of
national interests that is very similar to the one in Buchanan's new
page-turner.

            The main difference between these congressional
Republicans and Pat Buchanan is that none of them have been thoughtful enough
to apply their beliefs to World War II, or politically foolish enough to
mention it if they have.

         
      
   
