
   
   
      
         
            No. 279: &quot;When Worlds Collide&quot;

            
               Federal attorneys
in the Eastern District of New York arrested and indicted seven people in a
case that touched on Holland, Hasidim, and squirrels. What's the
connection?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Tuesday's Question (No. 278)--"Interest Rate":
Fill in the blank as Carleton S. Fiorina, 44, the newly announced CEO
of the $50 billion Hewlett-Packard company, meets the press: "My ________ is
interesting but really not the subject of the story here."
               
            

            
"Ability to play soccer."-- Jennifer 
               "Damned One-Note Media!"
Miller
            

            
"Inability to distinguish 'profits' from 'losses.' "-- Paul Tullis
            

            
"Dinner with Andre."-- Erich Van Dussen
            

            
"Sexual discrimination lawsuit against Hewlett-Packard."-- Richard
Nikonovich-Kahn
            

            "Nike
Inner Actives sports bra, which will go on sale at major sporting goods
retailers Monday, July 26, with a suggested retail price of $40."-- Doug
Welty ( Daniel Radosh and Kate Wing had similar answers.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            But of course it's not
for Carleton Fiorina to say what the subject of the story is; that's the job of
the reporter. Or, if the reporter works for Vanity Fair , of the
celebrity's press agent. You'll find your experience with the newspapers less
frustrating if you accept the idea that the reporter is there to tell not your
story but his or hers. It is, no doubt, irritating to be misquoted, but at
least you retain the moral high ground and a sense of yourself as wise and
well-spoken, albeit misunderstood. What's completely intolerable is to be
accurately quoted and seen--even by yourself--to be no better than you actually
are. It is a deeply demoralizing experience for anyone who lacks adequate
powers of self-deception and photo approval.

            
               Egalitarian Utopia
Answer
            

            "My gender is interesting but really not the
subject of the story here."

            "I hope that we are at a point that everyone has
figured out that there is not a glass ceiling," Fiorina added. Well, maybe.
But, while she is undoubtedly a terrifically capable and successful executive,
her new job will make her the only woman ever to head a company included in the
Dow Jones industrial average and one of only three to run a company listed on
the S&P 500.

            The former president of the $20 billion global
service provider division of Lucent Technologies, Fiorina is a surprising
choice in other ways, too. She is young, she is an outsider in a company that
has traditionally found its leaders in-house, she brings a marketing and sales
background to the engineering culture of H-P, and her first name seems utterly
unrelated to her surname.

            "Carly was quite simply
the best person to lead H-P into the next century," said Lewis Platt, the
company's current chief. "And to look fabulous doing it," he did not add.

            
               Brooke Saucier's
Pom-Pom-Shaking Follow-Up
            

            How ironic. I was a cheerleader in high school, and
Jeff Webb was the announcer on ESPN as we won the national championship in
1987.

            Goooooooooooooo, News
Quiz!!

            
               Good News--Or Not,
Depending--Extra
            

            "An investigation into
the size of male sex organs reveals that homosexuals are generally better
endowed than heterosexuals. ... Researchers say they surveyed data gathered on
5,172 men and found penis sizes to be larger in homosexuals than heterosexuals
based on five measurement standards. ... Researchers say an earlier study also
shows that homosexuals differ, on average, from heterosexuals in genital size.
A survey of 126 homosexual men had larger penises on the average than a similar
group of 86 heterosexuals."--from The List, a service of Wired Strategies.
Subscribe free by e-mailing join-THELIST@wiredstrategies.com.
(Thanks to Katha Pollitt.)

            
               Ongoing Domain Name
Extra
            

            GlobalEconomy.com is already registered by
SatelliteTV.

            Dollar-A-Day.com is already registered by Execulink
Internet Services. FiftyCents-A-Day.com is available.

            Participants are invited to submit a similar set (a
pair will do)--a domain name that is already taken along with an amusing and
available alternative.

            You can check the availability of domain names at
http://www.eHost.com/domain_reg/index.html.

            Replies due by noon ET
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Ambiguous name, attractive ass.

         
      
   
