
   
   
      
         
            Hugh Anxiety

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Mickey Blue
                
               
                  Eyes
                (Warner Bros.). Rather
grim reports for Hugh Grant's latest smirking, stuttering performance as an
upper-crusty Brit. This time around, he gets mixed up in the mob family of his
fiancee (Jeanne Tripplehorn). Yes, Grant's cute, but the movie's a stinker,
"little more than a series of stitched together gags" (Stephen Holden, the
New York Times ). Reviewers disagree about whose fault it is. The
Chicago Sun-Times ' Roger Ebert says the scenes where Grant learns to
talk like a gangster are "so badly handled by Grant that the movie derails and
never recovers." The Los Angeles Times ' Kenneth Turan, on the other
hand, argues that Grant "goes a long way toward saving [the film] from itself."
(Click to read the review by 
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein.
Visit the official site to see stills and clips from the
film.)

            

               
                  Teaching Mrs. T
               
               
                  ingle
                (Miramax Films).
Kevin Williamson, high off his continuing success writing teen films
( Scream ) and television ( Dawson's Creek ), tries his hand at
directing. The results are disastrous. The plot? Students take revenge on a
sadistic teacher. (The film was originally called Killing Mrs. Tingle ,
but the title was toned down in the wake of recent school violence.) The film
"bludgeons the audience with broad, crude, creepy developments" (Ebert, the
Chicago Sun-Times ) and lacks Williamson's usual humor and panache. Helen
Mirren, playing the evil Mrs. Tingle, rises above the weak material--which only
makes the film "even more painful" to watch (Desson Howe, the Washington
Post ). One critic dissents: Kevin Thomas, the Los Angeles Times '
always easy-to-please critic, flouts conventional wisdom and calls the film a
"knockout directorial debut." (Click here to find out more about Williamson.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  The 
                  Jukebox Queen of 
                  Malta
               ,by Nicholas
Rinaldi (Simon & Schuster). Critics enjoy this love story about a young
radio operator from Brooklyn and a local jukebox repairwoman who meet in Malta
during the bombings of World War II. Richard Bernstein praises the novel as "a
funny, melancholy, romantic, disturbing, character-rich window on the war" (the
New York Times ). But others complain that "the influences of Joseph
Heller's classic Catch-22 and Louis de Bernières' recent Corelli's
Mandolin are rather too blatantly present" and make the novel feel overly
familiar. Still, "if Heller hadn't existed we might be calling this a pretty
terrific novel" ( Kirkus Reviews ). (Click here to read the first chapter.)

            

               
                  Conduct
               
               
                  Unbecoming a Woman: Medicine on Trial in
Turn-of-the-Century Brooklyn
               , by Regina Morantz-Sanchez (Oxford
University Press). Critics are intrigued by the dramatic story of successful
19 th -century gynecological surgeon Mary Amanda Dixon Jones, whose
career was derailed by a smear campaign. Unfortunately, Morantz-Sanchez
recounts the tale "in academic prose thick enough to thwart all but the most
persistent" ( Kirkus Reviews ). Bernstein of the New York Times
agrees, complaining that "Ms. Morantz-Sanchez is more interested in the
scholarly value of her story than its inherent drama and that will make the
book tough going for some readers." But most say the interesting sociological
history and insight into attitudes about women in medicine make it worth the
slog. (Click here to read the first chapter.)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Movie
            

            

               
                  Universal
               
               
                  Soldier: The Return
                (Columbia
Pictures). Critics groan at Jean-Claude Van Damme's sequel to the 1992 action
flick about reanimated dead soldiers. It's all "bullets, bombs, and boobs--the
biggest boob being Van Damme, natch" (Rod Dreher, the New York Post ).
But "for those eager to bid adieu to their credibility for 82 minutes," at
least the action "rarely flags" (Lawrence Van Gelder, the New York
Times ).

         
      
   
