
   
   
      
         
             Richard Nixon Is Still Dead

            This week, 25 years after Richard Nixon resigned
the presidency, the conventional wisdom seems to hold that his once-abysmal
reputation has been largely rehabilitated. It's a familiar story: On Aug. 9,
1974, Nixon leaves Washington with a 24 percent public approval rating, facing
a possible prison sentence; by Aug. 9, 1999, he has been transformed into a
foreign-policy visionary, a domestic-policy liberal, and no worse a scoundrel
than lots of other presidents. "What had seemed impossible in the summer of
1974 had happened," his biographer Stephen Ambrose wrote (10 years ago
already). "Nixon was respectable, even honored, certainly admired."

            The historical irony is
delicious--and spurious. Pundits and historians talk as if Nixon has already
been rehabilitated, and that's flat wrong. To be sure, there are favorable and
critical views of him, simple and complex ones. But the most vivid and enduring
remains the image of Nixon as our national political villain. Tricky Dick lives
on.

            Even in his early career, Nixon had a reputation as a
comeback artist. In 1952 he salvaged his spot as Dwight Eisenhower's running
mate with the famous "Checkers" speech. He did it again when he won the
presidency in 1968, six years after ABC aired The Political Obituary of
Richard Nixon . And we've been hearing about Nixon's latest rehabilitation
practically since the resignation itself. Yet too often, it has turned out to
be all hype and little substance.

            Take his prime-time TV
interview with David Frost in 1977. Nixon believed that Frost's softball
questions would allow him to tell the public his side of the Watergate story
for the first time. While the broadcast drew some 45 million viewers--the same
as an episode of the top-rated Happy Days --Nixon won few converts; after
the show, more people lowered their opinions of him than raised them. He
remained, Newsweek wrote in a typical review, "careless of the record,
heedless of the proper limits of power, unable to plead guilty to anything much
worse than 'screwing up' and coming no closer in history to that final
absolution in history he seeks."

            Nine years later, though, it was Newsweek 's turn to
pronounce a return to respectability, splashing Nixon's photo on the cover with
a six-page article, a three-page interview, and a dozen photographs inside. The
former president, the article noted, had advised President Reagan, written
several books, and made Rolling Stone 's list of "Who's Hot." But, again,
what the large print gave, the fine print took away. Those who took the time to
read the article learned that Nixon's support came mostly from Republican
circles and that die-hard critics scoffed at his alleged foreign policy
expertise. An accompanying poll found that six in 10 Americans wished him to
remain in exile from public life. With the cover line--"He's Back"--the
magazine's editors unwittingly helped create the very phenomenon they were
supposedly just observing.

            In the years following, various episodes served as
occasions for one pundit or another to declare Nixon's reputation restored.
Nixon would visit Capitol Hill, or criticize George Bush's Russia policy in a
strategically leaked memo, or meet with President Clinton; each time he was
pronounced rehabilitated, even as polls showed that he remained unpopular. His
death on April 18, 1994, brought a new zenith of revisionism: an outpouring of
praise from President Clinton and other public figures. Television and radio
networks aired a relentless parade of fond reminiscences about Nixon, news
anchors drummed home the now-familiar lines about his comeback (again creating
the fact they were ostensibly just reporting), and the eulogies at the funeral
itself never once mentioned Watergate.

            Yet even this final
rebound proved illusory. No sooner had the tributes subsided than an equally
vociferous chorus spoke up to denounce the media's kid-gloves treatment. Many
of the nation's most esteemed political writers--including Russell Baker, David
Halberstam, and Garry Wills--chastised their peers for soft-soaping Nixon's
life in death. The publication of The Haldeman Diaries a month later,
with its reminders of Nixon's scheming, sinister side, confirmed that Watergate
would hardly be forgotten soon.

            Those proclaiming Nixon's return miss the subtext of their
own proclamations. Implicit--and sometimes explicit--in every story about
Nixon's comeback has been the underlying story of his calculated efforts to
come back: He authored foreign-policy books, wined and dined journalists, and
waged court battles for control of the White House tapes. These stories don't
dwell on any glorious new achievements on Nixon's part. Rather, they underscore
his campaign for rehabilitation and the public's alleged willingness to grant
it. In his book The Image , historian Daniel Boorstin coined the term
"pseudo-event" to describe events that have no intrinsic news value but get
treated as if they do. Nixon's comeback is a classic pseudo-event, erected
almost entirely on self-fulfilling punditry--a series of interviews, a magazine
cover, a cascade of adoring eulogies.

            This doesn't mean that no
one is rethinking Nixon's achievements. He continues to keep historians busy.
(I'm writing a book about him myself.) And most of the recent major Nixon
books--by Herbert Parmet, Jonathan Aitken, Joan Hoff, Tom Wicker, and (this
month) Irwin Gellman--have been quite sympathetic. Yet they haven't made much
of a dent in his overall reputation among scholars. In the latest ranking of
presidents by professional historians, conducted by Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
(admittedly no Nixon fan), RN finished in the bottom tier, alongside Andrew
Johnson, Ulysses Grant, Warren Harding, and Herbert Hoover. Twenty of 32
historians surveyed judged Nixon's presidency a "failure"; none called it
"great."

            Besides, even more telling than the views of academics are
the images of Nixon in popular culture, where he remains resentful, paranoid,
and ruthlessly power-hungry. On The Simpsons , for example, Nixon has
appeared in caricature at least 20 times (according to the "Simpsons
Archive" Web site). He's almost always portrayed as the dark, suspicious
figure circa 1974. On various episodes he is a member, along with Bluebeard and
the Grim Reaper, of "the Jury of the Damned"; he takes part in a
snake-bludgeoning (in a scandal exposed by a Bob Woodward book); his enemies
list is used for dastardly purposes; even his dog Checkers is said to be bound
for hell.

            Nor do Hollywood movies show any sign of revising
Nixon's image. In 1995, Oliver Stone's Nixon gave us the familiar,
shadowy president, emphasizing his most savage and conspiratorial qualities.
"He's the darkness reaching out for the darkness," Howard Hunt tells John Dean
in the film. "Look at the landscape of his life and you'll see a boneyard." The
recently released Dick portrays the president, as Stephen Holden wrote
in the New York Times , "with his hunched shoulders, darting paranoid
gaze and crocodile grimace ... the quivering, skulking embodiment of a single
word: guilty." For now, that remains the most vivid and pervasive image of
Richard Nixon in the American mind. And it's not likely to fade any time
soon.

         
      
   
