
   
   
      
         
            No. 327: "Haider Go Seek"

            
               Two weeks ago,
Jörg Haider led his far-right Freedom Party to a stunning second-place finish
in Austria's national elections; two weeks from now, he's coming to America. To
do what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 326)--"Scents and Sensibility":
            

            

               
                  "This is a dream for me--to find the soft parts and touch them
and even smell them. It's very exciting." Who said this about what?

                  
                     (Question courtesy of Jamie Smith and Andy
Aaron.)
                  
               
            

            "A
recently fired member of the Federal Aviation Authority's South Dakota
office."-- Beth Sherman ( Tom Crawford and Eric Akawie had
similar answers.)

            "Joe
Torre; Don Zimmer's head."-- Bill Scheft
            

            
"Billionaire or no, Martha Stewart loves mulch."-- Michael Mannella
            

            "My
grandmother, in the Waldbaum's produce department; about honeydew melons, 'good
for tomorrow.' "-- Larry Amoros
            

            "All
my answers have Peter Lorre accents."-- Ellen Macleay
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            With so much news and so little News Quiz, many
stories get neglected. However, it seemed important to provide the full text of
Pat Buchanan's speech on bolting the Republican Party. Unfortunately, for
reasons of space, I had to condense his remarks, adding nothing, just making a
few cuts and altering the punctuation to bring it into line with standard
usage. Buchanan speaks:

            "The junk yards of history are strewn with
wreckage. Dust!

            "Our own Elmer Gantry, Mr. Clinton, whose
desecration of the temples of our civilization and personal misconduct are good
and generous, first at the scene of natural disasters: Sir, your Turtle is in
jeopardy.

            "To those who prattle I'm not running: I'm running.
All of us must learn our English language. We can get pot doing its magic
again. We need a timeout.

            "This land is our land.
Pick up the whip. Insult a free people. Friends, the good manners are gone.
Swagger! Homage to the great god mammon! This is our cause. And so it is, that
in the name of the Founding Fathers we go forward to rescue our Lady America,
and will not quit this fight as long as there is breath within us."

            
               Huge, Old, and Hairy
Answer
            

            Dutch paleontologist Dick Mol said it about a
nearly intact woolly mammoth recovered from the Siberian permafrost last
week.

            A team of scientists was directed to the site by
local residents who found a tusk sticking up from the ground, reports the
Los Angeles Times wire service. The team dug up the head, which had
partially thawed and decayed, then halted digging for fear of destroying their
find. Using ground-penetrating radar to locate the carcass, they broke up the
frozen soil with jackhammers. A helicopter lifted the 22-ton block of frozen
dirt and flew it 150 miles to Khatanga, Russia.

            Alexei Tikhonov of the Zoological Institute in St.
Petersburg denies that the mammoth can be cloned, because during its
"preservation in permafrost, dehydration destroyed the chains of DNA. Now we
only have very small parts of the DNA chains."

            The mammoth, dubbed
Zharkov after the local man who discovered its tusk, was a 9-foot-tall adult
male, about 47 years old at the time of death; it would have looked like a
hairy elephant to the modern eye, much like ... oh, make up your own damn
joke.

            
               A. M. Extra
            

            CBS's new Early
Show debuts next week, taking on NBC's Today and ABC's Good
Morning America in the battle for moral suprema--sorry, for bigger profits
in morning television, much as the Founding Fathers anticipated when they
devised the three-network system. Competition, as we know, stimulates
creativity, so these three shows no doubt offer diverse pleasures. Which of
these shows possesses the following qualities?

            1. Studio with view of New York streets.

            2. Determinedly shallow news coverage.

            3. Near-psychotic obsession with the weather.

            4. Male and female co-anchors with eerie
resemblance to flight attendants.

            5. Inane celebrity guests promoting current
projects, quack nostrums.

            6. Tedious cooking segments include recipes for
human flesh.

            7. Guests strip to waist and fight with bowie
knives.

            8. Audience participation segment: "Which Clam Is
Tainted?"

            9. Subliminal messages urge audience to pelt Tony
Randall with bottles.

            10. Formerly hosted by a
monkey.

            
               Answers
            

            1 to 4 are true of all three programs.

            5 and 6 are half-truths, of which the true portion
applies to all three programs.

            7 to 9 are segment ideas none of the shows will
even consider, or even bother to return my calls to discuss. Uptight
bastards.

            10 is true only of
Today , but it would be a big improvement on nearly any show or
congressional committee.

            
               It Pays To Increase
Your Word Power Extra
            

            "We recognize the
importance of making the narrow-band end of the funnel as robust as possible
explicitly for the purpose of converting those users to broadband
eventually."-- George Bell , CEO, Excite@Home, explains why he's spending
a billion dollars to buy a greeting-card company, marketing prepackaged
sentiments for those unable to express themselves, until they can watch
television on their computers. Or something.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            As requested by Greg Diamond, the tally is

            Sex Jokes: 31

            Death Jokes: 7

            Conclusion: News Quiz--it's life-affirming. (In a
furtive sort of way.)

         
      
   
