
   
   
      
         
            Remembering the Holocaust

            
               A Fine-Tuned
Instrumentalization
            

            

               Editor's note: What follows in an exchange between Peter Novick, author
of The Holocaust in American Life , and James Young, one of the
participants in last week's "," in which Novick's book was discussed. Both
letters are reprinted with the authors' permission.
            

            Dear
James,

            I am appealing to James at leisure to overturn the
judgment of James in haste. I apologize for the fact that, as with many
appellate briefs, detailing the grounds for the appeal will require a fair
amount of space.

            In your exchange with Philip Gourevitch about my
book The Holocaust in American Life , you wrote the following, apropos of
what you termed "the so-called 'lessons of the Holocaust,' or why we recall the
Holocaust at all": "I would suggest, contra Novick, that not every
institutional memory of the Holocaust is a deliberate instrumentalization of it
toward cheap and self-interested ends." You add that I am "actually quite good
at ferreting out many of the instances where this is, indeed, the case."

            I'm not sure what the word "institutional" means
here--i.e., how an institution remembers. Holocaust memory, of course, becomes
"institutionalized" in curricula; in a "canon" of Holocaust literature; more
diffusely, institutionalized in popular--particularly Jewish--consciousness.
Let's turn to "instrumentalization"--a word which appears to carry a strong
negative charge for you. As you know, I never myself use that word (or its
cognates) concerning collective memory. The reason, made clear more than once
in the book, is that I think collective memories that really take hold
always do so because they serve a present or continuing purpose. That is
to say, memories take hold to the extent that they are--if one wants to use the
word--"instrumental" for some purpose. As you will recall, I make a partial
exception for certain forms of religious (or civic-religious) commemoration at
the very beginning of my chapter on "lessons": "Remembering the Holocaust,
especially for Jews, needs no pragmatic justification. It is an act of piety
analogous to reciting the Mourner's Kaddish on the anniversary of a relative's
death, to the remembrance of war dead on Memorial Day." In the introduction, I
point out that historically, Jewish memory--even religious memory--has been
selective: Events that seem to contemporaries to point up a useful contemporary
lesson are incorporated into collective memory; those that don't seem to teach
useful lessons recede, though they may be recovered later, as perceptions
change about what lessons are useful. And, a fortiori, this is true of secular
memory. Thus, for me , to say that a collective memory is "instrumental"
is to say nothing that isn't implicit in its being a collective memory.
For me , to say that Holocaust memory is "instrumentalized" says nothing
worth saying, and certainly nothing invidious or discreditable.

            For you (and others)
"instrumentalization" is invidious--and discreditable. By not explaining
why it is invidious--simply taking this for granted--and saying that I
treat Holocaust memory in America as all "instrumental," you attribute to me
the view that American Holocaust memory is somehow discreditable. I think we
ought to explore how you use the word, and thus the view you're attributing to
me. Are you saying that memories in general, or memories of the Holocaust in
particular, are "instrumentalized" when they are used for unworthy , or
at least inappropriate purposes? Let's consider those purposes for which
the memory of the Holocaust has been invoked, which are the ones I discuss
most in my book. These include both "Jewish-specific" and "general"
purposes:

            

               To rouse the conscience of the world about perceived threats to "the Jews
Hitler missed" in Israel.

               To reinforce Jewish solidarity, so that having survived Hitler, Jews will
not disappear through assimilation.

               To warn Jews to watch out for early warning signs of rising anti-Semitism
in America--signs that were ignored in Germany.

               To urge that the United States intervene against atrocities abroad which
are said to resemble the Holocaust.

               To teach tolerance and brotherhood--especially in schools.

            

            Can we agree that these are the "lessons of the
Holocaust" to which I devote the most space in the book? Which of them do you
think unworthy or inappropriate--and why? I wouldn't myself describe them that
way--and in the book I don't. To be sure, in invoking the Holocaust for these
(to me) worthy and appropriate purposes, those doing so were often led to
excess: for example, exaggerating Israel's peril or American anti-Semitism.
But that was my point . As I wrote in the book, "Once one starts using
imagery from the Holocaust--that most extreme of events--it becomes impossible
to say anything moderate, balanced, or nuanced; the very language carries you
along to hyperbole." But the ends for which the Holocaust was (to use
your word) "instrumentalized" seemed to me then and seem to me now both worthy
and appropriate.

            Or perhaps, for you, "instrumentalization" hinges
on motive : Perhaps you believe the Holocaust was invoked for these ends
"cynically" or "insincerely"? This may, in isolated instances, have been true,
but I can't recall ever either saying or implying that this was the case.
Certainly, overall, I repeatedly underlined the sincerity of those who
have invoked the Holocaust. Indeed, I extend this to some of the less
"mainstream" invocations--those that many, perhaps including yourself, think
unworthy or inappropriate. As you may recall, I underlined the good faith of
those who saw an analogy between the denial of the humanity of the fetus and
the Nazi slogan "life unworthy of life." I am myself conventionally
"pro-choice," but I would think it a dubious procedure to make that the
criterion of when it was illegitimate to invoke the Holocaust, reserving the
mantle of legitimacy for causes--like humanitarian intervention, or the
promotion of brotherhood and tolerance--of which I approve. If you differ with
me on this, it would have been appropriate for you to say: "Novick is
excessively tolerant of invocations of the Holocaust which I and many others
think quite intolerable." But you didn't say that: You said that I believe that
"every institutional memory of the Holocaust is a deliberate
instrumentalization of it toward cheap and self-interested ends."

            Let's turn to "cheap and self-interested." There
are indeed invocations of the Holocaust to which I'd apply this description. In
a section devoted to miscellaneous ways in which the Holocaust had entered
American discourse, I listed a few cases in which I thought this was so,
mentioning Hillary Clinton, Woody Allen, and a handful of others. To this one
might add the single paragraph I devote to the origin of the Washington
Holocaust Museum, which, as you wrote in your Holocaust Memorials in
History , was "proposed by then-president Jimmy Carter to placate Jewish
supporters angered by his sale of F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia." In all,
two pages of the 281 pages in the book.

            You write that I am "quite good at ferreting out"
instances of "instrumentalization of [the Holocaust] toward cheap and
self-interested ends." Ferret that I am, I indeed accumulated quite a
collection of such instances, along with instances of what you elsewhere term
the Holocaust's "commodification." There was Judy Chicago, selling Holocaust
jewelry to raise money for her (stupid and vulgar) painting cycle on the
subject. There was--my personal favorite--the travel agency advertising a
"Jewish Singles Weekend," the high point of which was a visit to the Washington
Holocaust Museum. Of these, or the many other similar examples I've collected,
there is no mention in the book . The reason that I didn't mention them
was that to do so seemed to me "a cheap shot"--concentrating on the ephemeral
and the inconsequential--the scummy froth atop the waves of any discourse.

            There are real differences between us in
interpreting the rise of Holocaust memory in the United States. As an
alternative to my approach, in which the growth in Holocaust memory is to be
explained by the contemporary purposes it serves, you suggest a focus on the
Jewish tradition of remembering catastrophes. These traditional reasons, you
say "explain its significance for many [Jews] at a preconscious level, whether
we like it or not." I think there is something to this, which is why I
discussed it, albeit briefly, in the book. For various reasons, I don't think
this explains much about the evolution of American Jewish memory of the
Holocaust. Still, yours is certainly an arguable position, which we can discuss
sometime. If you'd said in 
                  Slate
                that you thought I didn't talk
enough about this, that would have been a reasonable comment. But you went way
beyond that--counterposing your traditional/cultural hypothesis to my alleged
view that "every institutional memory of the Holocaust is a deliberate
instrumentalization of it toward cheap and self-interested ends." Is that the
only possible alternative to your view?

            I can suggest a possibility about how such an
unjust and demonstrably false characterization of my views came to appear in
your message to [Philip] Gourevitch. That possibility has to do with the
rapid-fire e-mail exchange format of 
                  Slate
               's "Book Club" in which
it appeared. You wrote in response to an e-mail by Gourevitch "postmarked" just
two hours earlier. You were in fact offering it, as you'll see if you go back
to the original, not as a considered characterization of my views, but as a way
of introducing your own "traditional/cultural" explanation.

            But of course, once made, and available for
excerpting, it became a (highly quotable) characterization of my views.
The "conversational illusion" that e-mail promotes seduces us into the kind of
careless hyperbole common to conversation. In real conversations, a
raised eyebrow can be enough to make us backtrack. Something like this happens
in private e-mail exchanges. I can't count the occasions on which I said
something in a message that my correspondent challenged. In the next message
I'd find myself saying something like, "Of course, you're right. I overstated.
What I should have said, meant to say, was ..." But in your e-mail exchange
with Gourevitch, your characterization of my views wasn't challenged.
And unlike hyperbolic remarks in private exchanges, buried in the innards of
our computers, this one went out to God-knows-how-many thousands of
"eavesdroppers." Can you have any doubt that given your reputation as a
fair-minded and circumspect commentator on these matters your characterization
will be widely quoted as an authoritative summary of my views?

            If you want it to be so
quoted, you'll of course let it stand. If, on reflection, you want to withdraw
what I hope you'll acknowledge was a hasty and careless characterization, you
can do so here.

            -- Peter Novick
            

            Professor of history

            
University of Chicago

            Dear Peter,

            Given the narrowness of both my hasty
characterization of your position (vis-à-vis "instrumentalization") and of your
own objection to my characterization, I'm glad to be able to come back and say
now that my words were unfair to your much more complex approach to "the uses
of the Holocaust." It was especially unfair to put a word in your mouth,
"intrumentalization," which you have taken pains to avoid--and for very good
reasons. I'm sorry.

            At the same time, I wouldn't characterize my own
position as reflexively knee jerk against instrumentalization, in that I find
every memory, institutional or otherwise, "instrumentalizes" to some degree.
Which is partly why you wisely dispense with the term.

            In this, it would be a little too easy to blame the
rapid-fire format for my misstating of your approach to the
"instrumentalization" (my word, not yours) of the Holocaust. I take
responsibility, apologize for my haste, and accept your raised eyebrow. As a
format, I think 
                  Slate
               's Book Club can provide just the kind of
fresh first-response to books and ideas that the editors had in mind. But along
with these rewards come risks in such a rapid exchange, something both the
"reviewers" and readers need to keep in mind.

            The conversation
continues ... Until next word, I send

            --Very best wishes,

            James
E. Young

            
               Race Matters
            

            I found Michael Brus' comparison of racial
profiling and affirmative action ("") simplistic and misleading. He fails to
provide a realistic definition of affirmative action and does not address the
issues that would provide a context for it.

            Affirmative action allows that, given two
candidates of equal qualifications, an institution may favor the candidate that
helps it achieve its affirmative action goals. The legitimacy of these goals
comes not only from notions of "social justice" but also from the desire to
offer a more effective educational environment, a more hospitable workplace, or
a more effective school system. In public schools, for example, the
effectiveness of offering students role models with similar ethnic or racial
backgrounds is widely accepted.

            But the defect in Brus' article is not that he
fails to recognize these benefits, or even disagrees with them, but that he
never gets to how this reasoning is implemented in affirmative action programs
in a manner that is quite different from what goes on with racial
profiling.

            Racial profiling (as practiced in New Jersey)
simply singles out people of color for harassment by police. It is a convenient
way to select drivers for traffic stops that happens to accord with the racist
notions that seem to flourish in law enforcement.

            Affirmative action
celebrates the cultural diversity of our country and seeks to create a more
inclusive economy and public life. It recognizes that talent and ability are
distributed across the population and that it requires extra effort to avoid
excluding parts of the population that have traditionally been excluded. Racial
profiling is merely a way for racist police officers to express their bigotry
at the expense of our civil rights. It doesn't stop crime and it doesn't build
community. That Michael Brus can find no difference between these practices--or
that he is willing to attribute it all to the "fudge factor"--shows he doesn't
get it. He does us all a disservice by offering up this superficial
comparison.

            -- Rick Pressler
            

            New
Brunswick, N.J.

            
               Blasting Bloat
            

            Well, Shuman must have got his Ph.D. in B.S. from
MS, if "" is his typical output. I assume his purposes were to keep
ingratiating himself with the big boss as well as getting a lot of reader
feedback.

            I have been on quite a few development teams and
was waiting for a few honest comments. They were there but buried. The truth,
as I have seen it, lies in the SWAT team that tried to keep code trim, combined
with the greedy rush to keep ahead of competitors' introductions.

            Given enough skill and time, good programmers could
write much, much smaller programs with the same or more features, including
backward compatibility with older products. It is rushed, lazy, or incompetent
coding that takes the easy ways out.

            These programs are
flabby only partially because of their feature sets. Marketing-driven decisions
and programming shortcuts are the road signs to Flabby Software City.

            -- Mike Ball
            

            Boston

         
      
   
