
   
   
      
         
            No. 282: &quot;It'll Take a Miracle&quot;

            
               An inquiry into
Mother Teresa began in Calcutta, India, Monday, as Pope John Paul II opted to
fast-track her canonization, waiving the five-year post-death waiting period.
Beatification, the first step toward sainthood, requires a confirmed miracle,
and one has already been "authenticated." Name that miracle.
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question (No.
281)--"Sign Here":
            

            

               Five years ago, at a cost of $1,200, Vicksburg, Miss., erected two identical
signs. Now one has been spray-painted with the word "hypocrite," and the other
has been smashed to pieces. What do the signs say?
            

            "Three
Days of Peace, Love, and Music."-- Ken Novak
            

            "Lott
for Sale--Soft Money Welcome."-- Charles Kenher
            

            
"Vicksburg's Pledge: No Unnecessary Signs."-- Francis Heaney ( Peter
Carlin had a similar answer.)

            "In
five years, please spray paint 'hypocrite' on one of these signs, and smash the
other to pieces. Thank you."-- Richard Nikonovich-Kahn (similarly,
Francis Heaney , Floyd Elliot , R. Hastings , Lonnie
Cooper , and Bill McDermott )

            "Kirk
Fordice hates sex, violence, and guns! And he loves Pat Fordice!"-- Molly
Shearer Gabel
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            A city's signs may be
smashed and spray-painted--and where I grew up they were often pockmarked with
buckshot--but this sort of treatment is generally reserved for public property.
It is surprising how seldom one sees enameled profanity splashed across a
private car. There is the occasional graffiti-covered van (and once the first
scarlet streak appears, others swiftly follow), but not many. Our vandals
apparently lack class consciousness. They are great respecters of private
property. They refrain from defacing Mercedes or Lexuses, these being objects
of envy, not resentment. Donald Trump walks the streets unafraid that someone
will scrawl some harsh architectural criticism across his vast backside. Even
in the suburbs, where dogs run free, no poodle comes home with a hammer and
sickle spray-painted on his side. There really is no Left in America.

            
               Civic Pride
Answer
            

            "Home of Governor Kirk Fordice"

            Gov. Fordice, whose adulterous affair is nothing at
all like President Clinton's adulterous affair, continues to irritate the home
folks.

            Sam Habeed, a city
alderman, wants to get rid of the signs "to remove the mixed or ambiguous
messages that are out there about marital loyalty." Robert Wilbur, the
governor's spokesman, urges Mississippians to look at "the big picture."

            
               Tom Williams' World of
Signs
            

            A sign here in Seattle says, "No Dumping Whatever,"
but it's printed on two lines, so it's easily read as "No Dumping (Whatever)."
By confusing "Whatever" with "Whatsoever," the author of this sign has created
a monument to late 20 th -century civic cynicism: the self-mocking
sign. No one's going to obey it anyway, so why bother? Embrace the
futility.

            Others that come to
mind:

            "Speed Limit 35 mph (Yeah right)"

            "Men Working (As if)"

            "Falling Rocks (No
shit)"

            
               Ellen Macleay's
Suburban Bliss
            

            My parents were original owners of a Levittown
home--it was my first home! There were thousands of kids on the block. When my
mom made her weekly trip to the emergency room to have doctors patch up one of
my four brothers injured in a game of King of the Hill or Catch the Arrow, it
was a given that another mother would "look after" us kids, even though we were
all running in opposite directions.

            My dad would drive to
Jones Beach to load up on sand for the sandbox that he built in the backyard.
The greatest thing about the price of the home, my mom would say, was that it
included a washer and dryer. It was the only way veterans who didn't
have two nickels to rub together could own a home-- no down payment .
Mortgages ran about $57 a month. The table where we ate every meal was a picnic
table! And, yes, the ice cream man stopped right in front of the house. I had a
little chrome coin changer just like he did--I would click out two nickels and
he would click out three pennies change. Levittown was the happiest place on
earth.

            
               Kieran Healy's
Erratum
            

            In Monday's News Quiz, "Errata" should read
"Erratum."

            [If you count the
"carybdis" spelling as one error, and "errata," the plural, as another error,
then there are two mistakes, and thus errata, the plural is correct, in which
case there is only one mistake, in which case errata, the plural, is now
incorrect, in which case my head starts to hurt and I have to go lie
down.--Ed.]

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Some kind of crazy paradox.

         
      
   
