
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Beau Coup</SPAN>

             

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Oct. 16
            

            An
article says the Pakistani coup wasn't so bad. Deposed
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was corrupt, using his power to punish political
enemies and undermine independent government institutions. But "Pakistan's
beaten-up constitution has been molested yet again," and the army takeover
could inflame tensions with India. ... An article calls the defeat of the Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty "a disaster for America's foreign-policymaking process." In an attempt
to humiliate President Clinton, the GOP exposed its "creeping isolationism" and
reckless willingness to hinder global security for partisan pleasure.

            

               
                  New
               
               
                  Republic , Nov. 1
            

            The
cover story depicts retired Rep. Bill Paxon as the "shadow
speaker." When he was a congressman, the New York Republican invited lobbyists
to dictate legislative provisions. Now that he is a high-paid "adviser" at a
lobbying law firm, Paxon serves as consigliere to Speaker Dennis Hastert
and as one of George W. Bush's pipelines to Capitol Hill. Paxon is persuading
GOP leaders to let Dubya dictate their agenda. (Read 
                  Slate
               's
of the new Al.)
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        Wired
                     
                  
               , November 1999

            The
cover story marvels at iSmell, a computer device that manufactures scents using
a software program linked to oil odor wells. The manufacturer, DigiScents , envisions
that every PC will be hooked up to "reekers" so that the operator can enjoy
odor-enabled Web sites. The technology could also add the smell of gunpowder to
action films or burnt flesh to computer games.

            
               
                  New
York
               
               
                  Times Magazine , Oct. 17
            

            The
fifth of six millennium issues centers on self-centeredness. An article claims
we are exiting the "Me Millennium." Over the past thousand years, humanism,
science, and the advance of capitalism have conspired to displace the worship
of God with self-veneration. (In the words of Whitney Houston, "learning to
love yourself" has become "the Greatest Love of All.") ... An essay
explores the rule-free zone between college and marriage. "Most prevalent in
high-income urban ZIP codes," the period of career cultivation and serial
monogamy is unique in its absence of commitments. This uncharted period of
freedom teaches "loopy, chattering disconnected I 's" about the emptiness
of an unmoored existence. ... The magazine publishes an "album of
archetypal personalities." Faust is the prototypical transgressor. Lassie is
the model for a stalwart friend.

            

               
                  Time
               
               
                  , Oct. 18
            

            An
interview with Unabomber Ted Kaczynski finds him good-humored
and sincere. He savages his brother David for turning him in, claiming David
was seeking revenge for the attention Ted got from their parents. The author
postulates that Ted hates David because David got married while Ted remained
alone. Weird details: Ted receives The New Yorker , New York Review of
Books , and Los Angeles Times in prison and spends his rare
recreation time with fellow bombers Timothy McVeigh and Ramzi Yousef.
... The cover story lionizes Steve Jobs for his wizardry at Apple and
Pixar. The article raves about Apple's new iMac and Pixar's Toy Story 2.
Jobs is the same "brilliant man-child" he's always been. ... A piece
describes the Learning Channel's new women-targeted reality TV shows: A
Wedding Story , A Baby Story , and A Dating Story , featuring
real-life marriages, babies, and dates.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               
                  , Oct. 18
            

            The
newsweeklies' Gen Y obsession continues with a cover
story on "Tweens," the 27 million 8-to-14-year-olds in the United
States. Banal conclusions: They love the Backstreet Boys, Dawson's
Creek , and wrestler Steve Austin, and their "superficial sophistication"
hides insecurity. ... A piece warns that Russia's nuclear power plants are shabby and
decaying. An accident 40 times worse than Chernobyl is possible. Neither Russia
nor the rest of the world will pay to keep the plants safe or to close them.
... Fertilizer runoff from the Mississippi River has killed sea life
over an area the size of New Jersey in the Gulf of Mexico, says an article . Farmers are resisting calls to curtail fertilizer
use.

            

               
                  U.S.
                
               
                  News & World Report, Oct.
18
            

            A
special report looks back at the Cold War, 10 years after the
fall of the Berlin Wall. The workers' revolution that Karl Marx envisioned
occurred in 1989 when Eastern Europeans overturned authoritarian rule.
Ultimately, the threat of nuclear combat eased the risk of hot war, and
quarrels among Communists prevented Soviet dominance worldwide. ... An
article says the enclosed mall is declining. Shoppers are
moving from suburbs to urban centers and buying online or from big discount
chains. A sure sign that the mall is outmoded: They just tore down the shopping
center that was the setting for Fast Times at Ridgemont High .

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  New Yorker , Oct. 18 and Oct. 25
            

            The
annual "Next" issue. An article describes how McKinsey & Co. markets itself
to recruits as a halfway house for the best of the brightest. The
consulting-firm-cum-finishing-school allows risk-averse overachievers to learn
more about business by acting as analysts for hire. ... A profile of
Jason McCabe Calacanis portrays the founder of the Silicon Alley
Reporter as the Walter Winchell of the Internet age. The working-class
Brooklyn native created publications and business conferences for and about the
Web world. His annual Silicon Alley 100 list defines who has made it in
cyberbusiness. ... In a "Talk of the Town" item, Ron Reagan Jr. praises
Dutch . "For all its fictive excursions," Edmund Morris' biography
captures "the contradictory man" he calls dad. Disclaimer: Junior admits a
friendship with the author.

            

               
                  Weekly
                
               
                  Standard , Oct. 18
            

            An
article accuses Vice President Al Gore of flip-flopping on
abortion. Gore staunchly opposed abortion and federal funding for it when he
was a House member in the '70s and early '80s but reversed himself once he
entered the Senate. Now he tries to pretend he was never pro-life. ... A
funny profile of Reform Party Chairman-elect Jack Gargan finds
him refreshingly honest, though only slightly less nutty than the rest of his
party. (He's been a chicken farmer, horse-racing announcer, and handwriting
analyst.) He can't control the Reformers and doesn't know which of their wackos
(Ventura, Trump, Buchanan, Perot, Fulani ...) is going to come out on top.

            

               
                  Vanity
                
               
                  Fair, November 1999
            

            An
article mocks the travails of shahtoosh addicts. Shahtooshes are $3,000 shawls
made from the wool of endangered Tibetan antelopes. Socialites cling to their
shawls, even though it is illegal to sell or import them. A Newark federal
court ordered more than 100 ladies, including Christie Brinkley and Nan
Kempner, to turn in their shahtooshes. ... The cover profile claims Jim
Carrey is more than the sum of his puerile jokes. "The Michael Jordan of
physical comedy" is an intelligent, introspective lone wolf and a thinking
man's comedian. His virtuoso portrayal of Andy Kaufman in the forthcoming
Man on the Moon proves that Carrey is more than just a "turbocharged
vaudevillian."

            

               
                  Business
                
               
                  Week, Oct. 18
            

            A
special report applauds the rising incomes of the poor. After losing ground for
decades, the working poor have enjoyed a 10 percent increase in
inflation-adjusted income over the past two years. The pay hike is being driven
by taut labor markets and the revival of inner-city industry. ... An
article examines Newt Gingrich's life after Congress. At $50,000 a speech,
Gingrich is expected to make $3 million just from blabbing. He has started a
corporate consulting firm to advise clients on high-tech and health issues. His
two political action committees pulled in $1.2 million in six months.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  Nation , Oct. 25
            

            The
cover story denounces welfare reform. Welfare-leavers are
arbitrarily denied food stamps, child care, and transitional Medicaid. Rather
than easing the transition from welfare to work, states hoard block grants and
dodge their obligations to the poor. ... An article attacks an Immigration and Naturalization Service
program to root out illegal immigrant labor. Operation Vanguard subpoenas
personnel records and uses the information to target workers for deportation.
The piece argues that the operation is deviously designed to lower wages.

         
      
   
