
   
   
      
         
            No. 321: &quot;World Series&quot; 

            
               New York, Bombay,
Sao Paulo, Mexico City--what comes next in this series? Why?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 320)--"Futurific":
            

            

               
                  
                     "It is one of the most significant developments in the
history of the space age," said John E. Pike of the Federation of American
Scientists, reacting to Tuesday's big event. What
happened?
                  
               
            

            "I got
a pedicure for the first time. I had no idea of the impact I was
having."-- Merrill Markoe
            

            "NASA
replaced the faulty O-rings in Al Gore."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            
"Quarter beer night at Hooters, just down the road from FAS
headquarters."-- Brooke Saucier
            

            "At
the AARP's request, early-bird specials will be available on all flights to the
moon."-- Ellen Macleay
            

            "I'm
excited about the Buffy - Angel crossover, too, but let's not get
too excited."-- Matt Sullivan
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            I hate the space
program. It's bread and circuses without the bread. And with a crappy little
circus that's got, like, maybe one trained donkey who isn't feeling very well.
Even NASA's most enthusiastic supporters must admit that the early promise of
this program has been unfulfilled. "The conquest of space has moved ahead with
breath-taking speed since the Space Age began on October 4, 1957," says
the 1960 edition of the World Book , without shame because it's just an
inanimate object and can't feel shame, unlike some kind of Space World
Book of the future that will know all human emotions and will be perfected
any minute. "On that day, Russian scientists launched the first true space
traveler, a chain-smoking dog named Laika, who, after befouling his kennel and
biting his trainer on the ass, was rocketed aloft in a spacesuit filled with
his own urine," it does not add. I've always favored the alternative
plan--small, unmanned probes, along with a gigantic annual bonfire of $1,000
bills folded into origami cranes. A-OK!

            
               I'm

               Not Looking Down on You, I'm Just Looking Down Answer
            

            On Tuesday, the first high-resolution image of the
Earth taken by a commercial satellite was made public.

            Space Imaging Inc. of Thornton, Ohio, released a
photo taken by a satellite 400 miles above Washington, D.C. The image of the
Washington Monument and the surrounding area is as crisp and detailed as some
military spy satellite photographs.

            The Clinton
administration approved private space cameras in 1994. Three other companies
expect to orbit their own satellites by next year. These cameras can resolve
objects as small as 3 feet wide, accurate enough to show a house or a car but
not a person, although you could make out the cloud of evil roiling around the
head of mass-death enthusiast Trent Lott.

            
               Dan

               Dickinson Calls for an End to all This Baptist Bickering
            

            Dear Randy and John
Murdoch: Lighten up. Baptists have come a long way. They're speaking to one
another in liquor stores now.

            

               Bail
               -Out Extra
            

            Below, actual lead
sentences that made participants instantly turn the page, or change the
channel, or slip a fresh clip into a cheap and easily obtainable hand gun or
"Saturday Night Special" purchased within 50 feet of an elementary school, as
our reporter goes undercover to ... well, you know--what The New Yorker
used to call "letters we never finished reading" (or something).

            

               "I ..." A.M. Rosenthal, New York Times .-- Daniel Radosh
               

               " 'Complicated' is a word for Tori Amos ..." Natasha Stovall, Rolling
Stone -- Ken Tucker
               

               "El Duque loves Chinese food, Derek Jeter loves the nightlife, and John
Olerud loves showtunes." New York Post Oct. 14, 1999-- Beth
Sherman
               

               "When you dial 911, will you get the help you need? Sam Donaldson
investigates." Promo for Monday's 20/20 .-- Matthew Heimer
               

               "As we head into high summer I find myself thinking often of summers long
ago and a way of life long gone."--Abigail McCarthy in the July 16, 1999
Commonweal magazine.-- Jim O'Grady
               

               "Attention Harvey Keitel fans ..." Start of the Entertainment Weekly
review of Lulu on the Bridge .-- Daniel Radosh
               

               "Good news tonight for New York's pro-wrestling fans." Delivered some night
last week by an anchor on the Fox local affiliate.-- Matthew Heimer
               

               "You, LESLIE GOODMAN-MALAMUTH, are the kind of man that Men's
Journal is writing for ..."-- Ms. Leslie Goodman-Malamuth
               

               "For nearly a year, while Bill Bradley labored to be taken seriously as a
presidential candidate, Al Gore studiously ignored him." From William Saletan's
Wednesday "Frame Game"-- Roger D. Hodge
               

               "Make sure to stay tuned for a live concert featuring the Backstreet Boys,
'N Sync, and 98 Degrees."-- Mary Fee
               

               "Raising a beaker with a balloon inside, Steven Jacquier peers at a wonder
of the world." USA Today , Oct. 14, 1999.-- Beth Sherman
               

               "This is Dan Rather, reporting from the eye of
the hurricane."-- Lee J. Nemetz
               

            

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Metric Tang.

         
      
   
