
   
   
      
         
             O Canada

            It's about time. Those of us who work on
international monetary theory have been wondering for a decade when Robert
Mundell would get his richly deserved Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic
Sciences. Mundell's work is so central to that field, so "seminal"--an overused
term that really applies here--that on many disputed issues his ideas are the
basis for both sides of the debate. But a layperson might be confused
about exactly what Mundell and his prize are really about.

            The Wall Street
Journal editorial page, rather pathetically, has declared this a
"supply-side" Nobel. No surprise there: Editor Robert Bartley's attempts to
claim intellectual vindication have become increasingly desperate in recent
years. With eight years and counting of Clintonian expansion making Reagan's
"seven fat years" look positively shabby, and with supply-side heroes such as
Jude Wanniski looking loonier by the day, the Wall Street Journal will
take anything it can get. (Since when does Bartley care about what some Swedes
think, anyway?) For what it is worth, the citation by the Nobel committee
doesn't mention anything Mundell has written since he was adopted as mascot by
Bartley et al. some 25 years ago. It is the young Mundell, whose theories still
dominate the textbooks, who earned the prize.

            So if it isn't a supply-side Nobel, what is it? Well, how
about regarding it as a Canadian Nobel?

            I'm not sure why Canadian policy issues are
universally regarded as being dull--why the winning entry in the old
competition for most boring headline, "Worthwhile Canadian Initiative," still
seems so funny (yes, I think it's funny, too). Maybe it has something to do
with the way they talk, eh? But when it comes to international monetary
matters, Canada has often been a very interesting case--the country that defies
the trends, that demonstrates by example the hollowness of the conventional
wisdom of the moment. Right now, for example, Canada's ability to thrive with
an independent dollar is the best single argument I know against British
europhiles who insist that their nation must join the European Monetary Union
or die. And when the young Canadian economist Robert Mundell did his most
influential work, in the early 1960s, it was arguably the Canadian difference
that inspired him to think outside the box.

            Here's what the world
looked like in 1960: Almost all countries had fixed exchange rates with their
currencies pegged to the U.S. dollar. International movements of capital were
sharply limited, partly by government regulations, partly by the memory of
defaults and expropriations in the '30s. And most economists who thought about
the international monetary system took it for granted, explicitly or
implicitly, that this was the way things would continue to work for the
foreseeable future.

            But Canada was different. Controlling the movement of
capital across that long border with the United States had never been
practical; and U.S. investors felt less nervous about putting their money in
Canada than anywhere else. Given those uncontrolled movements of capital,
Canada could not fix its exchange rate without giving up all control over its
own monetary policy. Unwilling to become a monetary ward of the Federal
Reserve, from 1949 to 1962 Canada made the almost unique decision to let its
currency float against the U.S. dollar. These days, high capital mobility and a
fluctuating exchange rate are the norm, but in those days they seemed
outrageous--or would have seemed outrageous, if anyone but the Canadians had
been involved.

            And so perhaps it was
the Canadian case that led Mundell to ask, in one of his three most famous
contributions, how monetary and fiscal policy would work in an economy in which
capital flowed freely in and out in response to any difference between interest
rates at home and abroad. His answer was that it depended on what that country
did with the exchange rate. If the country insisted on keeping the value of its
currency in terms of other nations' monies constant, monetary policy would
become entirely impotent. Only by letting the exchange rate float would
monetary policy regain its effectiveness.

            Later Mundell would broaden this initial insight by
proposing the concept of the "impossible trinity"; free capital movement, a
fixed exchange rate, and an effective monetary policy. The point is that you
can't have it all: A country must pick two out of three. It can fix its
exchange rate without emasculating its central bank, but only by maintaining
controls on capital flows (like China today); it can leave capital movement
free but retain monetary autonomy, but only by letting the exchange rate
fluctuate (like Britain--or Canada); or it can choose to leave capital free and
stabilize the currency, but only by abandoning any ability to adjust interest
rates to fight inflation or recession (like Argentina today, or for that matter
most of Europe).

            And what choice should a
country such as Canada--where capital controls were not a serious option--make?
Should it explicitly or implicitly give up on having its own currency and go on
a U.S. dollar standard, or were the risks of a fluctuating dollar-dollar rate a
price worth paying for the ability to actively stabilize the domestic economy?
The debate over how to define an "optimum currency area" is an endless one, but
Mundell set its terms, suggesting in particular that a key feature of such an
area would typically be high internal mobility of workers, that is, the
willingness and ability of workers to move from slumping to booming regions.
(This is a criterion, incidentally, that Europe--whose single-currency regime
Mundell now enthusiastically supports--manifestly does not satisfy.)

            It's hard to appreciate today just how novel both Mundell's
statement of the issues and the way he tried to resolve them were at the time.
But if you look at the international monetary literature when Mundell was in
his glory days, you get the impression that he was 15 or 20 years ahead of his
contemporaries. They were still thinking in terms of a controlled world, a
world where money moved where and when the authorities told it to move. He was
thinking in terms of a world where money moved freely and massively to wherever
it could earn the highest return. At the time, only Canada, thanks to its giant
neighbor, lived in anything like the world he envisaged; today we all do. And
if you look at any major textbook in international economics--such as the
perennial best seller by Krugman and Maurice Obstfeld--you still find that the
monetary half of the book is very largely based on the papers Mundell wrote in
the early 1960s.

            So who is this economist that the Wall Street
Journal thinks is on its side? Well, economists do change their styles and
their views as they get older; Mundell changed more than most. Those seminal
early papers were crisp and minimalist; they looked forward with remarkable
prescience to the wild and woolly, out-of-control world of modern international
macroeconomics. By contrast, Mundell's writings since the early '70s have been
discursive, one might almost say rambling, and often reveal a sort of hankering
for the lost certainties of the gold standard. (And yes, he has said a few
things that can, with some effort, be construed as support for supply-side
economics.) The precocious theorist anticipated the 1990s; the elder statesman
has hearkened back to the 1890s.

            So you can take your pick as to which Mundell you
prefer; but the Nobel committee basically honored Mundell the younger, the
economist who was iconoclastic enough to imagine that Canada, of all places,
was the economy of the future--and was right.

         
      
   
