
   
   
      
         
            The Cocaine Question

            This
weekend, Adam Clymer of the New York Times reported that George W. Bush,
responding in Ohio to a question about long-ago cocaine abuse, had issued
"another awkward answer" of the sort that had "made the issue linger." A
Times "Media Watch" story noted that Bush's previous answers had
obviously failed to "end the questioning." What both articles neglected to
mention was who had asked the question in Ohio: Adam Clymer.

            This
practice of self-concealment, which reporters pass off as "objectivity," is one
of the great frauds of American journalism. While many "opinion" writers argue
openly that the cocaine question is legitimate--pointing out, for example, that
Bush has jailed drug offenders and that Republicans have investigated President
Clinton's sex life--most "news" reporters pretend that the question is
immaculately conceived and needs no justification. Reluctant to become "part of
the story," news reporters press the question while obscuring their complicity
in keeping it alive. Instead, they tell readers that the question is "dogging"
Bush. Nonsense. Questions don't dog politicians. Reporters dog politicians. And
while they're dogging Bush, they ought to account for dodging a few questions
of their own.

            

               1. Who's asking 
               the cocaine question? Journalists
pretend that the question drives itself. It "hounds," "haunts," and "stalks"
Bush. It "percolates," "persists," and "swirls around" him. It is "turbulence,"
a "storm," a "blizzard." John Stacks, a Time editor who has led the drug
frenzy, said the question has "a kind of organic life." "These things take on a
life of their own," agreed Dan Balz of the Washington Post . "It followed
[Bush] from Texas to Ohio today, the question that will not go away," NBC's
Brian Williams reported Thursday night. "The questions would not go away,"
agreed NBC correspondent David Bloom. And who, exactly, had followed Bush and
asked him the question that day? David Bloom.

            

               2. Who's judging 
               Bush's answers? Not the media. They
don't evaluate the merits of a candidate's remarks. They just assess whether
the remarks will succeed or fail politically. Rather than treat the cocaine
inquiry as a dialogue in which the questions as well as the answers are subject
to rational scrutiny, most reporters depict it as a force of nature. Bush's
replies have failed to "douse the questions," "dampen the controversy," or
"turn down the heat." On the contrary, they have "stoked a brush fire," "fed
the story," and given it "oxygen," with "the automatic and absolutely
inevitable effect of keeping it going." Journalists are just part of this
"automatic" cycle. They're not hurting Bush. He's hurting himself.

            

               3. Why is the 
               press pursuing him? Reporters who
acknowledge their role in the assault seldom offer a reason. They say they're
just doing what comes naturally, and Bush is to blame for provoking them. His
answers "opened the door," "courted scrutiny," and "encouraged" more questions.
"His not answering it is just like waving red meat in front of carnivores,"
argued Susan Feeney of the frenzy-leading Dallas Morning News . "It's
inevitable that reporters will push until there's an answer." On Good
Morning America , ABC's Charles Gibson told George Stephanopoulos, "You know
the press. [Bush's answers] won't push the questions away, and he'll get them
again and again." Boys on the bus will be boys on the bus.

            

               4. What's wrong 
               with his answers? Journalists who admit
to judging Bush's answers generally accuse him of "shifting," "backpedaling,"
"altering," and "reversing." And what exactly did he reverse? He "reversed his
stance of not going beyond acknowledging youthful 'mistakes,' " complained the
Times ' Maureen Dowd . "First it was seven years, then it was 15
years, then it was 25 years." The complaint is not that Bush reversed his
story--there is no contradiction in being drug-free for seven, 15, and 25
years--but that he reversed his spin, obliging his advisers to "defend the
change of strategy." Why concede a politician's substantive consistency, when
you can attack his tactical vacillation?

            

               5. Did he 
               use cocaine? Careful journalists never infer
such impropriety. Instead, they posit the appearance of impropriety,
warning that Bush's answers "create an appearance at least that he has
something to hide" and "leave the implication" that he used hard drugs. His
assertion of "marital fidelity," according to the Times , "only adds to
the impression that he is hiding something about other aspects of his life." By
confining their inferences to such "impressions," the media sidestep the
unpleasant duty of ascertaining the truth.

            

               6. Is he 
               lying? Again, scrupulous reporters eschew this
question, focusing instead on public perception. Dowd, Paul Gigot of the
Wall Street Journal , and Chris Black of CNN concluded that Bush "looks
like" and "sounds like" he's dissembling. The Post suggested that Bush may have "created the impression with
voters that he is being cute or coy rather than forthcoming." Other pundits,
too scrupulous to characterize the public's perceptions of Bush, quoted their
colleagues' perceptions of the public's perceptions. ("Several people said ...
that George Bush came off as Clintonesque," ventured CBS's Bob Schieffer.)
Since the media decline to characterize the truth, perception is all that
matters. "Inconsistencies and ambiguities, real or imagined, are to journalists
as catnip to the cat," shrugged the New York Daily News , justifying the
drug story's persistence.

            

               7. Is the 
               controversy important? Pundits tend to ignore
this question, focusing instead on how Bush is "handling the crisis." "What
disturbed me this past week more was not even the fundamental issue, but it was
the handling of it," said ABC's Cokie Roberts. Gigot agreed: "What should especially
disturb Republicans is Mr. Bush's political judgment. If there's bad news to
get out, Politics 101 says release it as early as possible." 
                  Time
                called the controversy "the first big public test of
Bush's instincts and of his staff, and the results were pretty wobbly." Other
publications, too timid to endorse even this superficial assessment, reported
that "analysts" and "top Republicans" were questioning Bush's "erratic handling
of the drug question" and warning that his "candidacy had been bruised by his
handling of the issue."

            

               8. What exactly 
               is the question? The media imply that
Bush keeps refusing to say whether he has used cocaine. But that's not how the
question has generally been posed during this two-week frenzy. The first
version, crafted by CNN's Rowland
Evans, was: "Sir, is it not in your interest to tell us flatly if these
rumors are or are not true? ... Everybody says--every politician--[that] it's
to your disadvantage not to answer it." The second version, posed by a Reuters
correspondent, was whether Bush thought rumors of his cocaine use were "being
planted." A third version, posed by USA Today , was: "How can you make
questions about whether you used illegal drugs in your youth go away? Won't
they dog your campaign until you answer?" As Bush's inquisitors focus less on
the truth and more on politics, the inquisition becomes self-justifying.

            Bush's
Republican rivals are happy to exploit and hide behind the media's
pseudo-objectivity. While defending Bush's "privacy," Sen. John McCain
stipulated that "it is the media and the American people who decide what
questions should be asked." A spokesman for Gary Bauer agreed: "Gary feels the
candidates don't determine what is the statute of limitations on questions of
character and committing a felony. The American people and the press do." Dan
Quayle called the drug story a "side show" but added that Bush's wounds were
"self-inflicted. ... The general principle is that these questions,
unfortunately, are going to be asked." Sen. Orrin Hatch concluded, "I don't
think it's going to go away. ... The media is going to beat it to death until
he finally has to just say one way or the other."

            It's
hard to feel sorry for Bush, given his preposterous spins on the question. He
says he's stonewalling it because divulging past drug abuse "sends bad signals
to your children." Bush's surrogates claim that he's leading a "heroic" effort
"to purge the system of this 'gotcha' politics." He's making himself a
"positive role model" for kids and displaying the "leadership" for which "the
American people are hungering." "George Bush is the first guy in the line of
fire who's had the guts to stand up and say, 'I'm not going to play by the old
rules anymore,' " former GOP Chairman Haley Barbour boasted on television this
weekend. House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, chastised Bush's rivals for
failing to "show the same courage that George W. has shown" by "taking a stand"
against "personal destruction." Comments like these make you wonder not whether
Bush and his friends ever used cocaine, but whether they ever stopped.

            The
point is not that the question is unfair. The point is that the power to choose
and craft questions is more profound than the power to choose and craft
answers--and with that power goes responsibility. When the question is as
controversial as the answer, journalists who report the exact answer and who
said it ought to report the exact question and who asked it. And if it's their
question, they ought to justify it. In Newsweek , for example, Stuart Taylor Jr. spends an entire
column proposing and defending a better question than the media have asked Bush
so far: "Would you seek long prison terms for today's 18-year-olds for doing
what you say you may or may not have done as a young man--and when you now
suggest that whatever you did was a mere youthful indiscretion, and thus
irrelevant to your candidacy?" You can decide for yourself whether you like
Taylor's question--and that's the point. He has thought it through, spelled it
out, and told you who's asking it and why.

            The
same can't be said for the New York Times . In its editorial on the
cocaine controversy, the Times advised Bush "to be honest, and to let
the country take his measure. In his campaign, the governor has emphasized the
importance of assuming responsibility for one's own actions. He should be
thinking now about how to set a good example." So should the Times .

         
      
   
