
   
   
      
         
            Timor Killers Caught on Tape

            The
Independent
of London led its front page Monday with what it claimed was the first clear,
documented evidence that the Indonesian army directed the slaughter in East
Timor. It published transcripts of recordings of two-way radio
conversations between the special forces unit of the Indonesian army--the
Kopassus--and anti-independence militias. Radio conversations between Kopassus
officers and militia commanders shortly before and after the Aug. 31 referendum
included Kopassus saying, "It is better we wait for the result of the
announcement [of the ballot]. ... Whether we win or lose, that's when we'll
react." Also, Kopassus: "Those white people [referendum observers] ... should
be put in the river." Militia commander (passing the order to other
militiamen): "If they want to leave, pull them out [of their car], kill them
and put them in the river." Kopassus: "They need to be stopped." Militiamen:
"It will be done." "I'll wipe them out, all of them." "I'll eat them up."

            On
Sunday, the Observer of London led with an "exclusive" report that
members of the Kopassus had been secretly trained in the United States under a
program code-named "Iron Balance." Quoting Pentagon documents obtained by the
U.S.-based East Timor Action Network and Rep. Lane Evans, D-Ill., the
Observer said the program "was hidden from legislators and the public
when Congress curbed the official schooling of Indonesia's army after a
massacre in 1991." The training of Kopassus went ahead nevertheless at American
taxpayers' expense "despite US awareness of its role in the genocide of about
200,000 people in the years after the invasion of East Timor in 1975," the
paper said. It quoted a 1990 cable to the State Department from an unidentified
former official of the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta that the training had been "a
big help to the (Indonesian) army. They probably killed a lot of people and I
probably have a lot of blood on my hands."

            As the
first peacekeepers arrived in East Timor, the South China Morning Post took a hard line against the
Indonesian government in an editorial Monday, saying that "[i]f the army lets its
militia puppets fight the UN forces, then Jakarta should pay a heavy price.
International agencies should halt all aid, and other countries should bring
maximum pressure on Indonesia to act like the responsible nation it so often
claims to be." The liberal Jakarta Post predicted a strengthening of the power of the Indonesian
military with the anticipated passage in parliament this week of a new state
security bill. Condemning Indonesia's reform leaders for their lack of
resistance to the bill, the paper said it would give the military almost
unlimited power in a state of emergency, including the right to jail people
without trial. The day the House of Representatives endorses the bill will be
"a sad day for civil society," sounding the death knell for the reform
movement.

            A
commentary in the Jakarta Post warned that
Australia's leadership of the peacekeeping force could destroy the hitherto
close relationship between Australia and Indonesia. Aleksius Jemadu, a lecturer
in international relations at Parahyangan Catholic University in Bandung,
Indonesia, wrote that the East Timor militias might target Australian troops,
"thus drawing Australia into a conflict much more complicated than it ever
expected. The possibility of an open conflict with Indonesia cannot be ruled
out, particularly if pro-integration militias launch an attack from the western
half of the island of Timor." Noting that the Indonesian military is "very
suspicious" about Australia's motivation in East Timor (believing it may have
as much to do with Prime Minister John Howard's popularity at home as with
humanitarian concerns), Jemadu asked, "Does Australia have a strategic agenda
which might strengthen its bargaining position vis-a-vis its closest northern
neighbor? Now Australia's fear of Indonesia is turning out to be a
self-fulfilling prophecy."

            The
same kind of anxieties were expressed in the Sydney Morning Herald .
Michelle Grattan wrote that without a clear exit timetable, Australia's
relationship with Indonesia "will be seen through the Timor prism for years
rather than months." She said, "The surge of feeling for 'our boys' on their
departure is dangerously fuelling nationalist sentiment in both countries.
Australian business interests in Indonesia are being hit by the surge of
anti-Australian emotion. And alarmingly, despite the fact that Australia is
putting pressure on Indonesia rather than vice versa, some Australian
politicians are starting to talk in old threat-from-the-north language."

            While
remarking that Australia had played "a commendably sensible diplomatic role
throughout the latest troubles," the Financial Times of London said Monday in an editorial that
"[t]he venture has also exposed latent resentment of the potential leadership
of Australia in the region," particularly from Malaysia, which has refused to
take part in the peacekeeping force under Australian command. Le Monde of Paris made the
same point Sunday in an editorial, saying that most Asian countries (with the
exception of Thailand "which accepts all its responsibilities") regard the
intervention in East Timor as an example of western neocolonialism, but it
argued that the intervention is justified by international justice and, in the
specific case of Indonesia, by its wish "to benefit from the globalization of
trade and from substantial international financial aid." In an editorial Monday, the Bangkok Post praised Thailand's decision to join the
peacekeeping force and described it as a policy of "tough love."

            In
Spain, El País
reported an improvement in Spanish-Chilean relations because of
Chile's decision to raise the case of Gen. Augusto Pinochet with the
International Court of Justice in the Hague. It quoted Spanish Foreign Minister
Abel Matutes as saying this could bring "a complete solution" to the row
generated by Spain's request for Pinochet to be extradited from Britain for
murder, torture, and other human rights violations. It said the Spanish and
Chilean foreign ministers will meet for talks in New York this week.

            In
London, the Times reported Monday that British mountaineer George
Mallory, who died on Mount Everest in 1924, may have been the first person to
reach the summit after all. A book by members of the team that found his body
on the mountain last May revealed that he had enough oxygen to do so, and it
also offered another "tantalising clue. ... It is known that Mallory had
intended to place a photograph of his wife, Ruth, on the summit should he reach
it. No photographs were found on his body. 'Where are they,' the authors ask,
'if not at the summit?' " In an editorial, the Times (which is
serializing the book Ghosts of Everest: The Search for Mallory , by
Jochen Hemmleb, Larry Johnson, and Eric Simonson) admitted that the evidence is
hardly conclusive but said that an American search expedition will return to
Everest next year to look for the body of Mallory's fellow mountaineer Andrew
Irvine and for the missing camera with which Irvine planned to record them both
on the roof of the world.

         
      
   
