
   
   
      
         
            The Business of Net Campaigns 

            Twelve
years ago I worked at a small, left-leaning think tank in New York City. As the
1988 presidential primary election approached, we thought the voters might want
to differentiate between the various candidates. So we drew up 15 questions,
covering everything from reflagging oil tankers in the Persian Gulf (a hot
issue at the time) to gay and lesbian rights.

            We
then mailed letters to the dozen or so declared candidates from both parties
and requested position statements from their campaigns. We deliberately cc'd
the issues managers, figuring that this clever move would expedite the
responses. It didn't. The Republicans practically ignored us. The Democrats had
to be wooed, cajoled, and mildly threatened before they coughed up their
answers. Ultimately, we printed a decent-sized booklet and sold several
thousand copies at $10 apiece. It was a modest contribution to the cause of an
informed electorate, and it yielded an equally modest return on the investment
of our 100 or so hard-worked hours.

            Today
it would take just a couple of hours for a person with a Web connection and a
printer to produce a similar document for the 2000 presidential race. Each of
the declared presidential candidates maintains a sophisticated Web site that
details positions on a wide range of critical issues. (Granted, if you visit
http://gopatgo2000.org,
click on "Issues," and read Pat Buchanan's statement on the environment, you
may find the air a bit thin. But this is presidential politics, and vague
positions are hardly unique to cyberspace.)

            As
with other areas of the Net, e-mail is the great connector. Any campaign can
now take a press release that at one time would have gone to a few dozen
political reporters and e-mail it to tens of thousands, even millions, of
Internet users. That remarkable development helps to bind a portion of the
electorate more tightly to the campaigns. But we're still talking about a press
release, and any reporter will tell you that the value of such releases is
inversely proportional to the volume received.

            That's
just one illustration of how the Net's contributions to American Democracy
remains nascent and hard to define. While the 2000 campaign will be the first
presidential contest in which the Web plays a significant role, it is unclear
how profound that role will be (see Jacob Weisberg's accompanying piece,
"").

            One of
the premises of the Standard is that the Internet has seeped into and
changed every important business in the United States--and will soon have the
same effect around the world. Politics is not exempt. Although it's all too
often overlooked as a business, American politics is a multibillion-dollar
industry that employs millions. So it's the Standard 's job to cover how
the Internet will shape it. And that's the mandate for our once-a-week
contribution to "Net Election."

            
               Politics

               Meets E-commerce
            

            What
does politics-as-Net-business mean? In the most salient case, campaigns
themselves are businesses (albeit short-lived ones that cannot legally make a
profit). As of mid-July, more than six months before anyone could cast a vote
for Bill Bradley, the former basketball star had raised more than $240,000
through his Web site. That's only about 2 percent of his contributions. But the
site wasn't operational until January. Moreover, it wasn't until June that the
federal government said it would match online credit card contributions with
public funds, just as it matches money raised the old-fashioned way. With that
decision, every campaign has been rethinking its Internet fund-raising
strategies. We'll be closely examining their renewed efforts.

            One
question that leaps to mind is, "Are there viable forms of e-commerce that play
off of a political audience?" To date, the answer is essentially no. Sure, you
can connect to the Arizona Democratic Party's online gift shop. But
how many donkey Beanie Babies do you think have been sold there? eBay is not
yet disturbed.

            Still,
the tip of political e-commerce is beginning to poke up through the Web's
surface. In May, Texas Gov. George W. Bush tried to quash the parody site
www.gwbush.com, saying
infamously, "There ought to be limits to freedom." The result? The site got 6
million hits in a month. Net logic holds that eyeballs equal dollars, and sure
enough the controversial site was soon peddling T-shirts and bumper stickers
featuring Bush's quote. Another site looking to cash in on the campaign is
www.gore2000.com . It's not officially affiliated with the
Gore campaign, but the site sells a wide array of Gore
paraphernalia--everything from buttons to gourmet coffee. And it gives a
package of free collectibles to any Webmaster who picks up its banner.

            
               Online

               Advertising Gets Political
            

            The
Internet has already begun to transform the general advertising industry, and
it will soon hold sway over the tens of millions of dollars spent every
electoral season on television and radio ads. Web advertising holds the strange
position of being almost entirely unregulated. Fraud and defamation laws
presumably apply to Net advertising, just as they do to all advertising. But
the specific sections of communications law that constrain political speech in
the electronic media--including provisions for equal time for all
candidates--do not apply to the Internet.

            
Consider how such loopholes can alter the electronic media landscape: Each
weekday, Steve Forbes records a brief commentary about his pertinent issues.
The Forbes campaign claims that more than 160 stations in 45 states "carry"
this commentary. (Just because they carry it, of course, doesn't mean they
actually play it five times a week.) According to federal regulations,
beginning 45 days before a primary, any radio station that carries a prepared
audio message from a presidential candidate is required to give equal time to
any other candidate who requests it. As a practical matter, most radio stations
in that situation would simply drop the Forbes editorials. But his Web site can
continue to pump out a Netcast with no interference.

            
Changes like these should spur "Net piggybacking" throughout the 2000 race.
Here's how it works: Say a candidate is adamantly opposed to any form of new
taxes, regardless of whether they are advocated by the opponent. So the
candidate crafts a 15-second TV spot that does not directly attack her opponent
but warns viewers of an ominous, high-tax future and instructs them to punch up
www.nonewtaxes.com, where they'll find a complete history of the opponent's
record on taxation. Viewers might be asked to fill out petitions with their ZIP
codes and e-mail addresses, which would be used to alert them to the ad's next
installment. These techniques have already been used in a number of Senate and
congressional campaigns.

            Finally, we'll also be
watching the Net polling, Net focus groups, and Net organizing that follow the
flow of money around an election. Our goal, shared with editorial partner

                  Slate
               , is to capture the way the unfolding 2000 presidential race
looks from the Web. Whether you're a political junkie or not, we hope you'll
find Net Election informative, enlightening, and fun. At least, as much fun as
presidential politics will allow.

         
      
   
