
   
   
      
         
             The Third Edmund Morris

            Even if you haven't cracked Dutch , you know
about Edmund Morris and his semi-fictional namesake. And you probably haven't
avoided a third Edmund Morris: the tireless promoter who dogs your
channel-surfing. Strangely, this Edmund Morris on the gab-show circuit begs to
differ with Edmund the Writer. Where Edmund the Writer can be cleareyed about
his subject, calling Reagan "banal" and an "airhead," Edmund the Promoter fawns
like a Reaganaut, constantly trumpeting a "great president." Whereas Edmund I
claims he only made up Edmund II, Edmund III weaves tales that are flatly
contradicted in Edmund I's book.

            A striking instance of
inter-Edmund strife comes from last Friday's Larry King Live . There,
Edmund the Promoter told how Ronald Reagan almost joined the Communist Party.
And why didn't he? "The party elders heard about his desire to join, realized
at once that Reagan was not doctrinary material. He was too open and too
honest, and he couldn't be trusted to keep party secrets. So they asked him
politely to stay the hell away."

            But Edmund the Writer tells a very different version of the
same story in Dutch . He quotes writer Howard Fast, a party stalwart.
According to Fast, when Reagan tried to join, "the local Party leader asked
around, and word came back Reagan was a flake ... [who] couldn't be trusted
with any political opinion for more than 20 minutes."

            So Edmund I writes that
Ronald Reagan was too stupid for the Communists, and then Edmund III improves
the story for television by making him too virtuous. (Defending the
contradiction, Morris says, "flaky means he couldn't be trusted with secrets.")
Once you start making stuff up, apparently, it's harder to stop than you think.
But which Edmund is correct? Maybe neither. It turns out that even Edmund the
Writer may have been embroidering more than his own role.

            D utch devotes three pages to the CP episode.
Nearly half of this three-page stretch consists of Morris' conversation with
Fast, presented as screenplay dialogue. It is a dramatic scene with Fast
dishing a shocking piece of information that the obsessed biographer has never
heard before. Morris pours on the color--they are in a reception at the New
York Public Library's Astor Hall, they shake hands, they are wearing tuxedos,
the buzz of billionaires is in the background, and so on.

            But these are all Red
herrings, distracting from the fact that the scene is a silly vehicle for
exploring Reagan's flirtation with communism. Fast never claims to have met
Reagan or to have had firsthand knowledge of Reagan's application to join the
party. The Astor Hall reception was the only time he and Morris spoke, Fast
says. Fast now admits to recycling gossip, "This was a story told to me at a
dinner party. I can't remember who told it." Historian Ronald Radosh notes that
Fast has a reputation for "inconsistently remembering his time in the party,"
including contradictory recitations in his two memoirs. But Morris, having
stumbled upon a juicy story, never seriously questions Fast's reliability or
pokes logical holes in his account.

            Morris does recount his attempts to nail down Fast's story.
He describes conversations with three Reagan acquaintances, including the actor
Eddie Albert. Morris does not say that Albert was a party member, but he
strongly hints that Albert and his wife operated on "behalf of the CPUSA."
Albert confirmed for Morris that Reagan did indeed discuss joining the party
and was ultimately dissuaded. But Morris writes that when he tried to question
the aged actor further, "Albert caged up as expected."

            Oddly, when I called
Albert, he was anything but cagey. In fact he couldn't stop screaming into the
phone: "Reagan was a nice guy, but he was stupid. He didn't have a clue about
any Russia business. He talked about being a Communist. We all did. But he
never did anything about it. One night my wife sat down and told him the party
was a load of crap." But was this just a ploy? Were Albert and his wife
secretly Communists, conspiring to keep Reagan out of the party? "No." Did
Morris ask Albert this question? "[Morris] is an asshole," says Albert. And
even Fast can't confirm what Morris implies, "I have no idea whether Eddie was
in the party or not."

            Eddie Albert may be lying, of course, and corroborating the
Fast version of events may not be possible. But there are gaping holes in
Morris' reporting that can easily be filled with a few phone calls. For
instance, Fast told Morris that Reagan dealt with a local party leader, "a
well-known screenwriter, a playwright, a historian." Fast wouldn't identify
this person to Morris and Morris doesn't mention any attempt to track him down.
But only one Hollywood character fits this bill: John Howard Lawson, the dean
of Hollywood Reds who reemerged to become Reagan's political foe in the late
'40s. And Fast confirmed to me that he was talking about Lawson.

            Or Morris could have contacted Dorothy Healey, who
was the chair of the Southern California Communist Party during the '40s.
Healey told me: "This has to be apocrypha. It's nonsense. Of course, we never
rejected people for being too flaky. And if Reagan had been rejected, I would
have definitely heard about it." And in an interview, the authorized biographer
concedes that he didn't investigate thoroughly: "Arthur Schlesinger once told
me that he had dirt on Reagan buried in his filing system. But I never went
after him."

            Although the Communist Party episode is one of
Morris' most oft-mentioned scoops, he didn't even have it first. Howard Fast
told essentially the same story in the New York Observer eight years
ago. (And probably has been dining out on it for decades.) Yet Morris did
amazingly little to try to nail it down. But who has time to dig for facts when
you've got to make up not one but two different fantasies?

         
      
   
