
   
   
      
         
            Anti-War Semites

            Last
fall, six days after Israel signed a peace agreement with the Palestinian
Authority, a Palestinian terrorist tried to blow up an Israeli school bus.
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu faulted Palestinian leader Yasser
Arafat for failing to stop the bomber and, prodded by outraged Israeli hawks,
began stalling the agreement to death. This week, two days after Arafat and
Israel's new prime minister, Ehud Barak, signed another deal, terrorists struck
again. This time, Israel's minister of justice vouched for Arafat's "commitment
to fighting terror" and urged Israelis to stand with Arafat in "a coalition of
sane people versus the opponents of peace."

            The
words coming out of the Middle East these days are as revolutionary as the
deeds. Barak and his deputies are not merely changing Israel's policy toward
the Palestinians. They are trying to redefine and reconfigure the whole
conflict. Where Netanyahu saw a struggle between Israelis and Palestinians,
Barak perceives a struggle between those who support the peace process and
those who oppose it. In this configuration, Palestinian militants are allies
not of the Palestinian Authority but of Israeli extremists, and terrorism
against Israel is a reason for more collaboration with Arafat, not less.

            
Israeli hawks, invoking the old configuration, blamed this week's attacks on
"the Palestinians" in general. They accused Barak of betraying Israel and
demanded that he suspend the new agreement. But Barak's aides, while affirming
that "no peace process shall prevail over the personal security of the people
of Israel," rejected the premise that the former threatened the latter. They
denied that peace talks were a "zero-sum game," and they dismissed the Israeli
right's equation of terrorism with the Palestinian Authority. "We can't blame
the Palestinian Authority every time there's a terror incident," argued Israeli
Deputy Defense Minister Ephraim Sneh.

            From
Barak's perspective, the latest bombings were an attack not on Israel but on
the peace process. "There are elements who are very determined to disrupt the
process through terror and murder. We won't let them," Sneh vowed. "We cannot
dance to the tune of Hamas and Islamic Jihad." Barak's minister of industry
sketched a symbiotic relationship between Palestinian bombers and Israeli
hawks, warning Israeli rightists to "refrain from the kind of fiery rhetoric
they used in the past, which only encourages the terrorists." Conversely,
Israel's chief of military intelligence suggested that the Palestinian
Authority recognized terrorism as a threat to its interests. Barak and his
aides proposed a "joint Israeli-Palestinian fist" against terrorism and
reaffirmed that Israel's "Palestinian partners" were fulfilling their
"commitment to fight against terrorist acts."

            
Palestinian and Israeli Arab officials reciprocated this spin, reiterating
their "policy of zero tolerance for terror" and declaring the bombers their
enemies. Arafat pointed out that his police had arrested numerous terrorist
suspects and confiscated weapons. "Someone who sends a car bomb today is trying
to destroy the hopes of the Palestinian people," a Palestinian official
declared. One Arab member of Israel's parliament charged that the bombers
sought "the collapse of the Palestinian Authority." Another asserted that
Israeli Arabs and Jews shared a commitment to "the law and the democratic rules
of the game. Whoever carried out [the bombings] is enemy number one of the Arab
community."

            Having
defined the conflict this way, Palestinian officials suggested that Israel's
best means of defeating terrorism was to cooperate with the Palestinian
Authority. They accused the "enemies of peace" of staging attacks "aimed at
destroying the entire peace process." "The answer to anyone who tries to
undermine the peace process is that we are determined to continue," proclaimed
senior Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat. "Palestinians and Israelis,
Arabs--everyone in the region has paid so much in the absence of peace. It's
time for reconciliation."

            The
new configuration is beginning to take hold in the Israeli media. "Barak,
Arafat to cooperate in probe of bombings," announced Monday's Jerusalem
Post . "Barak: Car bombs will not derail process," added Ha'aretz ,
juxtaposing Arafat with "anti-peace Palestinians." Op-ed writers cautioned
against "a self-defeating freeze on the peace process," called Arafat a
"partner" in the "fight against terrorism," and observed that "Israeli
terrorists"--namely, mass-murderer Baruch Goldstein and assassin Yigal
Amir--had staged attacks "aimed at halting the peace process." Borrowing the
language of war, the Post called the latest bombings "the first test of
[Barak's] resolve to march toward the final status agreement 'uninterrupted.'
"

            The
American press, too, is adopting this pro-peace/anti-peace analysis of the
conflict. "The explosions will give ammunition to Israel's right wing,"
predicted the Los Angeles Times . The New York Times reported that
"terrorism" was once again challenging the "Israeli-Palestinian relationship."
The Washington Post , inferring that the bombers sought "to sabotage
Palestinian-Israeli peacemaking," stipulated, "Most Palestinians do not support
terror attacks against Israel, which they regard as only impeding progress
toward the tangible benefits of peace."

            
Framing is a transcendent art. It can serve petty advantage or profound reform.
It can be used to achieve goals or to rethink them, to defeat enemies or to
reassess them, to win wars or to stop them. "There is a war going on between
the peace process and terror" in Israel and the Palestinian territories,
political scientist Yaron Ezrhahi told the New York Times . The bombers
"are fighting the peace process because they know it promises to kill terror
once and for all." Is Ezrhahi Israeli or Palestinian? The Times didn't
say. And if he's right, it doesn't matter.

         
      
   
