
   
   
      
         
             J.D. Salinger, Failed Recluse

            J.D. Salinger is inevitably described as "the most
private man in America" ( Esquire ) or "the most private of literary
figures" (the New York Times ). In the introduction to his just-published
Salinger biography, Paul Alexander calls the Bard of Cornish the "one figure in
the twentieth century who didn't want his biography written." Yet Salinger has
already been the subject of two biographies.

            If Salinger really wants to be left alone, he is
going about it in a very strange way. He doesn't live in a gated community. He
summons perfect strangers into his hideaway. He sues people, and then phones
the media to spread the story.

            Maybe Salinger should take a page from Thomas
Pynchon, American letters' other famous recluse, who really wants to be
left alone. Two years ago, a London Sunday Times hireling bearded
Pynchon on the streets of Manhattan and nearly got his head bitten off: "Get
your fucking hand out of my face!" Pynchon bellowed.

            Here's the Tale of the
Tape in the Battle of the Hermit Divas:

            1. Location

            
               Salinger
               :
Salinger has lived on the same Cornish, N.H., property for over 30 years. Other
than a "No Trespassing" sign, there is no particular barrier to entry, from the
fictional Ray Kinsella of Shoeless Joe to the notorious stalkerazzi
photographer Paul Adao of the New York Post , no one has ever had much
trouble finding the place. Up until recently, Salinger used to chat casually
with his doorsteppers--unless they were journalists. The next generation of
visitors won't even have to interrogate the locals, as Alexander provides
directions in his new book.

            On the one hand, it's churlish to suggest that
Salinger should move just to protect himself from his public. On the other
hand, people have moved for less.

            

               Pynchon
               : Until recently, no one was really
sure where Pynchon lived. Seattle? Mexico? Northern California? Probably all of
the above. Much ink has been shed in proving that Pynchon spent several years
in California's Mendocino County researching his novel Vineland and
writing letters to the local newspaper under the name "Wanda Tinasky." But that
may have been a hoax.

            2. Litigation

            
               Salinger
               : In 1974,
Salinger sued the editor of an unauthorized collection of his stories and 17
bookstores that stocked the book. Lest his filing go unnoticed, he phoned
New York Times reporter Lacey Fosburgh to alert her to the case. He made
Page One.

            In 1986, he sued to block
publication of Ian Hamilton's biography, In Search of J.D. Salinger , and
forced the biographer to remove many quotations from the published work. This
kept his name in the papers for months, and forced him to give a six-hour long
deposition to Hamilton's lawyer, a portion of which appears for the first time
in Alexander's book. In 1996, Salinger's agent forbade a nonprofit Catcher
in the Rye Web site from using quotations from the novel, garnering the
usual rash of publicity.

            3. Lady Friends

            
               Salinger
               : In
1972, the 53-year-old Salinger wrote the notorious fan letter to the
18-year-old Joyce Maynard, who had just written a New York Times
Magazine cover story about herself. The rest is herstory. Salinger wrote
similar letters to other young female writers. He also had a fascination with
actresses. At age 62, he wrote a "fan letter" to the 36-year old actress Elaine
Joyce, whom he had seen in the TV show Mr. Merlin . That resulted in a
long-running affair. A few years later, he developed a fascination with the
comely Catherine Oxenberg, then starring in the TV show Dynasty .
Salinger traveled to California and "had shown up on the set," according to
biographer Hamilton. "He had to be escorted off."

            

               Pynchon
               : As befits a man guarding, as opposed
to flaunting, his privacy, Pynchon has kept his private life private. Past
girlfriends have spoken with journalists, mainly to report that Pynchon was
charming and a tad eccentric. In the early '70s, Jules Siegel, a college
friend, wrote an article for Playboy titled: "Who Is Thomas Pynchon and
Why Did He Take Off With My Wife?" The story praised Pynchon as "a wonderful
lover, sensitive and quick with the ability to project a mood that turned the
most ordinary surroundings into a scene out of a masterful film ..."

            For almost a decade now, Pynchon has been married to his
literary agent and keeping to himself. Cunningly, Pynchon is hiding in plain
view. He lives in Manhattan and escorts his son to and from school many days of
the week. A friend of mine says he's active in children's activities and has
even been written up in the school newspaper. "The mothers love him," he says.
Local literati know where he lives and they leave him alone.

            Why? Why is Pynchon left
alone and Salinger harassed? Theories abound. Some people feel that Pynchon is
a cerebral writer, and his fans are mature in age and temperament. Salinger's
great classic The Catcher in the Rye is about an adolescent and has
visceral appeal to adolescents of all ages. John Lennon's assassin, Mark David
Chapman, and Ronald Reagan's would-be killer, John Hinckley, were both major
Catcher fans.

            Another major difference is that Pynchon has continued to
publish. "Unlike Salinger, people have been able to access Pynchon, and his
evolution as a writer," explains Ron Rosenbaum, who has followed both writers'
careers closely. In 1997, Rosenbaum published an Esquire cover story
lauding Salinger's self-imposed Wall of Silence as "his most powerful, his most
eloquent, perhaps his most lasting work of art."

            But I wonder: Is the wall really art, or is it an
act? And has the act now supplanted the art?

            Two years ago, Salinger announced plans to publish
a 32-year-old story, "Hapworth 16, 1924," as a book. After some negative
publicity, he changed his plans. "The way Salinger handled the publicity he
said he did not want was a bit too contrived to get attention itself," Paul
Alexander concludes at the end of his new biography. He continues: "Salinger
became the Greta Garbo of literature, and then periodically, when it may have
seemed he was about to be forgotten, he resurfaced briefly, just to remind the
public that he wanted to be left alone . The whole act could have been
cute or whimsical; only, it felt as if it were being put on by a master
showman, a genius spin doctor, a public-relations wizard hawking a story the
public couldn't get enough of."

         
      
   
