
   
   
      
         
            No. 298: &quot;Fair Play&quot;

            
               "I'm so excited!"
hairstylist Richard Ferris said Monday at the Syracuse, N.Y., State Fair. "This
is the most exciting thing that has ever happened to me." What happened to
Ferris?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question(No 297)--"Ick":
            

            

               
                  Fill in the blank as John Christakos, president of Blu Dot
Design and Manufacturing, discusses the latest trends in his industry. "We
worried people would say, 'Oh, ick, see the _____________.' That hasn't
happened."
               
            

            "Gills
on that cow."-- Floyd Elliot
            

            "Dead
people falling off the thrill rides."--Pamela Weishaar
            

            
"Crushed appendages of our Third World workers."--David Lofquist
            

            "Way
Richard Nixon's face bleeds off the side of the urinal cake. In fact, aim has
improved by 80 percent since we introduced these."--Kate Wing
            

            "Dead
Turks--or ugly modular furniture constructed to shoddy specs."-- Molly
Shearer Gabel
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Were it an ordinary quiz
and were you ordinary quiz participants, I'd dilate on your detestation of
cutesy unconventional spelling. (What does it mean when the boyz make
illiteracy a fashion? And is a resistance to that fashion, a clinging to
conventional spellings, just a class marker and a reactionary one at that?) But
it is not an ordinary quiz, it is one where I thank Chris Kelly and Tim Carvell
for taking time away from whatever it is they do (I've written it down
someplace, but you know how it is when you're just back from vacation;
everything is at sixes and sevens.) to be such excellent quiz wranglers. And
you are not ordinary quiz participants, according to both guest hosts, each of
whom expressed his amazement at seeing so many first-rate responses. Apparently
my plan of throwing out the really good ones has now been exposed. In the
future, I'll try to be, if not more discerning, at least more cunning about
concealing my limitations--you know, like Johnny Cash in that movie where he
cudn't reed gud.

            
               Tim

               Carvell's Answer
            

            Just wanted to let you
know--the secret word for today's News Quiz is: particleboard. The quote comes
from the Page One, center-column story in last Thursday's Wall Street
Journal about particleboard's growing acceptance in the design community.
Christakos is describing an $89 coffee table with particleboard edges. "It
actually looks kind of cool," he says. "We worried people would say, 'Oh, ick,
see the particleboard .' That hasn't happened." The Wall Street
Journal then gives its readers some tough love: "For those still inclined
to say 'ick' at the sight of particleboard, the message is simple: Get used to
it." To which most readers, no doubt, will respond aloud, "No, you get
used to it, you puss. You want a piece of this?"

            
               Perfect

               Pairs Extra
            

            Coke and Pepsi, Crest
and Colgate, Bush and Gore--the more lackluster and indistinguishable the
products, the more each category tends to generate a dominant duo vying to
appeal to consumers in what is an essentially trivial decision. And so it is in
the Time and Newsweek world of magazines. Below, a
two-parter:

            
               The

               Putative Pairs
            

            Which of the following duos are genuine?

            1. Becky and Becky's Beanie Month
            

            
               Mary Beth's 
               Bean Bag World
Monthly
            

            2. Teddy Bear & Friends
            

            
               Teddy Bear 
               Club International
            

            3. Stamping Arts & Crafts
            

            
               Rubber 
               Stamper
            

            4. Muscle Media
            

            
               Pump
            

            5. Full Draw Bowhunting
            

            
               Bowhunting
            

            6. Today's Golfer
            

            
               Golf
            

            7. Forbes
            

            
               Archaeology
            

            
               Extra

               Credit
            

            Match each cover story with the magazine in which
it appears.

            A. "Via Osito"

            B. "The Inside Story on Growlers and Squeakers"

            C. "Get Huge and Ripped"

            D. "Adding Shimmer to Your Work"

            E. "Rut Tactics That Bag the Giants"

            F. "Hit It Long and Strong"

            G. "Valley of the Gilded
Mummies"

            

               Answers
            

            All pairs are genuine, although Forbes and
Archaeology may be an imperfect match; Forbes might more
accurately be paired with Bloated Plutocrat , were there such a magazine.
Oh and by the way, have Ellen Barkin and Ron Perelman--I've been away--begun
divorce proceedings yet?

            The cover stories run in
the same order as the magazines; each is from the latter title in each
pair.

            
               Best

               in Breed
            

            Most delightful sentence
in Tuesday's New York Times : "If I forget thee, O Jerusalem ... now
you're just a mouse-click away."

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Contempt for innovative
spelling.

            
               Common

               Denominator in the Personal Ads of the Saratoga Paper
            

            NASCAR fan.

         
      
   
