
   
   
      
         
            The Monk in Gucci Shoes

            The
main story around the world Tuesday was the terror in East Timor, for which the
Jakarta
Post joined papers everywhere in putting most of the blame on the
Indonesian government. In an editorial, the paper accused Indonesian President B.J.
Habibie of perpetuating the errors of his predecessor, President Suharto, the
man who ordered the invasion of the former Portuguese colony in 1976. By
continuing Indonesian military rule in the territory, Habibie provoked the East
Timorese into overwhelmingly rejecting his offer of autonomy within Indonesia,
the paper said. It also talked of a looming political crisis in which Habibie
is likely to lose the support of the Indonesian military.

            In
Hong Kong, the South China
Morning Post said that Habibie, after repeatedly promising to keep the
peace, was either being duplicitous or had lost control of his senior military
leaders, who were vehemently opposed to independence for East Timor. "Either
way, the status quo is intolerable," the paper said in an editorial. "Other nations are reluctant to dispatch their
own peacekeepers without an invitation from Jakarta. But they should seek that
permission actively and be ready to follow through. Meanwhile, they should tell
Jakarta that World Bank and other loans are blocked until the Government
honours its many pledges to maintain order and let East Timor have the freedom
it chose."

            Around
the world, opinion hardened not only against Indonesia but also against the
United Nations. The Times of London called on the Jakarta government to let U.N.
peacekeepers in, and the Guardian said there was no longer any alternative to foreign
intervention. The Independent called the U.N. decision to pull its current
mission out of East Timor "a grand Pontius Pilate-style washing of hands" and
"a treacherous abandonment for the Timorese people." In Paris, Le Figaro accused the United
Nations of "letting Timor founder in chaos"; and Le Monde , calling it "an
Asian Kosovo," named Portugal, Australia, and the United States as the
countries which are morally obliged to form the kernel of a rapid intervention
force "to stop Indonesia carrying out a new crime against humanity." In Italy,
La Repubblica
of Rome ran a front-page commentary by Noam Chomsky blaming the United States
for the fate of the East Timorese because of its failure to withdraw support
from its "Indonesian client" or to tell it that its game was up.

            
Following the drubbing received by German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder in two
state elections this weekend (a subject that naturally dominated the German
press Tuesday), the Financial
Times of London said the outcome was predictable. "Mr. Schröder has
presided over a thoroughly muddled and quarrelsome coalition since he defeated
Helmut Kohl in last year's general election," it said in an editorial.
"The main victors [in the east German state of Brandenburg] were the reformed
communists in the Party of Democratic Socialism, with 23 per cent of the vote,
and the extreme nationalist Deutsche Volksunion, which will sneak into the
state parliament with 5.2 per cent." In a brief comment published on the front
page of Corriere
della Sera of Milan, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Elie Wiesel expressed
alarm at the success of the Deutsche Volksunion, which he said exploits
unemployment to stir up racism. "It would be useful to know the percentage of
young people who identify with the German extreme right," he wrote. "One must
hope it is not a large percentage. All those who put their faith in German
youth must encourage them not to be seduced by simplistic and unworthy
solutions to real problems."

            

               Corriere 
               della Sera also reported on its front page a claim by
the British author John Cornwell that he has found evidence in the Vatican
archives that Pope Pius XII was a visceral anti-Semite who helped and supported
Hitler from when he came to power until the "final solution." The paper was
referring to a trailer in Vanity Fair for Cornwell's new book
Hitler's Pope: The Secret History of Pius XII that was omitted from
VF 's European edition. It quoted Jesuit church historian Giacomo
Martina, a professor at the Gregorian University in Rome, as saying that the
claim was "shameful." "How, for example, can it be reconciled with the fact
that in 1940, when the pope learned of plans by the German resistance to kill
Hitler, he passed the information on to the British authorities? To understand
the pope's caution in denouncing the persecution of the Jews, it would be
useful to analyse the similar caution shown by the Allies. The same reasons for
prudence guided both of them."

            
Another Vanity Fair article led Tuesday's Daily Telegraph of London--an
interview with Rupert Murdoch in which the media mogul referred to the Dalai
Lama as "a very political old monk shuffling around in Gucci shoes." In an
editorial, the Telegraph (which is locked in
bitter competition with Murdoch's Times ) called his comment "almost
endearingly wicked," having no purpose but to strengthen his business links
with China. "What Mr. Murdoch told Vanity Fair is profoundly wrong," the
paper said. "The Chinese have treated the people of Tibet abominably since they
invaded in 1959."

            In Israel, both
Ha'aretz
and the Jerusalem
Post ran editorials Tuesday welcoming the decision by Israel's High
Court of Justice that some of the rougher interrogation methods used by the
country's security service are illegal. Ha'aretz said
Israelis could take pride in the decision, even though it made the service's
work more difficult. The Jerusalem
Post said, "It is difficult to think of another nation that would be
willing to take such a bold step to protect the human rights of suspected
terrorists, at a time when the threat of terror is still so very real."

         
      
   
