
   
   
      
         
            Being John McLaughlin

            When
presidential candidates brag about their "dialogue with the American people,"
as they inevitably do, what they really mean, of course, is their "monologue at
the American people." They orate, you write a check. This is not conversation,
it is a sales pitch. (The candidate's idea of give and take is you give, I
take.) Even the much-vaunted campaign Web sites allow visitors no more
engagement than sending an e-mail off into the inky void.

            But it
is an Internet axiom that there are no one-way streets. For Netizens, a
"national conversation" requires actual discussion. There are plenty of Web
sites that will feed you political information--see Jack Shafer's "" for the
best--but where can you go on the Net to debate, bicker, blab, argue, spar,
kvetch, or just plain gossip about the presidential campaign? Where can you
play John McLaughlin to another cybergabber's Jack Germond?

            The
first stop is Usenet, where dozens of political newsgroups are gearing up for
Iowa and New Hampshire. Alt.politics.election is the most fertile of these
bulletin boards, but other heated campaign confabs can be found at
alt.politics.republicans, alt.politics.liberal, alt.politics, alt.politics.usa,
alt.politics.media, us.politics, alt.current-events.clinton.whitewater, and
others. (If you're not used to Usenet, you can access the groups at Deja.com.)

            
Newsgroupies aren't yet fixated on 2000, so to find campaign chat you'll have
to bypass endless threads about Waco, the Brooklyn Museum, Jesse Ventura, and
Masonic conspiracies. But once you do find it, the Usenet campaign talk is a
tonic. At their best, the groups spin off both Al Frankenesque quips and
high-minded colloquies about campaign platforms. On alt.politics, for example,
a couple of dozen folks spent several days drilling down on Bill Bradley's
health-care proposal. Meanwhile, "Athanaric" capped an alt.politics.republicans
debate on George W. Bush's alleged cocaine use with an endorsement of a
powderhead president: "Stoners ... just sit around hitting the bong, watching
CNN, and sending Secret Service guys out to bring back some Taco Bell. Real
cokehead politicians would be running around getting things done. You can't sit
still and be lethargic after doing a fat rail! I'm for Bush here." (It must be
admitted that there is a lot more quipping than wonking in these debates.)

            The
newsgroupies are wonderfully vitriolic. Many of the discussions are flame wars,
and almost all are uncivil. (Conservatives are the clear champions: A thread
titled "Republicans shoot American children in the back" is easily trumped by
"Democrats believe in raping their own daughters.") But the intimacy of the
newsgroups frequently borders on claustrophobia. You'll see the same names and
the same harangues over and over if you stay too long in a group. And Usenet
attracts more than its share of obsessives (most are garden-variety Waco
conspiracists or anti-Clinton loonies). Many threads that begin by analyzing Al
Gore's campaign end by denouncing the "Vice Criminal" and the "First
Rapist."

            For
less rant and more substance, head to the political Webzines.

                  Slate
               'sown forum, "," always has several active campaign threads,
usually pegged to "Ballot
Box " or "Frame
Game " columns. Because The Fray is linked to specific ,
campaign-related articles, it tends to stick to the election and not meander
off into conspiracy land. Salon also has lively campaign chat in its
"Table Talk "
section: It tends to be more conversational but less focused than The Fray (he
says unbiasedly).

            The
portal sites are trying to grab a share of the campaign palaver, too. Yahoo!
hosts several dozen political discussion "clubs." Most claim only a handful of
members (e.g., Republicans for Bill Bradley), but some of the larger ones are
quite lively, especially "Fear
and Loathing on Campaign 2K " and "Campaign
Techniques ," where they were debating whether candidates should ever
make campaign promises when I visited. MSN offers a similar array of
Web communities , though they are far less active. Both
CNN and MSNBC
are chockablock with political bulletin boards, though they too are tepid.

            Sadly,
otherwise abundant political sites such as Political Junkie don't
embrace conversation. Only Primary Diner has a forum worthy of the name. I learned more
about the pros and cons of the front-loaded primary season from the prattlers
at Primary Diner than I have from years of C-SPAN watching.

            When
you tire of the staidness and bipartisanship of the mainstream BBSs, invade the
free-fire zones of FreeRepublic.com and Lucianne. com
               . These are the spawning grounds of
the Vast Right-Wing Conspiracy. FreeRepublic gained a modest name for itself
during the Lewinsky scandal as a haven for Clinton haters, and Lucianne.com is
the queendom of Lewinsky doyenne Lucianne Goldberg. Lucianne and FreeRepublic
serve presidential chat laced with arsenic. Specially targeted: George W. for
conservative flaccidness and Gore for enviro-kookiness. (These sites are
proudly conservative, except when it comes to intellectual property law. They
reprint articles--or huge chunks of articles--from other publications without
seeking copyright permission.)

            You
can also conduct your 2000 debates purely by e-mail on a politics listserv. The
listserv I'm on--subscribe by sending the message "sub politics [your name]" to
listserv@aloo.netaxs.com--has not
yet focused on the campaign, but will as Iowa and New Hampshire beckon. (You
can search for political listservs at L-Soft .
Please tell us if you find a great one.)

            The
presidential candidates are beginning to acknowledge all this online campaign
talk, if only halfheartedly. Most of them have participated in live chats at
MSNBC or CNN.com. (Read the transcripts of the better CNN chats here . Look for the
Allpolitics section toward the bottom of the page.) But the chats are basic Q
and A's: Chatters ask routine questions, the candidate types back a canned
response. It's too bad the candidates' lone exposure to Internet talk is so
denatured, so polite, and so very dull. They could learn something--not much,
perhaps, but something--from the lively, nasty online discussions they're
missing.

         
      
   
