
   
   
      
         
            No. 271: &quot;Stop the Pressing&quot;

            
               On Wednesday, the
Future Homemakers of America made a startling announcement. What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
270)--"Crisis Management":
            

            

               
                  
                     "I didn't even want to talk about chocolate-chip
cookies, really. I shaved my beard and stopped wearing hats." Who said this
about what?
                  
               
            

            
"Famous Amos, after being profiled and strip-searched one too many times on the
New Jersey Turnpike."-- Dan Ricci
            

            "Donna
Shalala, in reference to some new Health and Human Services crap."-- Jon
Hotchkiss
            

            
"George W. Bush. I don't know what he was talking about, and I don't really
care. What matters is that he can win this, and we're backing him all the
way."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "This
was the disillusioned Jesus speaking days after performing the miracle of the
loaves and fishes. Knowing he had lost his grip on the crowd when they inquired
what was for dessert, he decided to make a radical change in his
life."-- Ellen Macleay
            

            "Queen
Elizabeth, complaining about just everything, describes the disguise that
enabled her to sneak out of Edinburgh a day early."-- Steve Bodow
( Sean Fitzpatrick and Matthew Cole had similar answers.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            By far the most frequent response involved Hillary
Clinton, the once and future baker, or nonbaker, who today begins her four-day
"listening tour" at the Moynihan Farm. (Fun With Juxtaposition: Which is the
more ludicrous expression, "listening tour" or "Moynihan Farm"?) Unimpressed
with her upstate forays, Rudolph Giuliani, her likely Senate rival, boasts:
"Every time I have gone up there, I have gotten the sense that they like me. I
think they like what I did with New York." (Fun With Prepositions: Instead of
"with" New York, substitute "to.") Like him they may, but have any of them
written a tribute as passionate as Ann Powers' love letter to Hillary in this
morning's Times ? (Some sentences omitted.)

            "[S]he waits, like the
sentinel of an enchanted world, and judges when it's safe to open up a trade
route. Her judgment has not always proven correct, but right now it is
impeccable. [W]hen you're a star of her magnitude, fashion will always return
to you, hanging its head. [S]he established herself as a mythical heroine,
questing but always true to herself. Even at her most spectacularly styled, she
keeps a rough-and-tumble vaudevillian edge. By maintaining an old-fashioned
ethic of showmanship, she seems exceptionally real." (Fun With Objects: Was
this flatulent blather actually about Hillary or was it perhaps about Cher?
Either way, just nuts, right?)

            
               There Are Second
Acts in American Baking Answer
            

            Wally "Famous" Amos reveals his feelings about the
dark days when his cookie empire collapsed.

            Amos started the company in 1975 with $25,000
borrowed from Marvin Gaye and Helen Reddy, pals from his days as a talent
agent. In 1982, revenue reached $12 million. But like many entrepreneurs, he
was not prepared to manage such a large enterprise, and in 1988, after attempts
at restructuring, the company lost $2.5 million and was sold. Under the terms
of the deal, Amos was not even permitted to use his own name for business
ventures. That's when he hit rock bottom.

            Much has improved.
Keebler, the new owner of Famous Amos, just offered him a two-year contract to
promote his old brand, and they are allowing him to use his name for his own
new businesses.

            
               Jewish Environmentalism
Extra
            

            Yesterday's Extra
squeezed a few cheap laughs out of a pamphlet for the Society for the
Advancement of Judaism, including their use of the phrase "Jewish
Environmentalism," for which you were invited to provide even cheaper
definitions. Such as these:

            "What
has the ozone ever done for our people?"-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Not
peeing in the (indoor) pool at Grossingers."-- Eliot Cohen
            

            "No,
it's all right, I'll sit in the dark."-- Jon "Have You Ever Known Any Jewish
Jons With an 'h' in the Name?" Zerolnick
            

            "You
call THIS an environment?!? Feh! I'll show you an environment."-- Matthew
Singer
            

            
"Suffering in Silence"-- Alison "The WASP-y Name Is Not My Fault"
Rogers
            

            "A
tree has been planted in your name ..."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Look,
where once dead deserts lay, now flowering cities arise! Zionism IS
environmentalism. Oh, and no Arabs allowed."-- Matthew Singer
            

            
               Good News Extra
            

            
"Missing Man is Found Alive and Stuck in Mud"--headline, New York
Times
            

            
               Jon Zerolnick's
Headline Haiku
            

            'You've Got Mail'
doesn't inspire Americans
to buy two
guns of Academe

            
               --Wall Street
Journal , July 6, 1999 (first section)

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Mrs. Clinton, Mrs. Fields, Mr. Claus, Mr. Elf.

         
      
   
