
   
   
      
         
             More Booze You Can Use

            When we last heard from them, the members of the

                  Slate
                beer-testing team were coping with lagers and trying to see
if they could taste the 3-to-1 price difference between the most- and
least-expensive brands. (Click for a wrap-up of the first round of beer
tasting.) The answer was: They found one beer they really liked, Samuel
Adams Boston Lager , and one they really hated, imported Grolsch from
Holland. Both were expensive beers--Grolsch was the most expensive in the
test--and otherwise the testers had a hard time telling beers apart. The
members of the team, as noted in the original article, all hold day jobs at
Microsoft, mainly as designers, managers, and coders for Microsoft Word.

            The point of the second test was not to find the
difference between cheap and expensive beers but instead to compare a variety
of top-of-the-line beers. Was there one kind the tasters preferred
consistently? Could they detect any of the subtleties of brewing style and
provenance that microbrew customers pay such attention to when choosing some
Doppelbock over a cream ale?

            Since the tasting panel had left the first round
grumbling that cheap lagers were not a fair test of their abilities, this
second round of testing was advertised to the panel as a reward. Every beer in
Round 2 would be a fancy beer. A microbrew. A "craft beer." A prestigious
import. These were the kinds of beer the panel members said they liked--and the
ones they said they were most familiar with. One aspect of the reward was that
they would presumably enjoy the actual testing more--fewer rueful beer
descriptions along the lines of "urine" or "get it away!" were expected than in
the first round. The other aspect of anticipated reward was the panelists'
unspoken but obvious assumption that this time they would "do better" on the
test. Intellectual vanity being what it is, people who had fought for and won
jobs at Microsoft and who still must fight every six months for primacy on the
employee-ranking scale (which determines--gasp!--how many new stock options
they receive) would assume that their skill as tasters was on trial, just as
much as the beer was. Of course they were right, which is what made this round
as amusing to administer as the first one had been.

            Here is what happened
and what it meant:

            
               1. 
               Procedure. This was
similar in most ways to the experimental approach of Round 1. The nine testers
who showed up were a subset of the original 12. The missing three dropped out
with excuses of "my wife is sick" (one person) and "meeting is running long"
(two).

            As before, each tester found before him on a table
10 red plastic cups, labeled A through J. Each cup held 3 ounces of one of the
beers. The A-to-J labeling scheme was the same for all testers. Instead of
saltines for palate-cleansing, this time we had popcorn and nuts. As they
began, the tasters were given these and only these clues:

            

               that the flight included one "holdover" beer from the previous round
(Sam Adams);

               that it included at least one import (Bass);

               that it included at least one macrobrew ,
specifically, a member of the vast Anheuser-Busch family (Michelob
Hefeweizen).

            

            After sampling all beers, the tasters rated them as
follows:

            

               
                  Overall quality points, from zero to 100, reflecting their
personal, subjective fondness for the beer.

               
                  Descriptions of and comments about each
beer's taste--"smooth and nutty," "too strong," etc. If the first ranking was a
measure of how good each beer was, this was an attempt to explain what made it
good.

               
                  Best 
                  and Worst , one of each from the group.

               
                  Name 
                  that beer! The tasters were told that some of
the drinks were Hefeweizens, some might be IPAs (India pale ales), some might
be bitters, and so on. They were asked to put each beer in its proper
category--and to name a specific brewery and brand if they could. The idea here
was to test the veteran beer drinkers' claim to recognize the distinctive
tastes of famous brands. (To see all the grids for all the beers, click .)

            

            
               2. 
               Philosophy. The first
round of testing was All Lager. This second round was All Fancy, and Mainly Not
Lager. As several correspondents (for instance, the of Best American
Beers ) have helpfully pointed out, the definition of lager provided last
time was not exactly "accurate." If you want to stay within the realm of
textbook definitions, a lager is a beer brewed a particular way--slowly, at
cool temperatures, with yeast that settles on the bottom of the vat. This is in
contrast with an ale, which is brewed faster, warmer, and with the yeast on
top. By this same reasoning, lagers don't have to be light-colored,
weak-flavored, and watery, as mainstream American lagers are. In principle,
lagers can be dark, fierce, manly. Therefore, the correspondents suggest, it
was wrong to impugn Sam Adams or Pete's Wicked for deceptive
labeling, in presenting their tawnier, more flavorful beers as lagers too.

            To this the beer
scientist must say: Book-learning is fine in its place. But let's be realistic.
Actual drinking experience teaches the American beer consumer that a) all cheap
beers are lagers; and b) most lagers are light-colored and weak. The first test
was designed to evaluate low-end beers and therefore had to be lager-centric.
This one is designed to test fancy beers--but in the spirit of open-mindedness
and technical accuracy, it includes a few "strong" lagers too.

            
               3.

               Materials. The 10 test beers were chosen with several goals in mind:

            

               To cover at least a modest range of fancy beer types--extra special bitter,
India pale ale, Hefeweizen, and so on.

               To include both imported and domestic beers. Among the domestic microbrews,
there's an obvious skew toward beers from the Pacific Northwest. But as
Microsoft would put it, that's a feature not a bug. These beers all came from
the Safeway nearest the Redmond, Wash., "main campus" of Microsoft, and
microbrews are supposed to be local.

               To include one holdover from the previous test, as a scientific control on
our tasters' preferences. This was Sam Adams , runaway winner of Round
1.

               To include one fancy product from a monster-scale U.S. mass brewery, to see
if the tasters liked it better or worse than the cute little microbrews. This
was Michelob Hefeweizen , from the pride of St. Louis,
Anheuser-Busch.

            

            Click for pricing information and pre-quaffing
evaluations. The beers tasted were:

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

            
               4. Data
Analysis.
            

            
               a) 
               Best and Worst. Compared
to the lager test, we would expect the range of "best" choices to be more
varied, since all the tested beers were supposed to be good. This expectation
was most dramatically borne out in the "Best and Worst" rankings.

            The nine tasters cast a total of nine Worst votes
and 11.5 Best votes. (Tester No. 1 turned in a sheet with three Best
selections, or two more than his theoretical quota. Tester No. 4 listed a Best
and a Best-minus, which counted as half a vote.)

             The results were clearest at the bottom: three
Worsts for Pyramid Hefeweizen , even though most comments about the beer
were more or less respectful. ("Bitter, drinkable.") But at the top and middle
the situation was muddier:

             

            There were three Bests
for Full Sail ESB , which most of the tasters later said they weren't
familiar with, and 2.5 for Redhook IPA , which all the tasters knew. But
each of these also got a Worst vote, and most of the other beers had a mixed
reading. So far, the tasters are meeting expectations, finding something to
like in nearly all these fancy beers.

            
               b) 
               Overall preference
points. Here the complications increase. The loser was again apparent:
Pyramid Hefeweizen came in last on rating points, as it had in the
Best/Worst derby. But the amazing dark horse winner was Michelob
Hefeweizen . The three elements of surprise here, in ascending order of
unexpectedness, are:

            

               This best-liked beer belonged to the same category, Hefeweizen, as the
least-liked product, from Pyramid.

               This was also the only outright Anheuser-Busch product in the
contest (the Redhooks are 75 percent A-B free). It is safe to say that all
tasters would have said beforehand that they would rank an American macrobrew
last, and Anheuser-Busch last of all.

               Although it clearly won on overall preference points, Michelob Hefeweizen
was the only beer not to have received a single "Best" vote.

            

            The first two anomalies can be written off as
testament to the power of a blind taste test. The third suggests an important
difference in concepts of "bestness." Sometimes a product seems to be the best
of a group simply because it's the most unusual or distinctive. This is why
very high Wine Spectator ratings often go to wines that mainly taste
odd. But another kind of bestness involves an unobtrusive, day-in day-out
acceptability. That seems to be Michelob Hefe 's achievement here: no
one's first choice, but high on everyone's list. Let's go to the charts:

            This table shows how the beers performed on "raw
score"--that is, without the advanced statistical adjustment of throwing out
the highest and lowest score each beer received.

             

            Next, we have "corrected average preference points,"
throwing out the high and low marks for each beer. The result is basically the
same:

             

            It is worth noting the
fate of Sam Adams on these charts. Here it ends up with a score of less
than 61. These were the numbers awarded by the very same tasters who gave it a
corrected preference rating of 83.33 the last time around--and 10 "Best" votes,
vs. one Best (and one Worst) this time. The shift in Bests is understandable
and demonstrates the importance of picking your competition. The severe drop in
preference points illustrates more acutely the ancient principle of being a big
fish in a small pond. These same tasters thought that Sam Adams was objectively
much better when it was surrounded by Busch and Schmidt's.

            
               c) 
               Value rankings. Last
time this calculation led to what the colorful French would call a
bouleversement. One of the cheapest beers, Busch, which had been in the
lower ranks on overall preference points, came out at the top on
value-for-money ratings, because it was so cheap. The big surprise now is that
the highest-rated beer was also the cheapest one, Michelob Hefe ,
so the value calculation turned into a rout:

             

            
               Pyramid

               Hefeweizen was expensive on top of being unpopular, so its position at
the bottom was hammered home--but not as painfully as that of Bass
Ale . Bass had been in the respectable lower middle class of the
preference rankings, so its disappointing Val-u-meter showing mainly reflects
the fact that it was the only beer not on "sale" and therefore by far the
costliest entry in the experiment.

            
               d) 
               Taster skill. As members
of the tasting panel began to suspect, they themselves were being judged while
they judged the beer. One of the tasters, No. 7, decided to live dangerously
and give specific brands and breweries for Samples A through J. This man was
the only panel member whose job does not involve designing Microsoft Word--and
the only one to identify two or more of the beers accurately and specifically.
(He spotted Redhook IPA and Redhook ESB.) The fact that the beers correctly
identified were the two most popular microbrews in the Seattle area suggests
that familiarity is the main ingredient in knowing your beer.

            Many others were simply lost. Barely half the
tasters, five of nine, recognized that Michelob Hefeweizen 
               was a
Hefeweizen. Before the test, nine of nine would have said that picking out a
Hefe was easy, because of its cloudy look and wheaty flavor. Three tasters
thought Sam Adams was an IPA ; two thought Redhook's IPA was a
Hefeweizen. In fairness, six of nine testers identified Pyramid
Hefeweizen as a Hefe, and six recognized Full Sail ESB as a bitter.
Much in the fashion of blind men describing an elephant, here is a how the
testers handled Sam Adams Boston Lager :

             

            
               5.
Implications 
               and Directions for Future Research. Science does
not always answer questions; often, it raises many new ones. This excursion
into beer science mainly raises the question: What kind of people are we?

            If we are Gradgrind-like empiricists, living our
life for "welfare maximization" as described in introductory econ. courses, the
conclusion is obvious. We learned from the first experiment to buy
either Sam Adams (when we wanted maximum lager enjoyment per bottle)
or Busch (for maximum taste and snob appeal per dollar). From this
second round we see an even more efficient possibility: Buy Michelob
Hefeweizen and nothing else, since on the basis of this test it's the best
liked and the cheapest beer. By the way, if there is a single company
whose achievements the testing panel honored, it would be
Anheuser-Busch . From its brewing tanks came two of the double-crown
winners of the taste tests: plain old Busch , the Taste-o-meter
and Snob-o-meter victor of Round 1, and Michelob Hefeweizen , the
preference-point and Val-u-meter winner this time.

            But, of course, there is another possibility: that
what is excluded in a blind taste test is in fact what we want, and are happy
to pay for, when we sit down with a beer. The complicated label, the fancy
bottle, the exotic concept that this beer has traveled from some far-off corner
of Bohemia or even the Yakima Valley--all this may be cheap at the
$1.25-per-pint cost difference between the cheapest and the most expensive
beers. In elementary school, we all endured a standard science experiment: If
you shut your eyes and pinch your nose closed, can you tell any difference in
the taste of a slice of apple, of carrot, of pear? You can't--but that doesn't
mean that from then on you should close your eyes, hold your nose, and chew a
cheap carrot when you feel like having some fruit. There is a time and place
for carrots, but also for juicy pears. There is a time for Busch, but also for
Full Sail "Equinox."

            For scientists who want to continue this work at
home, here are a few suggestions for further research:

            

               Tell the testers ahead of time what beers they will be drinking. Ask them
to rank the beers, 1 through 10, based on how well they like them. Then compare
the list with the "revealed preferences" that come from the blind test.

               As a variation, show them the list ahead of time and ask them to pick out
the beer they know they love and the one they know they hate. Then compare this
with the "after" list.

               If you're going to test imported lagers, try Foster's or Corona rather than
Grolsch.

               Remember to stay strictly in the scientist's role. Don't take the test
yourself.

            

         
      
   
