
   
   
      
         
            <I>Gorgeous</I> Isn't Even Skin-Deep

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Drop Dead Gorgeous
                (New Line Cinema). Miserable reviews for this
mockumentary about a Minnesota teen beauty pageant starring Ellen Barkin,
Kirstie Alley, and Denise Richards. The idea of spoofing the superficial,
back-stabbing world of teen pageants seems funny to most critics, but all agree
that the execution is abysmal. It relies heavily on Minnesota-bashing--the film
has "more lutefisk and Lutheran gags than a year of A Prairie Home
Companion " (Richard Corliss, Time )--and predictable jokes about
stage mothers and bitchy teens. Drop Dead Gorgeous was written by a
former Minnesota Miss Teen runner-up, but despite this insider angle, it offers
nothing that wasn't done better in 1975's Smile . (Click here to find out what
the Pageant News Bureau thought of the film.)

            

               
                  The Haunting
                (DreamWorks SKG). Frighteningly bad reviews for this
old-school horror movie: "The scariest thing about The Haunting is how
awful it is. No, worse than awful: desperate" (Lisa Schwarzbaum,
Entertainment Weekly ). Instead of going for the tongue-in-cheek, campy
horror style so popular of late, director Jan De Bont ( Speed ) relies on
old-fashioned things-that-go-bump-in-the-night scares. Despite a tasty cast
(including Liam Neeson, Catherine Zeta-Jones, Owen Wilson, and Lili Taylor),
the only faintly amusing element of the film is the computer-generated special
effects, which give the haunted house moving statues and doors that sprout
arms. A remake of a 1963 film adaptation of Shirley Jackson's novel The
Haunting of Hill House , this version cuts out the psychological elements
that made the original compelling. Roger Ebert is the only critic to speak up
in favor of the film, citing the scenery and effects as reason enough to see
it. (Click here to watch the trailer.)

            

               Magazine
            

            

               
                  Talk
               . The buzz on Tina Brown's celeb-mag reaches a fever pitch
a week before the first issue appears. Already, unasked-for publicity has been
showered on Brown's new baby, which is being published in partnership with
Miramax Films. 1) New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani denied permission to host the
launch party at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, apparently after hearing his Senate
seat rival Hillary Clinton was going to be on the cover. 2) A parody Web site by
Brill's Content writer Michael Colton was shut down by Miramax's
attorneys but was reinstated after Brown saw it and called off the lawyers. And
3) the New York tabloids have been charting every whisper of gossip on the
magazine for weeks. Brown has also been making the rounds talking up her new
project: Already this week she's done an interview in the Wall Street
Journal and been quoted at length in a piece in the "Business" section of
the New York Times . Times reporter Alex Kuczynski writes that
Talk "more closely resembles a postmodern version of Life
magazine or Paris Match " than Vanity Fair , and says that yes, the
cover will feature Hillary Clinton, but it will also give space to Miramax star
Gwyneth Paltrow and George W. Bush. According to the New York Post and
online gossip sites, Brown is steamed that the magazine went to press before
John F. Kennedy Jr.'s plane crashed, thus missing the biggest story of the
moment. (Not to mention the fact that rival Graydon Carter stopped the presses
at the last minute on the latest issue of Vanity Fair to change the
cover to a pic of Carolyn Bessette Kennedy.) The first copies of Talk
will be handed out at next Monday's launch party--held at the Statue of
Liberty, which is federal, not state, property--and it hits newsstands Tuesday.
(Click to read David Plotz's assessment of Brown in

                  Slate
               .)

            

               Event
            

            
               Woodstock
'99 . The massive rock festival ended in mayhem with fires, looting,
and riot police on Sunday night. After three days of music from acts such as
Jewel, Alanis Morissette, Insane Clown Posse, Rage Against the Machine,
Metallica, Red Hot Chili Peppers, and Limp Bizkit (the last band drawing the
biggest response from the crowds), a few hundred of the estimated 200,000
spectators broke loose. Highlights from the melee included: 12 tractor-trailers
set on fire, impromptu stripteases, giant bonfires with people leaping through
the flames, looting of T-shirt vendors' booths, smashed ATMs, and a food fight
with liberated soft pretzels. (Click here to
see Webcasts from the festival on the official site.)

         
      
   
