
   
   
      
         
            Daddys' Boys

            Except for political junkies, most people can tell
you precisely one thing about George W. Bush: His father used to be president.
No wonder he's in major-league denial when asked about matching Poppy's
achievements. "These are the kind of psychological analyses that I'm not really
thrilled about talking about," he told the New York 
               Times ,
revealing, in a classic Freudian protestation, more than he realized.

            But it would be
impossible for anyone in Bush's shoes not to bear an especially heavy Oedipal
burden. The life of the only son of a president to become president--John
Quincy Adams--illustrates why. W. has followed in his father's footsteps by
attending Phillips Academy and Yale, getting into the oil business, running for
Congress, and now, seeking the presidency. "JQA" (as he was called to
distinguish him from Dad) had the more daunting task of succeeding his
father--the nation's first vice president and second president, and an eminent
political theorist--as one of the great statesmen of the early republic. If W.
were to learn even a little about JQA's unhappy plight, he might well realize
the virtues of psychological self-analysis.

            The senior John Adams was a leader in the American
Revolution and wrote the influential tracts Thoughts on Government and
Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of
America . He saw no reason his eldest son, born in 1767, shouldn't attain
equal greatness. Adams set a rigorous course of study for young John, assigning
him, for example, to read Thucydides' History of 
               the Peloponnesian
War in the original Greek, at age 10. Morally stern, Adams also admonished
his son to make "a good account" of himself, and continued to hector him well
into his adulthood. "You come into life with advantages which will disgrace you
if your success is mediocre," Adams wrote to the 27-year-old JQA in 1794. "If
you do not rise to the head not only of your profession but of your country, it
will be owing to your own Laziness, Slovenliness and Obstinacy."

            JQA didn't need his
father's entreaties to work hard. He had internalized them fully, and his
copious diary entries reveal neurotically high ambitions and an obsessional
level of self-reproach for not meeting them. "Indolence, indolence, I fear,
will be my ruin," he wrote at age 20, voicing a refrain he repeated throughout
his hard-working life. At that same young age, he awoke one morning with a
hangover after a night spent caroling with friends, during which, he recorded,
"the bottle went round with an unusual rapidity." Yet for all his
self-flagellation, JQA learned self-control early. It took George W. Bush 39
years and many more hangovers before he learned the same. Of course, JQA's
paternally instilled perfectionism sparked a lifelong case of clinical
depression. W.'s growing-up experiences sparked a born-again Christianity that
has led him to believe all Jews are bound for hell.

            JQA benefited as well as suffered from his father's
position. Where George Herbert Walker Bush furnished his son with contacts in
politics and in the oil business, John Adams extended to his son equally rare
opportunities. As a boy, JQA accompanied Adams on a diplomatic mission to Paris
and, through that experience, won the assignment, at age 14, to be secretary
and interpreter on another assignment in St. Petersburg. These jobs primed JQA
for his later diplomatic career. And, just as the intellectually
undistinguished George W. doubtless got into Yale as a "legacy," JQA, though he
had mastered Thucydides, surely wasn't penalized for his father's name when he
was admitted to Harvard.

            For JQA's earliest
intellectual triumphs, too, Adams senior was at least inadvertently
responsible. At age 24, JQA wrote his first major work of political philosophy,
in the manner of many works then, under a classical pseudonym, "Publicola." A
rejoinder to Tom Paine's Rights of Man , "Letters From Publicola"
emphasized the role of passion, not reason, in governing men's political
behavior. Its conservative tone and polished style--compared admiringly to
Edmund Burke--led many to assume that John Adams had authored it. The case of
mistaken identity fed its popularity and launched JQA's career as a political
essayist. The episode stands as yet another eerie precursor to George W.'s
life: As a much-overlooked New York Times story noted last spring, W.
became the GOP front-runner largely because many people who told pollsters they
favored Bush were "actually thinking of the father"; the confusion triggered a
virtuous cycle of high poll numbers, improved fund-raising, and endorsements
that has lifted W. above the pack.

            Naturally, JQA came both to revere and to recoil from the
magnitude of his father's accomplishments. In a 1793 address, JQA vowed that
while "the copious treasures" of fame and achievement "have already been
gathered by the hands of genius," he and his generation would still stay true
to "the precious memory of the sages." Though he was ostensibly paying tribute
to the Constitution, it was not hard to hear the deep filiopietism beneath the
surface.

            On the other hand, JQA
struggled to stake out his own terrain as a lawyer or, his ultimate fantasy, a
poet. Naturally awed by his father's achievements, he swore he didn't want a
career in politics (again, not unlike the way W. pursued business after failing
to get elected to Congress at age 31). Yet no sooner had Adams undertaken his
pursuits as an attorney than his father, recently elected as the nation's first
vice president, informed him that George Washington had named the young man
minister to the Netherlands. The news dashed JQA's hopes for independence from
Dad. "I wish I could have been consulted before it was irrevocably made," he
said of the appointment. "I rather wish it had not been made at all." The
senior Adams, meanwhile, took the occasion to chide his son to start paying
attention to how he dressed.

            When John Adams became president in 1797, he appointed his
son to the even more prestigious post of minister to Prussia. In both
diplomatic missions, JQA received laudatory reviews, and he was marked as an
important leader in his own right. It could only have served as a painful
reminder of his father's still-greater fame, then, when, after losing the
election of 1800 to Thomas Jefferson, Adams recalled his son so as not to give
his rival the satisfaction of deciding whether JQA should continue in his
post.

            Following his career as
a diplomat, John Quincy went on to ascend ever higher in politics. He served as
a Massachusetts state senator and a U.S. senator, and then, during James
Monroe's presidency, as secretary of state, where he was largely responsible
for formulating the principles behind the Monroe Doctrine. Ensconced in what
was then clearly the No. 2 position in government, JQA was the presumptive
front-runner in the 1824 presidential race, though it was Andrew Jackson who
won a plurality (yet not the necessary majority) of electoral votes. Adams won
the presidency only because Henry Clay backed him in the run-off in the House
of Representatives, but Adams never lived down (false) rumors that he and Clay
had cut a "Corrupt Bargain." He unwisely fed the rumors and harmed his own
reputation by naming Clay his secretary of state.

            Despite Adams' relatively unremarkable presidency, however,
he rebounded as no other ex-president ever has. He ran for Congress from
Massachusetts and, revitalized, served for 18 years--notably helping to
overturn the shameful "gag rule" that forbade the reading of anti-slavery
petitions on the floor of the House. It takes little imagination to speculate
that JQA felt liberated to enjoy this second career only because on July 4,
1826, midway through JQA's presidency, his venerated old man passed away.

            The tragedy of JQA's life is that, for all his
spectacular achievements, he was doomed to feel inadequate next to his
larger-than-life father. W. should only have such problems.

         
      
   
