
   
   
      
         
            Dog Days of Summer

            The
traditional summer "silly season" finally arrived in Fleet Street Friday when
most British papers chose as their top news story a claim that sunbathing is
good for you. A report published in the British Medical Journal by a
team of Bristol epidemiologists infuriated cancer charities by saying there is
"evidence that the potential benefits of exposure to sunlight may outweigh the
widely publicised adverse effects on the incidence of skin cancer." The report,
which led the Guardian and the Daily Telegraph and made the front pages of the
Times and the
Independent , said that sunbathing could protect against heart disease
and multiple sclerosis and that more people would die from keeping out of the
sun than from being in it. The report also made the banal observations that
"people find lying or sitting in the sun enjoyable and relaxing" and that "this
subjective sense of well-being may be important in itself in improving the
quality of a person's life."

            An
even sillier "silly season" story, appearing the same day on the front pages of
the Times and the Financial Times , concerned the British government's decision
to establish a task force to study the threat of an asteroid hitting Earth and
destroying all life on the planet. The FT said that a plan to avert
Armageddon has been demanded of the government by an opposition member of
parliament named Lembit Opik, whose Estonian grandfather Ernst had an asteroid
named after him. Asked whether the proposed establishment of a Near Earth
Object Task Force wasn't rather a limp response to such a cataclysmic threat, a
spokesman for the Science Ministry said defensively, "It's not as if there are
asteroids hovering above the earth."

            Other
prominent stories in the British press included Thursday's $90 million
record-breaking sale at Christie's in London of a famous art collection looted
by the Nazis from the Austrian Rothschilds in 1938 and recently restored to
their American heirs, and the news that fox hunting is almost certain to be
abolished in Britain now that Prime Minister Tony Blair has said he will
support legislation against it.

            The
Daily Telegraph , the Financial Times , and the Independent ran
editorials Friday about Britain's re-establishment this week of diplomatic
relations with Tripoli following Libya's belated admission of responsibility
for the 1984 death of a British policewoman who was killed by shots fired from
the Libyan Embassy in London. The FT said this was the right decision,
not because Muammar Qaddafi was now "a Jeffersonian democrat" but because "he
has started to come into line with international law enough to justify a policy
of engagement rather than isolation." The Telegraph , however, said that behind this decision and an earlier one by
Britain to exchange ambassadors with Iran lay "an unwillingness to stand up to
terror-sponsoring regimes that have large commercial contracts in their gift."
The paper said Britain's current cozying-up to Libya, Iran, and China distances
it from the United States and "exposes the Government's proclaimed Atlanticism
as increasingly questionable." The Independent , on the other hand,
supported the Libya decision on the opposite ground--"that
by establishing dialogue, we are differentiating ourselves from the US." It
said, "Britain too often comes across as an American cat's-paw."

            A
report in the Guardian Friday from Tehran said that conservative clerics
have struck a blow at Iran's reforming President Mohammed Khatami by closing
the newspaper Salam , which helped his rise to power. There were now
fears that two other progressive Iranian newspapers, Sobh-e-Emrouz and
Kordad , will be closed down. A bill that the clerics pushed through
parliament Wednesday restricting press freedom is expected to compel
journalists to reveal sources and to bar many opposition writers and editors
from "any form of press activity," the Guardian said.

            The
Guardian led its international section Friday with accusations that the
Pakistani government executed hundreds of suspected criminals before they were
brought to trial. In Punjab, the home province of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif,
more than 850 people have been shot by police since he came to power two years
ago, according to a Punjabi paper, the News . The police explanation of
these killings is often that the suspects died "in cross-fire" during street
battles with criminal gangs, but Pakistani lawyers and human rights groups say
the killings are deliberate and authorized by Sharif's government, the
Guardian said. It also quoted what it said was a recent U.S. State
Department report on Pakistan saying that "the police committed numerous
extra-judicial killings and tortured, abused and raped citizens" and that
"there is no evidence that any police officers were brought to justice."

            The same Sharif promised
President Clinton that he will hand over Osama Bin Laden to U.S. authorities at
the earliest opportunity, the Indian daily Asian Age said Friday. In
its main front-page story, the paper reported from London--where the prime minister
stopped to meet with Tony Blair on his way home from Washington--that this was
one of Clinton's conditions for brokering a peace deal between Pakistan and
India over the disputed territory of Kashmir. Another was the early withdrawal
of Muslim mujahideen guerrillas from Kashmir, whose incursions there are the
cause of the latest India-Pakistan military conflict. Bin Laden, accused by the
United States of masterminding the terrorist bombings of U.S. missions in East
Africa last year, is hiding in Afghanistan under the patronage of the
Pakistan-supported Taliban regime, Asian Age said. The United States has
demonstrated its seriousness about getting its hands on him by announcing
simultaneously with Sharif's arrival in Washington that it is freezing trade
with "all territory under Taliban control or influence."

         
      
   
