
   
   
      
         
            The Perils of E-Fund Raising

            The
pitch arrived by e-mail, and it was a direct appeal for money.

            It
appeared to come from Tim Draper, the Silicon Valley venture capitalist, whose
e-mail would be eagerly read by anyone interested in the financing of
technology businesses. But this message wasn't about funding technology: It was
about funding the next president of the United States.

            "Dear
Friend," it began, "Please send $1,000 and call five friends to join us in
support of George W. Bush for president." The e-solicitation, dated Sept. 4,
gave out Draper's office phone number at the firm of Draper Fisher Jurvetson,
his e-mail address, and a place for checks to be sent.

            
Contributors who raised $5,000, the e-mail said, could "be listed as a cohost
and be invited to the VIP photo reception" at an event in Redwood City, Calif.,
Sept. 30. The final line said: "P.S. Forward this e-mail on to your address
list and get some viral marketing going."

            Many
recipients did, but at least a few questioned whether this was an authorized
request for money, or a hoax. "Obviously, someone is out to get him," said Dave
Alexander, executive vice president of VirtualFund.com, shortly after receiving
the e-mail. Alexander predicted that Draper would be flooded by angry
complaints from people "who don't know who he is and who think he really did
spam them."

            In
fact, Draper did spam them. "The e-mail was real," Draper later confirmed. "I'm
happy about it because I happen to think George Bush is the best man for the
job."

            
Welcome to the murky world of e-mail fund raising.

            As
more Americans and more political campaigns get on the Internet, e-mail is
replacing many of the campaign tasks traditionally handled through telephone
and direct mail. About $3 billion will be spent on all political direct mail in
the current four-year electoral cycle, according to Ron Faucheaux, editor in
chief of Campaigns & Elections magazine. In many cases, direct mail
represents a campaign's single largest expenditure (although presidential
campaigns have a different spending mix, because of their lopsided use of TV
advertising).

            As a
fund-raising device, e-mail has powerful advantages over direct mail. For
starters, it's essentially free. It's also self-replicating: One enthusiastic
recipient can easily send e-mail along to dozens of others, without the
campaign having to rent an additional donor list.

            But as
the Draper incident shows, the process can also create some unexpected
headaches. A traditional direct mail solicitation usually contains legal
reassurances that the solicitation is authorized (and the cost of postage makes
an unauthorized mailing an expensive proposition), which some e-mail
solicitations currently lack. Also, most individuals do not screen their e-mail
address books politically, meaning that a solicitation sent out to all a
person's contacts may well end up in the hands of someone who doesn't want
it--which could turn into a public relations problem.

            That's
what happened when Anthony Perkins, editor in chief of Red Herring
magazine, sent out an invitation to the same Bush luncheon as Draper. He used a
list from Red Eye, one of the e-mail newsletters that Red Herring
publishes. Using a pun on Red Herring 's name, Perkins' note appeared to
imply that a Bush donation would enhance readers' relationship to the
publication. "If you want to be a really big Fish, you can become a cohost of
this event by committing to raise $5,000, which will get you into a special VIP
reception with the governor," the e-mail said.

            The
message confused some of Red Eye's subscribers, and Red Herring rapidly
began a damage control campaign. (Perkins did not respond to several requests
for an interview.) First, the publication took the position that the e-mail
pitch mistakenly went out under the guise of a Red Eye editorial product, when
in fact it was a paid political advertisement.

            A few
days later, Perkins sent out a letter to Red Eye subscribers, apologizing for
the blurring of journalistic and political lines. "As you know, I have strong
political ties to presidential candidate George W. Bush, however these are not
the opinions of Red Herring Communications nor do they influence the
journalistic ethics of any of the editorial properties of Red Herring
Communications," Perkins wrote. "I apologize for the miscommunication and hope
it did not cause any irritation or confusion."

            
Perkins has said that he will personally pay the $900 cost of the list rental
to Red Herring Communications (which to some degree is the same as paying
himself, since he is the company's largest shareholder). Moreover, Perkins told
the New York Observer that he would record the expense as an in-kind
contribution to the Bush campaign. His apology e-mail, however, did not mention
this contribution, and as of Sept. 21, it had yet to show up on the Bush
campaign's online daily roster of campaign donations. The Bush campaign did not
respond to a request for comment.

            
Perhaps to avoid such sticky situations, some of Bush's presidential rivals are
steering clear of the e-fund-raising path--at least for now. Steve Forbes'
campaign accepts donations through its Web site and sends out thank you notes via e-mail to those
who contribute online--but that's all. "We haven't done any e-mail fund raising
at all," says Ben Gettler, a spokesman for the Forbes campaign, "and we don't
have any plans to do so. We believe our Internet presence is good enough." Of
course, Forbes is spending significant sums of his own money on the
presidential campaign, making his fund-raising urgency arguably lower than that
of other candidates.

            Ultimately, says
Campaigns & Elections ' Faucheaux, the electorate will become
accustomed to unwanted e-mail solicitations, just as it is to political junk
mail. "As long as donors are comfortable with it being there, I don't see that
[e-mail solicitations] have any particular problems," Faucheaux said.
"Remember: It's really in an experimental stage right now."

         
      
   
