
   
   
      
         
            Hell on Wheels

            
               
                  Bringing Out
the Dead
                provides director Martin Scorsese with a rich milieu for
one of his patented, pumped-up odysseys of the soul--an urban bedlam as seen
through the eyes of an emergency medical technician, Frank Pierce (Nicolas
Cage). The film is based on a book by Joe Connelly, who cruised the streets of
Manhattan in an ambulance from the mid-'80s to the early '90s, when the crack
epidemic was peaking and New York had become the embodiment of everything
untenable about major American cities. Connelly spent a lot of time picking up
shooting victims, crackheads in the throes of cardiac arrest, and homeless
drunks--some from the first wave of Reagan-era deinstitutionalization--and
bringing them to the overpacked emergency room of what he calls "Our Lady of
Misery" Hospital. The book is a memoir reframed as a novel: It boils those
years down to a couple of days in which Pierce clutches vainly at the last
vestiges of sanity. Night after night, he has visions of a young Hispanic
asthmatic whom he failed to resuscitate: Her head stares accusingly at him from
the shoulders of people he passes on the street. It's not just that he can't
forgive himself for not having saved her life; it's that he can't forgive
himself for putting her out of his mind. He can't live with the idea that he
has become indifferent.

            The material has so many Scorsese-like motifs that
it's easy to see why the director fell on it and passed it on to his Taxi
Driver (1976) screenwriter, Paul Schrader, who has said he finished the
script in three weeks. I can believe that, and not just because there's so much
dialogue and narration from the book on screen. It's probable that Connelly
thought of Taxi 
               Driver and Mean Streets (1973) when he
wrote his novel, so having it adapted by Schrader and Scorsese was like closing
the circle. But what the circle really needed was opening. It's not just that
slow-motion scenes of the ambulance gliding past people beating one another up
feel like déjà vu . It's that Schrader hasn't rethought Connelly's
trumped-up story line.

            The movie starts with
Pierce and his occasional partner, Larry (John Goodman), trudging to the top
floor of a Hell's Kitchen brownstone, where a man named Burke has been in
cardiac arrest for 10 minutes. They manage to get Burke's heart started, but
his brain shows only scant traces of activity; and in the hospital he keeps
flatlining and being resuscitated--15, 16, 17 times. In and out of the
emergency room over the course of several nights, Pierce gets chummy with
Burke's estranged daughter, Mary (Patricia Arquette), a lost soul whose
shellshocked existence (she begins to drift back into drug abuse) seems tied in
to her dad's neither-living-nor-dead condition. Pretty soon I got the sinking
feeling that the movie was building to the possibility of a mercy killing as a
test of the hero's ability to overcome his internal chaos and feel
something. It's true that Pierce's "altruistic" impulse is not on par with
Travis Bickle's impulse to shave his head and assassinate a presidential
candidate, but Schrader and Scorsese don't view his actions with any
irony. I have a feeling they needed an ending and this one was handy.

            Their opportunism is a shame, because there's enough
texture in Bringing Out the Dead for several movies. Scorsese does
crackerjack work, and some of the cruising imagery--not a bebop legato as in
Taxi Driver but hyperfast and strobelike--is startling. There's a
scary irony built into the material: that the people charged with saving lives
on the streets can't function at normal rhythms; that their amphetamine-jag
intensity can make them as likely to want to murder people as to revive them.
Scorsese and Schrader are at their most inspired in the raucous theater of the
emergency room, in which patients on stretchers scream at one another to shut
up, and an admitting nurse (played by Schrader's wife, the brilliant Mary Beth
Hurt) takes pains to let the drunks and addicts and failed suicides know just
how much they're imposing on her. ("Why should we help? You're just going to
get drunk tomorrow.") Scorsese and Queen Latifah can be heard as the voices of
the dispatchers, and their calls--they often have to bully the drivers to
answer--are beautifully shaped comic turns. Years of sitcom work haven't
softened Goodman, whose Larry is sour, unlovable, thickened by indifference. As
another of Pierce's partners, Ving Rhames talks into the radio like a
toasty-voiced DJ ("Big Daddy Marcus is alive") and strides through his scenes
with an unlit cigar in his mouth, defiantly proclaiming his potency. The
mixture of jokiness and blood never feels cheap--it adds to the movie's theme,
which is horrified estrangement from one's own humanity.

            I must admit that the
movie made me weep a couple of times: It's hard to watch with detachment as
tubes are thrust down people's throats or as they're shocked back to life. Some
of the more jaded characters act as if life is cheap, but Scorsese doesn't. And
everything Nicolas Cage does gives weight to the filmmaker's vision. Cage has
the same flamboyantly haggard (and toothy) look he had in Vampire's Kiss
(1989), yet this time the actor is grounded. His Pierce would love to soar off
into the ether--to escape into madness--but he can't quite make the leap.
"Sometimes it's less about saving lives than being a witness," he says, in
voice-over. "I was a grief mop. It was enough that I simply showed up." Cage's
wary alertness does those words justice.

            One of the best things about David Lynch's marvelous new
film 
                  The Straight Story
                is its play on
"straight"--which is both the name of the protagonist, the failing
septuagenarian Alvin Straight (Richard Farnsworth), and a description of the
movie's one-thing-after-another mode of storytelling. Farnsworth plays an old
duffer who hears that his brother, Lyle, has had a stroke. It emerges that they
haven't spoken for a decade, and the last time they did Alvin said some
devastatingly harsh things. So, as a kind of penance, Alvin decides to travel
hundreds of miles to Lyle's house under his own power. The only vehicle he's
legally allowed to drive is a John Deere lawn mower that goes maybe three miles
an hour. But somehow the mode of travel--and the hardship of that
travel--becomes the movie's message.

            I was impatient with The Straight Story 's
opening--the arty dissolves, the crawling pace, the sense of stasis. But once
Alvin left his mentally handicapped daughter (a radiantly simple turn by Sissy
Spacek) for the open road, it becomes apparent that Lynch needed those early
scenes. He needed to show you that as slow as Alvin is going on his tractor,
it's flying next to what he has been doing. As Alvin encounters a lot of plain
folks, both the character and the movie threaten to start seeming "dear." But
the vein of regret, misery, and the Lynchian promise of decay is always just
below the surface--and always palpable. In Lynch's last film, Lost
Highway , the director concocted an original, twisty syntax, in which
identity was mutable and the narrative moved by quantum leaps. This time he
sticks to the path, and his work is as transcendent--and as spellbinding--as
anything he has done since Blue Velvet (1986). Lynch has slowed the
world down and gotten back in touch with it. The Straight Story could be
subtitled Found Highway .

         
      
   
