
   
   
      
         
            No. 270: &quot;Crisis Management&quot;

            
               "I didn't even
want to talk about chocolate-chip cookies, really. I shaved my beard and
stopped wearing hats." Who said this about what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 269)--"Coaching Staff":
            

            

               
                  Sometime Thursday, Queen Elizabeth will take off her crown, put
on a purple and green dress in a thistle pattern, and step into her carriage.
Where's she going?
               
            

            
"Slumming?"-- Jack Defevers
            

            "Even
farther back in time."-- Larry Amoros
            

            "To
the guillotine."-- Keith Kurtz
            

            
"Another one of those suspiciously long 'lunches' with Sean Connery."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "To
kick off her bid for a New York Senate seat. 'In my family, we've always rooted
for the Yankees,' said the queen. 'Well, except for George III.' "-- Ben "We
New Yorkers" Heller ( Adam Martin and Seth Mnookin had similar
answers.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Many responses pivoted
on the amusing contrast between uptown swells and downtown schlubs, but this
reliable device, the mighty comic engine that generated so many terrific
Depression-era comedies and dimwitted Lampoon movies--Snobs vs.
Slobs--is as false and anachronistic as the small town in a Capra movie. The
two distinct worlds of upper-class and lower-class culture have merged into a
single megaworld of pop culture. The millionaire's daughter doesn't yearn for
the violin virtuoso; she wants the rocker. It was not Pavarotti who sang at
Diana's funeral, it was Elton John. And even if it had been Pavarotti, he'd
have brought along the other two tenors, assuming they could get time off from
their PBS commitments and their stadium bookings. In the romantic comedies of
the '30s-- It Happened One Night , My Man Godfrey --the wan,
indifferent upper-class beauty is humanized by her contact with ordinary
working-class life, but those days are over. In modern romantic
comedy-- Working Girl to Pretty Woman --we're meant to applaud the
heroine's rise from working-class to First Class, with the confidence that she
can still listen to Garth Brooks. It's the new One World, and its
pseudosophisticated anthem is "You're the Top. Forty."

            
               Deeply Held Nationalist
Yearnings Answer
            

            Last week the queen went to the opening of the new
Scottish Parliament, that nation's first in nearly 300 years.

            Although the new Scots MPs took an oath of
allegiance to the queen, there was no singing of "God Save the Queen," but they
did sing Robert Burns' "A Man's a Man for A' That."

            An old hand at this sort
of thing, Queen Elizabeth opened the Welsh Assembly May 26. The opening of the
West 94 th St. Parliament will take place in my apartment as soon as
the beer arrives. We won't sing "God Save the Queen," we will sing Gershwin
favorites.

            
               Jew du Jour
Extra
            

            One of the nicest things about Judaism--along with
Uma Thurmond, knishes, and irony--is its traditional lack of proselytizing
zeal. But the arrival in the mail of a flier from the Society for the
Advancement of Judaism may force me to rethink my proselytizing position. Some
highlights:

            

               Reassuring words on the cover: "Community," "Meaning," "Tradition"--each,
as I recall, a particularly moving song in Fiddler on the Roof .

               Disconcerting words on the cover: "modern Jews," which, for my money, is
the next Tina Brown magazine, and "Jewish journey," which generally meant
stopping a lot so my Aunt Rose could reject another Esso station restroom for
falling short our people's traditional standard of cleanliness. Also, fruit. A
lot of fruit on a Jewish journey. You kids OK back there? You want another
peach or maybe a nectarine?

               Disconcerting jargon inside: Adults can "enhance their relationships to
Judaism in a dynamic community of learners." I'm no FBI agent, but they're
talking about some kind of group sex swingers cult thing, right?

               The SAJ is run by Rabbi Julie Schonfeld who, we are told, graduated from
Yale. Not just a rabbi, an Ivy League Rabbi--which, coincidentally, is next
summer's big teen comedy for Adam Sandler. And Barbra Streisand. (Some mix-up
over the rights.)

               Rabbi Schonfeld's most impressive credential: "taught playwriting with the
New York Shakespeare Festival." It's a Wendy Wasserstein rewrite of The Jazz
Singer . Which path will Julie Schonfeld choose--Broadway or God's way,
Cats or Katz?

               "Conflict Resolution in the Bible." Sounds good. One factor in the decline
of the labor movement is its unwillingness to use stoning as a bargaining
technique. No stoning and very little smiting. Except the Teamsters.

               The "Experiential Hebrew School" offers various programs for children, so
good that "Your kids won't want to leave!" OK, now I'm sure about that cult
thing. And I like it!

               Also for der Kinder , "Jewish Ethics through Science Fiction." Ah, my
people, and their rigorous traditions of scholarship. I smell Spielberg
money.

               Recent SAJ projects include "Jewish Environmentalism." Please make up your
own joke. ( You send 'em, I'll run 'em. )

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Barney the dinosaur goes to Wimbledon, hell.

         
      
   
