
   
   
      
         
            Ayatollahed You So

            
Security forces quelled student protests in Iran. Young people in 18 cities had
staged protests, thrown stones, and set police vehicles on fire. Pro-government
conservatives rallied right back. "" compares the uprising to civil war and the
fall of the Iron Curtain, but the Iranian newspaper Neshat argues that
revolution is "neither possible nor desirable."

            

               Peace talks broke down in Northern Ireland. Protestant unionists
rejected a plan to implement last year's peace accord on the grounds that the
plan requires sharing power with the political wing of the still-armed Irish
Republican Army. describes the clamor for negotiators to return the Nobel Peace
Prize they won last year. The BBC reports that the post-breakdown finger-pointing is drowning out both sides' weary vows to continue the process.

            

               Ehud Barak pledged to renew the peace process. President Clinton said he
looked forward to Barak's first U.S. visit like "a kid with a new toy," but CNN
predicted that Clinton would refrain
from pressuring Barak into immediate action. At his first official
meeting with Yasser Arafat, Barak promised to implement former Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's still-unrealized diplomatic agreements, while
Arafat repeated calls to curb West Bank settlements. Both meetings were deemed
key steps toward rebuilding relationships Netanyahu had soured. Click to read

                  Slate 's David Plotz puncture the Barak euphoria.

            

               Taiwan asserted its autonomy from China. The island abandoned its "one
China" policy, which implied China's sovereignty over and eventual
reunification with Taiwan. "Don't underestimate the Chinese government's firm
determination to uphold national sovereignty, dignity, and territorial
integrity," warned the Chinese Foreign Ministry in response. The Wall
Street Journal says the move "alarmed even Taiwan's friends," including
the United States, which quickly affirmed the one China policy. But Hong Kong's
South China Morning Post 
               reports that the Taiwanese are ready to call what they
think is China's bluff.

            

               Pakistan and India will end their standoff in Kashmir. Pakistani-backed
Islamic militants withdrew from their Himalayan stronghold after weekend talks
between Indian and Pakistani officials. One Islamic military group still
refuses to budge. The Pakistanis spun their pullback as a mutual cease-fire,
but as "" notes, India bragged of "a total military rout." The rest of the
world sighed with relief at what the New York Times 
               called "an end to the latest confrontation between the
world's newest nuclear powers." A Washington Post editorial credits
President Clinton with quietly brokering the deal but warns that America may
now be drawn into the conflict.

            

               Serbian opposition leader Vuk Draskovic will try to oust Slobodan
Milosevic. The hitherto-silent Draskovic called for "massive rallies"
to topple the regime. The Washington Post 
               cautions that the effort may be sabotaged by a
crackdown from Milosevic or by internecine quarrelling among opposition
leaders.

            

               Rafael Resendez-Ramirez surrendered. The Mexican national who
topped the FBI's 10 Most Wanted list and is suspected of killings in three
states turned himself in under a plan brokered by his sister. He had been
apprehended in June by INS agents for trying to enter the U.S. illegally, but
had then been released, allegedly because the agents had no information on his
record or his warrants.

            

               
                  The Senate passed compromise patients' rights
legislation.
                Republicans defeated a plan to let patients sue
their HMOs but approved more access to emergency care and specialists.
Democrats protested that the reforms would apply to fewer than one-third of the
161 million Americans with private insurance. The Washington Post awards
the GOP "a clean win on an issue of prime importance to the
American public" but foresees an election-time brawl. "Today we saw what
'compassionate conservativism' pretends to be," harrumphed Sen. Barbara
Mikulski, D-Md. New York Times columnist Bob Herbert asserts that
managed care has bought Republican votes and that patients will die as a
result.

            

               George W. Bush will forgo federal matching campaign funds. He explained
that being unconstrained by spending limits will give him "strategic
flexibility." "There's a chance I'll be running against somebody who will be
able to jump in a government airplane and travel the country making promises,"
he said.

            

               Rep. John Kasich dropped his presidential bid. He endorsed
George W. Bush. USA Today 's Walter Shapiro eulogized
Kasich as "one of the most refreshingly outspoken figures in his party" and
concluded that "another voice in the struggle to define the party's agenda is
stilled." Other analyses agreed that Kasich was intimidated by Bush's haul of
money and endorsements, and wondered who might drop out next.

            

               Sen. Bob Smith quit the GOP and will run for president as an
independent. He castigated Republicans for going soft on gun control
and abortion. The Washington Post says that Republicans will encourage unity by allowing Smith to retain his
committee chairmanship and caucus membership. But Pat Buchanan opined on
Face the Nation that "the Republican establishment is doing its best
right now to almost force a fracture in the GOP."

            

               Republicans unveiled rival tax-cut plans. Senate Finance Committee
Chairman William Roth, R-Del., suggested slicing taxes by $792 billion over 10
years, while House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Bill Archer, R-Texas,
floated a $850 billion reduction. The White House called the cuts "a huge risk
for the country," and Rep. Charles Rangel, D-N.Y., called the Archer proposal
"a Christmas tree that's supposed to appeal to every Republican." In the
Washington Post , Archer accuses Democrats of supporting "big government 
                  on 
                  autopilot
               " and
argues that the cuts epitomize compassionate conservatism. But deficit-hawk
ex-Sens. Sam Nunn and Warren Rudman assert in the same pages that the surplus
should be used to pay down the deficit .

            

               The Vatican barred an American priest and nun from ministering to
gays. The decree accused Sister Jeannine Gramick and Rev. Robert
Nugent of an "erroneous and dangerous" failure to affirm the "intrinsic evil of
homosexual acts." The Washington Post reports that the decree
"effectively ends the careers of two of the most
prominent gay rights advocates within the Catholic Church."

            
               A
jury ordered General Motors to pay $4.9 billion to six victims burned by an
exploded Chevrolet fuel tank. It is one of the largest product liability
awards ever. The plaintiffs' lawyers had produced documents demonstrating that
GM execs resisted fireproofing fuel systems because it would cost an extra
$8.59 per vehicle. GM's lawyers, who had fought to conceal the memos, called
the argument "absurd." The Los Angeles Times clucks that "public trust
in product liability cases tried by juries might well be going down the drain
with these excessive awards ."

            

               Florida charged an airplane maintenance firm with murder in the Valujet
crash. The indictment blamed the deaths of the plane's 110 passengers
on the company's negligence. This is the first time criminal charges have been
brought over an accidental airplane crash in the United States.

            
               An
inexpensive drug will help prevent AIDS transmission from mothers to
children. Health advocates at the National Institutes of Health , which sponsored the trial,
predicted that the inexpensive medicine, Nevirapine, will curb infection rates
in poor countries.

            
               The
NAACP is planning to sue the gun and TV industries. The group will file
suits
against handgun makers, importers, and distributors to force gun companies
to market their products more carefully. It may also sue TV networks for
failing to depict minority characters in their shows. NAACP President Kweisi
Mfume told the Los Angeles Times that the networks are violating the
1934 Federal Communications Act , which specifies that the
airwaves belong to the public.

            
               The
U.S. Air Force dropped medical supplies to a South Pole researcher who found a
lump in her breast. Weather conditions will delay her evacuation until at
least October.

            

               Carnival Cruise Lines disclosed rape charges against its staff. Crew
members have been accused of sexual assault 62 times in a five-year span ending
last summer. The admission was ordered by a judge presiding over a lawsuit by a
former employee alleging that the company tried to cover up her rape.

            

               Apple's quarterly profits doubled. Its stock subsequently jumped to an
all-time peak. Formerly skeptical analysts raved about the popular iMacs and
predicted more good news with next week's introduction of iMac laptops.

            
               The
United States defeated China for the Women's World Cup soccer title. The
game was scoreless and ended in a penalty shootout. More celebrated was the
90,000-strong crowd, the largest ever for a women's sporting event. Former Sen.
Patricia Schroeder exults in the Los Angeles Times that the team "buries
some of the Barbie doll influence ," and Newsweek 's jubilant cover
story shouts that the team is "taking women's sports to the next level ," but New

               York 
               Times columnist George Vecsey wonders whether the
momentum to build a professional league can be
sustained. 
                  Slate
               's William Saletan explains the feminist
implications of .

            

               Jesse "The Body" Ventura will return to the wrestling ring. He will be a
referee at the World Wrestling Federation's Aug. 22 "SummerSlam" event. "It's
business that is separate from his gubernatorial duties," said an aide.

            
               The
Beatles will play their first concert in 30 years. Paul McCartney, Ringo
Starr, and George Harrison will commemorate the rerelease of the film Yellow
Submarine by playing a concert on a yellow submarine while floating down a
river in Liverpool.

         
      
   
