
   
   
      
         
            The Crime of Wine

            As Internet companies spin into the financial
stratosphere, Wall Street and the business press speak with awe of the
revolutionary implications of the Web. Issue after issue of Forbes ,
Fortune , and Business Week detail in awe-struck tones the
hundreds of millions (sometimes even billions ) raised by Net companies.
A new staple is the interview with the Internet expert (call him the I-guru).
The editors will ask meekly, "Dr. Chopra, what industries do you think will be
affected by the Internet?" To which the I-guru sighs, pauses, and explains,
"The real question, Charlie, is what industries will not be affected.
Frankly, I can't think of a single one."

            Well, I can--wine. The booze business might well
end up being one of the few areas of American life undisturbed by the great
Internet revolution. The buying and selling of wine across state borders is
still illegal in 28 states, including New York, where I live. It's a pity
because the wine business is perfectly suited to e-commerce. No store could
possibly stock even 10 percent of the 10,000-odd wines produced by America's
1,800 wineries, not to mention the vineyards of France, Italy, and Australia.
It would be a godsend if wine buyers could do a Web search for bottles of, say,
Cloudy Bay Sauvignon Blanc, a hard-to-find $16 world-class white wine from New
Zealand. In my mind's eye, I see myself using a search engine similar to the
Advanced Book Exchange,
which allows readers to track down secondhand books at hundreds of shops across
North America. I can just see myself clicking the mouse to comparison shop and
then score a bottle from a San Francisco store, four from a Texas shop, and 12
from a New York outlet.

            I'd settle for being
able to buy wine from mainstream Internet merchants such as 1-800-WINE-SHOP or Wine.com
(which used to be Virtual Vineyards). Alas, only 12 states--most of them in the
West--have completely legalized such acts of capitalism between consenting
adults. The laws regulating direct wine sales were rarely enforced until
recently, but a new zeal is in the air. Buying a single bottle of wine from
out-of-state is a third-degree felony in Kentucky, Georgia, and Florida and is
punishable with fines of up to $2,000 and jail time. And Orrin Hatch, senior
senator from the parched state of Utah, has introduced a bill that would allow
federal courts to prosecute offenders. Indeed, Hatch was moved to federalize
this crime precisely because new technologies like the Internet make it easier
to buy wine nationally (horrors!). Rep. Joe Scarborough, R-Fla., introduced a
similar bill in the House--which passed by a hefty margin.

            At the risk of making a one-way trip to Rikers Island ("I
must take the Fifth about my wine purchases, senator"), I spent a couple of
weeks this summer surfing the Web for vino. Some wine stores keep their lists
online, but none of New York City's big operations--Sherry Lehamn, Zachy's, and
Morrell's--do. Many of the Web wine lists I browsed were so outdated that 20
percent of the wine I wanted to order was out of stock. One major California
wine merchant I spoke to said that the Internet isn't having much effect on his
business because people from most big states can't use it to order wines. If
Internet wine buying was uniformly decriminalized and there was a genuine
nationwide market, on the other hand, the system would be more creative and
efficient.

            I had better luck ordering from two shops outside
New York, the Corkscrew in Springfield, Ill., and K&L Wine Merchants (a widely
known and well-regarded place) of San Francisco, as well as Wine.com, an
online-only store in Napa. The sites are pretty well run but, again, they
simply don't compare with those selling books, CDs, clothes, and baby wares.
The wines were shipped to a friend in Washington state, one of the enlightened
places where e-wines are legal. Precisely how I obtained the wines is a matter
of "don't ask, don't tell."

            I deliberately chose
wines that could travel badly--delicate white Bordeaux, Champagne, Pinot
Grigio--and also some harder-to-find wines such as Californian Italian wines
(Sangioveses). The wines were received in Seattle within a week of ordering.
They were all very well packed in special thermacol wine molds. As a result,
almost miraculously, most of the wines held up even though they were shipped in
90 degree weather. The Champagne (Billecart-Salmon's special K&L bottling,
$26.99) went slightly off (losing fruit and gaining acidity); the cheaper white
Bordeaux, Pont de Brion Blanc ($13.99), was a decent steely Sauvignon Blanc
that stood up to the trip nicely. The more expensive Chateau Smith-Haut-Lafite
($22.95) was superb, delicate, flowery, and yet crisp. But in an hour or two it
began fading; signs of jet lag. The Sangioveses were the most pleasant
surprise--Shaffer ($15) and a Virtual Vineyards special bottling ($13): Both
were delicious, with the pointed flavors of Italian Chianti and the ripeness of
California's clime mixed together. American Chianti-style wines are going to be
the next trend in Californian winemaking.

            Back to the puritans. Why do the new prohibitionists oppose
Internet wine? They claim two concerns: First, like most new legislation in
America, it has been passed for the benefit of the children. "States need to
ensure that minors are not provided with unfettered access to alcohol," Hatch
explained. He trots out the usual anecdote masquerading as evidence--a
13-year-old boy once ordered beer off the Internet. In fact, there is little
danger that teen-agers are going to order unusual wines from distant wineries,
wait days for them to arrive, arrange to have their parents out of the house
when they do, and then ... what? Throw a Claret keg party? California's State
Bureau of Alcohol has received exactly one complaint of an Internet sale to a
minor in recent years.

            Second, it's for the
Constitution. The 21 st Amendment, which repealed prohibition, allows
states to regulate the transportation of "intoxicating liquors." Indeed,
Hatch's bill is titled "The 21 st Amendment Enforcement Act." But the
protections of the 21 st Amendment are actually quite thin. The
language of most state laws would seem to violate the Constitution's interstate
commerce clause, which facilitated the creation of a national economy. Judges
are increasingly coming to this view. At the very least, it means that the
restrictions do not have the halo of constitutional protection.

            The 21 st Amendment's intent was to give the
states the power to prosecute the Mafia's involvement in the liquor trade. But
because much of the Mafia's interest in booze died with the repeal of
prohibition, what keeps these laws alive is politics. Liquor regulation is a
case study in the manipulation of politics by powerful lobbies. The regulations
in force are maintained and strengthened because distributors, wholesalers, and
large wineries benefit from them, and they are organized and politically
powerful. Over the years, their lobbies have been effective at working with
local cranks to regulate the minutiae of the wine business. In 15 states in
America, grocery stores can't sell wine. In Colorado, half-bottles of wine are
illegal, but in Florida oversized bottles are illegal. And so on. (The single
most bizarre law, which banned giving wine to dogs in Chicago, has recently
been repealed.)

            Those who lose out are small and up-and-coming
wineries, specialty producers and, of course, consumers who would have more
choice and lower prices. The entire setup has an anti-competitive,
anti-entrepreneurial flavor that rewards political lobbying rather than good
business practices. Sen. Hatch seems to recognize this when he says, "If there
is a problem with the system we need to fix the system, not break the laws."
For the moment, however, the fix is in for the consumer.

         
      
   
