
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=350300619-12101999><SPAN class=350300619-12101999>Fighting Over <EM>Fight Club</EM></SPAN></SPAN>

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Fight Club
                (20 th Century Fox). Strong
reactions--positive and negative--to director David Fincher's ( Seven )
film about a underground bare-knuckles fighting group born as a response to
men's feelings of disenfranchisement. "What's most troubling about this witless
mishmash of whiny, infantile philosophizing and bone-crunching violence is the
increasing realization that it actually thinks it's saying something of
significance" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). Roger Ebert of the
Chicago Sun-Times derides it as a "frankly and cheerfully fascist
big-star movie," labels the violence "macho porn," and frets that though
"sensible people know that if you hit someone with an ungloved hand hard
enough, you're going to end up with broken bones, the guys in Fight Club
have fists of steel, and hammer one another while the sound effects guys beat
the hell out of Naugahyde sofas with Ping-Pong paddles." A few critics rave.
The New York Times ' Janet Maslin, for one, dismisses other reviewers for
misunderstanding the film: "If watched sufficiently mindlessly, it might be
mistaken for a dangerous endorsement of totalitarian tactics and super-violent
nihilism in an all-out assault on society," but she sees it instead as an
investigation of "the lure of violence in an even more dangerously regimented,
dehumanized culture." Newsweek 's David Ansen is more ambivalent, saying
it's "alternately amazing and annoying ... an outrageous mixture of brilliant
technique, puerile philosophizing, trenchant satire and sensory overload." The
one point of agreement: Stars Brad Pitt and Edward Norton earn strong marks.
(The official
site includes video and audio clips from the film.)

            

               
                  The Story of Us
                (Polygram Filmed Entertainment).
Critics gag on this cornball story of a marriage on the rocks, starring Bruce
Willis and Michelle Pfeiffer and directed by Rob Reiner. "Though it sets out to
explain why this marriage is worth saving, [it] could prompt even single
members of the audience to file for divorce" (Maslin, the New York
Times ). Its main defect: Although the movie tries for the same combination
of whimsy and insight Reiner captured in When Harry Met Sally ... ,
there's no chemistry between Willis and Pfeiffer. Owen Gleiberman is the film's
sole supporter, praising it as "pungent, funny, and surprisingly forceful"
Entertainment Weekly ). (Find out more about Willis here and about Pfeiffer
here.)

            

               
                  The Straight Story
                (Buena Vista Pictures). David
Lynch ( Blue Velvet, Lost Highway ) shocks everyone by directing a G-rated
film of the sweet, true story of a 73-year-old farmer who drives 300 miles on a
lawnmower to visit his sick brother. Even more surprising, critics rank this
among Lynch's best work: It's his "first movie since Blue Velvet that
truly envelops you in its spell ... a piece of celestial Americana"
(Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ). Maslin calls it "a supremely
improbable triumph," all the more powerful because the film's "wholesome
radiance and soothing natural beauty are distinctly at odds with the famously
unwholesome Lynch imagination" (the New York Times ). Turan is the only
one who hears the faint sucking of Dennis Hopper's oxygen mask in the
background, calling the film "too mannered and weird around the edges to be
convincing" (the Los Angeles Times ). (Lynchnet has a page devoted
to the film complete with trailers and pictures shot on location.)

            

               
                  The Limey
                (Artisan Entertainment). "Like Pablo
Picasso thrillingly exploding old notions of how we perceive faces and wine
bottles, director Steven Soderbergh thrillingly splinters time and action" in
this "small cubist masterpiece," exclaims Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa
Schwarzbaum. Few others go so far in their praise, but most express a certain
awe at this '60s-style revenge movie starring Terence Stamp as an ex-con out to
whack his daughter's boyfriend and probable killer (Peter Fonda). A few critics
find the time-splintering distracting and annoying, asking, "Is he working out
a new form of visual storytelling, or has the ever-so-promising director of
sex, lies, and videotape lost his chops and his marbles?" (Richard
Corliss, Time ). (Click here to watch an interview with the director about The
Limey .)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  Motherless
Brooklyn
               , by Jonathan Lethem (Doubleday). Lethem's latest
genre-bending novel, featuring a Brooklyn detective afflicted with Tourette's
syndrome, impresses the critics. "Taking his cue from writers like Don DeLillo
and Philip K. Dick, who successfully blurred the lines between serious and
popular novels, Lethem is like a kid in a candy store, grabbing all the tasty
plots and gimmicks he can" (Albert Mobilio, the New York Times Book
Review ). The heart of the book is the protagonist's affliction and his
constant verbal outbursts, which form "a barrage of sheer rhetorical invention
that has tour de force written all over it; it's an amazing stunt, and, just
when you think the well is running dry, Lethem keeps on topping himself"
( Kirkus Reviews ). A few call the punning Joycean literary outbursts
unrealistic, but most just take them in stride, admiring the "highly
artificial, flamboyantly bizarre world that constantly upstages its genre
format ... in the end, the hero and his terrifying isolation from human
discourse are so vividly drawn that the novel becomes unexpectedly moving"
(Jack Sullivan, the Boston Globe ). Edward Norton will produce and star
in the film version. (Read the first chapter.)

         
      
   
