
   
   
      
         
            Is the Holocaust Literary?

            
               SUBJECT:
Günter Grass' "Political" Art

            
               RE:
""

            
               FROM:
Trevor
Butterworth

            
               DATE: Fri
Oct 8

            Though the critic Adorno admonished that poetry was
impossible in the wake of Auschwitz, in a different context he also argued that
art was more effectively political the less overt its politics-- pace
Brecht.

            Now, given the emotional and critical
persuasiveness of both positions, the question of how one might produce art
"adequate" to the Holocaust is fraught with incommensurability. How can art be
both authentically free and at the same time totalize the experience of
genocide?

            And so Grass, like Michel Tournier in The
Ogre and D.M. Thomas in The White Hotel
               , charts an oblique
course as far as historical engagement is concerned (though Thomas cuts loose
in his shocking denouement).

            If this is, as far as Grass is concerned, a moral
failure of literary process, then Ms. Shulevitz, and a notably resentful Jacob
Heilbrunn in the Wall Street Journal , need to make sense of their
criticism by showing how art can measure the Holocaust and still be art (and
not history or politics or philosophy).

            (To reply, click here.)

            

               SUBJECT: Shulevitz's Political Criticism

            

               
                  RE
               : ""

            
               FROM:
Roy Edroso

            
               DATE: Fri
Oct 8

            The Politicization of Nearly Everything (Literary
Division) proceeds apace. First the right-wingers attack the Nobel committee
for giving the Lit Prize to a commie--all the while admitting that he might in
fact be a good writer (presumably they'll get around to reading him sometime,
if they can ever get through that big, fat Tom Wolfe book). What's art, after
all, compared to conservative correctness?

            Then Ms. Shulevitz gets on Grass for presuming to
use an artistic technique, specifically irony, in the context of the
Holocaust--for what is art compared to a Holocaust? Shulevitz doubts Grass
"saved German literature." I say anyone who writes a masterpiece does a service
to literature, just as anyone who tries to make a work of art grist for their
political mill does it a disservice.

            (To reply, click here.)


            
               SUBJECT:
Nixon, the Jews, and Vietnam

            
               RE:
""

            
               FROM:
John Taylor

            
               DATE: Thu
Oct 7

            I'm the director of the Nixon Library and thus the
promulgator of the analysis of the tape opening that Timothy Noah quotes.

            Here's what I noticed about the NY Times
article: It neglected to mention a principal source of RN's frustration about
the Jewish community, which is plenty clear in our analysis and the tapes
themselves. Many of the same folks who wanted the U.S. to support Israel
against her aggressive foreign enemies did not particularly want the U.S. to
support South Vietnam against hers.

            Do you or do you not believe this is a legitimate
reason for a commander-in-chief in the middle of a war he inherited to be
frustrated, particularly when he was still signing 30-40 letters a week to the
families of KIA? Add that to the fact that he'd gotten about 20% of the Jewish
vote in '68, and what you have is a politician and a President who basically
viewed the Jewish community as predominantly liberal, Democratic, and anti-war.
He didn't just think they were against him; they were against him.

            And that's fine. Blocs of ethnic or religious
voters are frequently against certain politicians, and maybe all those
politicians get frustrated about it. That's fine, too--except when it's
captured on tape. But here's the bottom line: Words are words, and actions are
actions. When RN says "Jews" on the tapes, I hear "damn liberals," and I
understand it. This is why the points that he saved Israel in 1973 and that his
inner circle included Kissinger, Stein, Safire, and Garment are more than
aspects of a "some of my best friends ..." defense. These colleagues were
politically simpatico! And this was a politician! It's not complicated! Also,
find the tape in the new batch where he talks about how impressed he was after
a meeting with Arlen Specter--then, I believe, a tough young prosecutor from
Pennsylvania.

            Anyway, back to the NYT omission. In a
whole article about RN and Jews, why leave out the bit about Vietnam and
Israel? Doesn't he have the right to have the most immediate source of his
frustration even mentioned? Does the NYT want people to think these
feelings sprang from him totally unprovoked?

            Here's what I think: We're all still tiptoeing
around the Vietnam War. We post-Vietnam elites all tend to think that Ellsberg
was a great hero and that the war was immoral. We all tend to think that it was
okay to be for Israelis' freedom from aggression but to be indifferent toward
that of South Vietnamese. And so we still scapegoat RN for all the sins of the
era to avoid having to ask tough questions about what really happened to
Indochina, and to America, when Hanoi and the Khmer Rouge were permitted to
have their way with people whom we'd pledged to protect (and almost succeeded
in protecting). Check out Lewis Sorley's new book about Vietnam, for instance.
[Read more about the book in this "."]

            Revisionism about the war is inevitable;
revisionism about the toughest and best Vietnam commander-in-chief will come
next. And the tapes won't stop it. More likely, the tapes will fuel it. Maybe
it's a good thing he didn't burn them after all.

            (To reply, click
here.)

            
               SUBJECT:
In Defense of the Torah Codes

            

               
                  RE:
                ""

            
               FROM:
Michael Drosnin

            
               DATE: Fri
Oct 8

            Your article that posted late yesterday about the
Bible code would not have been published if your reporter, or your editors, had
taken the time to check out the facts.

            As author of The Bible Code , I've spent
the past seven years checking out all the claims and counter-claims. Here are
two basic facts your article ignores:

            a) The data for the original Bible code experiment
were chosen by an independent scholar, Dr. Shlomo Havlin of Bar-Ilan
University, who did not know how the data would affect the outcome of the
experiment. That alone absolutely refutes the new accusation that the data were
"tuned" or "fitted to the tests."

            b) The original Bible code experiment was
replicated by an American codebreaker, Harold Gans, for more than 25 years a
senior National Security Agency crypto-analyst. He not only re-did the
experiment from scratch, but also confirmed the code using entirely new
data.

            That alone absolutely refutes the new claim that
the results of the Israeli experiment can't be replicated. I understand your
reporter's false relief in not having to believe in the Bible code any longer.
I'm also secular.

            But this new attack by the same old critics does
not let Wittes off the hook. He, in fact, has done what he accuses those who
believe in the code of doing--he has taken on faith the false claims of the
critics.

            Had he actually checked the facts, he would know
the critics have not "solved the Bible code puzzle"--they told a lie.

            They knew that the esteemed scholar who chose the
data had stated in writing that he did not know how the data would affect the
experiment. They knew that the NSA codebreaker had publicly confirmed that he
replicated the experiment. These critics even lied about the results of their
own experiments--which did not "debunk" the Bible code.

            In fact, the critics' first experiment confirmed
the Bible code. So they ran a second experiment rigged to fail, and then hid
the positive results of their first experiment by lumping them together with
the fixed experiment.

            All of us who are not religious think we know that
the Bible code simply cannot be real. When I first heard about it, that was my
entire reply--"I'm not religious."

            But then I learned Hebrew, obtained a copy of the
computer program used by the world-class mathematician who discovered the code,
and worked with it myself every day for years. And then I found in the code a
warning that Yitzhak Rabin would be assassinated, and told the Prime
Minister--a year before he was killed.

            I still don't believe in God. I'm still not
religious. But I can assure you that the code is real. Your reporter perhaps
too quickly, too easily embraced the Bible code--and has now, like many a
disappointed convert, too quickly, too easily embraced the critics.

            I'm surprised that you and your editors have
followed him without even trying to check out the facts.

            (To reply, click
here.)


            
               SUBJECT:
Re: In Defense of the Torah Codes

            
               RE:
""

            
               FROM:
Benjamin Wittes

            
               DATE: Fri
Oct 8

            Both Professor Havlin's role in assembling the data
for the rabbi's experiment and Mr. Gans' work on the codes are discussed at
length in the rebuttal paper. In fact, the central point of that paper, as I
noted in the article, is that the criteria Prof. Havlin applied in creating his
list of appellations was insufficiently well-defined before the dataset was
assembled to be scientifically valuable. Far from ignoring this, I described it
as "the core of [the] critique."

            While my article does not discuss Mr. Gans'
experiments, that is chiefly because they were never published in a prestigious
peer-reviewed journal to begin with. The fair-minded reader will agree that the
McKay paper devastates the Gans experiments completely.

            It is also false to say that I ever embraced the
Bible Code or am now a disappointed convert. Rather, I always believed--and
still do--that the codes would, if demonstrated to be real, propel a
scientifically minded person towards Orthodox Judaism. I have, at the same
time, also always believed they would ultimately be debunked. Hence, they did
not change my religious convictions at all, though they shook them.

            Consider, by contrast, Drosnin, whose work
constitutes the least scientific and most intellectually shallow end of the
Torah codes discussion. He regards the codes as a proven fact, yet somehow
still professes non-belief. How is it possible that such a future-predicting
code embedded in such an impenetrable form in an ancient document could be the
work of something less than God? How can one believe in the codes and not in
God?

            It is not McKay and his co-authors who "told a
lie." That dishonor, rather, belongs to Drosnin himself for publishing a work
that grossly transcends even the now-discredited science on which it was
purportedly based.

            (To reply, click here.)

             

            
               SUBJECT:
The "Math of God"

            
               RE:
""

            
               FROM:
M. Didaktikos

            
               DATE: Fri
Oct 8

            Faith means that you don't have to have proofs of
the existence of God, oh ye of little faith. Anyone whose faith depends upon
mathematical letter sequencing in War and Peace or any other inspired
writing is grasping at straws.

            (To reply, click
here.)

            
               SUBJECT:
Re: The "Math of God"

            
               RE:
""

            
               FROM:
Reader

            
               DATE: Fri
Oct 8

            Benjamin Wittes says that the loss of the Torah
codes is a relief. But would it not be sensational to find proof, by way of the
rational mind, for a God with continuing interest in our well-being? 

            (To reply, click here.)

         
      
   
