
   
   
      
         
             Douglas Brinkley

            Douglas Brinkley is the William Ginsburg of the
Kennedy death circus. Before the crash, the boyish, gap-toothed Brinkley was
known primarily as a Michael Beschloss-in-waiting, a telegenic historian
fielding calls from the cable news networks. Now the University of New Orleans
professor has parlayed a contributing editorship at George and a
friendship with Kennedy into a job as a necropublicist. Between Saturday and
Tuesday, Brinkley appeared on MSNBC, Late Edition , Meet the
Press , Good Morning America , Dateline , Today (twice),
and NPR (twice). He also penned columns about his relationship with Kennedy for
Newsweek and the New York Times , and was quoted everywhere else
ink touches paper.

            According to the Washington Post , Brinkley
cut a $10,000 deal with NBC for a week of exclusive Kennedy commentary, but
then agreed to provide it pro bono. Editors at George are reportedly so
annoyed about Brinkley's death punditry that they have dropped him from the
masthead.

            Even amid this week's staggering hyperbole,
Brinkley's emotional profligacy has distinguished him. He is, as he rarely
fails to remind his audience, 38 years old like Kennedy, a vegetarian like
Kennedy, and a Sagittarius like Kennedy. That identification with Kennedy
accounts in part for Brinkley's tenuous proposition: that Kennedy's death is
the signal event of his generation, the moment Gen X lost its innocence. In the
opening paragraph of his New York Times op-ed, Brinkley opined: "It's as
if suddenly, an entire generation's optimism is deflated, and all that is left
is the limp reality of growing old." Kennedy's death may have affected his
friend Brinkley this way. I am not sure anyone else outside Kennedy's circle
was so moved.

            Brinkley has also
mounted his thanatic pulpit to tell and retell anecdotes about Kennedy's
decency: how he declined an honorary doctorate because he felt he didn't
deserve it, how his racial compassion sparked him to visit Mike Tyson in jail.
(Brinkley has grown comfortable enough with Kennedy-family talk that he no
longer limits himself to John Kennedy. In his second Today jaunt, he
opined about would-be bride Rory Kennedy: "It's the activist and the feminist
in Rory Kennedy that I think is her greatest contribution to American
life.")

            It's a historical truth, handed down from Mark Antony to
Jesse Jackson to Earl Spencer, that celebrity death is a fabulous marketing
opportunity, but Brinkley is not cynical about his prolific Kennedy comments.
"I have been in a deep, deep depression, and my way of responding was to be
proactive," he says. "I could have shut up about this and not done anything,
but I really believe that this is someone who matters ."

            Brinkley's belief that
Kennedy is someone who matters--matters enough for two op-eds and countless TV
gigs, in fact--is a good starting point for understanding the young prof. He is
an appropriate eulogist for Kennedy because they shared a vision of American
culture and politics. Kennedy's worthy democratic instincts inspired him to use
entertainment to teach politics. Brinkley's worthy democratic instincts inspire
him to use entertainment to teach history. In Brinkley's case, as in Kennedy's,
the results have been both inspiring and awkward.

            Brinkley (who is not David Brinkley's son--that's Columbia
history prof Alan Brinkley) stands at the intersection of academia, serious
journalism, and TV punditry. He is striving for a place in the pantheon of
popular historians such as Stephen Ambrose and Arthur Schlesinger. Brinkley
abhors the narrow academic history that has dominated universities. He scorns
scholarly monographs and favors a democratic, populist history. As history grew
more and more abstruse in the '60s and '70s, historians ceded the role of
public intellectual to journalists. Brinkley wants to take it back. (Kennedy
himself admired Brinkley's approach enough that, according to Brinkley, he had
been trying to land Brinkley an appointment at Harvard's Kennedy School.)

            Brinkley first came to
prominence as America's leading neo-beatnik, a believer that the best way to
learn history is on the road. In 1992, he led 17 students from Hofstra
University (where he then taught) on a six-week history road trip, from the
Grand Canyon to Route 66, from Ken Kesey's farm to Jack London's ranch. He
turned this "Majic Bus" trip into a popular book. He now guides a civil-rights
bus journey for inner-city high-school kids every spring. The Majic Bus also
inspired C-Span to start sending its own buses around the country.

            The Majic Bus illustrates both the charms and flaws of
Brinkley's notion of public history. Brinkley is the kind of professor freshmen
love, because he is a kind of Überfreshman himself, wildly enthusiastic and
infatuated with popular culture. He believes Jack Kerouac and Hunter S.
Thompson are the giants of American literature. He quotes Ramones lyrics. He
loves the word "troubadour." He refers to Lou Reed as "poet Lou Reed." The
Majic Bus is full of passages like this: "How could I be a great bop
wanderer, a mystic in search of ecstasy, a hobo scribbler of haiku and jazz
poems, somehow discovering, in Kerouacian terms, how to 'dig' life in the
divine world to the fullest?"

            Brinkley is a cheerleader
for American history. Everything is a celebration. He likes to cite Kerouac's
"I am not anti-anything" (except "racists" and certain big corporations). The
civil rights movement was great. The Beats were cool. Dylan is amazing. He even
wrote a kindly biography of Jimmy Carter. Brinkley skirts the arguments against
his rosy vision. When his Majic Bus students encountered a couple of
belligerent Buchananites spouting nativist claptrap, Brinkley's immediate
reaction was to treat the pair as loonies and hustle his students back onto the
bus. His America is conflict-free. Here, too, he resembles Kennedy, who was a
cheerleader for politics, publishing a magazine that detached politics from
ideology.

            The Majic Bus brought Brinkley minor fame. Blessed with
preternatural gregariousness, good humor, and a love of attention, he's been
tireless about pursuing both celebrity and the cause of popular history ever
since. "The word that is used around Doug is 'operator.' That is said
scornfully or dismissively," says historian and Brinkley mentor Ambrose, who
tapped Brinkley to succeed him as director of University of New Orleans'
Eisenhower Center. "He is an operator, and I think that's wonderful.
He's entrepreneurial and enthusiastic. It's very American."

            It's hard to find anyone
who knows Brinkley and dislikes him. It's also hard to find anyone who knows
Brinkley and doesn't worry about his obsession with fame. "His name-dropping is
almost pathological," says one friend. In my conversation with Brinkley, he
touched on a dozen famous politicians and artists he knows. His writing is full
of sentences that begin something like, "As John Cage once asked me ..."

            Brinkley worked assiduously to join Beschloss and Doris
Kearns Goodwin on the air. "TV is the most important medium for conveying
history. For historians not to reach out smacks of elitism," he says. He will
happily decorate any TV or radio story with a veneer of American history.
Recent months have seen him comment on the Kosovo bombing, ground troops, Rosa
Parks, Independence Day, impeachment, and Al Gore's military service, to name a
few topics.

            Meanwhile, he has pursued
a writing career that would fell a less industrious man. On the same day his
Newsweek and New York Times Kennedy pieces appeared, Brinkley
published a sweet article in The New Yorker about a 50-year
correspondence between Ronald Reagan and a member of his fan club. Brinkley
publishes in the Atlantic , Newsweek , American Heritage ,
and George. His work ranges from routine commentaries on the day's
political news to celebrity puff profiles. He writes more journalism than most
hacks, and certainly a lot more good journalism than most hacks. At the
same time, he has managed to write or co-write eight books in the past seven
years, including three full-scale biographies and a lively 600-page history of
the United States. (Brinkley's oeuvre demonstrates his genius for
endearing himself to all kinds of people: He has done books with the widow of
Dean Acheson, the ultimate establishment figure; with Hunter S. Thompson; and
with Carter.) He is currently working on a profile of Gore, a biography of Rosa
Parks, and a biography of Henry Ford.

            Brinkley's sunniness and ardor are appealing, but his
public history has its shortcomings. His idols, Ambrose and Schlesinger, have
won the admiration of the academy and the public. Brinkley has won the public
but has not wowed the academy. Some of his colleagues' dismay is simply
jealousy of his entrepreneurship, but some is more substantive. His books read
like good journalism--and that's no insult--but they are not great history. "He
has made no analytical contribution at all," says one Ivy League historian who
professes to like Brinkley.

            Arthur Schlesinger went on television to mourn the
death of President John Kennedy. Douglas Brinkley goes on television to mourn
the death of celebrity magazine editor John Kennedy Jr. This is why his
ambition to be a public intellectual may falter. A public intellectual resists
the frivolous. Brinkley does not resist the frivolous. As his mentor Ambrose
says, "I wish he would spend less time on John Kennedy and more time on Henry
Ford."

         
      
   
