
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Cronkite in a Speedo</SPAN>

            

               
                  New
                
               
                  Republic, Oct. 26
            

            The
cover story welcomes the decline of rational-choice
political science. Rational-choicers, who have dominated the field for two
decades, sought to explain political behavior through mathematical modeling.
The theoretical fad permanently handicapped political science by encouraging
academics to disengage themselves from the practice of politics. Two professors
have now proved that rational choice is based on dubious assumptions about
political actors' motives. ... An article explores the workplace paranoia industry. Consultants
profit from advising employers on how to prevent office rampages and training
managers to spot unhinged workers, but office homicides are declining, and all
the fretting may just exacerbate fear.

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Oct. 17
            

            The
cover editorial argues that free trade benefits the
environment by increasing economic growth and giving poorer countries the
resources to clean up. The related cover story applauds the World Trade Organization's
efforts to find common ground with environmentalists. The WTO should consider
the environment but not use trade sanctions to enforce environmental
agreements. ... An article questions the success of women's liberation. A
worldwide poll found that while 93 percent of women feel they are in a better
position than their grandmother was, a majority of respondents say that they
are no happier than granny was.

            

               
                  Brill's
                
               
                  Content , November 1999
            

            The
cover story identifies the 25 people who most influence what
we read, watch, wear, and think. Predictable picks include the managing editor
of Time , Rush Limbaugh, and Tim Russert. Surprising choices include the
creator of Gap ads, the managing editor of Yahoo!, and Martha Stewart.
... An article details how the New York Times muffed its coverage
of the Chinese spy "scandal." The paper got the facts wrong, played down
dissenting views, and inferred the worst from the leaks it received. The
Times acknowledged too late that it did not know how much information
was stolen or whether it had any impact on China's nuclear program. ...
An item reports that an unidentified major cable network is negotiating to air
Bare Essentials News --a nightly national news program featuring anchors
in bathing suits.

            

               
                  New
               
               
                  York Times Magazine , Oct. 10
            

            The
cover story, adapted from Michael Lewis' forthcoming The New New Thing ,
depicts Jim Clark as the personification of Silicon Valley's spirit of
relentless reinvention. In less than 20 years, Clark founded Silicon Graphics,
Netscape, and Healtheon. His latest company aims to put medical records online
and to allow Web-based insurance payments. ... An article hopes that the
confrontational Cardinal John O'Connor will be replaced by a more conciliatory
leader. The archbishop of New York, traditionally the most powerful American
Catholic, is expected to step down soon. His successor should be a peacemaker
who can bridge the ethnic differences that increasingly divide the American
church.

            

               
                  Talk
               
               , November 1999
            

            A
profile of Arnold Schwarzenegger reveals that he contemplates running for
California governor--and that he loves to paint pottery. The Terminator
decorates his ceramics with butterflies, flowers, and hearts. ... An
article explains that Al Gore enlisted for the Vietnam War out of fealty to his
father and distaste for draft dodgers: Gore deplored "the inequity of the rich
not having to serve." Gore is not asked what he thinks of President Clinton's
draft ducking. ... Former Food and Drug Administration Commissioner
David Kessler describes how an ex-R.J. Reynolds employee--"Deep Cough"--leaked
the feds information about the tobacco company's manipulation of nicotine
levels. FDA investigators also found a Philip Morris scientist who was silenced
and fired after his research demonstrated nicotine's addictiveness.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , Oct. 11
            

            The
cover story marvels at the "Wild Bunch" of egotistical
celebrities (including Warren Beatty and Donald Trump) who are pondering
third-party runs for the presidency. The quasi-candidacy of Beatty proves that
"Monica Madness" collapsed the distinction "between the serious and the
circus." Unsurprising conclusion: The appeal of the provocateurs stems from
disaffection with two-party politics. ... A profile of Gov. Jesse Ventura argues that the former
"sideshow freak" of the "political carnival" has become the ringmaster. Pat
Buchanan is courting his support, and the Donald consults with him regularly.
... A piece reports on a new treat for kids: yogurt in a tube.
"Go-Gurt" rang up $37 million in sales during its first year of limited
distribution. Expect a torrent of foodstuff in tubes.

            

               
                  Time
               
               , Oct. 11
            

            The
cover story is ambivalent about laser eye surgery. This year
500,000 Americans are expected to spend about $2,500 per eye to have their
corneas sliced open and reshaped. The 15-minute surgery immediately improves
the vision of most patients, but 10 percent-to-15 percent have to undergo a
second procedure, and 1 percent-to-5 percent suffer permanent impairments such
as double vision. ... A disgruntled laser-surgery patient relates how
she must apply artificial tears every 15 minutes or have her tear ducts
surgically plugged--and she still can't see her kids clearly. ... A
profile applauds California Gov. Gray Davis for a fearless first year. The
supposedly timid Davis pushed through bold HMO reform, an aggressive
assault-weapon ban, mandatory high-school exit exams, and peer review for
teachers.

            
               
                  U.S.
&
                
               
                  News & World Report , Oct. 11
            

            
Critically ill patients are being misled into acting as guinea pigs for
experimental treatments, frets the cover story . Pharmaceutical companies pay physicians to test
new drugs, and research institutes pressure them to recruit human subjects.
Researchers sometimes prey on patient desperation and fail to obtain informed
consent. In one drug trial, a 2-year-old died even though traditional
chemotherapy could almost certainly have cured her cancer. ... An
article ridicules the recent spate of books on human
behavior. Books on the cultural and biological roots of crying, love, disgust,
laughter, and gossip fuel readers' self-obsession.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  New Yorker , Oct. 11
            

            An
article hypes women's interest Web site iVillage for its savvy marriage of
content and e-commerce. The founders recruited advertisers by offering
"integrated sponsorships"--that is, advertisers contributing content. By
offering free e-mail, daily horoscopes, and online discussions with sex
coaches, the site has recruited 2.1 million members. All those eyeballs have
given unprofitable iVillage a stock valuation of nearly $2 billion.

            
               
                  
Business
                
               
                  Week , Oct. 11
            

            A
profile of India's MTV generation finds that young middle-class Indians are
zealous entrepreneurs who idolize Bill Gates. High-paying technology work has
displaced the civil service as the most desirable career. ... A
sympathetic profile of Bill Bradley claims that the candidate's biggest asset
is his appeal to "NBA Dads," independent baby boomers unattached to either
party.

            

               
                  The
                
               
                  Nation , Oct. 18
            

            The
cover story predicts that spending on federal campaigns in
2000 could reach $3.5 billion, while issue advocacy ads will inundate the
airwaves. Republicans are right that campaign finance reform is "class
warfare": It would wrest from the hands of the moneyed elite the
disproportionate political power it now wields.

            

               
                  Weekly
                
               
                  Standard , Oct. 11
            

            A
piece accuses avant-garde artists of "cultural blackmail."
They demand subsidies and threaten to brand the middle-class with philistinism
if it resists. The "Sensation" exhibit is "just the usual ... celebration of
the blasphemous, the criminal and the decadent." (Click for

                  Slate
               's "Dialogue" on the exhibit.) ... An article assesses George W. Bush's chances of clinching the
general election by winning California. The Spanish-speaking W. appeals to
Hispanics and has tons of money for advertising. A network of high-tech
supporters is pumping Silicon Valley for donations, while even Hollywood
honchos are buddying up with Bush.

         
      
   
