
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>Hollywood's Young Horrors</SPAN></SPAN>

            

               
                  New
               
               
                  York Times Magazine, Sept. 5
            

            The
cover story tracks four narcissistic young actors as they claw through
Hollywood's casting maw. They misrepresent their ages, dress the part of the
ingénue, and make sure to be seen at the right hot spots pledging dedication to
their craft. They all get cast, thanks to Hollywood's determination to
capitalize on the baby boomlet by churning out cookie-cutter teen dramas.
... An article forecasts that commercially available high-resolution
satellites will make the world safer by enabling watchdogs to monitor
troublemaking countries. Rogue nations will be cowed by the prospect of
surveillance. ... In an essay, Peter Singer argues that every yuppie
contributes to a child's death when he chooses foie gras rather than donating
to UNICEF (for more on Singer, see The New Yorker below).

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Sept. 4
            

            The cover story worries that earlier retirement and
reduced birthrates in the West will contract the labor force and reduce living
standards. Western nations should expunge pension incentives that encourage
workers to quit early and should create more "bridge" jobs to ease the
transition to retirement. ... An editorial laments India's failure to live up to its
geopolitical potential. Despite having a billion people and the bomb, India
attracts relatively little foreign investment and trade. If September's
elections lead to political stability, the next government could enhance
India's standing by harmonizing relations with Pakistan, liberalizing trade
policy, and privatizing industry.

            

               
                  Time
               
               
                  , Sept. 6
            

            The
cover story claims that Americans have embarked on "a
national orgy of thrill seeking." Bored Americans seeking the stimulation of
endangerment are participating in more adventure sports, sinking more money
into highly speculative stocks, and changing jobs with greater bravado than
ever before because traditional risks have been minimized by medicine and
government regulation. ... Republicans and Democrats have hauled in
record amounts of "soft money." In the first half of this year, the GOP raised
$29.4 million, and the Democrats raised $24.2 million. But the bumper harvest
might be both parties' last, according to an article. Donors are balking at
perpetual political dunning. About 100 large firms have formed a committee to
press for reform. Big companies such as General Motors have already spurned
overtures for cash.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , Sept. 6
            

            The
cover story questions whether high-stakes standardized tests
are improving schools. Testing helps assess progress, but legislatures are
mandating that kids be held back for failing, and some states are sanctioning
schools for low scores. Schools are focusing their curricula on exams to the
detriment of long-term learning. ... A book
excerpt traces the roots of the SAT. Reformers seeking to create
opportunities for underprivileged students adopted the test to assess
scholastic aptitude. Rather than equalize opportunity, the SAT turns the
uppermost percentile into a privileged class and perpetuates the educational
disadvantage of other test-takers. ... An article rethinks the drug war. During the crack epidemic,
Congress and the states imposed draconian mandatory minimum sentences for drug
offenses. America needs to roll back these wrong-headed laws and treat drug
offenders more compassionately.

            

               
                  The
               
               
                  New Yorker, Sept. 6
            

            A
profile of Peter Singer, a proponent of ethical treatment of animals, pinpoints
the radical philosopher's inconsistencies. Singer argues that all sentient
creatures are equally valuable and that you should donate your income until
you're as impoverished as a Bengali refugee, but he lives in comfort. He
advocates euthanasia and condemns people for caring more about relatives than
strangers, but he provides his Alzheimer's-afflicted mother with
around-the-clock care. ... An article chronicles the aborted return of
offbeat television. Hoping to revive the taste for surreal television, ABC
hired Twin Peaks creator David Lynch to pilot a noirish program called
Mulholland Drive . After insisting that the director cut down on
cigarette-smoking characters and shots of dog poop, the risk-averse network
ditched the series and filled its time slot with another Friends
clone.

         
      
   
