
   
   
      
         
            No. 295: &quot;The Gielgud, the Bad, and the Ugly&quot;

            
               Following an
outcry from, among others, Academy Award-winner Sir John Gielgud, the
Smithsonian Institution has canceled a program. What was the program, and the
problem?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 294)-- "Whose Tiara Is It, Anyway?":
            

            

               Facing sinking ratings, the producers of the Miss America pageant last
week announced a change in format, to make the telecast more entertaining for
the home audience. Name that change.
            

            "The
girls will promenade in bathing suits holding signs with their personal phone
numbers over their heads."-- Alfa-Betty Olsen
            

            
"Contestants will compete against Mickey Blue Eyes star Hugh Grant in
the controversial 'Run Like a Girl' event."-- D. Ross
            

            
"Actual AIDS babies, poverty-stricken youth, etc., for them to succor, as
promised."-- Norm Oder
            

            "The
winning contestant will, after being crowned, open up her head and show us all
the little gears and circuits inside."-- Floyd Elliot
            

            "It
will be held in the Maryland woods, and the telecast will consist of jittery
footage of the contestants' slow descent into madness as they are
systematically stalked and disappeared/disqualified by Bob Barker."-- Brooke
Saucier
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Tim's Wrap-Up
            

            The way I figure it,
there are two ways to go with today's question. The first, as many of you did,
is to take the competition improbably downscale--mixing implausible amounts of
sex and/or violence into the competition. (Oddly, given the results of
yesterday's News Quiz, few participants made the obvious leap and added farm
animals as well.) The other, largely neglected option: Imply that the
competition, as currently configured, is improbably upscale. Perhaps the
pageant organizers could prune the readings from Ionesco and the madrigal
recital, or they could finally stop forcing the contestants to defend their
theses. Or they could replace the Latin-translation portion of the evening
with--oh, I don't know, something frivolous. A swimsuit portion, or perhaps an
evening gown competition. Everyone likes evening gowns.

            
               Congenial
Answer
            

            The pageant's organizers
are cutting back on the number of performances from 10 semifinalists to five,
and they'll be backed by professional dancers and musicians. According to
USA Today , pageant CEO Robert Beck has found that the viewers get bored
watching the amateur talent routines. "You can flip to 20 or 30 stations and
find great entertainment," Beck says. "If, by great entertainment, you mean
programs starring Dweezil and Ahmet Zappa, or the umpteenth Discovery Channel
special on sharks," he did not add. In other USA Today news, single
diners tip best.

            
               You Be the Critic!
Extra
            

            As the best-known film
critic in America (and the only one ever to win a Pulitzer), the erstwhile
broadcasting partner of Gene Siskel holds a position of unique influence in
film. Play along as we rank the following movies, from best to worst, according
to Roger.

            
               Dances With Wolves
(Costner, buffalo)

            
               The Arrival
(Charlie Sheen, aliens)

            
               Booty Call (Jamie
Foxx, booty)

            
               Rushmore (Bill
Murray, prep school)

            
               8 Heads in a Duffel
Bag (Joe Pesci, eight heads in a duffel bag)

            
               The Usual Suspects
(Kevin Spacey, Keyser Soze)

            
               Blue Velvet (Dennis
Hopper, "In Dreams")

            
               The Ghost and the
Darkness (Michael Douglas, lions)

            

               Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead (Tim Roth, Tom Stoppard)

            
               Answer
            

            They are in the correct
order. Each film received a half-star less than the one that precedes it. Which
means that, to Roger Ebert, Booty Call was twice as good as Blue
Velvet . And that he walked out of The Usual Suspects saying, "It was
good, but it was no Dances With Wolves ."

            
               Weeklong Extra
            

            A headline from Monday's
Daily Variety : "Dutch regulators issue equal-access guidelines."
Participants are invited to find, in an actual newspaper or magazine, a less
enticing headline. Deadline is noon ET, Wednesday. Answers will be posted
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Jesse Ventura moderates as contestants
Jell-O-wrestle while answering difficult questions from Regis Philbin.

         
      
   
