
   
   
      
         
            Double Trouble 

            

               (Note: "Life and Art" is an occasional column that compares fiction, in
various media, with the real-life facts on which it is ostensibly
based.)
            

            {
                  {Boys 1#36194}} Boys 
               Don't
Cry --a just-released dramatic film about a woman who was raped and murdered
in a small Nebraska town for pretending to be a man--hews fairly closely to
what really happened to 21-year-old Brandon Teena (nee Teena Brandon).

            In the film--as in life--Brandon (who never used
the last name Teena; he was called "Brandon Teena" only posthumously) had
already been wooing young women as a man in his hometown of Lincoln before
arriving in Falls City (population 5,000) in late 1993. He begins dating a
19-year-old named Lana and quickly becomes part of her circle: Lana's mother, a
few female friends, and two ex-cons named John Lotter and Tom Nissen. (John and
Tom weren't old friends as the film makes them out to be. They met only a month
before Brandon's murder.) The marginalized group spends its time drinking,
playing cards, and "bumper-skiing" from the back of a moving pickup truck by
holding a rope attached to the cab. Brandon, who has a history of forgery, ends
up in the women's section of jail. Lana helps post his bail.

            Brandon's acquaintances
become suspicious of his gender, and John and Tom become hostile toward him.
(In real life, John had been involved with Lana, and Tom may have been briefly,
too, but the film avoids this history.) The two men pull down Brandon's pants,
exposing his genitalia, then later beat and rape him. Though Brandon is warned
to keep quiet, he reports the rape. In the movie, the sheriff sounds like a
blame-the-victim monster when he questions Brandon about the attack, but this
account jibes with what happened in real life. (Sheriff Charles Laux, who is
not named in the film, wanted to know why Brandon was masquerading as a man and
asked him if he'd helped one of the rapists get an erection.) A few days after
the rape, Lotter and Nissen track down Brandon at a farmhouse and kill him.

            Brandon seduces women with his good looks and his great
kissing in the film, but he charms them by just listening. In 1994, Brandon's
girlfriends told the Village Voice that Brandon was their best boyfriend
ever. One woman who was engaged to Brandon for three months said he was a "good
lover." Did they know that their perfect boyfriend wasn't a boy? Brandon passed
as a man by securing his breasts with Ace bandages, keeping his clothes on
while snuggling with lovers, and occasionally using a fake penis during
intercourse, all of which is covered in Boys Don't Cry . But he also told
some women that he was going to get a sex-change operation and others that he
was a hermaphrodite, a fact that his mother denies.

            When did Lana discover
Brandon's true gender? Both the film and the record oscillate on this question.
In a telephone interview, Boys Don't Cry director and co-writer Kimberly
Peirce says that Lana told her that "she knew Brandon was a girl the first time
she met him." But in subsequent conversations, Lana claimed that she didn't
find out until Brandon was jailed or until John and Tom had taken his pants
down or until he'd been raped.

            Although Lana knew Brandon for only a month before his
murder, the filmmakers make their relationship seem longer and more serious,
perhaps to give their affair epic status. Indeed, celluloid Lana (played by
Chloë Sevigny) and Brandon (Hilary Swank) almost escape the obstacles posed by
her family and the hatred of the community by running away together.

            And at one improbable
moment, they almost discover themselves as lesbians. In a lovemaking scene that
occurs after the rape, Brandon finally takes off his shirt. Lana says, "I don't
know if I'm going to know how to do it." Brandon responds, "I'm sure you'll
figure it out." As best we know, Brandon did not identify as a lesbian, saying
he was disgusted by the idea of loving a woman that way.

            One also supposes that the real Lana was a bit more
confused and angered by the public revelation of Brandon's gender than the
movie suggests. JoAnn Brandon, Brandon's mother (not depicted in the movie),
asserted on Geraldo that "Teena" told her that "she thought Lana had set
her up for the rape." This accusation, however, seems very much at odds with
the fact that Brandon and Lana spent time together after the attack.

            In the film, Lana tries
to prevent John and Tom from finding Brandon by asking them to go get a drink.
Instead, they drive her to the farmhouse, where she then tries to stop them
from killing both Brandon and their friend Candace. (Candace is fictional.
There were two victims besides Brandon: a woman who had been involved with
Brandon and a man who was visiting the area. Tom takes aim at Lana, but the
bullet misses because John shoves him. The men leave and Lana lies next to
Brandon's body, and the movie ends a few minutes later with a music video-ish
sequence of Lana driving out of town. Boys Don't Cry 's postscript
explains that she eventually returned to Falls City, where is she currently
raising a child.

            Nobody actually knows if Lana accompanied the two men to
the farmhouse. Tom and John did swing by Lana's house before heading to the
scene of the murder, and John reportedly said to Lana and her sister (who does
not figure in the movie), "I feel like killing somebody." Lana's mother, Linda
Gutierres (not her name in the film), told them where they could find
Brandon.

            Lana and her family have
been criticized for not warning Brandon that trouble was on the way. It's
possible that one of the reasons they didn't phone Brandon was that Lana went
with Tom and John. As Aphrodite Jones recounts in her book about the incident,
All She Wanted (for which Diane Keaton has bought the movie rights), Tom
told a police officer that Lana "was in the car" but didn't go into the
farmhouse. "She stayed in the car the whole time." Later, Tom testified against
John so as to avoid the electric chair. (John maintains his innocence from
death row. Tom is serving a life sentence.) On the witness stand, Tom said that
he and John were the only ones in the vehicle. And as John Gregory Dunne
reported in The New Yorker , Tom's initial allegation "was not vigorously
pursued in testimony."

            Susan Muska and Greta Olafsdottir, who made the 1998
documentary The Brandon Teena Story , say Lana "was adamant that she
wasn't there." Boys Don't Cry 's Peirce struggled over whether or not to
place Lana at the murder scene. "Is Lana actually going to sit in her house and
let Brandon be murdered?" Peirce asks. As to whether Lana would have sat in the
car, Peirce admits that it's possible, but that it wouldn't have been as
dramatic.

            Why did John and Tom feel as though they had to kill
Brandon? They had to be worried about the rape allegation, although as Dunne
points out in The New Yorker, it doesn't make sense to try to escape a
rape charge, which is difficult to prosecute, by committing murder. But these
were not especially bright ex-convicts. They tossed the murder weapons into a
river, which was frozen at the time. And Tom would later describe the murders
to a Playboy writer before his trial (the writer was called as a
witness).

            Both John and Tom were troubled. Boys Town rejected
John for admission when he was a child, and Tom had been abused and liked to
mutilate himself. They were no doubt enraged by Brandon's deception and angered
by his identity, as the film implies. Perhaps they were also disturbed by the
meaning of the rape. In the documentary, Tom's girlfriend says someone told her
Tom was a "faggot," and a lawyer asks Tom: "After this sexual assault ...
didn't [your girlfriend] tell you people were calling you a pervert? .... You
had just had sex--forcible sex--with a woman who was dressing as a man. How did
you feel about that?" Tom replies, "I didn't feel very good about it at
all."

         
      
   
