
   
   
      
         
            
<P>Is the &quot;Sensation&quot; Art Worth the Fuss?</P>

            Dear
David,

            Since you're writing from London, I assume you
haven't seen the show in Brooklyn, so the first thing I'm wondering is how you
can dismiss an exhibition that you haven't even seen. Consider yourself a
member of the Rudy Giuliani School of Art Criticism--the mayor, too, has not
seen the show.

            I have been out to Brooklyn several times to see
"Sensation," and I think it's a wonderfully spirited show. Obviously, not every
piece in it is a masterwork, and there are more than a few dogs. But, on the
whole, I felt moved by the level of energy and feel that the show provides a
welcome antidote to the New York scene, which at the moment is suffering from a
severe case of theory-itis. "Sensation," to its credit, isn't about Derrida or
Baudrillard or gender-bending or the reified moment of perception. It isn't
about political correctness. Generally speaking, it takes art away from the
theory people, from the academics with their 10-pound books and their
unbearable jargon, and allows real life to come shining through.

            Take, for instance, Damien Hirst's shark piece. It
occupies a giant glass box and so obviously harks back to the geometric forms
of the Minimalist movement of the '70s. Yet it's also a critique of American
Minimalism, which at a certain point became too elegant and mannered for its
own good. Minimalism, in the end, became an art of polished, quite exquisite
surfaces--and Hirst wants to get us below the surface, into a deep, muddy ocean
of feeling. Hence, the shark, the perfect below-the-surface symbol. At any
rate, I love the shark piece. Maybe I'm just a sucker for icons.

            By the way, I think it needs to be said that Damien
Hirst isn't nearly as dangerous as Mayor Giuliani. Damien Hirst is not running
for the U.S. Senate.

            As to Chris Ofili of
Holy Virgin Mary fame, I think he's a solid painter. Ofili is a black
Roman Catholic, and to my mind the picture represents an earnest attempt to
appropriate the Virgin for black culture. I have no problem with elephant dung
(which is just chewed up grass anyway), and I'd guess the reason the painting
set off such a furor is that it depicts a black Virgin Mary. I think Giuliani
freaked out when he saw a Virgin Mary who wasn't white. I mean, it's probably
not a coincidence that the mayor decided to single out (and all but lynch) the
most prominent black artist of his generation. That's a shame, especially since
the Brooklyn Museum of Art is the only major art museum in New York that serves
a racially diverse community.

            Yours
truly,

            Deborah

         
      
   
