
   
   
      
         
            A Cooling off in Kashmir

            The
Guardian of
London claimed Monday that an ecological catastrophe "far worse"
than the Exxon Valdez accident 10 years ago could happen in Alaska "at
any moment." Six "senior employees" of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System wrote
to Sir John Browne, the chief executive of BP Amoco, and to three U.S.
congressmen, warning of an imminent threat to human life and the Alaskan
environment from irresponsible oil operations there, the paper said in its main
front-page story. BP Amoco owns 50 percent of Alyeska, the company that
operates both the pipeline and the Valdez oil terminal near where the huge
tanker Exxon Valdez crashed on a reef in 1989, spewing millions of
gallons of heavy crude into Prince William Sound. (Alyeska's other biggest
shareholders are Exxon and Arco.) The unnamed whistle-blowers included evidence
in their letter of compliance failures, falsified safety and inspection
records, intimidation of workers, and persistent violations of procedures and
government regulations, the Guardian reported. Top Alyeska executives
allegedly instructed middle managers to "disregard and/or circumvent"
compliance manuals and codes of conduct and to "tone down, alter or delete
negative reports, including internal audits and surveillance reports."

            While
Indian newspapers reported Monday that Pakistani-backed Muslim guerrillas have
started pulling out of the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir--a development
described by the Hindu as
"a dramatic victory" for India and a "total military rout" for Pakistan--the
Pakistani daily Dawn
led Monday on planned protests by Islamic militants against the
withdrawal. As Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif prepared to defend the
withdrawl in a national broadcast, the paper said several mujahideen groups and
the opposition Jamaat-i-Islami Party announced that anti-government
demonstrations would be held in the Punjabi capital Lahore and in the port city
of Karachi. Sharif is planning to argue that the withdrawal is justified by his
winning unprecedented U.S. backing for new Indo-Pakistani talks to end the
52-year-old deadlock over Kashmir. But Dawn said
that "persistent Indian rejection of anything it sees as third-party mediation
might undermine his assertion that President Bill Clinton's pledge to take a
personal interest in the row might yield progress."

            
Indeed, the Hindu reiterated Monday in an editorial that India must resist
third-party intervention. "The country must move to put bilateral relations
back on the rails--and obviate the need for third parties," it said. "There is
no alternative but to seriously engage in bilateral discussions with
Islamabad." In another Indian editorial,
the Times of
India said that while "Pakistan's fifth attempt at aggression against
India" has ended, like all previous ones, "in ignominious defeat," its leaders
are "in the process of trying to proclaim victory once again." To counter this,
India should compile a detailed list of the Pakistani soldiers killed in the
fighting and publish it in the media and on the Internet. The people of
Pakistan must realize the extent of Pakistani casualties in the conflict, it
said. To sustain the myth that only unsupported mujahideen guerrillas were
involved, "Pakistani officers and soldiers killed in combat have been disowned
by their generals, their services unacknowledged; even a decent burial has been
denied them," the paper said. "A nation which repudiates its war dead will have
little credibility among its own people."

            

               Dawn 's editorial Monday was devoted not to the Kashmir crisis but to the
safer subject of the Arab-Israeli peace process. It expressed misgivings about
a statement in Cairo by new Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak that he wanted to
modify parts of the Wye agreement. His predecessor Benjamin Netanyahu has done
"incalculable damage to the peace process" by throwing Israel's commitment to
international treaties into doubt, the paper said. "Now it is Mr Barak's duty
to correct that image and prove to the world that agreements signed by a
previous Israeli government are not considered mere scraps of paper by a
succeeding Israeli administration and that every Israeli government has the
duty and international obligation to honor treaties signed by its
predecessors."

            The
Israeli press, by contrast, was generally upbeat about peace prospects
following Sunday's meeting between Barak and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat,
who referred to him afterward as his "friend and partner." Ha'aretz reported
that discussions on the Wye agreement would begin in about 10 days' time, after
Barak has visited President Clinton in Washington. Quoting diplomatic sources,
the paper said Barak would present Clinton with a detailed negotiating plan
that includes a Middle East tour by Madeleine Albright during the first week in
August. The plan would culminate at the end of the year in a
Barak-Clinton-Arafat summit to declare an "agreed framework for the permanent
settlement" or, failing that, a declaration of principles outlining the steps
toward a settlement. In an editorial, Ha'aretz urged Barak to help to
create a new atmosphere of trust by unilaterally dismantling the outposts
illegally established by Israelis on hilltops outside existing West Bank
settlements in "a wild, catch-as-catch-can land grab" during the run-up to the
Wye agreement.

            In
Germany, the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung led its front page Monday with the wave of student
demonstrations in Tehran, Iran, which were also prominently reported in many
other leading European newspapers. An analysis in the Financial Times of London said
that the protests reflect mounting frustration among Iran's students and many
ordinary citizens at the lack of progress in implementing President Mohammed
Khatami's reforms because of opposition by the conservative clerical
authorities. It noted the disproportionate influence of Iran's 1 million
university students in a country of some 62 million where more than 60 percent
are under 25 years old. The paper claimed that while popular indignation with
the conservative clerical authorities was running high, support for Khatami
remained solid.

            Both
the Straits
Times of Sinapore and the Guardian of London ran editorials
Monday urging the United States to be more sensitive toward Russia or risk
another Cold War. "Russia means to be taken seriously, and the US owes it that
respect," the Straits Times said. "American cockiness over its display of military technology
in the Gulf and Yugoslavia, and smugness over its longest post-war prosperity
streak, can blind it to a need to cultivate its relations with Russia beyond
promoting democratisation. Russians cannot eat democracy. The US should snap
out of its hubris over Kosovo--or the world could become very dark indeed if
Russian hurt turns to mischief-making." The Guardian said that "Russia's
anger over NATO's recent actions in the Balkans is in many ways justified and
since it is not understood, is the more likely to have broad, negative
consequences for the West's dealings with Boris Yeltsin and, more particularly,
his successors."

         
      
   
