
   
   
      
         
            Getting Past the Past

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I was adopted and grew up in a very abusive
home. I don't seem to be able to get past the bitterness and resentment I feel
for my parents. For years I have wanted to confront them about the beatings I
took, my mother's drinking, and my dad's complete indifference. At 30 years
old, I am sober and reasonably successful, despite having not completed my
bachelor's degree in accounting. I've had my own struggle with alcoholism, and
I have difficulty concentrating on much else besides how I grew up--though I'm
trying to get past it.
            

            
               Meanwhile, probably to assuage their guilt, my
folks constantly ask me questions such as, "Did we raise you right?" It is hard
to bite my tongue and lie to them, telling them they spent plenty of quality
time with me, etc. My fiancee has been very supportive and has suggested that
when my folks open the door with their questions that I should take advantage
of it and unload.
            

            
               What's your
take?
            

            

               --Closed door in D.C.
            

            Dear Closed,

            It certainly sounds as though your parents have
accumulated many debits in your emotional ledger. Prudie salutes you for
pulling yourself together considering some overwhelming obstacles. It's clear
that you need to unburden yourself, either to a counselor or to your folks.
Until all the resentment gets out, it will eat away at the vessel it is stored
in: you.

            It is interesting, and
Prudie thinks meaningful, that your parents continually pose these questions.
At some level of consciousness, they know the answers. This might be their way
of asking you to give voice to your feelings and to confront them. You
certainly have nothing to lose. Next time such a question is posed, ask them if
they really want the answer. If they say yes, then try to hold yourself
together and, as calmly as you can, give a truthful response. Tears are OK;
hollering is not. This may be what they've been waiting for so that they can
talk about the past and apologize. They , as well as you, might need to
give the disastrous past an airing. A repair is possible, but if it
doesn't happen, you've unburdened yourself, let in some sunlight, and
lost nothing. Prudie is for realism and honesty, and hopes the balance sheet
comes out with an improved bottom line.

            
--Prudie, encouragingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               After 20 years of marriage and raising our
children, my husband and I have decided to stop torturing each other. We broke
the news of the divorce gently to friends and relatives, and now are in the
process of dividing 20 years of assets. Because we see no sense in causing more
financial distress than necessary, we are still under the same roof while we
work out the details.
            

            
               The problem is: We
are not enemies. It seems no one can stand this, and whenever we encounter
friends or relatives, they invariably ask personal questions to try to get each
of us to speak ill of the other. As we don't do this, the next comment is
always something like, "Well, then, why are you getting divorced?" The worst
one was, "I don't think you really want a divorce, or you would have gotten one
by now." Please, do you have an answer for these "well-wishers" that would not
require giving them private and personal information?
            

            

               --shan
            

            Dear sha,

            Who are your friends--a bunch of divorce lawyers?
Prudie thinks it's marvelous that you and your spouse of two decades are able
to unhitch in a civilized, amiable manner. Unfortunately, it has become a
commonplace for about-to-be exes to badmouth each other to whomever will
listen. Friendly divorces are somewhat unusual, but possible. (Prudie
has even had one.)

            The next time one of
these yentas tries to goad you into dishing your soon-to-be-former mate, just
smile and say, "Oh, I am saving our life together for my memoirs." That kind of
non-answer always conveys the subtext: nothing forthcoming here; on to the next
subject.

            
--Prudie, admiringly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               For my roommate's
birthday last year, I took her out to a very expensive restaurant and bought
her a nice gift. One month later, for my birthday, she took me to a relatively
cheap Mexican restaurant and gave me a Beanie Baby. (I hate stuffed animals,
and she knows that.) We are both in similar financial situations, and I felt
cheated. Her birthday is coming up soon. Should I take her out again, or just
give her a small gift and forget our tradition of the birthday dinner?
            

            

               --Living With Selfish
            

            Dear Liv,

            
               If you are sure
that the two of you are in financially similar circumstances and also that she
knows of your dislike for stuffed animals, Prudie suggests you send out for
Chinese food for her birthday dinner and give her back the Beanie Baby with a
funny card. Prudie says this because the roomie is obviously cheap--and maybe
even hostile. If she remarks on the "tradition" being different for her
birthday this year than last, simply tell her that you are following her lead
about what level of celebration is appropriate. This may totally louse up the
living situation, so be prepared. Because you refer to her as "selfish,"
however, you may not wish to keep this arrangement going forever. Maybe stick a
birthday candle into the fortune cookie.

            
--Prudie, reciprocally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               During college, my best friend was a fellow
named Jay. We operated a small business together and continued daily contact
for over 10 years. Things have gone smoothly for for Jay: He moved to
Washington, D.C., and has worked as a high-ranking government official. Since
his move, however, our friendship has hit some snags. (He hangs out with
pompous members of the political establishment, has grown arrogant, and doesn't
have time to return my calls.) Late last week I heard that Jay is getting
married (to the youngest daughter of a political crony) and has failed to
invite me.
            

            
               Here's where I'm
stuck. Even though my feelings are hurt, should I send Jay a polite note of
congratulations? Shall I assume our friendship is over because he didn't invite
me? I welcome your insightful advice.
            

            

               --Joey
            

            Dear Jo,

            The fact that Jay didn't
invite you, by itself, would not signal the friendship's end, but the
too-busy-to-return-phone-calls does. You two have obviously grown apart. Time
and Life (not the magazines) often cool formerly warm relationships. Prudie
thinks it would be fine, as a tip of the hat to what used to be, to write him a
congratulatory note, if that is your inclination. Don't do it, however, if its
purpose would be 1) to get an invitation or 2) to give him the needle. Just by
the by, it sounds as if you disapprove of this man's "pompous friends" and
growing arrogance, so give the friendship a decent burial, emotionally,
remember the good times, and move on.

            --Prudie,
realistically

         
      
   
