
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>What's Wrong With Human Rights?</SPAN></SPAN>

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Aug. 8
            

            An
essay argues that the human rights movement is in trouble, despite its triumph
in Kosovo. Some of the movement's frailty stems from the failure to tame China
and from general compassion fatigue, but the biggest weakness is that activists
make no effort to generate popular support for human rights causes. This
elitism could backfire against the movement, just as affirmative action's
elitism undermined it. (The author is David Rieff, whose human rights views
were recently dissected in this 
                  Slate
                ".") ... An article
examines J.D. Power, the consumer research firm that uses public opinion polls
to rate products. J.D. Power's populist method challenges the more established
Consumers Union, which pays experts to rate products. (The article is by

                  Slate
               's Chatterbox, Timothy Noah.) ... The author of the
cover story, a former child prodigy, describes his return to piano-playing
after a decadelong hiatus. He makes the finals of a prestigious amateur
competition. ... A piece notes a bizarre Internet phenomenon. Players in
the online role-playing game Ultima now auction their virtual gold pieces for
real cash on eBay. The exchange rate is about 1,000 to the dollar, making
imaginary gold pieces worth twice as much as the Italian lira.

            
               
                  Talk , Premiere
issue
            

            On the
back page, Editor Tina Brown writes that her sprawling new magazine will end
the " 'disconnect' between literary and domestic culture." ... An
interview with Hillary Clinton suggests, among other things, that she is
responsible for the recent economic boom in Ireland, that her husband is a sex
addict, and that running for the Senate will save her marriage. ...
Former UNSCOM head Richard Butler blames Kofi Annan for the collapse of
weapons-inspection efforts in Iraq. Annan failed to understand the most basic
inspection rules and permitted the Iraqis to introduce gaping loopholes in the
process. ... A safari guide narrates how he and his tourist charges were
kidnapped by machete-wielding Hutu rebels in Uganda. Only half the captives
survived. ... The magazine includes many lists: "The Hip List" (snow
cones, blimps, scabby knees), an index of the "50 Best Talkers in America"
(Alec Baldwin, Arianna Huffington, Harold Bloom), and a reading list (Bob
Woodward's Shadow , pocket-sized guides to European design).

            
               
                  Time and
Newsweek , Aug. 9
            

            
               Newsweek 's
cover story notes the resurgence of cosmetic surgery,
especially among younger patients. New surgeries are safer, less invasive, and
more varied. Still, the anecdotes are cringe-worthy: the 31-year-old man who
brags about his pectoral and butt implants, the 24-year-old waitress who took a
loan from a "cosmetic loan company" (!) for laser resurfacing.

            
               Time 's cover story reconstructs the Atlanta massacre and blames it
largely on America's gun culture. A related essay contending that Americans have run out of tolerance for
the "barbaric era" of guns predicts that we could be "rid of the damned things"
in five or 10 years. (The essay seems to ignore the previous story, which notes
that 39 percent of American households own a gun.) ... 
               Newsweek 's
Atlanta package focuses more on the day trading angle, noting that 90 percent of day traders lose money.

            
               Newsweek says that rising house prices nationwide have benefited more
families than rising stock prices. Homeowners have $1.2 trillion in unrealized
gains tied up in their houses. Loan companies are permitting buyers to borrow
more than ever before--5 percent down payments are common--so many overextended
buyers could be devastated when the economy slows down.

            
               Time tours the
loopy, genial world of Art Bell, who draws 9 million listeners weekly to his
late-night, UFO-conspiracy, Martian-happy radio broadcast. Even if it's all a
crock, it's "great radio."

            
               
                  U.S. News &
World Report , Aug. 9
            

            The
cover story attributes teen-agers' mercurial behavior
to underdeveloped brains. Pubescent brains are flooded with aggression-inducing
sex hormones and aren't sophisticated enough to refer to past experience when
making judgments. ... Microsoft is reaching out to computer
novices , says a piece. To keep growing, it will have to win over new
users who may be tempted by easier-to-use hand-held devices and specialized
e-mail and Internet machines. Microsoft is monitoring selected families for
weeks to learn their hardware habits.

            
               
                  The New Yorker ,
Aug. 9
            

            A
piece describes how women in their 20s "donate" eggs to infertile couples for
thousands of dollars. The sellers are currently solicited through
advertisements ("Pay your tuition with eggs") but will soon be able to offer
their services on a specialized Internet auction site. Hopeful parents often
seek out donors who are athletic, Ivy League-educated, animal-loving, or
acne-free. ... A report from Iowa repeats the conventional wisdom that
the Ames straw poll is a sham. The minor candidates are spending vast amounts
of time and energy vying for second place, but the poll is irrelevant to the
actual nomination process.

            
               
                  Weekly Standard ,
Aug. 9
            

            The
cover
piece makes fun of the Reform Party convention, whose attendees
included a woman who framed the crumbs of a piece of cake Ross Perot ate in
1992 and a presidential candidate who claims he controlled exactly what
President George Bush said by sending faxes to a Secret Service agent.
Conclusion: Party members are so obsessed by process they will never get
anything done. See the New Republic below for more. ... A piece
urges the United States to recognize Taiwan as a sovereign state. China won't
dare go to war over Taiwan, and America's firm stance will cow Beijing, which
caves at any show of U.S. strength.

            
               
                  New Republic ,
Aug. 16
            

            The
cover story sneers at conservative doves.
Neo-Isolationists oppose interventions abroad because they despise Bill Clinton
and believe that American culture is debased. Just as left-wingers did during
Vietnam, they argue that "coercive diplomacy" is wrong because the nation is
morally unfit to impose its will on other countries. ... A piece counsels against discounting "compassionate
conservatism." George W. Bush's campaign theme represents a vision of
government that balances compassion against self-interest, just as Bill Clinton
evoked individual responsibility as a counterweight to government benevolence
in 1992. ... A dispatch reports that the Reform Party has turned into
an umbrella organization for fruitcakes. Activists grasp for another flamboyant
mogul--Donald Trump, perhaps--to replace Ross Perot, while a bunch of
delusional nuts promote their own candidacies for the party's presidential
nomination.

            
               
                  Economist, July
31
            

            The
cover editorial supports multilateral interventions to
halt belligerency. Violence in Kosovo, Kashmir, and Congo was quelled by
outside interference. The world is morally obliged to intervene and prevent
atrocities, even if this intervention does not resolve the underlying
conflict.

         
      
   
