
   
   
      
         
            Big Sister, Big Brother

            

               
                  Note: Robert Pinsky, U.S. poet laureate and
Slate 's poetry editor, will soon be answering your Fray posts!
To join in the discussion, just go to "The Fray" 
               
                  poetry
thread Friday, Oct. 29 at 3 p.m. ET. And in the meantime, click
here to read excerpts from Pinsky's Fray appearance last
year.
            

            
               Subject:
Beware the Politics of "Common Sense"

            
               Re:
""

            
               From:
Sam Tanenhaus

            
               Date: Sat
Oct 16

            Interesting, clever piece but it seems wedded to
the premise that liberalism = moral virtue. But mightn't a columnist offer
sentiments wholly opposed to Anna Q's and seem to his/her readers the paragon
of homespun good sense? Don't Pat Buchanan's fans think he's simply talking
"horse sense"?

            Others might object
[that] Ms. Q's warm sentimentality is really smugness. I'm reminded here of a
column she wrote on William Kennedy Smith, which (if I recall it correctly)
made the argument--never established, save on the grounds of emotional
identification with his accuser--that his acquittal was proof of the flaws in
our legal system. At a time like this Big Sister sounds like kissing kin to Big
Brother.

            [Sam Tanenhaus is the
author of Whittaker Chambers: A Biography .]

            (To reply, click
here.)

            
               Subject:
Anna Quindlen, Cultural Mandarin

            
               Re:
""

            
               From:
Edward Brynes

            
               Date: Sun
Oct 17

            Far from being a voice of common sense, Q is a
sophist who tries to make confused thinking look like common sense.

            In connection with Chris Ofili's painting [in her
first 
                  Newsweek
                column], she invokes Joyce
and Lawrence but fails to mention that neither was publicly funded. She
mentions banning and burning, but the painting is not being subjected to
either. The funding issue isn't supposed to matter because citizens don't have
control of every item in the budget anyway. Oh? Maybe they don't directly
oversee every item, but they have every right to complain about items they
don't like and demand that they be deleted.

            Q seems to think that the issue of what is or is
not offensive can be resolved by appealing to analogies in culture and history:
"medieval Catholic art, for example, is chockablock with sexual and
scatological imagery." Do the medieval artists use the imagery in the way Ofili
did? Would she apply the same reasoning to her issue of hate speech and say for
example that the n***** word shouldn't be offensive because it is widely found
in 19 th -century American literature and is sometimes used by blacks
in referring to each other?

            The Brooklyn Museum case isn't about free speech
but rather subsidized (i.e., privileged) speech. Most speech and artistic
expression are not subsidized by anyone. The museum is subsidizing the Ofili
painting because it is supposedly of exceptional value. But do our cultural
mandarins, in the name of "free speech" have the right to frivolous (and likely
self-seeking) judgments as to what speech is valuable and what is not?

            (To reply, click
here.)

            
               Subject:
Bradley's Missed Moment in Iowa

            
               Re:
""

            
               From:
Yellow Dog

            
               Date: Tue
Oct 12

            Campaigns have defining moments. Remember the
moment Ronald Reagan demanded that his microphone be turned on--after the media
moderator ordered it turned off [in a 1980 debate]--so that he could speak in
support of George Bush's whining disruptions to protest that he should be
included in a Nashua, N.H., debate? ("I paid for this microphone, Mr.
Breen!")

            Bill Bradley missed such a moment the other night
in Iowa, when Gore brayed at him from the stage Bradley had just relinquished.
"How about it, Bill?" Gore taunted, looking straight at Bradley. "If the answer
is yes, stand up and wave your hand."

            What if Bradley had risen from his chair, walked
over to Gore, and said, "Let me respond. As I just finished saying, let's
abandon the old politics of personal confrontation and have the kind of
reasonable discussion people want before deciding how to vote. Yes, Al, I agree
to debate--not on your schedule, not on your terms, but at mutually acceptable
times and places and in a format that lets people hear what we have to say. And
in the meantime, why don't you knock off the 'How about it, Bill?' stuff.
That's playground ball." Would Al have been ready to "Stay and Fight" under
those circumstances? We'll never know ...

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject:
Journalism, Post-Metabolife

            
               Re:
""

            
               From:
Theo Przybyszewski

            
               Date: Tue
Oct 12

            Chatterbox does a terrific job of pointing out the
essential lunacy of trying to control information in this era, where anyone
with a computer can read, watch, or hear something in the mass media, then get
onto the Internet, find 400 versions of the truth, and make up his own
mind.

            Access to all this data makes us all a little
crazier. On the other hand, it helps guarantee that the days of media moguls
and politicians controlling our thoughts and opinions ( Citizen Kane :
"People will think what I tell them to think!") are fading fast. Unlike my
parents, I won't buy a brand of cake flour or vote for a candidate just because
that lovely Mary Margaret McBride tells me to on her radio show. Not when I can
go to a cake flour chat room on the Web and get the real lowdown.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject:
The True Cost of Driving in Manhattan

            
               Re:
""

            
               From:
Richard K. Green

            
               Date: Wed
Oct 13

            Moneybox is likely correct about taxi medallions
and rent control. But I am not convinced about parking on two counts:

            The value of land in Midtown Manhattan is somewhere
in the neighborhood of $2,500 per square foot. This high land cost, along with
the high cost of constructing underground parking, means that more parking
might not be economically feasible (i.e., land might be used more profitably
for apartments, office space, and hotels).

            Even if new garage space were feasible under
current conditions, there is a good chance that it should not be built. While I
tend not to worry about market failure unless it is large, in the case of
automobiles, it is large. Edwin Mills of Northwestern University estimates that
the social costs of automobiles could be internalized with a $2 per gallon gas
tax in Chicago. In NYC, the tax would have to be higher than that. But there
seems to be little political will to impose rational gas taxes, so second best
solutions, such as regulating garage space, are likely better than allowing
unregulated garage space combined with subsidized auto travel.

            (To reply, click
here .)

            
               Subject:
Your Diary, My Marriage

            
               Re:
""

            
               From:
Anne Marie Fenton

            
               Date: Mon
Oct 11

            Today, I have been in a verbal communiqué with my
husband, Captain Robert E. Fenton, USCG (Ret.) regarding his desire to travel
to a mini-reunion of the USCGA Class of '63 in Orlando, Florida, next week.
Having just returned from a week in San Diego at an FAA convention, I feel less
than enthusiastic about these plans. After all, we still have two teenagers at
home to care for! This morning, I telephoned him (at his office) asking, "Why
do you want to go on this dumb trip?" After all, we have been married for
nearly 33 years, and we have seen some of the classmates within the past
year.

            His reply was that it will be wonderful--we shared
so much together and went through so much, I want to see them. He then
forwarded this article written by the at-sea Coast Guard commander. Is this a
coincidence? My husband served as a commanding officer of a CG cutter, 1980-82.
He claimed it was the best time of his life. His personality does not allow him
to express emotion or sensitivity. After reading this article, I know why he
has always felt so close to the Guard (as I have), and why he wants to share a
few days with his former classmates. Thanks for the great article. We will
forward it to as many classmates as possible. No doubt I will be on that plane
to Orlando next week. I will send you a follow up as to how it went.

            (To reply, click here.)

         
      
   
