
   
   
      
         
            Lost in Spacey

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  American
               
               
                  Beauty
                (DreamWorks SKG). Raves
for this dystopian dark-side-of-the-American-dream tale starring Kevin Spacey
as a "suburban Travis Bickle--off his rocker, but happy about it" (Owen
Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ), who experiences a massive midlife
crisis and falls in lust with his teen-age daughter's friend. Spacey acts with
"heavenly finesse" (Janet Maslin, the New York Times ), and Annette
Bening as his high-strung wife is "spectacular" (Mike Clark, USA Today ).
The director, Sam Mendes, and writer, Alan Ball, are new to film--they're stage
and television veterans, respectively--and many critics say that's why the film
feels so fresh. A handful of critics concede that while the film is technically
excellent, it's in no way groundbreaking; rather it's simply a collection of
"stale and reactionary ideas" being pawned off "under the all-purpose rubric of
'black comedy' " (David Edelstein, 
                  Slate
               ). (Click to read the
rest of Edelstein's review.)

            

               
                  For
               
               
                  Love of the Game
                (Universal
Pictures). Kevin Costner heads back to the buffet for a third helping of
baseball, this time as an aging pitcher in the last game of his career.
Costner's performance may be decent, but most critics call this effort out at
the plate. Cutting back and forth between Costner as he pitches a perfect game
and remembers his longtime girlfriend, director Sam "The Evil Dead "
Raimi nails the baseball half of the film, but the romance is so awful that
"you will simply want to shoot yourself by the third inning" (Richard Corliss,
Time ). (Take a look at Kevin Costner's high-school yearbook page
here.)

            

               
                  Breakfast
               
               
                  of Champions
                (Buena Vista
Pictures). Director Alan Rudolph gets credit for trying to adapt Kurt
Vonnegut's beloved novel, but critics agree that the result is a "frenzied film
that seems both dated and dead on arrival" (Peter Travers, Rolling
Stone ). Stephen Holden of the New York Times writes that it "looks
and feels like a frantic live-action psychedelic cartoon ... a John Waters film
divested of camp." Bruce Willis stars as a car salesman who experiences a
crisis of conscience; Nick Nolte, Barbara Hershey, and Albert Finney round out
the rich cast. What went wrong? Skewering consumer culture might have been
novel in the 1970s, but these days it feels like beating a dead horse. (Click
here to read an excerpt from the novel.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Action
                (Fox; Thursdays; 9:30 p.m. ET). Excellent
reports for this profanity-laced comedy about a nasty Hollywood movie producer.
The critics are unanimous that it's "the season's naughtiest, bawdiest, and
probably funniest new show" (Tom Shales, the Washington Post ). Just
about every review describes it as "edgy." Not only is it full of cursing,
ethnic jokes, prostitution, and the like, but it dares to have no laugh track
and a bastard as the protagonist: "the show is truly subversive and daring in
its scabrous attitude" (Caryn James, the New York Times ). A few minor
complaints: 1) The show is "a little in love with its own transgressiveness"
(James Poniewozik, Time ). 2) The show relies on "humiliation humor" and
Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker predicts that the unlikability of star
Jay Mohr will sink the show. (Click here to find
out more about the show.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  'Tis:
                
               
                  A Memoir
               , by Frank McCourt (Simon
& Schuster). The expectations for McCourt's follow-up to the best-selling
Angela's Ashes were high, and critics are uniformly disappointed: It
"lacks the drama, the magic, the gentleness, the lilt of the first book"
(Deirdre Donahue, USA Today ). They're quick to point out that
'Tis , which picks up McCourt's life at age 19, once he has left Ireland
for America, is not a bad book, it's just not as good as the first. McCourt
"seems less in control in this book and at times is powerless to keep himself
from becoming the stage Irishman, crying in his beer, milking sentiment until
it becomes false" (Peter Collier, the Los Angeles Times ). (Click
here to read the first chapter.)

            

               
                  A
               
               
                  Republic, Not an Empire: Reclaiming America's
Destiny
               , by Pat Buchanan (Regnery Publishing). The anticipated Reform
Party presidential candidate gets harsh reviews from conservative
publications--and no reviews from liberal ones. Buchanan may be a compelling
writer, but critics attack his isolationist policies and revisionist history
(highlight: Germany would not have invaded France had America stayed out of
World War II). Andrew Roberts writes in the Wall Street Journal that
Buchanan's thesis is "deeply flawed" and "does not stand up to close historical
scrutiny." Robert G. Kaufman, in a long review in the Weekly Standard
(which welcomes Buchanan's departure from the Republican Party), paints
Buchanan as having gone over to the dark side: He's "a representative of one of
the perpetual temptations of conservative thought." In regards to Buchanan's
support of Charles Lindbergh's isolationist anti-war campaigning, Kaufman
writes, "Buchanan's defense of the morally and strategically indefensible is
remarkable." (Click here to visit Buchanan's campaign headquarters.)

         
      
   
