
   
   
      
         
            Floyd? It's America's Fault

            In
London Friday, the Guardian blamed Hurricane Floyd on America's "massive,
wasteful consumption of a disproportionate share of the planet's resources." An
editorial opined, "Brutal though it may be to say so, Hurricane Floyd is a
necessary warning to the country which contributes more than any other to
global warming." In an op-ed article, the Guardian 's Washington
correspondent asked why disasters in the United States receive so much more
attention in the European press than much worse disasters elsewhere. Answer:
"The truth is that Europeans--and not just the French, who at least admit to
it--positively enjoy transatlantic misfortune. Perhaps, in an era of American
global hegemony, we need to have it confirmed to us that our masters are
gun-obsessed crazies or that their lovingly constructed Florida beachfront
condos can be smashed to smithereens within seconds by some arbitrary force of
nature."

            The
Independent
said that Thursday's gun massacre in Fort Worth, Texas, "may in some respects
have done the country a favour." It said, "[T]he issue of gun control will certainly have a central
place in next year's presidential election campaign." But in the Times , columnist Simon
Jenkins said that "Britain's gun control is about as lax as America's, at least
on the non-domestic front." He said Britain sold arms to at least 30 countries
whose human rights records fail to receive the Amnesty International seal of
approval and that "British foreign policy has long been a confection of
self-interest spiced by opportunism and cling-wrapped in sanctimony."

            In an
editorial about an antitrust challenge to the U.S. genetically modified food
industry by farmers and pressure groups alleging misuse of intellectual
property to restrict competition, the Financial Times took the side of the underdogs. "[T]wo
factors make this a special case," it said in an editorial.
"One is the immense speed of scientific advance in GM food technology, and in
bio-engineering generally. The other is that control of several important
markets for GM products is already highly concentrated, and that industry
consolidation appears set to accelerate through acquisitions." On its front
page, the FT reported that lawyers for the Justice Department and 19
states are considering trying to break Microsoft into two if they win their
antitrust case against it. "A break-up of Microsoft would be highly
controversial and politically contentious, especially in the run-up to a
presidential election," the paper said.

            A big
story in the British press Friday was the release of MI5 intelligence files
showing that P.G. Wodehouse received monthly payments from the Germans during a
crucial period of World War II and could have faced treason charges if he had
returned to Britain from the United States in the postwar years. The files,
showing that Wodehouse received four payments through the German Embassy in
Paris between May and August 1944, challenged previous historical judgments
that he was a fool lacking in worldly wisdom but in no sense a traitor.

            In
Australia, the Sydney
Morning Herald , noting that the commitment of "a mere 2,000 troops" to
East Timor is already seriously straining the country's defense budget, called
for a large increase in its defense capability. "One message coming loud and
clear out of the recent flurry of diplomatic activity over a peacekeeping force
for East Timor is that, as far as the United States is concerned, Australia is
on its own in dealing with such regional problems," the paper said in an
editorial. While Washington eventually agreed to offer "token" logistical
support to the peacekeeping effort, it "proceeded reluctantly, refusing to take
the initiative from Canberra or even lend it the kind of significant military
support it was requesting."

            The
Jakarta
Post reported that the 8,000-strong, Australian-led force was expected
to arrive in East Timor by Monday at the latest. In an editorial, it once again placed all the blame for the
humanitarian catastrophe on the Indonesian government. "No matter how they
explain it, or what excuses they come up with for the situation in East Timor,
the bottom line is Indonesia is responsible for everything that has happened
there," it said. "We have lost East Timor, and nothing we do now can deny East
Timorese their well-deserved independence. ... By now, we hope our leaders have
truly learned their lessons well: that as a self-respecting nation and member
of the international community, we must respect universal humanitarian values
and live up to our responsibilities."

            In
Israel, Ha'aretz defended the police against charges that they are
biased against the right because they rushed to investigate corruption
allegations against former Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. "If the police
force does not rush to investigate suspicions against a former prime minister,
it will not have the moral justification to act against ordinary criminals,"
the paper said Friday. In an interview
with Ha'aretz , former British MI5 agent David Shayler said that as
recently as 1995 Britain expelled Mossad [Israeli secret service] agents for
operating on its territory without permission. Shayler, whom Britain is seeking
to extradite from France for breaches of the Official Secrets Act, said Britain
repeatedly turned down Mossad requests to station a representative in London.
Even so, "Mossad secretly sent agent operators to Britain to gather information
on Arab targets" and "MI5 exposed these undeclared Mossad officers and quietly
instructed them to leave the country." The Israeli Foreign Ministry described
Shayler's claims as "completely baseless."

            
Writing in La
Repubblica of Rome, Roj Medvedev said that the wave of terrorist
bombings in Russia is now shaking the Russian ruling class to its foundations.
"With one voice, all the leading political figures are asking [President Boris]
Yeltsin to resign," he wrote. "The government, parliament, and even members of
the president's own office are asking it." Medvedev said that the country is
also being rocked by a flood of compromising documents to the press, among them
a recording of a conspiratorial telephone conversation between the media tycoon
Boris Berezovsky and the Chechen guerrilla leader Shamil Bassayev. "The
conviction is growing in the country's collective consciousness that its
leaders are not just thieves, but men ready to do anything, however bad," he
wrote. Medvedev said Yeltsin has lost control of the country and that "if there
is still logic in this world, he should resign as soon as possible, before
things go too far." He added that he believed he would do so.

         
      
   
