
   
   
      
         
             Got Osteoporosis?

            It will be hard to frolic through the next
millennium with bones that have turned to sawdust. That is the fate that awaits
those of us, we are told, who don't consume the escalating amount of
calcium--now at a quart of milk a day or the equivalent--endorsed by public
health officials. Just two years ago the National Academy of Sciences increased
its daily recommendation for calcium by 50 percent for older Americans. Another
upward revision and we will all have to be attached to udders with an IV.
Strange, then, that most of the world's people, who rarely if ever drink milk
and who get just a small percentage of the calcium we are told is vital, have
not devolved into boneless heaps of protoplasm. Even stranger, in many of these
dairy-avoiding countries, people get through life with far fewer of the
age-related hip fractures that plague Americans.

            This paradox has led a small number of researchers
to become dairy doubters, questioning the wisdom of the calcium recommendations
of the public health establishment. For one thing, the doubters say, our diet
is so fundamentally flawed that trying to protect our bones by taking in loads
of calcium is like trying to fill a tub with no stopper by turning up the
faucets. The problem is this: In general, world dietary patterns show that
countries where people consume large amounts of calcium are also countries
where people eat extravagant amounts of animal protein, places such as the
United States and northern Europe. These countries also suffer among the
world's highest rate of fractures due to osteoporosis, the disease
characterized by weak, porous bones. "The correlation between animal protein
[intake] and fracture rates in different societies is as strong as that between
lung cancer and smoking," says T. Colin Campbell, professor of nutritional
biochemistry at Cornell University.

            Our bodies contain 2
pounds to 4 pounds of calcium, 99 percent of which is in our bones and teeth,
the rest circulates in the blood where it is necessary for nervous-system
function. Eating animal protein, which is high in sulfur-containing amino
acids, requires the body to buffer the effects of those amino acids. It does so
by releasing calcium from the bones, literally peeing them away. But this
leaching of calcium should be offset if the balance of calcium to protein in
the diet is within a reasonable range. Robert Heaney, professor of medicine at
the Creighton University School of Medicine and a proponent of high dairy
consumption, found in a study he co-authored that the "single most important
determinate of the rate of bone gain" in young women was not the amount of
calcium consumed but the ratio of calcium to protein. But it's a difficult
balance to strike when it's common for Americans to eat double the protein we
need, with 70 percent of it coming from animal sources.

            Could there be some other dietary factor at work as well?
Retired Harvard professor of nutrition Mark Hegsted thinks there may be. He
believes calcium consumption may be at the root of our bone problems, but his
heretical hypothesis is not that we don't get enough calcium but rather that we
get too much. In an article in the Journal of Nutrition he writes,
"[H]ip fractures are more frequent in populations where dairy products are
commonly consumed and calcium intakes are relatively high. Is there any
possibility that this is a causal relationship?"

            Hegsted explains the way
such a mechanism would work. The body adapts to low calcium intake by
efficiently using what is available. Conversely, high calcium consumption
causes the body to decrease the amount of the mineral that is absorbed,
excreting the excess. That's why populations with low calcium consumption
manage to form healthy skeletons, and high calcium consumers don't develop
bones like mastodons. But what happens over time, Hegsted suggests, is that the
inefficient consumers may permanently damage their abilities to effectively use
dietary calcium and to conserve calcium in the bones later in life. As we age,
the body naturally goes from building bone to losing it. Hegsted's hypothesis
explains why high dairy consumers so often end up with rampant bone loss. He
cites studies of rural Gambian women who don't drink milk, get about
one-quarter of the calcium we're told to consume, yet rarely have osteoporotic
fractures. "It will be embarrassing enough if the current calcium hype is
simply useless; it will be immeasurably worse if the recommendations are
actually detrimental to health," he writes.

            Cornell's Campbell says our fate could be different if we
would take a lesson from the Chinese (fortunately he's a nutritionist, not a
political scientist). He has spent the last 20 years studying the health and
dietary habits of rural Chinese and comparing them to those in the West. These
Chinese consume less than half the calcium we're told is necessary, virtually
all of it from plant sources, in particular leafy green vegetables. They have
one-fifth the incidence of hip fracture of Americans. Although they consume
more calories per day than we do, only about 10 percent of their diet is from
animal sources. On average, American diets are 70 percent animal-based.

            Campbell has what could
be called the unified field theory of bones and breasts. He explains the mortal
consequences of diets high in dairy, protein, and fat. Early in life, American
girls consume lots of these, which leads to relatively dense bones, high levels
of estrogen, and early sexual maturation. The age of menarche has been dropping
for decades in this country and now often occurs as early as age 10. In rural
China, girls don't usually begin menstruation until age 15. Chinese women have
only about two-thirds of the amount of circulating estrogen that American women
do, which helps account for their far lower rate of breast cancer, says
Campbell.

            Estrogen helps maintain bone, so most women's skeletons are
fine until menopause. Then estrogen levels drop, in the case of American women
faster and lower than their Chinese counterparts. "Now they're vulnerable,"
says Campbell. "That all suggests that the factors that cause osteoporosis are
rather similar to the ones that cause breast cancer."

            Two very different sets of studies support his
theory. One compares bone density of Japanese and British women. The Japanese
get almost all their calcium from soy, the bones of small cooked fish, and
vegetables. They also have about 40 percent the rate of hip fracture of the
West. The British diet is similar to ours and so is their hip fracture rate.
Before menopause, the British women do indeed have denser bones than the
Japanese. But following menopause, the British women end up losing more bone
than the Japanese. And a spate of recent studies in this country has found that
women with the highest measured bone density, a much-desired goal according to
the literature on osteoporosis, have a significantly increased incidence of
breast cancer.

            Campbell says views such
as his are not more widely known because, "Unfortunately, we are absolutely
drowned in information coming out of the dairy industry. ... Our national
nutrition policies are corrupted by the influence of the dairy industry."

            The milk proponents offer a variety of responses as to why
osteoporosis is far less common in the nonmilk-drinking world. One is that the
theories of the doubters could be characterized as demented ravings, probably
induced by dairy deficiency. Another boils down to: "We're Americans. If we
were rural Chinese or Gambians, sure we'd be eating primarily beans and
vegetables, so thank goodness we aren't." The public health official's version
of the line, "Take my wife, please," is "Tell Americans to eat kale five times
a week."

            The milk advocates
rightly point out that physical activity, particularly the kind that requires
weight-bearing, is crucial to bone growth and maintenance. For example, while
we have turned our bathrooms into palaces of comfort, lots of the world's
people still squat over holes, which makes it difficult to finish reading the
business section, but is a real bone builder. Another theory holds that Asian
women in particular have better designed hips than Caucasians, making them like
inflatable punching toys that can't be knocked down, thus less likely to suffer
hip fractures. The problem with this theory is that recent studies show that
the Chinese diet is rapidly becoming more Westernized. Guess what, so is the
Chinese rate of osteoporosis.

            But most of all, they say, forget population statistics and
instead look at the laboratory. Indeed, there are dozens of clinical
experiments showing that high doses of calcium either arrest bone loss or even
build bone in older women. Fine, say the dairy doubters, if calcium is the
answer, then it should both prevent and cure osteoporosis, but it doesn't. The
doubters also argue that these laboratory studies, which usually run from two
to four years, may just be seeing a short-term effect. That is, there is some
initial bone-building response by the body to large calcium doses, but it may
be a temporary and unsustainable change.

            Which camp is right has
enormous public health consequences. Eight million American women and 2 million
men have osteoporosis. The disease is responsible for more than 1.5 million
fractures annually, with a direct cost of $14 billion. Of those, 300,000 are
hip fractures; one-third of the people over age 50 who break their hips never
walk independently again, and 20 percent die within a year from related
complications. With an aging population, and in the absence of some plumbing
apocalypse that will cause Americans to adopt a squatting posture to relieve
themselves, the incidence and cost of osteoporosis can only rise.

            In a way, Americans are voting with their stomachs on the
milk issue and unintentionally siding with the dairy opponents. Milk
consumption has been falling for decades. It is now about half what it was in
1945. Other beverages have displaced it--in the case of young people
especially, soft drinks. Soft drinks are loaded with phosphorus, which is an
essential and widely available nutrient. The problem is that too much
phosphorus itself causes calcium to be lost from the bones. Then there's excess
salt, another component of the average diet and a bone-killer as well.

            The battle between the vegetable advocates and
dairy advocates over the nutritional choices of Americans is like symphony
orchestras dueling with opera companies over the entertainment dollars of
teen-agers. While they're fighting, they forgot to notice the audience is at
American Pie . So it turns out that no matter who is right, the calcium
doubters or the calcium advocates, that shattering sound you will hear as the
21 st century progresses will be America's bones.

         
      
   
