
   
   
      
         
             My Father's Estate

            A letter from an ill-mannered former high-school
classmate of long ago, one of several like it, which I pass on in paraphrase:
"I saw that your father had died," she wrote. "He was always so clever about
money. Did he leave you a big estate? Did he figure out a way around the estate
tax?" It's a rude question, but it has an answer.

            My sister and I have been going through my father's
estate lately with his lawyer, and we're pawing through old, dusty files to
find bank account numbers and rules for annuities, so maybe it's a good time to
think about what my father, Herbert Stein, left to us.

            He did indeed leave some
money. By the standards we read about in the Wall Street Journal or
Sports Illustrated , it was not worthy of much ink. In any event, because
of the class-warfare-based death tax, the amount that will be left is vastly
less than what he had saved. As an economist, my father was famous for
defending taxes as a necessary evil. But even he was staggered, not long before
his death, when he considered the taxes on his savings that would go to the
Internal Revenue Service.

            The nest egg is going to be taxed at a federal rate of
about 55 percent, after an initial exemption and then a transition amount taxed
at around 40 percent (and all that after paying estate expenses). When I think
about it, I want to cry. My father and mother lived frugally all their lives.
They never had a luxury car. They never flew first-class unless it was on the
expense account. They never in their whole lives went on an expensive vacation.
When he last went into the hospital, my father was still wearing an old pair of
gray wool slacks with a sewed-up hole in them from where my dog ripped them--15
years ago.

            They never had live-in help. My father washed the
dishes after my mother made the meatloaf. My father took the bus whenever he
could. His only large expenditure in his and my mom's whole lives was to pay
for schools for his children and grandchildren. He never bought bottled,
imported water; he said whatever came out of the tap was good enough for him.
They still used bargain-basement furniture from before the war for their
bedroom furniture and their couch. I never once knew them to order the most
expensive thing in a restaurant, and they always took the leftovers home.

            They made not one penny
of it from stock options or golden parachutes. They made it all by depriving
themselves in the name of thrift and prudence and preparing for the needs of
posterity. To think that this abstemiousness and this display of virtue will
primarily benefit the IRS is really just so galling I can hardly stand it. The
only possible reason for it is to satisfy some urge of jealousy by people who
were less self-disciplined.

            There are a few material, tangible items that an assessor
will have to come in to appraise. There are my father's books, from his days at
Williams College and the University of Chicago, many of them still neatly
underlined and annotated in his handwriting, which did not change from 1931
until days before his death. Most of them are about economics, but some are
poetry.

            That's another item my father left: his own poetry
and his massive prose writings. Very little of it is about anything at all
abstruse. There are no formulas and no graphs or charts, except from his very
last years. There are many essays about how much he missed my mom when she
died, about how much he loved the sights of Washington, about how dismaying it
was that there was still so much confusion about basic issues in economics. And
there are his satires of haiku about public policy, his takeoffs on Wordsworth
and Shakespeare, often composed for a friend's birthday, then sometimes later
published. I suppose there will not be much tax on these because my father was
hardly a writer for the large audience.

            Some of them will go to
the Nixon Library, and some will be on bookshelves in the (very small and
modest) house my wife and I own in Malibu, a place he found beguiling because
he had always wanted to live by the ocean and write. And there are his
furniture and his clothes, none of which has any value at all except to me
because they remind me of him and because, when I stand near them in his
closet, I can still smell his smell of hair and skin and leather shoes, the
closet smelling a lot like he smelled when he came home from work in 1954
carrying a newspaper that said there could be no more racial segregation in
schools. And there are his mementos of Richard Nixon, his White House
cufflinks, photos of Camp David, certificates and honorary degrees, and
clippings of great events of state. And there are his love letters to and from
my mother when they were courting in 1935 and 1936, still tied with light blue
ribbon in what was my mother's lingerie drawer, talking about their love
triumphing over the dangers of the Depression. I suppose we'll have to place a
value on these and have them taxed, too.

            But these are the trivia of what he left me and my sister.
The really valuable estate cannot be touched by the death tax. The man's legacy
to his family has almost nothing to do with anything that can be appraised in
dollars and cents.

            The example of loyalty and principle: When he had
just taken over as the chairman of President Nixon's Council of Economic
Advisers, he hired a young staff economist named Ron Hoffman (brother of Dustin
Hoffman). Almost immediately, John Dean, then White House counsel, came to see
my father to tell him that he had to fire Hoffman. Apparently, Ron Hoffman had
signed a public anti-war letter. The FBI, or whoever, said that showed he was
not loyal and not qualified. My father said that this was a free country, that
Ron Hoffman was hired as an economist not as a political flack for RN, and that
he would not be fired because he disagreed with some aspect of Nixon policy.
After much worrying, Hoffman was allowed to stay--and performed well.

            My father was loyal, and the IRS cannot impound that
legacy. When RN ran into every kind of problem after June of 1972, most of
which were unearned and a chunk of which was earned, my father never thought of
disavowing him or even distancing himself from Nixon. Even though he had an
appointment to the University of Virginia in his pocket, Pop several times
extended his stay at the White House to help out with the struggles over
inflation and recession, and never once publicly said a word against Nixon.

            Long after, when Nixon was blasted as an
anti-Semite, my father told in print and in person of the Nixon he knew: kind;
concerned about all on his staff, regardless of ethnicity; pro-Israel;
pro-Jewish in every important cause. My father would never turn his back on a
man who had been as conscientious to the cause of peace and as kind to the
Stein family as RN had been.

            "Loyalty." There is no
item for it in the inventory of estate assets to be taxed.

            My father lived his life, especially in the latter years of
it, in a haze of appreciation. Whatever small faults he could and did find with
America, he endlessly reminded anyone who listened that the best achievement of
mankind was America, whose current failings were trivial by historic standards,
which was in a constant process of amelioration, and which offered its citizens
the best chance in history for a good life.

            When he did consider the failures of American life
in the past, especially institutionalized racism, he did so to note the
astonishing progress that had been made in his lifetime. He had no use for
those who held up a mirror of fault-finding from the left or the right when he
could see in his own era what vast improvements in freedom had been made for
blacks, Jews, women, Asians, Hispanics, and every other minority.

            He appreciated art, especially ballet and opera. He
sat for hours in front of the television watching videos of Romeo and
Juliet or Les Sylphides or Tosca . He lived to go to the
Kennedy Center to see great ballet or opera, and he talked of it endlessly. But
he also appreciated art in the form of obscure fountains in front of federal
buildings, of the statues of Bolívar and George Washington and San Martin. He
appreciated the intricate moldings on the ceiling of the second floor of the
Cosmos Club. He was in awe of the beauty of the mighty Potomac in fall and of
the rolling green hunt country around Middleburg and The Plains, Va., in
summer.

            This quality of
gratitude for America and for the beauty of life cannot be taxed, at least not
so far.

            He appreciated his friends and did not differentiate
between them on the basis of fame or position. He took the words of his
longtime pal Murray Foss at the American Enterprise Institute, a think tank
where he hung his hat for many years, into account; and the words of Mrs.
Wiggins, who ran the cafeteria at the AEI; and the thoughts of Alan Greenspan
or the head of Goldman, Sachs; and valued them entirely on their merits to him,
not on the basis of how much press or money the speaker had. He never once in
my lifetime's recall said that any man or woman deserved special respect for
riches--in fact, like Adam Smith, he believed that the pleadings of the rich
merited special suspicion. He did not believe that my sister or I should devote
our lives to the pursuit of money, and by his life set an example to us of
pursuing only what was interesting and challenging, not what paid the most. I
never knew him to chase a deal or a job (he never in his whole life applied for
a job!) for any other reason except that it was of interest to him. He derived
more pleasure from speaking to his pals at the book club of the Cosmos Club
about John Keats than he did from giving speeches to trade associations that
paid him handsomely.

            My father's stance against seeking money for its own
sake--so wildly unsuited to today's age, but so reassuring to his
children--cannot be taken by the Treasury.

            Pop had a way of putting what I thought of as
catastrophes into their rightful context. If I was hysterical about losing some
scriptwriting job, my father would brush it aside as a basic risk, part of the
life I had chosen. If my stocks went down, even dramatically, my father would
explain that if I had a roof over my head and enough to eat, I was far, far
ahead of the game. Most reassuring, my father would tell me that my family and
I could always come to Washington, D.C., and live quietly, keeping him company,
for which not a lot of money was required. (My father lived on a fraction of
the income from his savings, even allowing for paying for his grandchildren's
education.)

            Once, about 25 years ago, when my boss treated me
unfairly, my father said that if it happened again, I should quit and he would
take care of me until I found a job. I never needed to do it, but the offer
hung in my mind as a last refuge forever.

            This reassurance--that
somehow things will be all right, that there is a lot of ruin in a man, as well
as in a nation, to paraphrase his idol, Adam Smith--has become part of me, and
I can still summon it up when I am terrified because of a huge quarterly tax
payment due or a bad day on the market. Again, the IRS taxes it at zero.

            My father himself, as far as I know, inherited no money at
all from his father. He did inherit a belief that hard work would solve most
problems, that spending beyond one's means was a recipe for disaster, that
flashy showoff behavior with borrowed money was understandable but foolish. He
did inherit enough common sense to tell his son that buying property he would
never live in was probably a bad mistake. (He rarely spoke in moral absolutes.
He believed instead that humans could and would make individual choices but
that there were surely consequences to those choices that could be considered.)
He passed these beliefs on to me, although they have become somewhat attenuated
by my 20-plus years in the fleshpots of Hollywood. Still, I am one of the only
men I know here who has never been drastically short of money (so far), and
that I attribute to hearing his rules of prudence.

            Most of all, my father believed in loving and
appreciating those persons close to him. He stayed close to all his pals from
the Nixon days (and would not hear personal criticism of Pat Buchanan, who had
been a friend and colleague, although he was bewildered by Pat's stands on many
issues). He basked in the pleasure of the company of his colleagues and friends
at the American Enterprise Institute, which he thought of as one of his three
homes--the Cosmos Club and his extremely modest but well-situated apartment at
the Watergate were the others.

            He could form
attachments readily. Even in his last days in the hospital, he took a liking to
a Ukrainian-born doctor and used to refer to him as "Suvorov," after the
Russian general written of glowingly in War and Peace-- which still sits
on the table next to his reading chair, with his notes on little pieces of
paper in it.

            He grieved like a banshee when my mother died in 1997 and
never really got over the loss of a soul mate of 61 years, who literally
dreamed the same dreams he did. Once, he wrote my mother a poem (which he
called "Route 29") about the beauty of Route 29 north of Charlottesville, Va.,
and the pleasure of riding along it with my mom. He filed it away for further
work and never touched it again. The day after my mother's death, he found
it--with her reply poem telling of how she hoped to never see those hills and
those clouds and those cattle with anyone else but Pop. She had written her
poem (which she titled "Only You") and put it back in the file without ever
telling him. He survived that terrible loss with the help of a beautiful widow,
whom he also came to appreciate and live for. He probably spent more time
trying to help her with an annuity problem than he ever did on any financial
feature of his own life. A simple call from her inviting him to dinner in her
kitchen on Kalorama Circle was enough to make his life complete.

            Even in his hospital bed, hearing my son's voice on
the phone could make him smile through the fear and the pain. ("He sounds so
sweet when he calls me 'Grandpa,' " my father said, beaming even with tubes in
him.)

            Never once did my sister or I ever ask him for help
that he hesitated, let alone declined, to give. Usually this was some research
we were too lazy to do, but which he did without any resistance at all. When I
was a child and had a chore like leaf raking that I didn't want to do, his
simple answer was to say, "Let's do it together. It'll take half as long." I
use that with my son almost every day, along with the devotion, and my father's
example about his friends from long ago to make my life work. He stayed close
with friends from Williams College Class of '35, especially Richard Helms of
the CIA. He had lunch with one of his pals from Williams, Johnny Davis, class
of '33, who got him a job as a dishwasher at Sigma Chi, days before he went
into the hospital.

            This quality of devotion
and the rewards I get from it are worth far more than any stocks or bonds in my
father's estate--and cannot be taken away at the marginal rate of 55 percent.
Plus, I can pass it on to my son without any generation-skipping surcharge.

            And he left something else of perhaps even greater value: a
good name. Many people quarreled with my father's ideas about taxes or about
when to balance the budget. He faced frequent opposition to his belief in a
large defense budget. Of course, most of the people he knew disagreed with him
about RN. But no one ever questioned that he came by his views honestly, by
means of research and analysis and sometimes sentiment, but not for any venal
reason or by the process of money changing hands. His reputation for honesty
was simply without a speck of question upon it.

            This good name cannot be taxed at all, at least not
right now. My sister and I and our children will have it for as long as we keep
it clean. It's priceless, incalculable in value.

            So, in answer to the query from the forward
high-school classmate, "Yes, my father did leave an immense estate, and yes, he
did manage to beat the estate tax." The only problem is that I miss him every
single minute, and I already had the best parts of the estate without his being
gone, so the death part is pure loss.

         
      
   
