
   
   
      
         
            Old <STRONG><EM>Slate</EM></STRONG>, New <STRONG><EM>Slate</EM></STRONG>

            A few housekeeping
announcements:

            

               Access to the "
                     Slate
                   Archives" (formerly known as "The
Compost") is now free to both subscribers and nonsubscribers. Find past

                     Slate
                   articles by using the "Search 
                     Slate
                   Archives"
function at the bottom of each page or by going to the Archives page (also
accessible in the "Utilities" drop-down menu). The Archives page features,
among other delights, a virtual reality function that allows you to imagine
that it is any week since June 1996, re-create the 
                     Slate
                   Table of
Contents, and relive the excitement of that particular moment. Or, for those of
you who didn't read 
                     Slate
                   for the 10 months or so we were
charging for access to almost all content, this is a handy way to catch
up.


               While we're giving stuff away, we also have a new free e-mail service:
daily delivery (five days a week) of 
                     Slate
                  's home page, featuring
descriptions of and links to every 
                     Slate
                   article that is new that
day. If your e-mail program accepts mail sent in HTML, you'll get the actual
home page. If not, you can ask for an all-text version. Click here to sign up.
(Other e-mail services, including daily "Today's Papers" and weekly delivery of
our all-text edition, 
                     Slate on Paper
                  , are still services for
subscribers only.)


               Check out our new "
                     
                        Slate Store
                     ." We
don't just sell Slate T-shirts and coffee mugs. In fact, we don't sell
that stuff at all (though we will within a few weeks). But if you want to pick
up a last-minute Mercedes-Benz, this is the place to do it. Also books,
chocolates, and other essentials of life.

               

               
                  
                     Slate
                   is now available on PalmPilots and Windows CE devices,
through the good offices of AvantGo.com. It's a great way to keep up with the
world and impress your friends with how busy you are. We offer a variety of

                     Slate
                   features, including Today's Papers, for these hand-held
gizmos. You need to register (it's free), which you can do here and then subscribe to
the 
                     Slate
                   options you want (yes, yes, that's free too), which
you can do right here .
Then you'll no longer need to waste those valuable seconds spent waiting for
the elevator.


               But it's hard to read a hand-held computer while on the treadmill at the
health club or while driving a car--or, for that matter, while at your grown-up
computer. For that you need 
                     Slate
                   by audio. A link on the page
(look near the top left of the page or click here for
today's audio edition) will bring you Scott Shuger's daily national newspaper
summary (read aloud by a voice far more mellifluous than Scott's own). You'll
need Windows Media Player software (which you may already have if you've
installed the latest version of Internet Explorer). If you don't have it,
there's a link on the Today's Papers page for that, too, or click here .
Free, free, yes, of course, free.


               To hear 
                     Slate
                   by audio on devices other than your computer,
including Windows CE hand-held machines, you'll need to visit Audible.com . This is a site that offers audio
versions of a wide variety of printed material, including selections from

                     Slate
                  . They also offer their own listening gizmo, which you can
leave on your dashboard and get downloaded audio over your car radio (or
through headphones). The 
                     Slate
                   selections include Today's Papers,
"Chatterbox," and "Moneybox." To get them through Audible.com, you must
subscribe. And no, this one is not free. It's $6.95 a month or $49.95 a year.
But --subscribers to 
                     Slate
                   itself can get an Audible
subscription for free. A 
                     Slate
                   
                  subscription costs just
$19.95 a year. Do the math. It doesn't take a PalmPilot.

            

         
      
   
