
   
   
      
         
            Greenspin

            From
time to time, a great man arises among us, teaching wisdom and virtue. Awed by
his authority, the political leaders of his day embrace his legacy, distort his
words, and persecute their enemies in his name. Such is the fate of
Washington's reigning prophet, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. Last
week, he testified before Congress in the midst of a partisan fight over a
Republican plan to cut $800 billion in taxes over 10 years. While Democrats
solicited his denunciation of the plan, Republicans sought his condemnation of
the Democratic alternative. Greenspan tried to preach higher principles, but
both sides twisted his answers to suit their purposes. Their fight for his
favor revolves around four questions.

            

               1. What's the comparison? Greenspan testified that debt
payment is the best use of the surplus, tax cuts are the next best, and
spending hikes are the worst. While opposing a big tax cut, he stipulated, "If
I became concerned that the surplus is going to be employed for increased
spending programs, [then] I would be strongly in favor of tax cuts now. I think
it's the second best alternative." In short, whether Greenspan supports a tax
cut depends on which alternative it's compared to.

            To
make the tax cut look bad, Democrats compare it to debt payment. At the
hearing, Rep. John LaFalce, D-N.Y., asked Greenspan whether he opposed the
Republican plan. "My first priority, if I were given such a priority, is to let
the surpluses run," Greenspan replied. LaFalce tried to quit while he was
ahead, but Greenspan insisted on adding, "My second priority is, if you find
that as a consequence of those surpluses, they tend to be spent, then I would
be far more in the camp of cutting taxes, because the least desirable [outcome]
is using those surpluses for expanding outlays." In their post-hearing spin,
Democrats ignored this caveat. Rep. Brad Sherman, D-Calif., asserted that
Greenspan had "attacked the Republican Party." Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill.,
suggested that Greenspan's analysis made clear that a $500 billion tax cut was
just as "dangerous" as an $800 billion tax cut.

            
Conversely, to make the tax cut look good, Republicans compare it to spending
hikes. "My understanding from all you've said here today," Rep. Michael Castle,
R-Del., told Greenspan at the hearing, "is that you believe that debt
retirement is probably the best thing we could do. And if not that, perhaps
some sort of a tax cut. But probably the thing that could really get us in
trouble in an economic sense from your perspective is to spend it all." In
post-hearing TV appearances, House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas, and
Senate Budget Committee Chairman Pete Domenici, R-N.M., argued that Greenspan's
essential message was to "be sure you do not increase government spending."

            

               2. Is Clinton's plan debt payment or spending? President
Clinton's alternative plan would reserve about 45 percent of future surpluses
for Social Security and Medicare while setting aside nearly 20 percent for
education, defense, veterans, agriculture, medical research, and other
programs. Armey and Domenici call this "spending." "The president is going to
spend every nickel" of the surplus, Domenici protested, "so Alan Greenspan
would agree with us" that taxes should be cut instead. "The White House is
buying down less debt, and increasing spending, and increasing taxes," added
Armey. "I'm sure Alan Greenspan will applaud our effort relative to the
president's effort to buy down less debt and increase government programs."
Conversely, Durbin spun Clinton's plan as debt payment. He claimed that when
Greenspan was asked whether he supported the tax cut, he said no. "The best
thing to do is the Democratic plan: spend down [the] national debt, invest the
money in Social Security and Medicare."

            

               3. Which excess would be harder to reverse? Since tax cuts and
spending erode the surplus, Greenspan is wary of both. Democrats, seeking to
direct his ire against the Republican plan, emphasize the difficulty of reining
in tax cuts once they've been promised. At the hearing, Rep. Ken Bentsen,
D-Texas, asked Greenspan about the "risks" of "having locked in a tax cut that
we then have to borrow more to pay for." Afterward, Durbin suggested that
Greenspan didn't want Congress to "get committed" to tax cuts. Republicans, on
the other hand, emphasize the difficulty of reining in spending. "If you create
all those new programs, you'll never get that money back," Sen. Phil Gramm,
R-Texas, argued, whereas if the money goes to tax cuts, "[y]ou could get it
back by raising taxes."

            

               4. Whose promise is less trustworthy? Democrats promise to
preserve the surplus for debt reduction by not spending it. Republicans promise
to preserve the surplus for debt reduction by cutting spending to keep pace
with their tax cuts. The Republican interpretation of Greenspan's remarks--that
taxes should be cut because the Democrats can't be trusted to refrain from
spending the surplus--obscures the contrary possibility, i.e., that the tax cut
should be avoided because the GOP can't be trusted to make the necessary
spending cuts. Democrats neglected to ask Greenspan about this possibility at
the hearing, but on Face the Nation , Bob Schieffer of CBS put the
argument to Domenici: "Some people would come back at you and say, 'Look, for
this surplus to be this large, you have to have a 20 percent reduction in
programs, [which is] totally unrealistic.' "

            So
far, the Democrats' spin has prevailed, mostly because, as the Wall Street
Journal noted Tuesday, the media have ignored Greenspan's caveat that tax
cuts are preferable to more spending. Most reports say only that he opposed the
Republican plan. None of the New York Times ' political stories or
editorials about Greenspan's testimony mentioned his qualified endorsement of
the tax cut. Instead, the Times fed its readers the Democrats'
comparison, noting that Greenspan said, "it is more important to pay down the
national debt than cut taxes." The Times ' only mention of Greenspan's
caveat was in the 15 th paragraph of a story in the business section,
which dismissed the caveat and concluded that "effectively, Mr. Greenspan was
siding with the White House" and other foes of the Republican plan. A
Times editorial chided Republicans for "seeking Greenspanian ambiguity
where it did not exist."

            This
shallow reporting doesn't just bury the Republican spin. It conceals a deeper
question about Washington's Greenspan worship. The Fed chairman made clear that
his recommendation against cutting taxes depends on a calculation that Congress
won't spend the surplus. If that calculation is wrong, he would favor the tax
cut. And on what basis did Greenspan make this calculation? His only answer was
that he "hoped" he wasn't mistaken.

            Not
only is Greenspan's answer scientifically baseless; his characterization of the
problem (whether the surpluses will "be spent") is superficial. The salient
questions, outlined above, are more relative and dynamic: whether Democratic
promises to refrain from spending the surplus are less trustworthy than
Republican promises to match tax cuts with spending cuts, and which
hypothetical error--excessive spending or excessive tax cuts--would be harder
to reverse. How could an economist of Greenspan's sophistication fumble such
important questions in such an unsophisticated manner? Because, like most
questions about how much money the government will raise and spend, they're not
economic. They're political. And instead of throwing these questions at Alan
Greenspan, Congress should be answering them itself.

            
               Photograph of Alan
Greenspan on the Slate Table of Contents by Kevin
Lamarque/Reuters.
            

         
      
   
