
   
   
      
         
            Offspring Obligations

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               The twit who inquired about dissing the offspring of the discarded relatives needs
perhaps something more along the lines of a swift kick in the rear. If these
are older children, as is suggested by requests for letters of recommendation
and invites to graduations, then these are more or less formed people, who
deserve to be accepted or rejected on their own merits--not for any slight
their parents may or may not have committed. Anything less is the moral
equivalent of present-day Jews not buying a new VW Beetle because it's made by
a German company, a sort of inherited grudge, if not racism.
            

            
               In England, they
think people are important, or not, based on their birth. This is America, and
we hold that people deserve to be admired or respected because they have earned
respect or admiration.
            

            
               --Yours,
            

            

               Mike C., Brunswick, Maine
            

            Dear Mike,

            Though Prudie doubts the
estranged relative will be swayed by your opinion, Prudie agrees with you and
hopes that your thoughts might make a difference in someone else's
thinking.

            
--Prudie, agreeably

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               We have close
friends who have us to their home for dinner almost every week. (The wife
doesn't want to go out or come to our house.) When we're there, however, she
spends a large part of the evening on the phone or on the computer. Her husband
says she actually spends less time on either because we're there. Should we be
honored or insulted?
            

            

               --Insulted and Ignored
            

            Dear Ig,

            I don't know what her problem is, but I bet it's
hard to pronounce. The mistake that is commonly made about neurotics is to
suppose that they are interesting. It is not interesting to be engrossed with
oneself and socially idiosyncratic. Or rude.

            It sounds to Prudie as
though there is a genuine friendship amongst the four of you, though given the
wife's peculiarities, it may be that the man is the primary friend. If this has
been going on for a long time, which is what Prudie infers, go along with the
program without being honored or insulted. The woman's behavior has little to
do with you. For whatever reason, she is glued to her house and not interested
in social intercourse. Prudie hopes, by the way, that the hospitality-free
hostess is a good cook.

            
--Prudie, understandingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               As you no doubt know, living with roommates is
no longer just a college thing. Many single adults live with other nonrelated
adults to defray the high cost of city rents. I currently share a four-bedroom
house with three other people. Here's the problem: Three of us don't like the
fourth and are unsure of how to get rid of him.
            

            
               What's wrong with Roommate No. 4? Well, that's
difficult to put a name to. He does his chores, pays rent on time, isn't noisy
at night, and isn't messy. The problem is he's a know-it-all with something
negative to say about everything. What makes the situation difficult is that
there's no obvious reason to ask him to leave, and he seems intent on staying.
It's to the point where at least two of us bristle when we hear him come
through the door. He is oblivious.
            

            
               We aren't
comfortable saying, "We just don't like you. Please leave." Is there a polite
way to tell him, "This just isn't working out"? Is that even legal? I'm the
only original lease-signer still living in the house, and we now rent
month-to-month. He's lived here a little over two years. Your assistance is
appreciated.
            

            
               --Sincerely,
            

            

               Have a Nice Life Somewhere Else
            

            Dear Have,

            Prudie has met people like the roommate you
describe. She calls them The World's Greatest Experts, because they know
everything. But to answer your question: There is nothing legally tricky in
your situation, though you might have to give him a month's notice. On
month-to-month tenancies, tenant or landlord has to give notice, usually
equivalent to the period of rent payments. This may not apply to nonsignatory
roommates, but it seems the decent thing.

            There is nothing wrong
with saying, "This isn't working well," or "Sometimes it's just time for a
change." Prudie would say, simply because she couldn't resist, "We don't know
how to tell you this, but the three of us are seeing someone else."

            
--Prudie, puckishly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Am I obliged to
return a voice mail that is garbled ... where the name of the person and most
of the message is garbled (because the caller is slurring), but the number is
the only understandable part of the message?
            

            

               --Slurred Off in Melbourne, Australia
            

            Dear Slur,

            This all depends on the mood you're in. Unclear
messages are annoying, and you have every right to ignore them. If the number,
however, is clear, and you're feeling charitable, you might call back and say,
"This is Slurred Off. I have no idea what you said in your message, but I am
returning your call."

            If the number is
familiar to you, this may help to decide which way you're going to play it. And
just FYI, if people think it's important to reach you, they will keep trying.
And keep in mind that we are dealing with machinery. Slurred messages are not
always signs of Jim Beam or careless callers. They may, in fact, be courtesy of
faulty microchips.

            
--Prudie, clearly

            
               Dear Prudie,
            

            
               In re "In Need of Help in Ohio ," I think I am half of "this other
couple who invited us to be their guests at a minor league baseball game." I
think I'll call and let them off the hook, maybe schedule a dinner or something
...
            

            

               --D.
            

            Dear D.,

            How wonderful that both
parties in a dilemma are reading Prudie! This just proves that virtual reality
is its own reward.

            --Prudie, ecstatically

         
      
   
