
   
   
      
         
            Nuclear Infusion 

            

               Massive radiation leaked from a Japanese nuclear fuel plant.
Three employees were hospitalized, and 300,000 residents were ordered to remain
indoors. U.S. experts said the threat to widespread health appeared small. The
nuclear industry's spin: This was no Chernobyl . Environmentalists' spin: Do we need another
Chernobyl to realize that nuclear power isn't safe ?

            

               Vice President Al Gore shook up his campaign. He is moving his
headquarters from Washington to Tennessee and challenging Bill Bradley to a
series of debates. Gore said he'll assemble a "leaner, tougher" organization to
respond to Bradley, who has recently raised more money than Gore. The rosy
spin: The return to his roots will show that Gore is independent from
Washington ( Nashville Tennessean ). The skeptical spin: Put the
headquarters where you will, but a vice president is never an outsider.

            

               The Brooklyn Museum of Art filed suit to prevent New York City from
withdrawing its funding. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has halted checks to
the museum because of its "Sensation" exhibit, which includes a dissected pig
suspended in formaldehyde and a painting of the Virgin Mary that's adorned with
elephant dung. Giuliani's spin: Artists are guaranteed freedom, not taxpayer
support. The museum's spin: When you withdraw support for unpopular views, you
violate this freedom. The jaded spin: The debate is less about principles than
about self-promotion. (
                  Slate
               's "" and "" debated
Giuliani's move.)

            

               President Clinton signed a temporary spending bill. It will
fund agencies at current levels for three weeks as Congress and the White House
negotiate the 2000 budget. Separately, a Congressional Budget Office study
concluded that current budget proposals would spend nearly $18 billion of the
Social Security surplus. The Democratic spin: Republican promise-breakers are
raiding Social Security. The Republican spin: The Democrats are the real
raiders since they won't cut spending.

            

               Dan Quayle quit the presidential race, and John McCain entered
it. Quayle said he had insufficient funds to remain competitive with
George W. Bush. Pundits variously said Quayle's withdrawal revealed: 1)
moderates' control of the GOP; 2) the influence of money over presidential
politics; and 3) Quayle's lingering reputation "as a lightweight" ( New York
Times ). McCain framed himself as the candidate of patriotism and integrity,
promising to reform campaign finance and strengthen national defense. Pundits
debated whether his platform would: 1) differentiate him from Bush; or 2)
alienate him from the Republican establishment.
(
                  Slate
               's William Saletan McCain's messages.)

            

               Amazon.com opened its Web site to sales by other retailers.
Anyone can list products through Amazon by paying a monthly fee and a
percentage of each transaction. Amazon's zShops began Thursday with 500,000 new
products. Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos asserted that his company was becoming the
Internet's supermall. Skeptics worried that poor products or service from
unknown merchants could tarnish Amazon's reputation (
                  Seattle Post-Intelligencer
               ).

            

               The Indonesian army is withdrawing from East Timor. U.N.
peacekeeping forces now officially control the territory and are encouraging
exiled refugees to return home. Australian troops discovered nine charred
bodies, the first physical evidence of human rights abuses. The hopeful spin:
It's safe to live in East Timor again. The gloomy spin: Most Timorese don't
have homes to go back to.

            

               Ronald Reagan's biographer wrote himself into the story as a fictional
character. The forthcoming book portrays author Edmund Morris as
Reagan's contemporary. 
                  Newsweek
                featured an excerpt of the book. Former Reagan
aides called the book "pure fiction," and George Will dubbed it "dishonorable" for its distortions.
But Gore Vidal said the mixing of fact with fantasy was appropriate for a
president "whose life owed so little to Parson Weems and so much to
Pirandello." (
                  Slate
               's "Culturebox" Morris' literary
device.)

            

               Pat Buchanan will likely switch his presidential campaign to the Reform
Party. Buchanan, who sparked controversy with a new book questioning
the need for U.S. intervention in World War II, has been increasingly vocal
about his frustration with GOP moderates. The Republican and Reform parties are
divided over whether 1) Buchanan's views are too extreme to be included; or 2)
his conservative constituency is too valuable to be excluded. Democrats are
unanimous: When the dust settles, we'll come out on top.
(
                  Slate
               's "Pundit Central" the debate.)

            

               The United States won golf's Ryder Cup. The Americans'
one-point victory over the European team was the biggest comeback in the
tournament's history. American Justin Leonard's 45-foot birdie putt on the
17 th hole set off a celebration on the course before his European
opponent finished playing. Both teams called the win historic: The United
States said it was golf's "greatest moment" (ESPN);
the Europeans labeled the celebration "the most disgusting thing" the sport had
seen (ESPN).

         
      
   
