
   
   
      
         
            No. 316: &quot;Don't Do It, Deacon Don!&quot;

            
               Deacon Don Thomas
of the Lily of the Valley Church of God in Christ in Fairbanks, Alaska, defends
what he does to reach the community: "Yeah, we want to compel people to come to
Christ, but at the same time we don't want to intrude on people. I think
there's a big difference." What does Deacon Don do?
            

            
               ( Question
courtesy of Charlie Glassenberg. )
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
315)--"Cool, Calm, Rejected":
            

            

               
                  
                     "They're taking something that's about as likely to
happen as a meteorite falling on your head and telling everybody that it could
happen any time," said Dr. Merlin D. Tuttle, about those worrywarts at the New
York State Health Department. Name that exaggerated (or not)
danger.
                  
               
            

            "A
meteorite falling on your head."-- Katha Pollitt and David Feige
( Marshall Efron , Tim Carvell , Eric Berlin , Richard
Nikonovich-Kahn , Francis Heaney , and Dave Gaffen had similar
answers.)

            
"Paintings containing elephant dung falling on your head."-- Merrill
Markoe
            

            
"Merlin D. Tuttle falling on your head."-- Susan Vance
            

            "Being
christened 'Merlin D. Tuttle.' "-- Colleen Werthmann (similarly,
Richard Nikonovich-Kahn )

            "I'm
taking 3-to-2 odds that he gave himself that name."-- Merlin Carvell
            

            "You
wake up one bright autumn morning and you're halfway to the subway when you
decide to walk to work instead. But you don't go to work. Instead, somehow, you
find yourself at the Central Park Zoo. The zoo just opened and there's no one
there and it's clear and bright and so quiet you can hear the seals break the
water as they circle their pool and the gulls fighting the kept birds for their
seed. You close your eyes and think about other mornings, mornings on the
boats, back in Nova Scotia. The wet wool smell of your uncles in their Eaton's
sweaters and army surplus peacoats and shredded wheat for breakfast and thin
ice on the tide pools and diesel as the engines kick in. Then you hear another
noise, a cry for help! It's winsome and multitalented Reese Witherspoon, and
she's accidentally dropped her new baby in the polar bear cage! You don't
think, you just act, and endless seconds later the baby is back in Reese
Witherspoon's arms. But something else is bothering Reese. She's crying, but
they're not just tears of relief because you saved her baby from a polar bear.
Something deeper is wrong. Ryan just isn't the man she thought she married ...
he's not real ... like you ... and that's when you get hit by the
meteorite."-- Chris Kelly
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            When is a threat real and when is it exaggerated
for political interest, like the missile gap, or the bomber gap, or the 80
death threats against New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani this year, up from last
year's total of 77? That danger is very, very real declared Deputy Chief Daniel
Oates, testifying in federal court Monday as to why protests on the steps of
City Hall must be limited to 50 people, a limitation set for the first time in
the city's history.

            "I have to take the position that anyone in that
crowd might have some evil intent," said the chief. "And that you are an evil
space robot. Taste lead, evil robot! Blam! Blam! Blam!" he did not add.

            The chief stressed that
this beefed-up security is in no way intended to stifle dissent. Nor is it
evidence of a megalomaniac mayor with a puffed up sense of self-importance. Nor
is it simply a chance for any city official to indulge a personal taste for
martial law, surrounding himself with a hunky praetorian guard, manly men whose
manliness glistens in the light of their boots, burnished to a fine sheen by
the sweaty exertions of muscular comrades in arms who--I'm sorry. Could you
repeat the question?

            
               Caught

               Unawares Answer
            

            The New York State Health Department warns that you
might be bitten by a rabid bat and not even know it. Merlin D. Tuttle thinks
they're a bunch of hysterics. The health department. Not the bats, of whom only
3 percent to 4 percent are rabid, and if they bit you, you'd know it.

            The NYSHD recommends rabies shots if a bat is found
in the same room with a sleeping person or unattended child, even if it is not
known if the person has been bitten or if the bat has rabies or if the child is
very nice.

            To help sound the alarm, the NYSHD distributes a
"Bat Rabies Alert" refrigerator magnet and a poster with a sinister bat
silhouette: "If you see me, tell an adult." Says the bat, not Pat Buchanan, who
probably doesn't have rabies either.

            Bat Conservation International, the organization in
whose magazine Merlin D. Tuttle made his comment, says that there has never
been a case of rabies from an unnoticed bite. But that doesn't impress the
NYSHD's comically named spokeswoman Claire Pospisil. (A name even sillier than
Merlin D. Tuttle. Imagine the childhood teasing. There must be days when she
yearns for the sweet release of an unnoticed bite from a rabid bat.) "Let's say
you wake up in a room and there's a bat in there and the bat flies out the
window," says Pospisil, hoping to be taken seriously. "The health department
would recommend you get treatment."

            The treatment comprises six injections over 28 days
and costs about $1,000. If untreated, rabies is fatal.

            New York state has
recorded only a single bat rabies fatality in 45 years. It was not Pat
Buchanan.

            

               Technologically 
               Blessed Extra
            

            A company called
Tsu-Tech is promoting
the Panasonic Inti-Mist Personal Hygiene System, a high-tech toilet seat.
Beneath a headline that makes the indisputable claim "Comfort You Never
Expected," is this list of features:

            

               Bidet Shower

               Anti-Slam Seat

               Heated Seat

               Dryer

               Family Shower (Anus Washing)

            

            Now, I don't know about
your family, but ...

            
               Chris

               Kelly's Warren Adler Is Only a Symptom Extra
            

            "My novels explore the mysteries behind love and
hate, the darkly amusing, deeply disturbing" blah, blah, blah, I'm so
scrumptious, me, me, me, concludes writer Warren Adler about his own work.

            Participants are invited
to submit other actual examples of writers finding similar delight in their own
wonderfulness. Replies to run Thursday.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Encephalitis and elephant dung.

         
      
   
