
   
   
      
         
            No. 287: &quot;First-Class Male&quot;

            
               When Fred
Fournier, a health insurance broker in Novato, Calif., goes to the post office,
the employees gather round: "They say, 'Boy, that's neat!' " What do the postal
workers admire?*
            

            
               (*a gun-free
question)
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 286)--"Supplies Party":
            

            

               Vinyl rope, magnets, large nails--what's the connection?
            

            "One
can only have so many face lifts."-- Colleen Werthmann
            

            "The
next three Russian prime ministers."-- Charlie Glassenberg
            

            
"Things used to prop up the Queen Mum for her birthday photo-ops?"-- Trey
Adams
            

            "Items
not on display at the check-out counter of my local CVS drugstore (except for
the magnets and vinyl rope)."-- Keith Kurtz
            

            "These
things are in such short supply in North Korea that they have to be smuggled in
in the stomachs of South Korean cows."-- Mark Myers
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            The rope, the magnet, and the nail comprise a fine
set of fasteners. Indeed, we live in the golden age of attaching one thing to
another thing--bolts, rivets, screws, glue, tape, Velcro, staples, giant rubber
bands, various forms of welding, some of which are practiced by cool robots,
suction cups, funtac--I could go on. But I'll tell you this: There is no
fastener--however great the tensile strength of its carbon fibers, however
powerful the chemical bonds of its space-age polymers--that can hold together a
marriage without love, without trust, and without communication.

            (This has been a News
Quiz/Lifetime Television Romantic Moment. Promotional fee paid.)

            
               Magic Beans
Answer
            

            North Korean authorities say autopsies turned up
all these items in the stomachs of dead cows, part of a charity herd trucked
north by South Korea's Hyundai group.

            Last summer Chung Ju Yung, Hyundai's billionaire
founder, donated 500 head of cattle to the famine-stricken North. Now about
half the cows are dead. The North accused the South of sabotage; the South
denied it, but North Korean vets still searched the cattle carcasses for
suspicious viruses and electronic devices. "It was absolutely untrue that we
planted any type of surveillance device on the cows," says a spokesman for the
South's intelligence service.

            Chung donated the cows
to honor a family debt. As a young man, he stole his father's cow, sold it, and
used the money to head south to make his fortune. He has since donated an
additional 500 cows; their fate is unknown.

            
               The Object of My
Reflection Extra
            

            Match each subject with
its object to complete the sentence and determine what is being reflected.

            
               Subjects
            

            1. Tina Brown, editor's note, Talk : "New
voices are everywhere. We would have a chance to bring some of them together to
reflect ..."

            2. Tina Brown, same magazine, same piece, same lame
figure of speech: "Of course, we needed a new format, one that would reflect
..."

            3. Xinhua news agency headline: "People's Daily
Says Li Hongzhi's Fallacies Reflect ..."

            4. Newsweek press release, announcing Susan
Faludi piece on Atlanta: "Recent Shootings Were Acts of Individual Madness, but
Also Reflect ..."

            5. Company Press Release: "LaunchPad Technologies,
an idealab! company that recently acquired PointCast, today announced it has
changed its name to EntryPoint to reflect ..."

            6. Company Press Release: "Neuron Data 'Blazes' Its
Way Into the Internet Self-Service Market. Changes Name to Blaze Software to
Reflect ..."

            7. Company Press
Release: "Maxnet, Inc.'s name has been changed to MaxPlanet, Corp. MXNT has
changed its name to reflect ..."

            
               Objects
            

            A. "... a point of view, a marriage of emotion and
ideas."

            B. "...the accelerated boom and flack of modern
American life."

            C. "... Dangerous Political Aims."

            D. "... Pressures of Changed Society on American
Men"

            E. "... its powerful new desktop 'EntryPoint' to
the Internet."

            F. "... Runaway Success of Its WebPersonalization
Engine."

            G. "... its diversified
Internet development and marketing business."

            
               Answers
            

            
               1-A, 2-B, 3-C, 4-D,
5-E, 6-F, 7-G.
            

            
               Extra Credit
            

            Compare and contrast the
accelerated boom and flack of modern American life with the pressures of
changed society on American men. Illustrate. With photographs. Of
celebrities.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Cocaine-snorting presidential candidates.

         
      
   
