
   
   
      
         
            
<P>Is the &quot;Sensation&quot; Art Worth the Fuss?</P>

            
               
                  Click
here to view the entire "Sensation" show
online.
               
            

            Hey, are you the same Deborah Solomon I thought you
were? The author of sensitive biographies of Jackson Pollock and Joseph
Cornell? And you say Sarah Lucas is major ?

            Margaret Thatcher, whom I quote with trepidation
following your comments on the unappeased longings of conservatives, once
observed that there was no female equivalent of the (masculine) word "puerile."
"Puerile" is surely the only word for Lucas. Her gendered mattress is the kind
of garbage an immature college student would turn out the night before an exam
in a desperate bid to seem iconoclastic and "relevant." It is a squalid
irrelevance even in the context of "Sensation," but "major" would put her in
bed with the leading artists of our time, e.g. Lucian Freud--now, he
knows what to do with a mattress! And the idea that an oblique, hardly probable
cross-reference to Rauschenberg's quilts helps Lucas on the path to greatness
is risible (the jury is still out on Rauschenberg, anyway). More likely with an
artist of Lucas' intellect and attention span is that her work is a mock homage
to the cast mattresses of Rachel Whiteread--as her chum Tracy Emin's resin-cast
urinals, exhibited in New York earlier this year, are a mock homage to
Whiteread, via Duchamp.

            In vaunting two of the nastiest and silliest
exhibits in "Sensation" (you have a soft spot for Mat Collishaw's bullet hole
because it reminds you of some other orifice, you say), you expose a disturbing
infatuation with literalness, that precious "real life" you tell me you want in
art. It is this quality--or lack of quality--of simply transplanting the real
and making it into "shocking" art, which is in my opinion the bane of
contemporary art today, nowhere more painfully than at the Brooklyn Museum. By
this stage in art history we can surely draw a line under appropriation. Some
genuine artists earlier in the century did inspired things with the found
object and unleashed extraordinary images, but the spurious alchemy of lifting
things unmediated from the common culture and plonking them down in the art
gallery is truly exhausted now that it has become the academic norm. It rests
on a contradiction: It demystifies skill and imagination, and yet relies on
artists having privileged elective powers.

            Your cravings for "real
life" and youthful exuberance lead you to exactly the same folly as the popular
press: You focus on the sensationalist at the expense of the subtle and
reflective. Vastly more provocative and unsettling, in my opinion, than the
ludicrous Lucas, is Jane Simpson's Sacred : a vanity chest that is
colored like skin (or is it smudged lipstick?) and oozes dry ice and is almost
anthropomorphic in its voluptuous, erogenous curves. It doesn't jump at one's
throat with an obvious, sexual-political meaning, but evokes genuine, enriching
ambiguity. It is an old-fashioned sculpture in respect of its interplay of
forms, of the way all the elements feel like they have been thought through in
relation to the pervasive mood of the finished work. These elements--surface,
shape, color, associations--add up to something substantial, a variety of
sensations rather than merely "a" sensation. This is what I think art should
do. Anyone else who thinks the same way, come join me in the closet.

            David

         
      
   
