
   
   
      
         
            No. 286: &quot;Supplies Party&quot;

            
               Vinyl rope,
magnets, large nails. What's the connection?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 285)--"Sir, Counterintuitive, Sir!":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           Secretary of the Army Louis Caldera has
announced a plan that will put more guns in American high schools. What is this
program called?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Puberty."-- Alison Rogers
            

            "Take
Your Father to School Day."--Norm Oder
            

            
"Project Louie Caldera's Kid Gets an A in Math or Else!"-- Erich Van
Dussen
            

            
"Coca-Cola and the U.S. Army Present 'Shoot a Pepsi Drinker and Win a Guest
Spot on Dawson's Creek ' Contest."-- Charlie Glassenberg
            

            
"Whatever, just so long as they're not singing 'Mony Mony.' "-- Colleen
Werthmann
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            The admonition, "You
become what you behold," has yielded to "You become what you belittle." We
Americans mocked the militarism of German youth in the '30s, and now we're
embracing Louis Caldera's ballistic schemes. In the '50s, we taunted the clunky
cars of the U.S.S.R. for their farm-wagon squareness; now we drive cool SUVs.
The joys of deriding portly Austrian burghers in the '60s haven't prevented us
from becoming a nation of American fatties. Nor has the fun we all had sneering
at England's squandering its North Sea oil windfall in the '70s and '80s kept
the Republican Party from proposing to give away the budget surplus to their
rich constituents. The frightening conclusion, if mockery precedes mimicry, is
that any minute now we'll all be working for Tina Brown.

            
               Lock and Load
Answer
            

            The program is the Junior Reserve Officer Training
Corps.

            To meet what it calls a growing demand from high
schools, the Army will double its JROTC by the 2000-2001 academic year, adding
it to 50 more high schools in 18 states, for a total of 1,420. After that, 50
more schools will be added annually for the next five years. There were 230,000
kids in the program last year. The Army will supply various pieces of
equipment, including guns for the kids' marksmanship training.

            Taught by retired Army
guys, JROTC courses cover history, current events, technology, communications,
physical fitness, and the ever popular shooting. Militaristic? You bet! But the
good kind of militaristic. "By expanding the JROTC, the Army is broadening its
investment in America's young people through a program that emphasizes the
values that have made our country great," says Caldera. "Insert your own dark
joke about those values," he did not add.

            
               Nominal
Extra
            

            Once left to
talented--or not--amateurs, naming new products is now frequently the task of
outside specialists. But has professionalizing this chore resulted in richly
evocative names? Can you tell what sort of products the following are (each
advertised in Sunday's New York Times )?

            
               Names
            

            1. Tiempo

            2. Aero

            3. Altima

            4. DaVinci 2

            5. Tango 3

            6. Rav 4

            7. Turbo Power 1500

            8. Rebel 2000

            9. Freedom Supreme

            10.
Cambridge Cherry

            

               Products
            

            1. Nike soccer shoe

            2. Compaq PalmPiloty
thing

            3. Nissan carish sort of
thing

            4. Another PalmPilotish
thing

            5. Adidas soccer ball

            6. Toyota SUV

            7. Hoover vacuum
cleaner

            8. Canon 35mm camera

            9. Minolta camera

            10. Fake Queen Anne
bedroom set from Drexel Heritage furniture

         
      
   
