
   
   
      
         
            The Kosovo Killing Fields

            In a
report picked up by Canada's National Post to lead its front page
Monday, the Observer of London said Sunday that hundreds of documents
discovered after the Yugoslav retreat from Kosovo prove that the ethnic
cleansing there had been "meticulously planned and ordered from Belgrade." "The
papers provide crucial evidence linking massacres that claimed an estimated
14,000 lives to Serb army generals and police commanders all the way up to
President Slobodan Milosevic," the Observer reported from Pristina. It
said most of the documents are now in the hands of the intelligence service of
the Kosovo Liberation Army, which has claimed that "nothing happened in Kosovo
without it being planned and organised in Belgrade."

            
Several British papers led with pictures of the eccentric young British
violinist Nigel Kennedy performing a "concert for peace" at the Sava Concert
Hall in Belgrade Monday. The Guardian of London said several members of the government,
including Serbian president Milan Milutinovic, attended the concert Sunday--the
first in Yugoslavia by a leading Western musician since the war--but were
barred from visiting the musician backstage by his staff "who wanted to avoid
an embarrassing photo-opportunity." But Kennedy told his ecstatic audience that
the Serbs were "a warm, friendly people who did not deserve to be bombed." "I
came to Belgrade to see if you were all right and succeeded in staying alive,"
he added.

            With
regard to the India-Pakistan conflict in Kashmir, the Times of India reported
Monday from Srinagar that nearly 500 "personal bodyguards" of America's most
wanted terrorist, the Saudi billionaire Osama Bin Laden, were fighting in
Kashmir on the Pakistani side. They had fled to Kashmir from Afghanistan as the
United States began to close in on their boss, the paper said. The whereabouts
of Bin Laden himself is not known. The Times of India said U.S. agencies
believed he could be in the Kargil area of Kashmir but added there was not any
concrete evidence of this.

            The
Hindu ,
another Indian daily, reported India's concern about its future relations with
China after the state-owned China Daily called Saturday for an "immediate ceasefire" in
Kashmir. The Hindu said this was clearly a pro-Pakistani comment and a
departure from China's neutrality in the dispute. It suggested that Beijing
might be changing its tune because of growing fears of United States' meddling
in the region. But the paper added: "If China is really worried about possible
American gains from the Kargil crisis, it should hardly be advocating a
ceasefire. Instead it should be demanding that Pakistan withdraw the armed
aggression and remove any excuse for Western intervention."

            The
crisis in Northern Ireland led the front pages Monday of several European
newspapers, including Germany's Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung . With British Prime Minister
Tony Blair having set midnight on Wednesday, June 30, as the "absolute"
deadline for agreement on implementing the Ulster peace deal, British papers
were pessimistic. The problem has been a refusal by the loyalist Protestant
leadership to allow the republican Catholic Sinn Fein party a role in the newly
developed government of the province unless its military wing, the Irish
Republican Army, starts handing in its weapons.

            The
conservative Daily Telegraph of London said Monday in an editorial that the
decommissioning of arms has not begun because Sinn Fein "knows that its power
derives from violence and the threat of violence, and so it does not want to
sacrifice that power." The paper strongly supported the loyalist refusal to
share power with Sinn Fein under these circumstances. "If Sinn Fein come into
the executive this week, something new in the history of our parliamentary
democracy will have taken place," the Telegraph said. "An armed group
will be taking part in government. The power of a private army will, for the
first time, be exercised through out institutions." The paper reported,
meanwhile, that republican and loyalist terrorist groups are both preparing for
new violence.

            The
Times of
London took the same view, saying that a power-sharing executive without an IRA
commitment to disarmament "would be less a democratic political body than
bureaucratic cover for a protection racket." The Independent , however,
criticized Blair for setting an unreal deadline for the peace talks. The
situation was not like Yugoslavia, where a compromise between NATO and
Milosevic would have been a disaster, the paper said. If the republican and
loyalist leaders haven't reached agreement by midnight Wednesday, "[t]he sky
stays where it is," the paper said. "They simply have to keep trying, and Mr.
Blair will have lost an important modicum of credibility."

            In an
editorial Monday, the Guardian urged Bill Clinton to stand by Hillary during a New
York Senate campaign that would see "the dirty laundry of the past eight years
recycled," new tensions in the Democratic camp, and "a hot reception, no
punches pulled" from New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. Feeling betrayed and
humiliated by the Monica Lewinsky business, Hillary had considered a
separation, but "in the end she stayed and supported her husband when he needed
her most." "Message to Bill: as Hillary heads for New York, it's payback time,"
concluded the Guardian .

         
      
   
