
   
   
      
         
            Sieg Haider

            The
electoral surge of the far right in Austria made the front pages of most
European newspapers Monday. In Germany, it led the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
and the Süddeutsche
Zeitung of Munich, but curiously not Die Welt , which confined the story to an inside page.
The Italian papers raised the loudest alarm. In La Repubblica of Rome,
columnist Bernardo Valli said the achievement of the Austrian Freedom Party in
getting more than 27 percent of the vote in the general election was "a slap in
the face" for Europe. The party's leader, Jörg Haider, who has praised Hitler
and described former SS soldiers as "decent men of character," won a share of
the vote almost double that ever achieved by the xenophobic French party of
Jean-Marie Le Pen, he said. (Le Pen has never got more than 15 percent.) The
result could only be regarded as worrying, even "obscene," by Austria's
neighbors, especially since Austria is now a member of the European Union,
which espouses principles quite different to Haider's.

            

               Corriere della
Sera ran a front-page cartoon showing Hitler as a jack-in-the box
making the Nazi salute and shouting, "Sieg Haider!" Its eight-column headline
was: "Austria, the hour of the extreme right." Much of the press comment
stressed the importance of keeping the Freedom Party from joining a new
governing coalition. The Times of London, noting that Haider's result "has thrown the
country's politics into turmoil, frightened investors and brought closer to
power the leader of the largest and most radical far-right party in Europe,"
said Monday in an editorial that it is a disaster for Social Democrat
Chancellor Viktor Klima, an embarrassment for Austria, and "a triumph for a man
whose political prejudices have shattered the country's cosy and often corrupt
consensus." If Klima cannot form a government, Haider is next in line, it said.
"For much of Europe, that would be unthinkable: the ghosts of the Nazi past
have never been properly exorcised in the land of Hitler's birth, and the image
of the right-wing leader, denouncing foreigners as criminal, calling for the
expulsion of asylum-seekers and denouncing the European Union, would make the
international storm over Kurt Waldheim seem nothing by comparison."

            
Following the close of polling in the Indian elections Sunday, Corriere
della Sera announced on its front page that, according to exit polls,
Congress Party leader Sonia Gandhi, Italian widow of the assassinated Rajiv
Gandhi, has clearly lost to the nationalists, although the official results
won't be known until Wednesday. Indian papers led on the deaths of 18 people in
violence during the final phase of polling, about which the Times of India quoted
the chief election commissioner's conclusion: "It's gone off well." In an
editorial, the paper said: "Hot air, floods, blood, death and abuse--these are
the abiding images of Election '99. ... Not all is well with the polity." The
editorial described Sonia Gandhi as "stiff and inarticulate" and said many
people considered her "a ventriloquist's puppet and an instrument of a
self-serving coterie." The future of the Gandhi dynasty, it suggested, rests on
her daughter Priyanka, whose "strength is her charm and her seeming ability to
communicate with people." But she will have to prove "she has a mind of her own
and intends to use it regularly."

            
British war correspondent Robert Fisk led the front page of the Independent of London
Monday with a scare story about health-endangering contamination in
Kosovo caused by the NATO airstrikes. "After insisting throughout its air
bombardment of Yugoslavia that its use of depleted uranium [DU] munitions
against Serb forces posed no hazard to human health, Nato officers in Kosovo
now admit that particles from their shells may have contaminated soil near
targets in Yugoslavia and could cause 'inhalation' problems, especially for
children," he wrote. In briefings to international aid workers in Pristina, one
K-For officer warned of "contaminated dust" at the scene of depleted uranium
munitions explosions and urged aid officials to stay 150 feet away from targets
hit in NATO airstrikes. But NATO cannot--or will not--say where it used DU
ordnance against Serb forces, Fisk wrote. He said that in Iraq, where the
United States fired more than 860,000 DU rounds during the 1991 Gulf War,
doctors subsequently found "an exponential increase in child cancers and
deformities" among families living close to the targets. "One Iraqi doctor's
report in Basra last year recorded three babies born without heads in August
along with four with abnormally large heads, six babies born with no heads in
September, and two with short limbs," he added. "In October 1998, another baby
was born without a head and four with oversize heads."

            The
Times of London led Monday with warnings from Irish police sources that
dissident Irish Republicans are planning a series of high-profile terrorist
attacks in Britain around the end of the year, including one on the Millennium
Dome in Greenwich, London. The planned bombing campaign by the Real IRA, as the
renegades call themselves, is considered by the police to be "a serious
threat," the paper said, and is designed to coincide with any millennium bug
computer problems.

            Harold
Evans, former editor of the Sunday Times and the Times of London
before he emigrated to America and became president of Random House, returned
to Fleet Street Monday as a columnist from the United States. The first of his biweekly columns for the Guardian on the
presidential election campaign is about the battle between Al Gore and Bill
Bradley for the Democratic nomination and how they are both currently
campaigning as underdogs. "The problem for both Gore and Bradley in the odd
game of chicken they are now playing is that neither will be electable if they
act the underdog for too long," Evans wrote. As a new American citizen, Evans
seems proud to use language that few British readers will understand, as in
this explanation of why Bradley relishes his underdog status: "He has happy
memories of those electric nights with the Knicks when he caught the opposition
napping with a last-second slam dunk."

            The Daily Telegraph fronted
a report from Paris that thousands of fish have been killed in the River Marne
by a surfeit of champagne. The fish, mainly pike, roach, and tench, died when
the residue of grapes from the last pressing was washed into the river by heavy
rains last week.

         
      
   
