
   
   
      
         
            Kenneth Starr: a &quot;Witty and Benign Companion&quot;

            In an
interview Tuesday with Britain's Daily Telegraph , Kenneth Starr accused President Clinton of
continuing to lie to the American people but reserved his harshest words for
Monica Lewinsky. The independent counsel's only stated regret was that he
didn't do enough to stop Congress publishing the most salacious material in his
report. He deplored Congress' decision to authorize publication of the
unexpurgated evidence instead of "screening and winnowing" it first. "I wish I
had done more to say to Congress: be careful," he said. Some of the most
sensitive evidence he gathered has never been made public, he said; and "had
the President seen fit to tell the truth, we would have been spared the
intrusive nature of the details." But he said that much of the information
published was vital to the credibility of Lewinsky's testimony.

            Starr
complained that even now, a year later, Clinton has "admitted no offences,
other than to have the inappropriate relationship, which is not a matter of
interest to federal law. To the contrary: he has very vigorously stated that he
at no time committed any federal offences." Starr said that "in one of the most
unfortunate episodes of the entire drama" Clinton made the decision, when his
relationship with Lewinsky came to light in January 1998, that he was not going
to tell the truth. He was advised by Dick Morris "that the American people
would readily forgive an adulterous relationship, but they would not be
forgiving of offences against the justice system. And the President informed
him, 'Well, we will just have to win, then.' Thus, instead of telling the
truth, admitting the facts and seeking forgiveness of family and nation, he
launched a campaign designed to erode confidence in the duly appointed system
of justice."

            Asked
if he regretted the personal distress suffered by Lewinsky, Starr replied:
"She--as an obviously highly intelligent young adult, a professional, a college
graduate--made a most unfortunate judgment, and that was that she would commit
federal crimes in order to obstruct the judicial process in the form of a
sexual harassment action [the Paula Jones case]. Not only that: she importuned
another person, Linda Tripp, to likewise engage in federal crimes. That was
serious business. She did it not on the spur of the moment; she did it over a
considerable period of time. She knowingly went to one of the most powerful
lawyers in the country, who in turn guided her to another lawyer to prepare
what she knew to be a perjurious affidavit. One should not blink at those kinds
of offences." Because of her decision "not to be readily forthcoming," Lewinsky
had "put the nation through seven months of a wretched and miserable 24-hour
news cycle," he said. "Miss Lewinsky did not co-operate until July 1998. This
could have been over in January." The enduring lesson of the whole affair,
Starr said, was that "we in the United States take the law seriously and that
we are all accountable."

            The
Telegraph , a conservative paper that was vigorously anti-Clinton
throughout the scandal, sponsored a lecture by Starr Tuesday. His interviewer
was much taken with him. "The grimly bespectacled prosecutor is only the public
face," he wrote. "In private, he is a witty and benign companion. He enjoys a
Martini and is relaxed on the subject of sex: by no means the prudish
teetotaller portrayed by the White House. One of the best legal minds of his
generation, he speaks in perfectly grammatical sentences, with the same
exhaustive precision as his celebrated report."

            In an
editorial Wednesday headlined "Gore's Burden," the Times of London said
Vice President Al Gore's virtues are largely being ignored in the election
campaign because of his "intense and inevitable association with President
Clinton--to whom some 55 per cent of the electorate believe that Mr Gore is
'too close' for their comfort." If he is to beat Bill Bradley for the
Democratic nomination, "he must emerge as something more than the President's
favoured successor," the paper said. "Mr Clinton secured the White House as the
candidate of change. In this respect, at least, Mr Gore has lessons to learn
from his President."

            But
the main focus of the British press Wednesday was Prime Minister Tony Blair,
whose speech at the annual Labor Party Conference promising to end the class
war, create equality of opportunity, and purge Britain forever of "the forces
of conservatism" generated many editorials. His "vision of a nation more like
America than Britain is laudable," the Times said, "but he will have to
pursue it with a passion and defend it with care." The Daily Telegraph ,
however, called it a "strangely nerve-wracked speech, at once
belligerent and insecure, that seemed to reveal an inner uncertainty about what
his Government is trying to achieve, and why." The liberal Guardian said the
speech was "as accomplished as any speech Mr Blair has given," but the
Independent
said "real radicalism needs substance, not just a collection of good tunes."
The Financial Times
praised his radical rhetoric, but also said he failed to explain "how all this
translates into hard-edged policies."

            
Another FT editorial said the ice is breaking in corporate Japan, with
companies changing "in ways that would have seemed impossible only a few years
ago." It concluded, "As Japan's politicians continue to posture in much the
same old familiar ways, the economy is at last beginning to be restructured
from the bottom up." But in Tokyo, Asahi
Shimbun dwelt on the human cost of this, reporting a rapid rise in the
number of Japanese businessmen diagnosed as psychotic depressives. "The trigger
for their slide into mental illness is constant anxiety in the workplace," it
said. "Many are alarmed by the prospect that their company's restructuring
drive will single them out." Some of them check into a Tokyo psychiatric clinic
at weekends in order to find the strength to go to work on Mondays, when
important business meetings are often held, the paper added.

            In Israel, Ha'aretz led its
front page Wednesday with a report
that the change of government in Israel has ended efforts by Russian mobsters
to establish ties with Israeli government officials. Such ties had been
"ripening" under the premiership of Benjamin Netanyahu, it said, quoting police
and intelligence sources, but were broken after Ehud Barak won the
election.

         
      
   
