
   
   
      
         
            Gunned Down

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Wild Wild West
                (Warner Bros.). No debate on this one--the critics
hate it. (A sample jab, from Time 's Richard Schickel: "The film is an
unmitigated disaster.") Despite the winning combination of Will Smith and
director Barry Sonnenfeld, who struck gold together with 1997's Men in
Black , critics say the cast can't overcome the horrendous script. The
Wall Street Journal 's Joe Morgenstern calls it "an eight-legged turkey,"
and Todd McCarthy of Daily Variety writes that it's "just not there."
Roger Ebert ( Chicago Sun-Times ) sums it up: "[It's] a comedy dead zone.
You stare in disbelief as scenes flop and die. ... There are moments when all
artifice fails, and you realize you are regarding desperate actors, trapped on
the screen, fully aware they've been left hanging out to dry." Or, as Susan
Wloszczyna advises in USA Today , "Handle West like an old boot:
Sniff at your own peril." (Visit the official site.)

            

               
                  South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut
                (Paramount Pictures).
After emphasizing just how gross this film version of the popular Comedy
Central series is ("the potty-mouth on this R-rated cartoon is pretty
mind-boggling"--Gary Dauphin, the Village Voice ), critics go on to
praise it: "Hilarious, willfully filthy" (Janet Maslin, the New York
Times ); David Ansen ( Newsweek ) calls it "tasteless, irreverent,
silly and smart." Nasty highlights: 1) A torrid gay affair between Saddam
Hussein and Satan. 2) An enormous talking clitoris. 3) A series of musical
numbers, one of which is titled "Kyle's Mom's a Bitch." Most critics do not
admit to being offended, save one: Roger Ebert, delivering a far more negative
review than most, admits he laughed all through the film but says, "I did not
always feel proud of myself while I was laughing. ... A lot of the movie
offended me." (Click here to read a less positive review of the film: "South
Park is another movie straight from the smoking pits of Hell," and for
David Edelstein's rave in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               
                  Summer of Sam
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Critics call Spike Lee's
latest worthy but deeply flawed. The film follows an insulated Italian-American
community in the Bronx during the summer of 1977, when the Son of Sam killer
was terrorizing New York City. On the upside, John Leguizamo's performance as a
philandering hairdresser is "raging, startlingly visceral" (Maslin, the New
York Times ), and Lee's evocation of the tension that gripped the city--the
blackouts, looting, and violence--is enthralling. On the downside, the film is
long, wandering, and something of "a glum and unpleasant experience" (Kenneth
Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). Several critics also say Lee's
direction tends toward the heavy-handed. Ebert departs from the pack, giving
the film 3.5 stars and a rave review: It "vibrates with fear, guilt and lust."
(Click to read Edelstein's review.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  
                     Eleanor Roosevelt Volume 2: 1933-1938
                  
               , by
Blanche Wiesen Cook (Viking). Reviewers praise the second volume of Cook's
biography as well researched, thorough, and fascinating. Many also take it as a
point of departure for talking about Hillary Clinton. Maureen Dowd's review in
the New York Times Book Review is largely a laundry list of the
differences between Clinton and her admitted hero: "[Roosevelt] did not engage
in the shadowy manipulation practiced by other opinionated First Ladies. ...
Unlike Hillary, Eleanor ignored personal insults, sloughed off negative news."
Dowd ends her review by asking, "Are you listening, Hillary?" Most notably, the
book reveals excerpts from Roosevelt's letters that confirm suspicions, raised
in the previous volume, of her amorous relationship with Associated Press
reporter Lorena Hickok. Also of note are explicit examples of Roosevelt's
anti-Semitism both in her private life and her public life: She was an advocate
for the oppressed in all corners of the world--except, apparently, in Nazi
Germany. (Click here to listen to an interview with the author, courtesy of the
New York Times .)

            
               
                  
                     Wonders of
the Invisible World: Stories
                  
               , by David Gates (Knopf). Positive
reviews for Newsweek critic Gates' first story collection (after two
novels, including the Pulitzer Prize finalist Jernigan ). Publishers
Weekly calls it "Gates' best so far." The stories range in topic from a gay
man who takes in his sister's son while she checks into drug rehab, to an old
man's religious awakening after a stroke. Michiko Kakutani writes in the New
York Times that although Gates "delineates his characters' predicaments
with a pitch-perfect ear," the collection suffers when "a certain authorial
smugness creeps into the narration," which leaves the reader "feeling superior
to his characters, irritated with their solipsistic mind games and
self-inflicted wounds." (Click here to
read one of the stories in this collection.)

         
      
   
