
   
   
      
         
            Creationism Evolves

            The
media have been in an uproar this month over the latest putative outbreak of
creationism. "Kansas Votes to Delete Evolution From State's Science
Curriculum," shrieked the New York Times . Liberals thought the steady
unearthing of fossils, the decline of organized religion, and several adverse
court decisions had rendered creationism extinct. Instead, adversity has made
critics of evolution stronger. It has forced them to develop themes and
arguments better suited to the new environment.

            

               1. 
               Censorship. The conventional wisdom, put out by
evolutionists and picked up by the media, is that the Kansas Board of Education
"rejected," "eliminated," and "expunged" evolution from its curriculum. NBC's
Today show said Kansas had "banned" evolution. The Times
speculated that school districts might "force" teachers to dispute evolution or
teach creationism. In phrasing questions about the controversy, several
reporters characterized the issue as "censoring" evolution.

            What
the Kansas board actually did was remove evolution from the list of subjects on
which the state will test students. While liberals call this "censorship,"
conservatives spin it as an affirmation and exercise of freedom. The safest
dodge, adopted by every major Republican presidential candidate, is that "state
and local" leaders should be allowed to choose their own curricula. Republicans
also argue that "parents" should decide such matters. "I'll trust the parents
more than I will bureaucracies," proclaimed Steve Forbes.

            
Hard-core creationists have mounted a more aggressive libertarian
counterattack. In TV interviews since the Kansas decision, Jerry Falwell has
deplored the bad old days when the government "forced" creationism on kids.
Now, says Falwell, the government is "forcing evolution" on them. Other
spokesmen for creationism accuse evolutionist "censors and book-burners" of
suppressing "evidence for creation science." Falwell constantly invokes
"academic freedom," pleading that schools should "teach both [evolution and
creationism] as theories, and trust the children with their parents to arrive
at their own conclusions." When CNN's Wolf Blitzer asked Gary Bauer whether
Kansas should be allowed to "ban" evolution, Bauer replied, "What Kansas did
was allow both views to be presented. ... That is consistent with America and
our free discussion of things."

            To
protect creationism from "censors," conservatives have adopted the relativism
and multiculturalism of the left. Falwell argues that "all models or theories"
should "be taught on equal footing." George W. Bush agrees: "Children ought to
be exposed to different theories about how the world started." Steve Forbes
says the facts of prehistory are "all up in the air now. A lot of what we
thought was true turns out [to be] not true. There's a raging debate. So I
leave it to local decisions." Fox News commentator Sean Hannity pleads for
"tolerance" and "pro-choice" education. "If some school districts can have
ebonics, I think others can talk about creationism," argues CNN's Tucker
Carlson. "There is room for all ideas."

            

               2. 
               Meaning. Liberal pundits, eager to pick a fight with
the religious right, attack the notion of pairing "religious instruction" with
the teaching of "scientific evolution." They accuse creationists of violating
"the wall of church and state" by imposing "a religious theory" on "the secular
educational system." It's all part of the culture war over sex education and
other school controversies, they scoff.

            This
may be good constitutional law, but it's lousy politics. According to Gallup
Polls, 50 percent of Americans believe in evolution, but only 10 percent accept
it as a purely secular account. The other 40 percent (within the 50 percent)
think God has guided evolution toward human development. And while only 40
percent want to banish evolution from the schools and teach creationism
instead, 68 percent think both ideas should be taught. The bottom line is that
if evolutionists force the public to choose between evolution and religion or
between evolution and divine creation, they'll lose.

            
Creationists, recognizing this equation, try to force precisely this choice.
They dig up quotes in which evolutionary theorists espouse atheism and scorn
"divine intervention." A recent Wall Street Journal op-ed, titled "The
Church of Darwin," called evolution "the main scientific prop" for a philosophy
of "materialism" that denies God's existence. In TV interviews, Bauer rigs the
debate by juxtaposing the idea that we "descended from monkeys" with the idea
that we are "divinely made" and are "creatures of God." Evolution implies
"there is no divine intelligence involved," he told reporters last week.
Likewise, Dan Quayle attributed the uproar over creationism to "a hostile
environment against religion."

            
Conversely, creationists broaden the appeal of their own theory by associating
it with the general idea of "divine intervention" and "intelligent design."
Whereas there's no "meaning in life if we're just animals in a struggle for
survival," they argue, "If we can teach creation, there is an order, there is a
plan. You have a place in this world." On the deepest and most decisive level,
this spin has been an enormous success. While privately scorning creationism,
the media have thoughtlessly absorbed and promoted the creationists' dichotomy
between God and Darwin. The day of the Kansas decision, CBS News posed the
question this way: "Are human beings divine creations or the product of eons of
evolution?"

            Wiser
evolutionists know that the better approach is to pose a choice not between
science and religion but between literalism and interpretation. While most
people want to believe that God created us one way or another, few can swallow
the literal creationist reading of the Bible, which holds that the earth is
less than 10,000 years old. (Never mind the strictest reading, which supposes
that creation took a week.) The first theory is flexible enough to withstand
fossil evidence, but the second isn't. When asked about the Bible's literal
account of creation, as opposed to the attractive concept of divine
creation, every major Republican presidential candidate--even Bauer--has
squirmed, ducked, and tried to steer the discussion back to "faith," "morals,"
and the general idea that humans "were created in the image of God." The smart
strategy for evolutionists, in short, is to embrace theism and shift the debate
to dinosaur bones.

            

               3. 
               Elitism. Scientists and liberal commentators love to
ridicule creationists for "going back to the 19 th century," turning
kids into "scientific ignoramuses," and second-guessing "experts" and the
Supreme Court. "There is no alternative" to evolution, asserted Barry Lynn,
executive director of Americans United for the Separation of Church and State,
during a recent Fox News debate. "There isn't really anything on the other
side." On the Today show, an evolutionist professor scoffed at the
Kansas board's decision: "Only in education would an elected board of lay
people decline to take the advice of a committee of experts."

            
Creationists have learned to jujitsu the scornful tone and overreaching scope
of these pronunciations. Responding on Today to the professor's crack
about "lay people," the chair of the Kansas board observed: "Many parents I've
talked to believe that they know what is best for their children. This attitude
[of evolutionists] has been characteristic of some parts of the education
community that only they know what is best for kids." Bauer and other
creationists accuse the evolutionist "elite" of trampling popular values and
defying the "American tradition that the people have a right to disagree with
the experts."

            The
conventional populist critique of evolution identifies it with sex education,
condom distribution, restrictions on school prayer, and other perceived liberal
attacks on religion. But as the public places its faith less in orthodoxy and
more in the marketplace of ideas, creationists are developing a hardier strain
of populism that appeals to progressive concepts such as "questions,"
"skepticism," and "investigation." Rather than defend religious dogma, they
poke holes in evolutionary dogma, scrutinizing the theory's missing links and
the mathematical probability of the emergence of complex life. Schools should
"teach the evidence ... that raises questions about how thoroughly evolution
explains everything," argues Bill Kristol.

            This
appeal to skepticism seems likely to flourish. The creationists had only five
of the six seats they needed on the Kansas board to remove evolution from the
required curriculum. They got the sixth vote by persuading a noncreationist
board member that evolution should be presented as a theory rather than as a
fact. "Before we start sneering" at Kansas, writes liberal columnist Lars-Erik
Nelson, "We might look askance at the supposed scientists and social scientists
who defend their own pet theories [such as] global warming, free trade,
supply-side economics ... with a religiouslike zeal, denouncing all doubters as
either heretics or ill-educated bumpkins."

            
Creationism, it turns out, is a case study in the evolution of spin. The
environment changes, the idea mutates, and new strains and arguments take hold.
Is it natural selection or intelligent design? You decide.

         
      
   
