
   
   
      
         
             Defining Decay Down

            If you haven't visited a dentist in the past few
years, first of all, that's gross. (Checkups are every six months, and
don't pretend you forgot.) Second, be grateful that you have avoided the
"intra-oral camera." As the dentist (or assistant) navigates this horrifying
little gadget through the graveyard of your mouth, a color television magnifies
the florid pustulance of your gums and the puke-yellow dinge of your smile. A
harmless crevice in your silver-mercury amalgam filling looks like Hell's
Canyon. The microcracks in your enamel look like a broken window. All this can
be fixed, of course, with 10 grand of straightening, filling, sealing, and
whitening. "You will agree to anything the second they put that thing in
your mouth," says one recent victim of the camera. "You can't believe you are
walking around with that, that, that ick in your mouth."

            The transformation of
American dentistry from drill-and-fill to shoot-and-loot is an unlikely
business success story of the '90s, a case study in how a profession can work
itself out of a job and still prosper. Dentists, after all, are supposed to be
extinct by now. While they happily (and profitably) scraped teeth and filled
cavities during the '60s and '70s, fluoride was quietly choking off their
revenue stream. The percentage of children with cavities fell by half and kept
falling. People stopped going to the dentist, because they didn't need to. At
the same time, the government funded dental-school construction, spilling new
dentists into a saturated market. Many found themselves cleaning teeth for $10
an hour in mall clinics. In 1984, Forbes magazine forecast the end of
the profession. Only a few lonely dentists would survive to fill the few
remaining cavities, the last vestiges of a once-great civilization on Long
Island.

            Instead, the number of dentists has jumped 20 percent, and
the average salary soared from $76,000 in 1987 to $124,000 in 1996. What
happened? In part, the oversupply of dentists and the declining demand for
fillings forced the profession to change. Dentists had to become nicer and
visits less unpleasant. The Marathon Man has been replaced by Dr.
Soothe. "People figured out pretty darn quickly that if you were an ass,
patients would not come to you," says Dr. William Hartel, a St. Louis dentist.
Many dentists' offices let you don virtual reality glasses and watch movies on
them. Others offer massage therapy and hot tubs. Does your dentist have a
certificate of pain management on her wall? I bet she does.

            The most important
discovery dentists made was the endless vanity of aging baby boomers. "We are
dealing now with the boomers who are the runners and the joggers and the
dieters, and they are very concerned with how they look," says American Dental
Association President Dr. Timothy Rose. Since going to the dentist was no
longer a necessary evil, dentists made it an unnecessary pleasure. They allied
themselves with the self-improvement movement. "You still go for the needs, for
the cavity that has to get filled, but more and more people ... come here to
feel better about themselves," says Dr. Stephen Friedman, a Maryland
dentist.

            People used to be happy if they made it to old age with
enough choppers to chew. But boomers, lured by media images of the Great
American Smile, expect more. According to an ADA poll, the percentage of people
who are "very satisfied" with their teeth has dropped from 57 percent to 46
percent in the past decade. Dentists have learned to play on this vanity and
anxiety, encouraging dental care that is medically unnecessary but attractive
to patients. "It's as if you went to a physician for a treatment for a disease
and he said you needed a nose job," says Dr. John Dodes, author of Healthy
Teeth: A User's Manual .

            To flog $500 teeth
whitenings and multi-thousand dollar adult orthodontic treatments, dentists run
computer simulations of your whitened, straightened teeth. Tooth color is
measured on a scale that starts at A1. "My dentist showed me these disgusting
color charts and told me, 'You're an A2 now, but by the time you want to get
married you are going to be an A4. And no one wants to marry an A4,' "
says one woman who got her teeth bleached. Dentists also prod patients to
replace perfectly functional gray-metal fillings with tooth-colored plastic
ones and to dump their solid gold crowns for white porcelain. Other dentists
sell the psychology of tooth appearance. One dentist specializing in porcelain
caps advises that male bosses with small teeth seem "weak."

            Some dentists dress up these cosmetic measures in medical
scare talk. A friend of mine just quit a dentist who was pressuring him to
whiten his teeth as a "preventive measure." (To prevent what? Yellow teeth?)
Many dentists claim, without scientific evidence, that the mercury in amalgam
fillings is dangerous. They urge patients to replace the excellent amalgam with
plastic fillings at four times the price.

            Dentists make a killing
on bad breath--or "halitosis," as they prefer to call it. Breath clinics have
sprouted up all over the country and are heavily advertised on the Web. They
terrify patients with a "halimeter," a new gadget that measures a nasty
smelling chemical called methyl mercaptan. Armed with the halimeter proof, the
dentist then dangles expensive mouthwashes and tongue scrapers in front of the
patient. Never mind that you can get the same results for free with careful
brushing and basic tongue-scraping. The machine makes the sale. "Now that there
is this machine that can document your complaint and can put a number on it, it
motivates a patient to actually do something about it. But the treatments
available now are the same ones that have been available for 15 years," says
Hartel.

            Entrepreneurial dentists market this elective care with
trained aggression. Dental management organizations often require their
employees to recite a quasisales script guiding patients toward profitable
cosmetics. Ads in the Journal of the American Dental Association and on
the Web promote tapes and classes on marketing techniques. One person I know
quit his dentist when he spied a pamphlet in the office instructing the dentist
in how to get his patients to "trade up" to more expensive treatment. The ADA's
annual conference is overflowing with seminars on topics such as "how to move
your patients to 'yes.' "

            The industry calls this
technique "treatment acceptance," a marvelous euphemism for parting you from
your money. According to the ADA's journal, this year's ADA conference will
include an all-day "Treatment Acceptance" seminar "for the dental team that is
fed up with patients accepting only what insurance covers or asking for
alternative cheaper treatment plans. Involve the entire team in creating the
strategies for patients to accept optimum care."

            This hard sell is critical in dentistry in a way that it
isn't in other medicine because of the profession's brutal economics. Dental
insurance covers only 44 percent of Americans (compared to more than 80 percent
for health insurance), and provides skimpy coverage for those who do have it.
As a result, patients pay most dental costs--about 60 percent of them--out of
their own pockets. Dental care is just another way to spend discretionary
income, competing with a vacation or a new car. Dentists have to make patients
want adult orthodontics in a way physicians don't have to make patients
want a quadruple bypass.

            It's tempting to dismiss
the whole industry as a scam, particularly when dentists keep coming up with
new ailments such as bruxism (teeth grinding), periodontal disease,
malocclusion (bad bite), and microcracks. But these ailments are real, and our
awareness of them shows how far dentistry has come. A generation ago, dentists
filled teeth and cast dentures because that's all they knew. Decay killed so
many teeth that fancier problems seldom arose. Since then, researchers have
studied bonding, implants, and periodontal disease. Dentists can now make
crowns that last forever, bridges that stay anchored, dentures that behave
almost like real teeth. A generation ago, implants were a joke. Today's
implants, affixed to your jawbone by a titanium screw, can hold for the rest of
your life.

            Scientists have learned how bacteria can build up in gaps
in the gum, cause infection, weaken the jawbone, and eventually murder teeth.
New research links these periodontal bacteria to heart disease, diabetes, low
birth-weight babies, and other nastiness you'd expect from bacteria running
wild in the bloodstream. This is why your dentist hectors you to rubber-tip
your gums, brush with a superconcentrated fluoride toothpaste, and wear a night
guard to control your bruxing (which loosens teeth, opening pockets between
teeth and gum, etc.). It's also why your dentist may bully you into gum
surgery. It all seems unpleasant and slightly absurd--the night guard is "an
excellent form of birth control," as one wearer puts it--but the alternative is
losing your teeth at 40, getting dentures, and gumming your food. Dentistry is
a hassle now because it works.

            "If you think back a
couple of generations, it was considered inevitable that people would lose
their teeth when they reached midlife. Around 40 or 45, you would have your
teeth taken out. Periodontal disease was not understood, and decay was rampant.
But now teeth are resistant to decay and are lasting a lifetime. I have gone in
18 years from learning how to make dentures and thinking it is OK for people to
lose teeth to being appalled if anyone loses teeth. It is a failure," says Dr.
Judith Penski, my own fabulous D.C. dentist.

            Which brings us to the irony of dentistry's comeback: Just
as patients love the dental care they should suspect, they resent the care they
should appreciate. Aesthetic dentistry is the most profitable segment of the
business because it is an easy sell. Put a camera in your mouth and you'll want
whiter teeth, too. It is much harder to convince someone to poke her gums every
night with a piece of rubber, to sleep with a choking plastic tooth guard, and
to undergo four surgeries to fix a gum flap, all for a benefit that is decades
away. The very success of dentistry has raised expectations so high that
patients now object to any inconvenience. Americans under 60 believe keeping
all their teeth is an entitlement: Telling them they need gum surgery to
preserve their teeth makes them angry, not grateful--even though those teeth
would have been goners 20 years ago.

            When I surveyed 100 friends and acquaintances about
their dental complaints, few bitched about cosmetic dentistry that was foisted
on them. They like their whiter, straighter teeth. No, they griped about the
medically advisable treatments that their dentists prescribed, especially gum
surgeries and mouth guards. Pity the poor dentist who abjures cosmetic
dentistry but vigorously protects patients' teeth. Patients don't like
periodontal treatment, so they suspect it's a rip-off. This could not be
further from the truth.

            "Dentists are aware of providing what patients
want," says Hartel. "I had a woman come in with a terrible toothache. She
needed a root canal, but she did not want it. But she did want her teeth
bleached, and she paid cash for it."

            Such is the triumph of American dentists: If they
can't sell you what you need, they'll sell you what you want.

         
      
   
