
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=120490521-01071999><SPAN class=630250921-01071999>The Decline of Rupert Murdoch</SPAN></SPAN>

            
               
                  Economist , July
3
            

            The
cover story
                predicts excitement from the 2000
presidential race, if not from the selection of the candidates then from their
stances on the economy, Medicare, and Social Security. ... The editors
opine that President Clinton's Medicare plan "does
nothing to address the underlying problems of rising health costs" and "is
simply endorsing a massive rise in government spending on health care."
... An article debunks the notion that guns have always been
a fixture of American life. Before 1850, no more than a 10th of all Americans
owned guns. ... Another piece attributes the decline of Rupert Murdoch's media
empire to his belated entry into new media and his alienation of the local
partners on which his broadcasting deals depend. (For more on Murdoch and new
media, see ".")

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , July 19 and 26
            

            The
Rev. Al Sharpton brags to a reporter that Hillary Clinton will need his
blessing to win a New York Senate seat. "How enthusiastic[ally] I would support
her would be based on how she respects and regards the new dynamics of New York
politics," he hints cagily. ... A piece reviews growing scientific evidence that the
practice of religion promotes good health. Possible explanations: Most
religions advocate temperate lifestyles, and prayer encourages mental
well-being. The findings amount to "a health boon" and "a new argument for
taking faith seriously." ... The "TRB " column protests the "gross generational inequity" of
President Clinton's Medicare plan. Prescription drug coverage for the elderly
isn't nearly as pressing a need as education and child nutrition.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , July 4
            

            The
cover story is an oral history of Stanley Kubrick told by film types and family
members. He comes across as a paranoid perfectionist. He required 80 or more
takes on a single scene and once called an employee and demanded help while she
was in labor. ... An article explores the Patel Motel phenomenon: More
than half of American motels are owned by Indians, and 70 percent of those
Indians have the last name Patel, indicating that they belong to the same Hindu
merchant subcaste. Why? Motels are fairly easy to run and come with a house,
and many were for sale at the time Indians began immigrating to the United
States in large numbers. ... A grim piece profiles Chevron's
superintendent of operations along Nigeria's Niger River. His job consists of
paying off tribal chiefs to prevent them from disrupting pumping operations. He
relies heavily on Nigerian military muscle to protect Chevron's interests.

            

               
                  Vogue
               
               , July 1999
            

            An
article heralds the return of curvy models. After a decade of fashion androgyny
and heroin chic, waifs and weird-looking "girls" are yielding runway space to
full-bodied Breckish beauties. Reasons for the zaftig vogue include the
mainstreaming of the hip-hop ideal of beauty and the popularity of curvaceous
actresses such as Catherine Zeta-Jones. A Manhattan plastic surgeon testifies,
"They're no longer asking for stick legs. No one wants their butt removed."

            
               
                  Business
Week
               
               , July 5
            

            The
cover story says that megabillionaire and
stock-picking legend Warren Buffett has quietly shifted his focus from buying
individual stocks to purchasing companies. Stocks have shrunk from 76 percent
of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.'s assets in 1996 to 32 percent currently.

            
               
                  Time ,
July 5
            

            The
cover story purports to critically examine the hype
surrounding Stanley Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut but really just adds to it.
Co-stars Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman are featured naked on the cover--"like
you've never seen them. " (Like you've never seen him , perhaps:
Newsweek put a naked Kidman on the cover last year.) Contrary to
previous reports, there is no necrophilia in the film, but there is an orgy.
... An article examines "cascading," the post-affirmative action
phenomenon in which minority students denied access to top-tier universities
attend lesser ones. Students at University of California, Irvine claim they are
succeeding in a supportive atmosphere. Critics worry that the kids
underestimate the importance of blue-chip college credentials. (The New York
Times Magazine wrote a nearly identical piece two months ago.)
... A "surprising" survey of American kids ages 6-14 finds
that the overwhelming majority believes in God, pray, feel safe in school,
admire their parents, are in no hurry to grow up, and disapprove of premarital
sex.

            
               
                  Newsweek ,
July 5
            

            The
cover story , while profiling several instant millionaires and
noting that 6 million workers now get stock options, says that more than 60
percent of Americans feel they are missing their chance to prosper during the
high-tech boom and bull market. (For 
                  Slate
               's earlier
take on Internet envy click .) ... An article examines the latest hot dietary supplement: SAMe.
European trials and anecdotal evidence suggest the naturally occurring
substance can relieve depression, arthritis, and liver disease without the
toxic side effects of pharmaceuticals. ... A photo essay vividly depicts the brutal rite of genital
mutilation in Uganda. A circle of family and friends looks on as an "initiate"
lying on the ground has her clitoris removed with a razor blade.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report , July 5
            

            The
cover story hails the "class of heroes" who graduated from
West Point in 1939. The 456 graduates of '39 played a vital role in three major
wars, and 72 became generals. ... George W. ought to keep his distance
from the Washington establishment, according to an analysis . Bush might be tarred by the congressional GOP's
fumbling of the gun and budget battles. ... A piece mocks a law pushed by Louisiana Republican Gov. Mike
Foster requiring school kids to say "sir" and "ma'am" when addressing
teachers.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker , July 5
            

            A
"Talk of the Town" item sourced to "some old friends of the First Family"
suggests that President Clinton is considering running for Senate from Arkansas
in 2002. The only ex-president to serve in the Senate was Andrew Johnson, also
the only president besides Clinton to be impeached. ... A piece warns
that Wall Street's blue-chip firms may be just as unstable as the infamous
hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management. Wall Street banks are just as heavily
leveraged as LTCM was, exposing them to staggeringly enormous potential
losses.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard , July 5
            

            The
cover
story blasts the Department of Justice's antitrust case against Microsoft.
The government was snookered by Netscape into assailing Microsoft for its
predatory conduct. But the evolution of the browser market belies the charge.
Contrary to the DOJ's predictions, the Internet has thrived, and bullying
competitors is part of the "creative destruction" that leads to marketplace
innovation. ... Bill Bradley is alternately disagreeable and boring,
according to an article. The quixotic presidential candidate refuses to answer
reporters' questions and even disagrees with his wife when she introduces him
to donors as "demure." ... The magazine publishes George W. Bush's Map
of the Balkans. West of the Yugoslav capital of Retrograd, Kosovaria borders
Fredonia, topped by Souvlaki, which is adjacent to Insomnia, a neighbor of the
Check Republic.

         
      
   
