
   
   
      
         
            Back to Berlin

            The
German press led Friday on the election of Johannes Rau as the country's new
president during the last ever meeting of the German parliament in Bonn before
its return, after more than half a century, to Berlin. Following the example of
the former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who insisted during the final Bonn
session that the re-establishment of Berlin as the country's capital doesn't
mean that "we are turning our backs on the values and basic principles of our
constitutional order," the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung said in a front-page comment
that "the Germans and their politicians don't want any other republic than the
one they've got; they want ... the calm continuation of a national success
story after the greatest imaginable catastrophe."

            In an
editorial titled "Auf Wiedersehen, Bonn," the Times of London said
many people still worry about what Germany might again become "once ruled from
the harshly beautiful, eastward-looking, centre of Prussian and Nazi military
expansion." It said, "The Berlin Reichstag parliament has been rebuilt, all
glass and mirrors, to discourage delusions of grandeur and infuse old Prussian
authoritarian style with a taste of Bonn-inspired transparency. Rule from Bonn
is now history. But its spirit should live on in Berlin."

            Most
British papers led Friday with the failure of the British and Irish prime
ministers to resolve a dispute over terrorist disarmament, which is threatening
the Northern Ireland peace process. Despite five days of intensive negotiation
in Belfast, David Trimble, the leader of the Ulster Unionist Party, continues
to insist that he will not agree to share power with Sinn Fein, the political
wing of the Irish Republican Army, unless the IRA simultaneously starts
surrendering its hidden weapons. In an analysis of the problem, the Financial Times noted that
decommissioning is a key element in every peace settlement, but that Northern
Ireland stands out as a rare case where--by contrast, for example, with
Kosovo--the issue was not resolved in the early stages of a deal and has been
allowed to fester.

            The
other big British story Friday was the formal opening by Queen Elizabeth II of
Scotland's first national parliament in 300 years. She was hailed by the
parliament's presiding officer as "Queen of Scots," the first monarch to be
thus addressed since 1707. But the Independent noted "a whiff of rebellion" in the spontaneous singing by the
entire parliament of Robert Burns' anti-royal ballad "A man's a man for a'
that," which favorably compares the ordinary man with "Yon birkie ca'd 'a lord'
/Wha struts an stares, an a' that." And the tabloid Daily Express found
the queen "upstaged" by the actor Sean Connery, an advocate of full
independence for Scotland, who received "the biggest cheer of the day" when he
arrived in full Highland dress with kilt and sporran and announced menacingly,
"This is only the beginning."

            The
Guardian
gave front-page treatment to Rupert Murdoch's announcement at a press
conference Thursday in London--just six days after his marriage in New York to
his third wife, Wendy Deng--that his global News Corp. is to become "an
Internet company." He said he was starting a new company called eVentures in
partnership with the Tokyo-based Softbank, the world's biggest backer of
Internet-related businesses. "Big will not beat small any more," Murdoch said.
"It will be the fast beating the slow."

            Henry
Kissinger--in London to promote the latest volume of his memoirs--became the
center of a controversy about the interviewing methods of the BBC. A column in
Thursday's Daily
Telegraph strongly attacked Jeremy Paxman, one of Britain's best-known
radio and TV interviewers, for being "insulting" to Kissinger when he asked him
if he felt "a fraud" on receiving the Nobel Prize for "bringing peace" to
Vietnam, and whether he waited 17 years to produce these memoirs because he
wanted "to rewrite history." In a letter in self-defense published in Friday's
Telegraph , Paxman wrote, "It is surely unarguably true that the detente
which Dr Kissinger so energetically promoted was built upon the assumption that
the Soviet Union would exist for the foreseeable future. He now claims it was
part of the process which led to the dismantling of the Communist empire."

            The
Coca-Cola crisis in Belgium last month was due more to a mass psychological
problem than to anything wrong with the drink itself, according to research
reported in this week's edition of the British medical journal the
Lancet . Coca-Cola was banned in Belgium, Luxembourg, and France after
more than 100 people, many of them children, claimed to have suffered severe
nausea and headaches after drinking it. The company found "bad carbon dioxide"
at one Belgian cannery and some fungicide on the outside of cans at another;
but Belgian researchers from the Catholic University of Louvain now say that
most of the health complaints made after this was reported in the media suggest
a "mass sociogenic illness" requiring "social healing" rather than "medical
cure."

            The
Daily Telegraph reported Friday that a German truck driver working
for a British haulage firm close to London's Heathrow Airport has been awarded
about $18,000 in compensation after his bosses and co-workers called him
"Hitler" over the public address system, shouted "Sieg Heil" when he walked
past, and referred to his truck as "the Panzer division."

         
      
   
