
   
   
      
         
            It's in the Genes

            The
world press ran out of new things to say about Kennedy tragedies many years
ago, and all the old clichés were revived Monday in the massive coverage of the
tragic loss of John F. Kennedy Jr. in a plane crash Friday--the "curse" on the
family, its love of adventure, the "end of a dynasty," etc. But the Jerusalem Post peddled a new
theory. The Kennedys are not "star-crossed, cursed, or unlucky," it said in a
front-page report. "They undoubtedly bear the novelty-seeking and risk-taking
gene discovered in Israel that makes members impulsive, adventurous, and tend
to take chances with drugs, sex, speed, and other potentially dangerous
activities." The paper was quoting Dr. Richard Ebstein, a molecular geneticist
at Jerusalem's Herzog Memorial Hospital, who headed the team that discovered
the gene. "If I were a Kennedy, I would consult the best psychological experts
in the US to discuss what normal personalities are and how to control their
risk-taking urge," he told the paper. Ebstein discovered "the D-4 receptor and
serotonin transporter promoter gene" in 1996, the paper said. "He more recently
found that it increases the bearer's risk of getting addicted to hard drugs
(although several genes are probably involved), can cause adults to seek
sensation, and makes newborns as young as two weeks more alert and curious
about the outside world."

            There
was widespread reluctance in Kennedy-obsessed European newspapers to write off
the future of the family dynasty. Corriere della
Sera of Milan pegged John Jr.'s cousin Kathleen Kennedy Townsend on its
front page as the heir to his "sceptre." "It would be good if Camelot, the
mythical realm of King Arthur, were to end in the hands of a woman above
suspicion," it said. "It would be poetic if the first American woman president
were to be called not Hillary but Kathleen." Corriere also carried an
interview with Gay Talese, "the troubadour of today's America and yesterday's
Italy," dismissing the idea of a Kennedy curse. "I think, on the contrary, that
there burns inside them a feeling of invincibility, an obsession with
challenge, an arrogance of power that drive them to take risks all the time,"
he was quoted as saying. Asked if he thought John Jr. had been different from
the others, Talese replied: "Different in the sense that he wasn't a sexual
predator, like his father, uncle and grandfather, nor addicted to drugs or
alcohol, like other members of his family. ... But otherwise he was a
Kennedy--sure of himself and convinced of his immortality."

            

               La Repubblica
of Rome, on the other hand, said John Jr.'s problem was that he knew he wasn't
a Kennedy at heart and that he had crashed his plane because he wanted to be
one. "He didn't manage to live like a Kennedy, but fate allowed him at least to
leave this world as one," it concluded. (But what does La Repubblica
know about it? Another characteristic of the Kennedys is that they invite
reckless psychological examination.) La Repubblica led its front page
with a headline saying that John Jr. shouldn't have flown at night because he
wasn't certified to do so. In Britain, the tabloid Express announced in
huge letters that he had "had a death wish." In Paris, Le Figaro 's headline was
"The Accursed Kings" ("Les Rois Maudits "), and its front-page
editorial compared John Jr. to the late Princess of Wales. "Like Lady Di," it
said, "fate struck because, according to one of those Elizabethan poets of whom
President Kennedy always kept a quotation in reserve [not Elizabethan actually:
James Shirley, 1596-1666], 'There is no armor against fate;/ Death lays his icy
hand on kings.' "

            In an
editorial, the Times of London said John Jr.'s fate recalled another
myth--that of Oedipus, who fulfilled a prophecy by killing his father and
marrying his mother without knowing who they were. The Oedipus story survives,
the paper said, "because it embodies the deep human sense that free will is a
fragile thing, and no inheritance, however noble, frees one from the mark of
sin. ... The fate of John Kennedy Jr reinforces in every mind that melancholy
truth." The Independent of London also made the Princess Diana
comparison, saying that her myth, like that of the Kennedys, was not solely the
property of one country. "It would be a fitting legacy if John Junior's death
reminded America and the world of the high ideal of public service and liberal
values than run through the Kennedy rhetoric," it said in an editorial. "It is
the Kennedy greatness to call us to a higher moral purpose, and the Kennedy
tragedy that none of the family could fulfil that promise."

            The Guardian of London
commented in its editorial Monday that if John Jr.'s death "helps slow down the
US trend toward a new kind of dynastic democracy, then some good will have come
from this grim news." The paper also quoted Col. Muammar Qaddafi of Libya, as
reported by the BBC, on its front page. While expressing his "deepest regret"
about the tragedy, Qaddafi said he was "even more sad" that the United States
has been unable to locate his plane. "America claims to know how to find a
mustard seed, either on earth or in space, thanks to its extraordinary
capabilities," he said. "Or perhaps the US is negligent and not serious in
searching for its citizens from the Kennedy dynasty?"

         
      
   
