
   
   
      
         
            No. 311: &quot;Dutch Treatment&quot;

            
               Tuesday, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands reopens one of Amsterdam's
most popular tourist attractions after extensive renovations. What
attraction?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 310)--"Insight Out":
            

            

               
                  
                     "I'm saying we really do have to recognize that it's
going to be difficult and take a while for people to get this stuff," says
Professor Shoshanna Sofaer of Baruch College, an adviser to the federal
government. "And for a significant percentage, they're never going to get it
because they're cognitively impaired, they're too frail, or they just don't
have the energy to invest in understanding these things." Who's never going to
understand what?
                  
               
            

            
"Convicted drug dealers in Texas will never understand how their former best
customer gets to run for president while they rot in a Fort Worth
prison."-- Brooke Saucier
            

            "The
average American; how he, too, can qualify for a $1.3 million
mortgage."-- Barbara Lippert
            

            "Dogs
are never going to understand quantum mechanics. It's sad, in a way. If they
could, they'd know whether to bother with Schrodinger's cat or not."-- Steven
Davis
            

            
"Jedediah Purdy; why people giggle when they hear the name Jedediah. Especially
in combination with Purdy."-- Daniel Radosh ( Steve Roche had a
similar answer.)

            
"Frankly, I think that even if you missed the pilot of The West Wing , it
should be pretty easy to catch on."-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Anecdotal
Wrap-Up
            

            I'll tell you what I don't understand--why
Professor Shoshanna Sofaer of Baruch College sounds so cranky. (Needs a little
sabbatical?) Or why Congress (Needs term limits? Of about 30 seconds?) makes it
harder for ordinary people to join in a class action suit but easier for giant
oil companies to pump free oil from public land and sell it at a profit,
probably to NBC (Needs--oh where to begin? With Tom Brokaw's sentimental
nonsense about World War II? OK. There!) to fuel those big turbines to
illuminate the studios for the telecasting of semi-popular tripe on the public
airwaves at vast profits, for the entertainment of bored oil rig workers out in
some once-magnificent national park. (Need a good book store with a series of
author appearances, maybe starting with Susan Faludi? She's full of
understanding. And slogans.)

            You know who would
understand? Karl Marx. Pretty obvious to him. But even a great genius like Marx
whose head weighed more than 350 pounds and had to be braced up with a special
cast iron frame, even he can't understand why love is a crime, the sort of
crime spelled out in a restraining order from some judge (NEEDS HIS GODDAMNED
HEAD EXAMINED!!!!) who is oh so ready to ignore everything one person says and
just believe everything some other person says even when she is a liar !
Hypothetically speaking. Answer me that, Professor Shoshanna Sofaer of Baruch
College! Where's all your governmental advice now?

            
               Learn

               Fast or Die Answer
            

            Older folks don't understand Medicare and its
alternatives.

            Patricia Neuman of the Kaiser Family Foundation
says many people "[d]on't understand the rules that govern their care."

            Pollster Michael Perry says people are "very angry
over how confusing the program is."

            But Diane Archer, executive director of the
Medicare Rights Center, disagrees, "It's all incredibly complicated, not only
for seniors but for everyone, including me." Or perhaps she agrees. It's very
confusing.

            And so Medicare is launching "the biggest peacetime
education program the federal government has ever undertaken." Features
include:

            

               a handbook being mailed to 39 million Medicare beneficiaries

               a toll-free info line: (800) 633-4227

               a Web site [www.medicare.gov]

               outreach efforts with 200 local and national groups

               the advice and snippy comments of Shoshanna Sofaer

               Geezer, the Old and Stupid Healthcare Baboon, a lovable mascot who'll
travel to nursing homes and explain that what seems like a cold and heartless
system is really great, once you grasp it. Or maybe I've misunderstood this
last one, and it doesn't actually exist. Shoshanna?

            

            

               Opprobrium 
               Extra
            

            I give the expression of
disdain; you tell me who said it about what, and then tell me your bankcard PIN
code.

            
               The 
               Slurs
            

            1. "Sick stuff"

            2. "Anti-Islamic and offensive"

            3. "I'm embarrassed about it"

            4. "Is wrong, is embarrassing, is outrageous"

            5. "He has corrupted all of those around him"

            6. "= Hitler"

            7. "An insulting
mess"

            
               The 
               Targets
            

            A. New York Mayor Giuliani doesn't like some art he
hasn't seen. His response: cut off the museum's finances.

            B. Mayor Giuliani also detests an article in a
student magazine: He had two young writers jailed. Wait, sorry, it was Iranian
Shiite Muslim clergy who jailed the kids; I keep confusing Tehran and New
York.

            C. Morgan Entrekin is sorry he nearly published
another of James Mackay's possibly plagiarized biographies. Entrekin has
destroyed all 7,500 copies of the suspiciously prolific Scot's John Paul Jones
bio, by my count his 925 th book.

            D. New York Rep. Nita Lowey says, "To be the
biggest deadbeat at the United Nations ..."

            E. Professionally disapproving William Bennett
doesn't want President Clinton to give the annual Jefferson Lecture for the
National Endowment of the Humanities. And so he won't.

            F. Demonstrators in wheelchairs don't think
Princeton should hire Peter Singer, but they will.

            G. New York Times
TV critic Caryn James doesn't enjoy Aaron Sorkin's West Wing .

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            The pleasantly varied News Quiz responses defy easy
categorizing. So you're all dismissed 15 minutes early.

         
      
   
