
   
   
      
         
            Stanley Steamed

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Eyes Wide Shut
                (Warner Bros.). Thumbs go up, down, and every
which way for the final film by director Stanley Kubrick, who died shortly
after wrapping the movie. Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman star as a married couple
entangled in sexual jealousy, but the critics focus largely on Kubrick's work.
Roger Ebert (the Chicago Sun-Times ) labels it "a worthy final chapter
to a great director's career," and Janet Maslin (the New York Times )
raves that it's his riskiest film and "a spellbinding addition to the Kubrick
canon." Michiko Kakutani (the New York Times ) begs to differ,
complaining that the director's "meticulous, detail-oriented approach has
sucked all spontaneity and passion from the picture." Most reviewers pillory
the film's highly publicized group-sex scene, in which human figures were
digitally inserted to avoid an NC-17 rating: "the most pompous orgy in the
history of the movies" (David Denby, The New Yorker ), and "one of the
least erotic orgies ever filmed" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles
Times ). (Click for 
                  Slate
                critic David Edelstein's review
and for an "Explainer" on Arthur Schnitzler, who wrote the novella that
Eyes Wide Shut is based on. Click here to see the trailers.)

            

               
                  The Blair Witch Project
                (Artisan Entertainment). A big hit at
this year's Sundance Film Festival, this first feature produced by five
film-school graduates from Florida steals some of Kubrick's opening-weekend
thunder. Its mockumentary premise: Three young filmmakers disappear while
trekking through the woods of Maryland in search of a local witch; a year
later, their footage is found and presented as The Blair Witch Project .
The trio get increasingly suspicious of each other as they hear eerie sounds in
the night and find mysterious bundles of sticks hanging from trees, and by the
end they're running for their lives. With its tiny budget of $75,000, the film
cleverly keeps the evil off-screen: "Most of the time, it's what the three
witch-searchers don't see--but fear--that gets our petrified juices flowing or
curdling. This is low-tech inventiveness at its best" (Desson Howe, the
Washington Post ). BWP is "the new face of movie horror" (Peter
Travers, Rolling Stone ), and it ends with "as heart-stopping a climax as
any the genre has seen in years" (Jay Carr, the Boston Globe ). The
Los Angeles Times ' Kevin Thomas demurs, knocking it as "a clever,
entertaining stunt, no more, no less," but Joe Morgenstern (the Wall Street
Journal ) advises, "Don't see this ingenious first feature if you believe in
ghosts." (Click here
to see the movie's official Web site, with more back-story on the
mockumentary.)

            

               
                  Lake Placid
                (20 th Century Fox). Neither Kubrick nor
the first-time filmmakers from Blair Witch Project have much to fear in
the way of competition from this flaccid creature feature, written by David E.
Kelley ( The Practice , Ally McBeal ). At a fictional lake in
Maine--not the real Lake Placid in New York--Bridget Fonda and Bill Pullman
take on a 30-foot migrant crocodile from Asia. (Movie critics seem to have a
hard time telling a crocodile from an alligator.) Maslin (the New York
Times ) does find bright spots in the dialogue, the "divinely cheesy"
special effects, and the supporting cast, which includes Oliver Platt and
The General 's Brendan Gleeson. But "since even the gator horror satire
is old hat (remember Alligator ?), there's no remaining way to make this
interesting." Or, as Harry Knowles ( Ain't
It Cool News ) neatly puts it: Placid is "the worst giant
alligator movie known to man." (Click here to play the official site's wacky Croc Drop game.)

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  A Short History of Rudeness: Manners, Morals, and Misbehavior in Modern
America
               , by Mark Caldwell (Picador). No one argues that Caldwell is
the first historian to survey the origin and use of manners, but whether he
adds much to the discussion is another question. David Bowman (the Village
Voice ) calls Short History "an amusing but lightweight read" and
notes that "even Mick Jagger had a more rigorous take on the subject ... in
'Sympathy for the Devil.' " The NYT 's Richard Eder takes a harsher
line: "These broader subjects are treated in books and magazines and the slow
sections of newspapers." Most reviewers notice Caldwell's positive spin on the
much-maligned Martha Stewart--that she democratizes civilized living by making
it not a matter of class, but simply of good habits, which anyone can learn.
"It's difficult to recall a single book in which [manners] are discussed as
comprehensively and intelligently as in this one ... the definitive book on the
subject--at least for now" (Jonathan Yardley, the Washington Post ).
(Click here to buy the book.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  
                     Significant Other
                  
               , by Limp Bizkit
(Flip-Interscope). The notoriously potty-mouthed rap/metal quintet matures a
bit on the follow-up to its 1997 debut, Three Dollar Bill, Y'All$ . The
band occasionally departs from its hard-core speed metal and ventures into
"melodic interludes, user-friendly grooves, and actual harmonious vocals"
(Lorraine Ali, Rolling Stone ). The lyrics, by singer Fred Durst (who
clambers out of a toilet during the band's stage act), are "still the stuff of
monochromatic dude talk," but sometimes they hint at something deeper--like
when "the formerly promiscuous singer confesses his shame for past recreational
nookie sessions" (Ali). "The unholy matrimony of metal and rap celebrates
another victory on this superb sophomore effort" (Amy Sciarretto, College
Music Journal ). (Click here to buy Significant Other and here to buy Three Dollar Bill, Y'All$ .)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Book
            

            
               
                  
                     Inside the
Oval Office: White House Tapes From FDR to Clinton
                  
               , by William
Doyle (Kodansha International). Doyle's look at the audio-taping practices of
10 presidents is a "valuable history and comparative survey" (Ron Rosenbaum,
the New York Times Book Review ). Doyle, a "master of crackling prose"
(Richard R. Roberts, the Indianapolis Star ), provides insightful
transcripts from key moments, such as the Cuban missile crisis and the final
days of the Nixon administration. (Click here to buy the book.)

         
      
   
