
   
   
      
         
            Tomorrow Is an Udder Day

            
               She's Got a Bone
To Pick
            

            One very important factor that Emily Yoffe ("")
leaves out in all the comparisons among diets in China, Africa, and America is
genetic/ethnic background.

            Did these studies compare Chinese-Americans to
Chinese people in China, and African-Americans to native Africans?

            The genetics of a person of European descent can be
vastly different from a person of Chinese or African descent. Osteoporosis,
breast cancer, and sexual maturation are all highly influenced by genetics.
Unless you are comparing rural Chinese diets with the diets of Americans with
the same ethnic background, these comparisons are largely invalid.

            People in Northern Europe and North America have
consumed dairy products as a large part of their diets for centuries. They also
tend to have very different body types than Asians or Africans. It is known
that many people of African ethnic origin and other ethnic groups (including
Asian) have problems digesting milk products past puberty. People of Northern
European descent often do not have this problem. Could it also be that Northern
European ethnicities have more problems with hip fractures or higher estrogen
levels for reasons other than diet?

            Just because rural
Chinese and African people may not need high dairy consumption to be healthy
does not mean that Americans should be discouraged from drinking milk.

            
               --Rachael
Harralson
            

            
Auburn, Calif.

            
               The Values
Thing
            

            With respect to Jacob Weisberg's "Ballot Box" (""),
he makes one decent point, and then blows it.

            It's true that, as he says, "We're electing someone
to run the government, not minister to the condition of our souls." And though
Bill Clinton proves that people will elect presidents who feel their pain,
still I think Weisberg is close to the mark on this point. But from there, he
goes wrong.

            George W. Bush and Bill Bradley are not talking
about individual holders of wealth. Nor are they engaging in subtle class
warfare. They are responding to those who would assert that American society as
a whole is just fine because it is collectively wealthy. American society is
manifestly not "just fine."

            I believe the majority of Americans, if they think
about it at all--and keep in mind that the ones who think about it are also the
ones who take the time to vote--think that our cultural life has coarsened, or
even debased, and that the sense of "values" that just 30 or even fewer years
ago meant that the majority of Americans felt no need to lock their doors has
been, perhaps irretrievably, lost. How else can people understand tragedies
such as Littleton, in which "normal" middle-class kids are not playing baseball
or flirting with girls or even duking out their differences after school on the
playground; they are nursing monstrous visions of murder and mayhem, while
building bombs in their clueless parents' garage. Anyone who pays the least
attention could make a long list of their preferred examples.

            This is the spiritual
emptiness Bush and Bradley are talking about. Not whether a 27-year-old
"Dellionaire" is bored with his Lamborghini. Or whether those less fortunate
are envious of his horsepower.

            
               --Patrick
Moore
            

            
Dallas

            
               Revenge Killings,
Served Up Cold
            

            I must thank David Greenberg for the fascinating
"History Lesson" ("") on the postwar Jewish "Revenge Group," but I disagree
that such an organized and, frankly, insane plan has much in common with the
revenge killings by Albanians (we assume) of Serbs in present-day Kosovo.

            I think the Serbian government and police were the
evil monsters in the recent conflict--the Yugoslav army maybe less so--and that
the outcome of our bombing campaign was generally a good thing. However, I've
never had any illusions about the unsavory nature of the Kosovo Liberation
Army, as the more simple-minded media outlets seem to still hold.

            The killings of the 14 Serbian farmers look to be a
case of classic terrorism with a clear political aim--scaring the remaining
Serbs out of Kosovo. Killing even the boys and old men doesn't sound much like
the vengeance of honorable men.

            The "Revenge Group," on the other hand, was bent on
carrying out revenge killing without any political aim. The Nazis were well out
of power; nothing would have come of the killings except a vague sense of
self-satisfaction on the part of those involved.

            In any case, I can't
condone what either group of killers did or planned to do. To even for an
instant try to intellectually justify killing members of one group simply
because other members of that group did unspeakable things--whether that group
consists of Serbian civilians or imprisoned SS guards--is lazy thinking. It's
plainly wrong, and there's no amount of philosophizing that could convince me
it's not.

            
               --Paul
Wagenseil
            

            New
York

            
               How To Keep Your
Kids From Turning Into Tele Tubbies
            

            The recent installment
of "Culturebox" ("") by Judith Shulevitz deserves comment. She's wrong: The
issue isn't that working parents must choose between anesthetizing their
children with television or catering to all their whims while also trying to
pay the bills and nuke the frozen dinner. Given a little guidance and some
suitable playthings, children who don't get hooked on television at an early
age are actually perfectly capable of amusing themselves for long stretches of
time. Obviously there's a lot more to say on the subject, but Shulevitz doesn't
seem to be aware of much that has already been said.

            
               --Alix Beatty
            

            Chevy Chase, Md.

         
      
   
