
   
   
      
         
            The Road to Beverly Hills

            Sunday, Oct. 3, 1999.
Holiday Inn, Charleston, W.V.

            My name is Robert Kaufman. I normally write about
social policy for a small magazine of opinion, but right now I am driving from
Washington to Los Angeles in a 10-year-old Honda Civic with my friend Elizabeth
Ash. Elizabeth is moving to my hometown, the California hamlet of Beverly
Hills, to become a sitcom writer. E's Pottery Barn hope chest is in the
backseat, stuffed with books. Her 13-inch television is in the trunk. On the
roof are balanced a wood futon bed frame, E's mountain bike, and E's queen-size
futon, which I failed to convince her to throw in a Dumpster. The whole pile is
tied down with a variety of bungee cords, giving my Honda an appearance not
unlike an updated version of the Joad family vehicle in Grapes of
Wrath .

            E has recently written several quickie celebrity
bios, and here is an instant celebrity-based guide to our characters: For me,
think the youthful Elliott Gould of, say, California Split , slowly
turning into the more eccentric Elliott Gould of Kicking &
Screaming . For E, think the dewy Mariel Hemingway of Manhattan with
a touch of Alan Dershowitz. In the unreadably bad novel I wrote last year, E
was the basis for a Washington femme fatale . By Page 20, she'd already
run through four men, including the male protagonist, who wrote about social
policy for a small magazine of opinion. I trashed the novel when the one person
I showed it to was, how to put it, less than fully supportive. "You have no
idea how to write fiction," she said. "For instance, you have this
character--all he cares about is sex and welfare policy! Nobody will believe
that! You have to flesh him out a bit! Give him some real human qualities."

            Why would I take a week off from work to drive E
and her stuff 2,800 miles across the country? Because driving across the
country is my idea of a vacation. I've done it about 14 previous times. I enjoy
doing it alone. Doing it with another person is that much better. True, I used
to be interested in E, but that was years ago, and we're now just good friends.
I have no desire or expectation that anything romantic will happen on this
journey. Please remember this, as it is an important point. No expectations.
None at all. Zero. Right.

            I would say the trip began with three trouble
signs. In order of increasing troublesomeness, they are:

            1) E is on a health kick and declared, "I only want
to eat tofu on this trip." I try to let her down gently, suggesting that while
of course they surely stock the basic tofu products in, say, Silt, Colo., they
might not have the selection she has come to expect.

            2) She mentioned that there is some guy who wants
to meet her in Las Vegas and take her to a show.

            3) She has brought a tape of Crosby, Stills &
Nash.

            We've already discovered that it is hard to follow
the news on the road. This morning, at our hotel in Washington, we briefly saw
the new outsider/insurgent candidate for president, Al Gore, giving an
interview to Bob Schieffer on CBS. It seemed as if Gore's thin hard carapace of
impenetrability has been replaced by a thick, smooth gelatinous coating that is
equally impenetrable. But I don't know for sure. I also know there are some
expense-account accusations against Gore's campaign manager, Tony Coelho, but
don't know who the anti-Coelho factions are that are spreading them (or why
they couldn't dig up something bigger).

            And has the following point been made on the Op-Ed
pages: that Arianna Huffington and Warren Beatty have chosen to attack centrist
Democrats as cynical sellouts who ignore American poverty just when, according
to the Census Bureau, those cynical centrists are making the greatest strides
against poverty that have been made in my adult lifetime? ("Poverty Drops to 20
Year Low"--that was the USA Today headline we saw at a Wal-Mart in
Morgantown.) Poor Beatty has a need to think Clintonite Democrats aren't
tackling race and poverty, much like Marx had a need for a proletariat, except
that Marx's need was theoretical, while Beatty's is only theatrical. And Marx's
was closer to reality.

            The best sign so far? Somewhere in the Maryland
panhandle, E and I were for some reason discussing Wendy Shalit's book, The
Return of Modesty , which makes the case for chastity, patience, courtship,
etc. Shalit argues that when you walk down the street you can tell the virgins
by their fresh, healthful glow. E's critique, in full: "I don't know. I always
thought it was the girls who got fucked that had the healthy glow." She also
said she hasn't had sex in two years, which I didn't believe. But, come to
think of it, she does look a bit pale.

         
      
   
