
   
   
      
         
             That '70s Gossip

            After making her way through this month's tabloids,
Keeping Tabs feels as though she's been stuck in a bit of a time warp. The
tabs, suffering from an overload of nostalgia, read like magazines one might
have thumbed through while waiting backstage at the Mike Douglas or Merv
Griffin shows. How else to explain headlines such as "Linda Lavin finds
happiness in the heartland" and "Rhoda shattered as charity folds"? (The latter
would, of course, be actress Valerie Harper, whose partner in the failed
venture turned out to be none other than Dennis Weaver, television's McCloud.)
Why, there's Dukes of Hazzard star Catherine Bach at a premiere! An
exclusive interview with Charles Nelson Reilly! A new album from the real-life
band that inspired the Partridge Family! The Globe , meanwhile, has
landed "showbiz insider" Charlene Tilton--she played Lucy Ewing on
Dallas , you'll no doubt recall--as its newest gossip columnist. I mean,
if Charlene Tilton's not where it's at, who is?

            After a brief check to verify that The Gong
Show is, in fact, no longer on the air, Keeping Tabs perused the
Globe 's story about rhinestone cowboy Glen Campbell, who is shown
"relaxing in the comfy floral-pattern bedroom" of his Phoenix, Ariz., mansion.
The Globe also reports that Lee "Bionic Man" Majors is set to return to
television in a British sitcom. The National Enquirer has a page of
photos of stars (including both Lisa Whelchel of The Facts of
Life and Barbara Mandrell!) sporting the hairdo made famous by Majors'
ex-wife Farrah Fawcett circa 1977. But apparently life is a mixed bag for
Fawcett these days. While the Star has a story titled "Fabulous Farrah
shows she's still got it--at 52," it also reports that Fawcett is in such dire
financial straits that she's had to cut back her gardener's visits from five to
three times a week. And the Star couldn't refrain from running a truly
unfortunate time-lapse sequence of the actress picking her nose in public.

            Even when they do manage
to focus on celebs who have actually worked regularly in the last, say, 10
years, the tabs seem uncommonly fixated on looking backward. The
Enquirer 's special double issue contains 42--count 'em!--pages
chronicling celebrity style makeovers over the years, while this week's
Star devotes 30 full pages to "before they were stars" pictures. Vanna
White was a very cute baby indeed. And Keeping Tabs is pretty sure she had the
exact outfit that Melissa Gilbert once wore in 1982.

            With so much photographic evidence on hand, it's only
natural that there's much discussion about who's had plastic surgery. The tabs'
short answer: pretty much everybody. The Globe has the requisite doctor
on hand to assess 10 celebs' before and after photos. He gives high marks to
Sharon Stone's "light-handed surgical touch" but pans Mickey Rourke, whose
"skin is pulled back so tightly he looks like a lizard."

            Those reported to be
contemplating plastic surgery include pop star Britney Spears (liposuction, per
the Star ), Judge Judy Sheindlin (face lift, breast lift, dermabrasion,
also from the Star ), and Camilla Parker Bowles ($50,000 worth of
miscellaneous fixes, to help her win the race against Sophie Rhys-Jones to
"become the new Princess Diana," says the Globe ). The most talked-about
face lift prospect is, of course, Hillary Rodham Clinton. Both the Star
and the Globe report that the first lady, "wearing dark sunglasses and a
navy blue pantsuit," was seen visiting the offices of a Park Avenue plastic
surgeon, while the Enquirer insists that no consultations were done in
person. Instead, the circumspect first lady is said to have sent various
doctors "high resolution photos taken of her face from different angles" in
order to get their opinions.

            We learned of the putative planned lift only after
discovering that the "before and after photos" of Clinton promised on the cover
of the Sept. 28 Star were nothing more than a computer simulation--much
like the Globe 's simulated "mugshots" of JonBenet Ramsey's parents,
around whom tabloid suspicion is once again furiously swirling. Perhaps the
tabloids' loaf was sliced just a little too thin, but there seems to be an
unusually high ratio of tantalizing headlines to banal copy this month. To
wit:

            

               The new book that the Star claims "blows [the] lid" on pop star
Brandy's love life reveals such gasp-inducing nuggets as, "I liked [former
boyfriend Kobe Bryant]. He had that confidence and innocence about him that
attracted me."

               The "remote island paradise" where the Star says Frank and Kathie
Lee Gifford bumped into Frank's former paramour Suzen Johnson turns out to be
Nantucket, Mass., which last we checked sits a mere stone's throw from the
coast of Cape Cod.

               The Globe teases us with the "secret life of Sopranos hunk"
James Gandolfini, which turns out to be that he is married and has a
child.

               And those "intimate secrets" about Princess Diana offered up to the
Star by her former butler? "She'd put an outfit on and come downstairs
and look at me and say, 'You don't like this, do you?' If I said, 'No I don't,'
she'd go back upstairs and try something else on."

            

            The tabs seem so mired in the mundane that they've beefed
up their coverage of celebrity errand-running. The low point might have to be a
Globe story titled "Lisa Kudrow's friendly trip to the hairdresser,"
complete with a photo of Kudrow--whose expression suggests she may have just
realized she's not alone--with her head piled high with silver foils. The
Globe also catches every minute of Barbra Streisand and James Brolin's
action-packed trip to a plant nursery, while the Star spots rock star
Mark McGrath of the band Sugar Ray "washing his undies with the ordinary folk
at a Hollywood laundromat." (Hel-lo! Tabloid editors on holiday! Who is he
sleeping with, for God's sake?) After slogging through all three pages
of the Star 's "supermarket secrets of the superstars," Keeping Tabs was
particularly interested to learn that Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gormé, who
seemed to just vanish into thin air at about the time the Carol Burnett
Show went off the air, are alive and well and often seen picking up "the
latest stain removers and cleaning supplies" at Trancas in Malibu. A "store
insider" at the Erewhon supermarket on Beverly Boulevard breaks the startling
news that Love Boat captain and Mary Tyler Moore stalwart Gavin
McLeod "is crazy about our almond butter."

            Finally, the Globe reports that NYPD
Blue 's Dennis Franz was spotted spending 15 minutes in a supermarket
inspecting some 50 ears of corn. "He sniffed each ear, poked it and even
counted all the kernels," confides an observer.

            Keeping Tabs is highly skeptical of a Franz corn
purchase, however, because the National Enquirer says that the actor
recently shed 35 pounds on the kind of high-protein, low-carbohydrate diet in
which corn is verboten . Franz, the story says, owes it all to the diet
books sent him by--wouldn't you know it?-- Three's Company star Suzanne
Somers. We bet he'll be fitting back into those old leisure suits in no
time.

         
      
   
