
   
   
      
         
            A Great and Gross Festival

            John
F. Kennedy Jr. was laid to rest. The ashes of Kennedy, his wife, and
sister-in-law were scattered at sea. The Los Angeles Times attributed
the crash to a piloting error by Kennedy, but a tidal wave of eulogies
(including this one from the Washington Post ) blamed a curse
on the Kennedy clan. Other explanations: The New York Times cited
hazy flying conditions , James Fallows explained the of
the flight in 
                  Slate
               , the New York Post reported
that Kennedy had been obliged to schedule the Vineyard landing by his wife , and
Fortune says that Wall Street is blaming Morgan Stanley for making JFK
Jr.'s sister-in-law work late. The Jerusalem Post pointed to a
"novelty-seeking and risk-taking gene discovered in Israel" (see "International
Papers" for ). Michael Kelly asks Washington Post readers why "we lard
up the sorrow with this great and gross festival of national media blah-blah about
Camelot and royalty and The Kennedy Curse." 
                  Slate
               's
William Saletan examines the debate over whether the .

            

               Republicans gathered support for a $792 billion tax-cut plan.
GOP leaders appeased moderates by agreeing to condition the cuts on yearly
reductions in the federal debt. In the Washington Post , House Ways and
Means chairman Bill Archer, R-Texas, accuses Democrats of supporting
"big government 
                  on 
                  autopilot
               " and
argues that the cuts epitomize compassionate conservatism. But deficit-hawk
ex-Sens. Sam Nunn and Warren Rudman assert in the same pages that the surplus
should be used to pay down the deficit . President Clinton warned, "I
will not allow a risky plan to become law."

            

               The Pentagon spent hundreds of millions of dollars on projects
unapproved by Congress. According to the New York Times , a
congressional report accuses the Pentagon of funding a top-secret Air Force
program, an $800 million satellite, a high-tech missile defense system
previously rejected by Congress, and other unapproved purchases. The report
expresses shock at the flagrant illegality of the expenditures. "Do we get it
right 100 percent of the time? Of course not," the Pentagon responded.

            

               Ehud Barak pledged to strike peace deals with Syria and the
Palestinians within 15 months. Syria responded by asking radical
Palestinian groups in Damascus to end their attacks on Israel. His meetings
last week with President Clinton and Yasser Arafat were roundly applauded for
rebuilding relationships former Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had
soured, but David Plotz explains in 
                  Slate
                why Israelis
are . In the Washington Post , Henry Kissinger warned Israelis
not to leave the United States out of the peace
process, while an op-ed piece in the Israeli paper Ha'aretz cautioned
that congressional Republicans, under the sway of the right-wing Israeli Likud
Party, will "throw spikes into the newly energized peace train."

            
Security forces quelled student protests in Iran. Young people in 18 cities had
staged protests, thrown stones, and set police vehicles on fire. Pro-government
conservatives rallied right back. "" compares the uprising to civil war and the
fall of the Iron Curtain, but the Iranian newspaper Neshat argues that
revolution is "neither possible nor desirable." The New York Times '
Thomas Friedman calls them both wrong, saying Iranians simply want the
government "to get out of their lives so they can freely partake of the
prosperity, cultural options, and opportunities that today's
world-without-walls offers."

            

               U.S. diplomats will try to soothe tension between Taiwan and
China. The island abandoned its "one China" policy, which implied
China's sovereignty over and eventual reunification with Taiwan. "Don't
underestimate the Chinese government's firm determination to uphold national
sovereignty, dignity, and territorial integrity," warned the Chinese Foreign
Ministry in response. An editorial from the Chinese Xinhua news agency vilified
Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui for venturing down "a dead alley" and swimming
against the "historical tide" of unification. The Weekly Standard
argues that America should back Lee with words now and, if necessary, military
force later, but the Washington Post reports that the U.S. envoys will
pressure him to back down. The Wall Street
Journal predicted that the spat will blow over when Lee steps down in
eight months.

            

               The Senate agreed that a new agency should supervise nuclear weapons
research. The agency would report directly to the secretary of energy.
Sponsors of the plan said it would institute accountability for security
breaches, but the House reportedly prefers an even stronger independent
agency.

            

               California enacted the country's strictest ban on assault
weapons. It eliminates loopholes that previously allowed gun
manufacturers to evade restrictions by renaming or slightly altering their
weapons. Another new law restricts gun buyers to one weapon purchase per month.
The Los Angeles Times gives its blessing , and the New York Times reports that
the ban bodes well for tighter gun control in other states.

            

               Rep. Michael Forbes, R-N.Y., defected to the Democratic Party.
The Washington Post reports that Democratic leaders courted Forbes, a conservative who opposes abortion
and gun control, in a drive to claim the six seats they need for a majority.
National Republican Congressional Committee Chair Tom Davis denigrated Forbes'
decision by likening it to "many of his past actions, inconsistent and
erratic." Jodi Kantor in 
                  Slate
                how Forbes made the
move, and David Brooks explains in the New York Times why: "party
loyalty and gratitude are never allowed to get in the way of the epic personal
drama that exists in a politician's own mind."

            

               
                  The Senate passed compromise patients' rights
legislation.
                Republicans defeated a plan to let patients sue
their HMOs but approved more access to emergency care and specialists.
Democrats protested that the reforms would apply to fewer than one-third of the
161 million Americans with private insurance. The Washington Post awards
the GOP "a clean win on an issue of prime importance to the
American public" but foresees an election-time brawl. "Today we saw what
'compassionate conservativism' pretends to be," harrumphed Sen. Barbara
Mikulski, D-Md. New York Times columnist Bob Herbert asserts that
managed care has bought Republican votes and that patients will die as a
result.

            

               Cigars will carry warnings similar to those on cigarettes. The
Federal Trade Commission said the current
absence of labels implies "that cigars are a safe alternative to
cigarettes." Industry honchos protested that "cigar smokers are mature,
well-informed adults who smoke on an occasional basis."

            

               Ohio Democrats want Jerry Springer to run for Congress.
Democratic officials in the Columbus area have discussed the idea with Springer
and the state party. Politics has become entertainment, a political consultant
shrugged to the Associated Press.

            

               A generic drug may prevent death by heart failure. Researchers
announced that Spironolactone, a 40-year-old, inexpensive medication used to
treat water retention, cut death from congestive heart failure by 30 percent in
experimental trials. Twenty million people suffer from this heart condition
worldwide. Half of them die within five years of diagnosis. The New England
Journal of Medicine rushed the story to
press.

            

               Apple introduced iMac laptops. The iBook, pictured here , can function like a
cordless phone, allowing users to connect to the Internet while roaming up to
150 feet from a telephone jack. Analysts predict it will fuel sales of laptops
to the home market in general and Apple's turnaround in particular.

            

               Hewlett-Packard chose a female president and CEO. Carleton S.
Fiorina will be the first female CEO among the country's 20 biggest publicly
held companies and the third among the Fortune 500. The Wall Street
Journal says the choice proves that H-P "is serious about continuing to
revamp its stodgy image," while a New York Times editorial calls it
evidence that the glass ceiling "is at least cracking."

            

               David Cone of the New York Yankees pitched a perfect game. It
was the 16 th perfect game in Major League Baseball history. The
New York Daily News boasted of "Yankee magic," fueled by Yogi Berra and Don Larsen's presence at
the game. Even the Canadian Globe and Mail 
               agreed .

            
               Paul Lawrie won
golf's British Open. Lawrie, ranked 159 th in the world,
began the final round 10 strokes back but advanced to a three-way playoff when
tournament leader Jean Van de Velde choked away a three-stroke lead on the
final hole. The Associated Press effused that "the most stunning collapse in
golf gave way to the greatest comeback in the history of major
championships." The Scottish Press and Journal celebrated the triumph of
its native
son .

         
      
   
