
   
   
      
         
             The American Teen-ager

            They are ardent environmentalists. They adore
technology and understand it as no generation before them did. They practically
invented the Internet. They don't vote: They distrust politics and prefer
voluntarism. They're skeptical of corporations and impervious to traditional
advertising. They're less racist and more multiracial than any group of
Americans in history.

            They are, of course, Generation Y, as trend-mongers
describe them today. But they are also Generation X, as trend-mongers described
them six years ago. And no doubt they are Generation Z, as trend-mongers will
describe them in 2015. Generalizing about a generation is always bogus,
especially when most of its members aren't out of short pants yet. But no
matter. Fifty-five million Gen Xers, once hailed for their iconoclasm, have
been discarded as "cynical" and "sour." Supplanting them are the 77 million
sunny children of Gen Y. (Generation Y--a ridiculous --includes those born
since 1981.) Gen Xers were in their 20s when they became media darlings. The
oldest members of Gen Y have just entered college, which means that for the
first time since the baby boom, America is obsessed with teen-agers.

            Teens (and 25-year-olds
masquerading as teens) have kidnapped pop culture. Their movies--from
Titanic to Scream to Cruel Intentions --have swallowed
multiplexes. Their melodramas own the networks and have turned their
nymphs-- Dawson's Creek 's Katie Holmes, Party of Five 's Jennifer
Love Hewitt, Felicity 's Keri Russell--into superstars. Their music
rules, from Kid Rock to Eminem to Backstreet Boys. Even adults have been
bewitched by the teen invasion. The New York Times Magazine is fretting
about teen-age boys' body image problems. U.S. News just ran a cover
story on "The Teen Brain." (Why are your teen-agers sullen and irrational?
Because the parts of the brain that develop last are those that regulate
judgment and emotion. Also because they hate you.)

            The United States is global HQ for teendom, but Americans
have not always fixated on teens or even been aware of them. As Thomas Hine
reports in his new book, The Rise and Fall of the American Teenager , the
teen was invented in the 20 th century. For most of American history,
adolescents (also a modern creation) inhabited the adult world as laborers and
apprentices. No one claimed that teens were incapacitated by raging hormones or
needed an eight-year respite to find themselves. The Great Depression minted
the American teen by exiling kids from the labor force to high schools. Only
after World War II did high school become the universal, defining experience of
youth. For the first time, adolescents were artificially segregated from
adults, and developed their own culture of cars, dating, and rock 'n' roll.
America was fascinated by teen-age boomers not only because there were so many
of them, but also because they were so alien: The country had never seen
teen-agers before.

            We, however, have seen
and been teen-agers. So what explains our tyromania? Demography is part of it.
Generation Y is huge, 50 percent larger than Generation X. By 2010, 35 million
teen-agers will haunt malls and chat rooms, more teens than there ever were
during the baby boom. The media cycle has also boosted Generation Y.
Trend-spotters need trends. Yuppies were the stereotype of the '80s. The bleak
early '90s were defined by the allegedly darker and less materialistic Gen
Xers. Now the media need a new plot line, and Gen Y is providing it.

            Generation Y is also booming because it is a cheerful story
for a cheerful age. Just as the slump of the '90s has been replaced by the
eternal boom, the cynical pessimists of Gen X have been vanquished by the
cheery Ys. In the '80s, writing about teen-agers meant writing about rising
pregnancy rates, drug use, and crime. Today, teen pregnancy, drug use, crime,
dropout rates, and sexual activity are down. Church-going is up. Racism is out.
The "New Earnestness" and the "New Familism" are in. Rebellion is passé. At
last, commentators gloat, kids are having real childhoods again. The school
massacres in Littleton, Colo., and Jonesboro, Ark., have barely soured the
mood. The media have focused on kids' passionate, unified response to the
killings.

            This incessant cheer is
inspiring inane predictions about what magnificent adults these Gen Yers will
be. Commentators opine that their childhood prosperity will make them generous
and idealistic. According to polls, teens are optimistic. Pop prophets William
Strauss and Neil Howe call them a "Hero" generation. But young people,
especially teens, have always registered optimism. Even Gen Xers were
optimistic when they were polled five years ago. Of course Gen Yers are peppy
now: Who wouldn't be? Let's see what they say when the economy dives the year
they graduate from college. And let's wait until most Gen Yers are capable of
rational thought. Most of them haven't reached puberty yet, and many are in
diapers.

            The most important reason for today's tyromania is
economic. America seems obsessed with youth because corporations are obsessed
with youth: If they catch kids early enough, they can cement their brand
preferences for life. Networks are producing teen dramas so that their
advertisers can reach this impressionable audience. Movies are pitched to
teen-age sensibilities because only teen-agers go to movies again and again and
again. As far as marketers are concerned, Gen X is over: It has aged out of the
consumption game. But Generation Y kids are up for grabs: They are young, they
have monstrous amounts of cash to spend--the average teen has $94 a week of
disposable income!--and they'll be even richer when they grow up.

            It's unsurprising, therefore, that the people
pushing the Gen Y boom hardest are not sociologists, journalists, or activists
but market researchers. The most quoted Gen Y pundits are folks who work at
companies such as Youth Information Network and Teenage Research Unlimited,
which collect data on trendy brands. (TRU is the Ford Foundation of Gen Y
analysis.) Stories about Gen Y tend to shortchange kids' views on family,
school, and politics, and dwell instead on their favorite clothing stores.

            (To cynical Gen Xers such
as myself, this marketing talk seems both contradictory and fatuous. The market
researchers instruct that Gen Yers are brand-conscious yet skeptical of
established brands, independent-minded yet conformist. They say things like
"This is the coolest generation ever." If you can use "viral marketing" and
"Abercrombie & Fitch" in the same sentence, you too can be a Gen Y pundit.
Then again, if you could use "grunge" and "Social Security reform" in the same
sentence, you could have been a Gen X pundit.)

            The final reason for the teen renaissance is boomer
self-obsession. A pervasive theme of Generation Y is that it is growing up just
as the boomers did: prosperous, happy, well-adjusted. If you consume teen
culture at all, you have surely noticed the remarkable number of sympathetic
parents around. Today's TV parents are wisdom figures, not the adult buffoons
we have grown accustomed to. Similarly, articles about Gen Y--many written by
boomer parents--are fulsome about how well boomers are raising their tots, how
intimately parents and kids communicate, and how much kids admire mom and dad.
The "surprising fact" that pops up in almost every Gen Y story is a survey in
which teens named parents as their favorite role models. (I would bet that
every survey of teens taken since Cain and Abel found that they named parents
as their favorite role models.)

            Boomers, whose self-absorption has long been
ridiculed, have finally managed to get over themselves. They have found a new
object of their affection. They don't need self-love anymore. They've got
Mini-Me.

         
      
   
