
   
   
      
         
            No. 278: &quot;Interest Rate&quot;

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 278)--"Interest Rate":
Fill in the blank as Carleton S. Fiorina, 44, the newly announced CEO of the
$50 billion Hewlett-Packard company, meets the press: "My ________ is
interesting but really not the subject of the story here."
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Monday's Question (No. 277)--"Summerize":
Trent Lott, Ronald Reagan, and Steve Martin did it when they were young, and
this summer more than 400,000 people will attend camps to learn how to do it
better. Do what?
            

            "Let's
just say that somewhere Dr. Joycelyn Elders is smiling."-- Tim Carvell
( Daniel Krause , Chris Thomas , and Norman Oder had similar
answers.)

            "Liven
up a crowd, or a Klan rally in the senator's case, with the smooth, lilting
sound of a banjo."-- Brooke Saucier
            

            "Flirt
with Larry King."-- Barbara Lippert
            

            
"Ronald Reagan was young?"-- Alison Rogers
            

            "If I
remember camp correctly, surrendering completely to an arbitrary and irrational
authority under the threat of violence."-- Charles Star
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Largely ignoring Trent
Lott--good advice for all--many News Quiz participants assumed that shorthand
for Ronald Reagan is senility, and shorthand for Steve Martin is the old arrow
through the head bit, which he performed back when he was still--oh, cruel,
cruel participants!--funny. Martin has indeed been in many bad movies recently,
and he certainly benefited from Tina Brown's editorial policy of publishing
anything at all if it was written--or dictated over the phone--by a celebrity.
But there is another reason, more tragic and ironic, why this gifted and
imaginative guy seems less funny lately. Comedy relies on surprise. A joke sets
up a chain of logic, and then subverts it in a surprising and delightful way;
that's the punch line. A comic persona embodies an unexpected way of seeing the
world. But the more successfully a comic does this, the more familiar his point
of view becomes. And finally, after years of exposure to even the liveliest
comic mind--and Martin certainly has one--we can all make up our own Steve
Martin gag or Trent Lott denial or Ronald Reagan unworkable budget policy. His
way of seeing things is too familiar to surprise us, too predictable to be
funny. And so a comedian's success creates his failure. That, and appearing
with Chevy Chase.

            
               Give Me an "A," Give Me
an "N," Give Me ... Oh, Just Give the Damn Answer
            

            All three men were cheerleaders.

            There are more than 3.3 million active cheerleaders
in America--if they weren't active, they wouldn't deserve to be called
cheerleaders--97 percent of them are women.

            The network of training camps, competitions, and
uniform manufacturers that make up the "spirit industry" is described as "a
virtual circle of cross-marketing," by Jeffrey Webb, CEO of Varsity Spirit
Corp., a company big in all three areas.

            Maintaining a single
cheerleader can run $5,000 a year in equipment, travel, and entry fees--tough
on a parent, but far cheaper than the high-priced world of NASCAR racing, where
the cars can't even talk, let alone spell out mood-boosting words letter by
letter while leaping into the air. On the other hand, some spectators are
disappointed that cheerleading contests include so few fiery collisions.

            
               It's an Orderly and
Predictable Universe Extra
            

            "I
think I also have an obligation to deal with the hurt and the harm done to
these police officers who were put in a position where they had to kill your
son."-- Rudy Giuliani, on the radio, hectoring Margarita Rosario, the mother
of an 18-year-old, who was one of two men lying face down when the cops shot
them 22 times
            

            "Quite
sensitive and quite honest."-- Rudy Giuliani, evaluating his comments to the
dead boy's mother
            

            
"There's no point in moralizing whether this is a good or bad thing."-- Gene
DeWitt, advertising executive, on a whole other subject
            

            
               Ongoing Domain Name
Extra
            

            The domain name WebInvest.com is already registered
by Kenneth L. Riffle, but OneBornEveryMinute.com is still available.

            Participants are invited to submit a similar
pair--a domain name that is already taken along with an amusing and available
alternative.

            You can check the availability of domain names at
http://www.eHost.com/domain_reg/index.html.

            Replies due by noon ET
Thursday, July 22.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The old arrow through the head bit, the old
autoeroticism thing.

         
      
   
