
   
   
      
         
             Pope John Paul II

            In the early evening of Oct. 16, 1978, the newly
elected Pope John Paul II appeared on the balcony of St. Peter's Basilica and
told the crowd that he had accepted election even though "I was afraid in
receiving the nomination." If so, it was the first and last time that the
former Cardinal Karol Wojtyla of Krakow had known fear. Six days later, when he
was invested as pope, John Paul II was commending the Christianity of courage.
Echoing the assurances of the angel who told Mary of Nazareth that she would
conceive and bring forth the son of God, the 58-year-old pope told the throng
in St. Peter's Square: "Be not afraid."

            John Paul II is not
afraid--of religion's cultured despisers, of geopoliticians who find his
near-pacifism naive, of liberal Catholics who accuse him of betraying the
spirit of the Second Vatican Council ("Vatican II"), of feminists who suspect
that he sees only two acceptable roles for women--virgin and mother. He is
unafraid of his own infirmity, caused by advancing age and by the residual
effects of a 1981 assassination attempt. Finally, and perhaps most interesting,
John Paul II has intimated that he might be unafraid even of a downsizing of
the papal authority his charisma has done so much to dramatize.

            Born in 1920 to the wife of a Polish soldier, the future
pope was a precocious intellectual, actor, and poet who worked in a quarry and
a chemical plant during World War II. Imbued with the popular Catholicism of
Poland--marked by effusive devotion to the Virgin Mary (an aspect of John Paul
II's spirituality that discomfits Protestants and liberal Catholics)-- Wojtyla
began studies for the priesthood in 1942 in an "underground" seminary made
necessary by the Nazi occupation.

            After the war he studied
in Rome, boarding an ecclesiastical fast track: auxiliary bishop of Krakow in
1958; archbishop in 1964; and cardinal in 1967. Though Communist officials
regarded him as more pliable than other churchmen, he proved unafraid to
confront them in the cause of freedom for the Polish church. When Wojtyla was
elected pope, after the 33-day reign of the Italian John Paul I, the
international press portrayed him as the darkest of dark horses. In hindsight,
his ecclesiastical networking during and after Vatican II made him a logical
candidate once it was clear no Italian cardinal could win election.

            The rest is history, from which liberal and conservative
Catholics draw strikingly contrary conclusions. The pope took the Gospel and
his magnetic personality on the road--forsaking the throne, on which past popes
were carried through St. Peter's Basilica, for the Popemobile. The year after
his election, John Paul II returned to Poland for nine days and encountered a
rhapsodic reception that more than one biographer credits with helping to sow
the seeds of the Solidarity movement's later challenge to the Communist
regime.

            Elsewhere on his world
tour, which has passed through 119 countries, he kept faith with his
predecessors John XXIII and Paul VI in defending the dignity of workers and
anathematizing the arms race. He called for negotiations rather than the use of
force in the Gulf War and in Bosnia and Kosovo. He has been critical of
international sanctions against Iraq, and he hopes next year to visit the
birthplace of the biblical patriarch Abraham there. These and similar
initiatives pleased political liberals inside and outside the church; not so
the Vatican's use of its quasigovernmental status to oppose population-control
initiatives that the pope feared would contribute to the "culture of
death."

            The style of John Paul II's papacy has occasioned as much
comment as its substance. Past popes were remote and magisterial figures, but
capitalizing on his relative youth, his actor's panache, and a mastery of mass
communications, John Paul II changed all that--unafraid of diluting the papal
mystique through overexposure.

            The pope's roadshow has
never had an exclusively Catholic cast. He has met with Rome's chief rabbi and
has joined in worship with Lutheran bishops and, in a historic 1982 ceremony in
Canterbury Cathedral, with the spiritual leader of the Church of England, which
broke with Rome in the 16 th century.

            Some would dismiss this as photo-op ecumenism and note that
Anglicans are not invited to take Holy Communion in Roman Catholic churches,
despite agreements by an Anglican-Roman Catholic theological commission on the
meaning of that sacrament. Anglicans were also dismayed when Cardinal Joseph
Ratzinger, the pope's doctrinal watchdog, signed a document that seemed to
rehabilitate a much-criticized 1896 papal bull declaring the holy orders of
Anglican clergy "absolutely null and utterly void."

            It isn't only in his
policy toward other churches that John Paul II is accused of preaching reform
and practicing reaction. Vatican II gave rise to a less hierarchical and more
outward-looking Catholicism and set the stage for once-unthinkable innovations
like plainclothes nuns and the celebration of the Mass in English and other
modern languages. Liberal Catholics concede that John Paul II may follow the
letter of the council's decrees but, mindful that "the letter killeth, but the
spirit giveth life" (2 Corinthians 3:6), they see in Vatican II a trajectory of
further change that this pope has frustrated. John Paul II is not oblivious to
these criticisms, just contemptuous of them. It is his duty, he writes in
Crossing the Threshold of Hope , to "interpret [Vatican II] correctly and
defend it from tendentious interpretations." It seems the pope enjoys
confounding his critics. He recalls that on one trip to Poland he offended
local adherents of the "enlightened agenda" by emphasizing the Ten
Commandments. "For such people," he said, "the Pope becomes persona non
grata when he tries to convince the world of human sin."

            Much of the liberal Catholic case against the pope deals
with sexuality. It is even said that he has a "woman problem," which supposedly
finds expression in his defense of church positions on an all-male clergy,
contraception, and abortion. Yes, abortion is anathema to John Paul II, who is
bemused by suggestions that he has an "obsession" with the subject, but he
condemns abortion because he sees it as not only anti-life but also
anti-woman.

            The pope has endorsed sexual equality in the
workplace and in society, but there is no doubt that he subscribes to a
Christian version of difference feminism. In a 1988 apostolic letter on the
"dignity and vocation of women," the pope warned that "in the name of
liberation from male domination, women must not appropriate to themselves male
characteristics contrary to their own feminine 'originality.' "

            What is so "original" about women? In a 1962 retreat
for university students in Krakow, the future pope, espousing what sounds like
the Gospel According to Carol Gilligan, told female participants that "women
are more feeling and intuitive people and become involved in things in a more
sensitive and complete manner." In separate remarks to male students, Wojtyla
argued that "in men, the intellect has a certain supremacy over the heart, and
this is why Christ entrusted responsibility for the Gospel as idea to
them."

            This view of sexual
differences suggests that for John Paul II, opposition to women priests is not
simply a tradition inherited from his predecessors or even an emulation of
Jesus' decision to call only men as apostles. For John Paul II, as for Paul VI,
the male monopoly on priesthood is required by "theological anthropology." The
pope has ratcheted up its importance by decreeing that the male monopoly on
priesthood is an article of faith that must be "definitively held by all the
Church's faithful."

            His obstinacy on the issue is cited as proof that John Paul
II is indifferent to one of the major themes of Vatican II: Christian reunion.
The picture is more complicated. While the pope has warned the archbishop of
Canterbury that the ordination of women as Anglican priests poses "an
increasingly serious obstacle" to reconciliation between Rome and Canterbury,
he has indicated a surprising willingness to compromise on a seemingly more
fundamental obstacle to reunion: the papacy itself. In a 1995 encyclical, John
Paul II broached the possibility that, in the interests of Christian unity, he
or his successors might "find a way of exercising the [papal] primacy which,
while in no way renouncing what is essential to its mission, is nonetheless
open to a new situation." He went on to note that in the first 1,000 years of
Christianity the bishop of Rome "acted by common consent as moderator" when
Christians disagreed about belief or discipline.

            This tantalizing suggestion of a scaled-down papal
office was seized on by the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission
this May in a report that suggested Anglicans should accept a circumscribed
papal primacy as a "gift to be shared." The pope's suggestion also dovetails
with a new interest among some Protestant theologians in a "universal primate"
who would serve as a focus of unity for world Christianity. (What it does not
comport with, ironically, is the papal role as John Paul II has so effectively
enlarged it. Would a "tiebreaker" bishop of Rome have any use for an airplane
or a Popemobile?)

            Here is perhaps the ultimate example of John Paul
II's fearlessness: a willingness at least to consider some diminution in the
scope of his office in exchange for an improvement on the current "imperfect
unity" of Christendom. But churches that ordain female clergy might have their
own "woman problem" in accepting a scaled-back papacy that came with
theological strings attached. The pope surely knows this, which suggests that
his target might not be the churches of the Reformation, but the Orthodox and
other ancient churches of the East. Although estranged from Rome for hundreds
of years, these tradition-rich churches long have fascinated John Paul II, who
comes from a part of the world where Latin and Byzantine Christianity overlap.
And one more thing: The Eastern churches do not, and likely never will, ordain
women.

         
      
   
