
   
   
      
         
            No. 303: &quot;Decline and Fall&quot;

            
               
                  "That was a
miserable year, when I watched a great man, a man I love more than life--you
know, one of the really fundamentally solid, decent people--go from 92 to 38 in
a very quick period of time." Who watched whom go from 92 to 38
what?
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question (No.
302)--"It's Back":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    "It's back, and we
used it this summer. But they don't want us to use it too much. It's not going
to be a big deal." Who said this about
what?
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Doctors at Kaiser Permanente talking about the hospital's heart-lung
machine."-- Jon Greenberg
            

            "The
Indonesian military on ethnic cleansing."-- Kenton A. Hoover
            

            "The
president; speaking about use of the Delta Force to combat oddball religious
groups and political dissenters who have it coming."-- Chris Thomas
            

            "The
promotion director of Sony's music division; about Jennifer Lopez's
butt."--Francis Heaney
            

            "It
was the caption for last Tuesday's Family Circus , where Dolly is showing
Jeffy the family crack pipe."-- Noah Meyerson
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            The most popular response (the one all the cool
kids are writing) plays with the "malathion" (yeah, right) the city is spraying
throughout New York to kill "mosquitoes" (wink, wink) that transmit
"encephalitis" (go on: pull the other one). It makes one nostalgic for the fear
of LSD in the water, fluoride in the water, and saltpeter in the cafeteria
food, presumably to create a docile population of human slaves with excellent
teeth who keep hallucinating that they're uninterested in sex.

            There is a difference between canny skepticism and
dumbbell skepticism. The latter is unearned and knee-jerk: "They're all a bunch
of crooks." It's a form of self-aggrandizement whose effect is to make the
skeptic feel knowing. The former is informed and terrifying: "The president was
willing to let hundreds of thousands of people get slaughtered in Rwanda." Its
effect is to make the skeptic want to throw himself out of a
10 th -floor window.

            Of course, there really
is fluoride in the water, the government really did test hallucinogens on
unknowing human subjects, and sexual vitality can be diminished by watching
television. At least in prime time.

            
               Help

               Me off the Field and Into the Answer
            

            New York Jets coach Bill Parcells said this about
the use of instant replay to challenge an official's call, a rule change
instituted for the new National Football League season that began Sunday.

            The Jets, many fans' preseason pick to make it to
the Super Bowl, lost their season opener and the services of four starters
including quarterback Vinny Testaverde, out for the season with a ruptured
Achilles' tendon.

            This concludes the News
Quiz coverage of the 1999 NFL season. Next up: NASCAR reaches out to gays,
Jews, and Patricia Duff.

            
               Andrew

               Staples' Yet More News Quizzes Extra
            

            Adding reference to Australia (as suggested by the
folks at Excite) leads to the Brisbane Airport's monthly
quiz.

            Sample: What is the second busiest domestic air
route in Australia currently?

            (Probably not the one
into Dili. Because that wouldn't be domestic. Right?-- Ed .)

            
               Sick

               Fish Follow-Up
            

            "We trout fisherman consider this an extremely
threatening situation that you make light of, especially since it is the
Colorado DFG that is largely responsible for the proliferation of the disease.
A couple of years ago, the Colorado DFG decided to go ahead and stock thousands
of trout that it knew had been exposed to the disease; wouldn't you know it,
the disease soon showed up in wild trout in Colorado and other states. Now
they're gonna spend $80 million to study it. Go figure."-- Steve
Hellerman
            

            "Oh, fine, it's OK to slander the fish in the name
of a quick laugh, but there is a whirling disease in trout. The poor little
guys just swim around and around in a circle until they die. And it's all our
fault for genetically engineering them and raising them by the thousands in
hatcheries."-- Kate Wing
            

            (My apologies to any
afflicted fish I may have offended, and to those who love to kill
them.-- Ed .)

            

               Clarification
            

            George W. Bush will
disclose all campaign contributions on his Web site; he will not let major
contributors post saucy photographs of themselves on a page called the
"Bare-Ass Eagle Club."

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Skepticism about just what Rudolph Giuliani is
spraying for, praying for, howling at the moon and baying for. (Look for
News Quiz Music , a hot new CD in stores this Christmas, if the man
doesn't stop us.)

         
      
   
