
   
   
      
         
            Turkey Shakes and Breaks

            
Newspapers everywhere led on Tuesday's ruinous Turkish earthquake, where the
latest tallies show more than 6,300 dead and at least 20,000 injured. Most
reports noted that although strict building codes have been in effect in
Istanbul since the 1940s, the regulations are often ignored. The Times of London said
that "shoddy construction work, cheap building materials and a reckless
disregard for safety," almost certainly caused so many buildings to crumble.
The Times noted that "Turkey has long been ... a land of ruins," but
recommended that just as the Turkish government uses the latest techniques to
protect monuments such as the Hagia Sophia in Istanbul from seismic turbulence,
so should it "apply the same rigorous standards to its more mundane buildings
for it is upon them and their inhabitants that its future depends."

            Many
papers quoted the headline from Turkey's best-selling newspaper
Hurriyet : "Murderers!" El Mundo of Spain said: "Adjacent to buildings that are
completely destroyed there are others that are totally undamaged. How can this
be? Yesterday, the Turkish authorities criticized the poor quality of many of
the buildings that have gone up in the last few years in the area affected by
the earthquake, a region that has experienced heavy industrial development.
This undoubtedly amounts to criminal irresponsibility. Even more so,
considering that they knew they were building on an active fault line that has
caused dozens of devastating earthquakes in recent decades. But the builders
couldn't have put up such fragile buildings if the authorities had not
permitted it." An editorial in the liberal French daily Libération Thursday
agreed, pointing out that the "the outcome in seismic catastrophes has less to
do with poverty than with negligence."

            
Singapore's citizens won't be voting for a new president Aug. 28, because the
official screening committee approved only one of the three applicants for the
position. S.R. Nathan, 75, was the only candidate to meet their eligibility
requirements of senior government or business experience and personal
integrity. According to the Straits Times of Singapore, Ong Teng Cheong, the
incumbent and the country's first elected president (prior to 1993 the
president was chosen by parliament), wanted to seek re-election, but the
Cabinet declined to support him for a second term because it felt "there was a
strong likelihood that the President's health would affect the discharge of his
official duties in the next few years." The International Herald Tribune maintains that the selection was a deliberate effort to ensure
that Singapore's head of state would come from one of its non-Chinese
minorities. Nathan is of Indian descent, while the other two applicants, like
Ong, are from the country's Chinese majority, which accounts for 77 percent of
the population. The IHT said, "With Singapore's giant neighbor to the
south, Indonesia, riven by ethnic conflict, and its northern neighbor,
Malaysia, about to hold elections in which the political supremacy of the Malay
majority will again be an underlying issue, the Singapore government wants to
re-emphasize its commitment to racial equality as the bedrock of political
stability and economic growth."

            One of
Indonesia's ethnic hot spots was the subject of an editorial in the Straits
Times Wednesday. The paper said that the north Sumatran province of Aceh
"long a festering sore on the Indonesian body politic, is now an open wound."
More than 250 people have been killed and around 140,000 displaced from their
homes since May, when the Indonesian military stepped up its campaign against
the Free Aceh Movement. According to the ST , "Acehnese separatism is
fuelled by popular anger against Jakarta for taking more than it returns to the
resource-rich province, and by Acehnese insistence that they are an Islamic
enclave distinct from the Javanese who dominate the central government."
Separatists intensified their campaign in January when the Indonesian president
announced that there would be a referendum on autonomy or independence in East
Timor, but the Straits Times observed, "Amputation is out because Aceh
is unquestionably a part of Indonesia, unlike the former Portuguese colony East
Timor it invaded and then annexed in 1976." The editorial concluded that the
"carnage will stop only when reconciliation begins," but as a story in
Thursday's Sydney Morning Herald noted, the fighting is currently intensifying, with the head of
the Indonesian armed forces threatening to order a state of emergency in the
province.

            The
South China Morning
Post of Hong Kong fretted about the situation in Kosovo, where the
Serbian population has shrunk from 200,000 to 50,000 as a result of
post-conflict Albanian persecution. An editorial said, "Nato thought it was fighting for a
multi-ethnic province. Instead, it seems about to inherit a long-term 100 per
cent Albanian protectorate, ethnically cleansed by the victims of ethnic
cleansing, who can be as cruel as their former tormentors when given a chance."
The SCMP concluded, "Kosovars are better off than under Serb control,
but there is no peaceful solution in sight."

            The
Guardian
of London reported Wednesday that heavy metal rockers Led Zeppelin are the most
bootlegged musical artists in Britain. The British Phonographic Industry's
anti-piracy unit has 384 titles by the group in its collection, compared with
320 by the Beatles, 317 by the Rolling Stones, and 301 by Bob Dylan (the
subject of "Browser" column on "the bootleg fallacy"). Tenth on the BPI's list,
with 170, is Jimi Hendrix--who hasn't done many live concerts since 1970.

         
      
   
