
   
   
      
         
            No. 318: &quot;Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien&quot;

            
               "You won't hear
any apologies from me," said Dr. Stephen Ostroff of the Centers for Disease
Control. "Anyone who continues to maintain that there was some mistake here
doesn't understand the way science proceeds." What isn't Ostroff apologizing
for?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 317)--"She's Still Got It":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           "We are quite the best country in
Europe. In my lifetime all the problems have come from mainland Europe, and all
the solutions have come from the English-speaking nations of the world," said
Margaret Thatcher in her first speech at a Conservative Party conference since
stepping down as prime minister in 1990. Lady Thatcher was inspired to speak by
a particular cause. What?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Raising money for the Pol Pot Leisuredome."-- Barbara Lippert
            

            "Oh,
when will the western European rappers make peace with the eastern European
rappers?"--Francis Heaney
            

            
"National If English Was Good Enough for Our Lord Jesus Christ, It's Good
Enough for Me Day."-- Michael J. Basial
            

            "Pat
Buchanan's A Republic, Not an Empire . (She was dictating the
foreword.)"-- Raymond Chen ( Anthony D. Stone , Larry
Renbaum , and Eric Akawie had similar answers.)

            
"PinochetAid concert."-- Cathy Christianson
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Reagan and Thatcher
present us with contrasting retirement strategies--pathetic senility and
rancorous immortality, each in its way a grotesque form of self-parody. We
always knew they had it in them. Other figures of the Reagan-Thatcher era chose
other retirement plans. Duvalier went with exile to France, Noriega went with
prison, and Brezhnev, I believe, is now a privately owned cement factory near
Sverdlovsk. What none of them ever does is die in a hideous automobile
accident. This defies all probabilities. Every American has been in a car
crash. Forty thousand of us die that way each year. Either each powerful
retiree is transported in some kind of titanium case or that satanic pact is
still in effect even after one leaves office. Either way, great benefits.

            
               Stand

               by Your Man Answer
            

            Lady T. was shaken from her slumber by the plight
of Augusto Pinochet.

            "Make no mistake, revenge by the left, not justice
for the victim, is what the Pinochet case is all about,'' she declared to a
packed hall in Blackpool, at the Conservative Party's annual conference.

            "Sen. Pinochet," she said--choosing his honorific
with the same care ABC News uses when calling its own pet war criminal "Dr."
Kissinger--"is, in truth, on trial not for anything complained in Judge
Baltazar Garzon's indictment but for defeating communism. "

            "What the left cannot forgive is that Pinochet
undoubtedly saved Chile and helped save South America,'' she said. "That, and
the torture and murder of thousands of civilians, but mostly that," she did not
add.

            A British court has
ruled that the former murderer can be extradited to Spain.

            
               Al

               Cloutier's Franco-Prussian Extra
            

            Sure, all the world's
problems come from Europe, but who is able to produce funnier problems, the
French or the Germans? At last, science can decide. Using Alta Vista's translator, I've double-translated a passage from the Tsu-tech
"Inti-Mist" Family Bidet Web site into French then back to English:

            

               Sit Of heating: A seat of heating eliminates "the frosted contact" usually
tested when to rest on a seat of toilet cooled by the cold of the winter. You
will be astonished and satisfied the comfortable comfort of the seat of toilet
of heating by Bidet of Inti-Mist.

            

            The same passages,
translated into German then back to English:

            

               Lively seat: A lively seat eliminates the "icy note" normally experienced,
when sitting on a toilet seat to showers of the winter cooled down. They are
surprised at cozy the comfort of the lively toilet seat intimatist bidet and
please.

            

            
               Who is funnier? Ask Margaret Thatcher.
            

            
               Ongoing

               Bail-Out Extra
            

            "As a journalist who writes about pizza ..." Boom.
Right there. That's where I snapped off my radio, in the opening phrase of a
piece by some twinkly gasbag on NPR's annoying Sunday Edition .

            Certain phrases are so potent and evocative they
inspire you to hurl the newspaper across the room, or hurl yourself across the
room to switch the station, or hurl the cat across the room to ... not that I'd
ever do that.

            Participants are invited to submit similar
examples--from newspapers, magazines, or broadcast news--of what The New
Yorker used to call "letters we never finished reading" (or something like
that).

            Best examples to run
Thursday.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Anglo-French hostility.

         
      
   
