
   
   
      
         
            No. 302: &quot;It's Back&quot;

            
               
                  "It's back, and
we used it this summer. But they don't want us to use it too much. It's not
going to be a big deal." Who said this about what?
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's Question
(No. 301)--"Army Men":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Fill in the blank as Professor
Charles Stevenson of the National War College assesses a new study of military
and civilian beliefs. It is "scary," he said, to have "an officer corps so
overwhelmingly
_____________."
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Made
up of people merely using the experience as a steppingstone for starting their
own militias."-- Matt Sullivan
            

            
"Unable to say the phrase 'humanitarian mission' without giggling."-- Matthew
Heimer
            

            
"Subscribing to the utilitarian beliefs of disturbing yet guilt-inducing
philosopher Peter Singer."-- Norman Oder
            

            
"Indebted to the Chinese government for loans to buy their homes."-- Eliot
Cohen
            

            "Prone
to sudden bleeding and speaking in scary voices!!! (Promotional fee paid by
Stigmata © 1999)."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Banana Republicans. If
Time magazine were half the trend-spotter it thinks it is, that's the
banner it would run to mark the triumph of Reaganism, transforming the United
States into the kind of South American nation we used to deride. We now have
the essentials--a huge army dominated by leaders far to the right of the rest
of society, a vast chasm between a tiny rich minority and everyone else, and
the proliferation of soap operas in prime time, despite the
counterrevolutionary snubbing of The Sopranos at Sunday night's Emmy
Awards.

            
               Fun 
               Facts:
            

            

               The wealthiest 1 percent earned as much after taxes as the poorest 100
million Americans.

               That ratio has more than doubled since 1977.

               The poorest 80 percent of the country now earns a smaller percentage of the
national income than they did 20 years ago.

               Ninety percent of America's economic growth has gone to the richest 1
percent of the population.

               Patricia Duff's first name easily substitutes for the name "Evita," making
it possible to do a new version of the musical without cluttering up the
elegant rhythm of the songs.

               Ricky Martin.

            

            If anyone wants me, I'll
be in the mountains--probably the Catskills--growing my beard.

            
               Right

               Face Answer
            

            It's scary to have "an officer corps so
overwhelmingly Republican ."

            Professor Stevenson was
commenting on a study conducted by the Triangle Institute for Security Studies,
comparing the social and political views of the military elite with those of
prominent civilians. The study concluded that the soldiers are far to the right
of the general society.

            
               Scary 
               Facts:
            

            

               Sixty-four percent of the military officers but only 30 percent of the
civilians surveyed are Republicans.

               Sixty-seven percent of the military officers but only 32 percent of the
civilians call themselves "conservative."

               Forty-five percent of the military officers but only 17 percent of the
civilians would bar homosexuals from military service.

               Seventy-four percent of the officers but only 46 percent of the civilians
favor school prayer.

               Only 10 percent of the officers but 37 percent of the civilians think
capital punishment should be banned.

            

            "In the 19 th century officers frequently
had political alignments," Stevens said, "but they did not favor a single party
consistently."

            Defense Secretary
William Cohen said it would be a major challenge for him "to somehow prevent a
chasm from developing between the military and civilian worlds." News Quiz host
Randy Cohen, his wife of 35 years, said, "Too late. And, actually, no
relation."

            
               Other

               Quizzes, Other Rooms Extra
            

            So that none of you play
because of a lack of alternatives, here are actual questions found by looking
for "News Quiz" through various search engines, along with comments pointing
out how much better things are right in your own backyard.

            
               
                  Jacksonville
                        Times-Union
                     
                  
               
            

            The Jacksonville sheriff's office had to close
which park to vehicles after it filled to capacity on Memorial Day?

            Westside Regional Park

            Hanna Park

            Mandarin Park

            Metropolitan Park

            

               Comment : Questions may be overly local.

            
               KET
News Quiz
               
            

            True or false? The Newport Aquarium is home to
animals that live in and around water.

            

               Comment : Unless this is some kind of trick question, they're
talking to us like we're idiots. Are we going to take that?

            
               
                  Christian 
                        Science Monitor
                     
                  
               
            

            What is nicknamed the government's fourth
branch?

            The FBI

            NATO

            The U.S. Federal Reserve

            

               Comment : Admirable use of quiz form to slyly denigrate the
military-industrial complex, although the fourth choice might have been "Bill
Gates."

            
               
                  Topeka

                        Capital-Journal
                     's CJ KidsZone News Quiz (in coordination with
the public school system of Topeka)
               
            

            What is making the Gwinch'in tribe lose their
ancient ways?

            Laws

            Other tribes

            Money

            Television

            

               Comment : I can't prove it, but I suspect that an early draft
included fifth answer: "attacked by dinosaurs just 800 years ago."

            
               colorado .now
               
            

            Test your "NQ" with this week's array of questions,
dreamed up by the colorado.now staff.

            The Colorado Division of Wildlife wants to spend as
much as $8 million to fight "whirling disease," which afflicts what
species?

            Black bears

            Whooping cranes

            Deer mice

            Trout

            

               Comment : There's no such thing as "whirling disease."
(Although little whirling deer mice would look adorable.) Colorado.now staff
should have "dreamed up" ways to smoke less pot.

            
               The
Old, Pre-Java CNN Quiz
               
            

            Travel through the world of current events with
today's quiz!

            According to the Consumer Product Safety
Commission, at least how many children have choked to death on children's
products since 1980?

            17

            259

            753

            1,030

            

               Comment: If you read between the lines, it's pretty clear CNN
thinks the best answer is "not nearly enough." Heartless bastards.

            
               Philanthropy in the News
               
            

            This quiz is based on news articles abstracted in
this week's issue of Philanthropy News Digest . To view the full
abstracts, go to the Digest .

            Who narrates the "Learn & Live" film produced
by the George Lucas Foundation?

            James Earl Jones

            George Lucas

            Robin Williams

            

               Comment : Focus pretty narrow, but not narrow enough to exclude
reference to Robin Williams.

            
               Test Your
Pesach IQ
               
            

            At the Seder we drink four cups of ...

            Hot chocolate

            Wine

            Olive oil

            

               Comment : Author of quiz too insecure about his place in
American life to include possible answer "blood of Christian children."

            
               
                  Rochester 
                        Business Journal
                     
                  
                  , Dec. 27,
1996
               
            

            The Midtown Plaza B. Forman Co. store closed for a
second time. Name the store's owner.

            Kodak named this executive vice chairman; later in
the year, he announced his retirement. Name him.

            What Rochester Top 100 firm faced charges in a suit
filed under the Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act?

            In June, the Rochester Business Journal
ceased to be a weekly. Why?

            What Buffalo-based company says it lost $1 million
in RTS funds?

            Which leading area realty firm filed for
bankruptcy?

            Name the Kodak veteran turned consultant who was
accused of stealing trade secrets.

            What local family was rocked by a $225 million
legal feud?

            

               Comment : Most depressing set of questions I've ever read. The
quiz format may not be the ideal way to chart a town's economic collapse. And
couldn't they at least get out of bed long enough to update the thing now and
then? And shave? And put on clean clothes?

            

               Clarification
            

            The president's gun
buy-back plan does not include a proposal to eliminate the middleman and funnel
the $15 million directly to Smith & Wesson.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            Don't ask, don't tell, don't kvetch.

         
      
   
