
   
   
      
         
            Go to Hell

            In his current 
                  Slate
                "" column, David
Greenberg compares George W. Bush and John Quincy Adams. John Q.--as he was not
known--is the only president's son so far to become president himself.
Historian Greenberg finds many parallels but some differences. For example, Q.
suffered a "lifelong case of clinical depression," whereas W. has come to
"believe that all Jews are bound for hell." While the parallel is unclear,
these are certainly two different things. As someone who has (based on
circumstantial evidence such as his bar mitzvah), I found this latter datum
especially interesting. And, of course, it is remarkable to learn that George
W. has actual opinions on any subject, let alone strong and controversial
ones.

            Unless you're a political junkie, or live in Texas,
you may have missed this story. The press have reported it, but not with the
neurotic intensity you might expect. Why not? Conservative press critics often
complain that the media ignore the importance of religion. This may be a case
in point, though not one those critics are likely to complain about. Second,
there is the inoculation phenomenon: Once a story has "been done," editors and
producers don't want to do it again. So, getting it done small is protection
against finding it done big. Finally, there may be a feeling among journalists
that the whole thing's a bum rap. Which it is and it isn't.

            There's no evidence that
George W. is an anti-Semite. After college he was even engaged briefly to a
half-Jewish woman. Some have suggested that Bush may have dumped her because
her father was Jewish, but there's no reason to think he didn't know that all
along, if he cared, so the episode weighs in against the anti-Semitism charge,
not for it. Bush has had many Jewish business partners and friends. If he
believes they're all going to hell, he hasn't held it against them in this
life.

            So what does he believe? Like the Gospel tales themselves,
the story of Bush's views on Jews has several variants. In 1993, discussing his
decision around age 40 to accept Christ as his personal savior, Bush told a
Houston Post reporter that--as the reporter paraphrased it--"heaven is
open only to those who accept Jesus Christ." So at worst, Bush never condemned
Jews specifically to hell specifically, but rather condemned most of humanity
(anyone who doesn't accept Christ) to what may be, depending on your point of
view, a wider geographical area (anywhere outside heaven). I'm not sure if
that's better or worse.

            Here's where the gospels
differ. According to Fred Barnes of the Weekly Standard , Bush says his
mother then called Billy Graham to straighten him out. Graham advised him to
"never play God" by ruling on who gets into heaven. But according to Sam Howe
Verhovek of the New York Times , Bush says Graham's intervention occurred
earlier, during an informal theological discussion at the Bush Sr. White House.
And according to Ken Herman of the Austin American-Statesman , Bush
actually made his 1993 comment in the course of recounting the Graham episode.
In this version, the evangelist's advice was slightly different: "Graham
generally agreed with the theory but cautioned against spending much time
worrying about it, Bush said."

            So, where does this leave us? If Billy Graham actually
convinced Bush long beforehand that we don't know who gets into heaven, then
the Houston Post report of 1993 was flat-out wrong and Bush didn't
believe Jews were shut out of heaven even at the time. But Bush has never
denied the accuracy of the reporter's paraphrase. Nor, needless to say, has he
adopted Version 2 of Graham's advice by declaring that Jews won't get into
heaven, but he's too busy to care. Bush now answers all questions on the
subject of heaven and its admission requirements with this catechistic
formulation: "It is not the governor's role to decide who goes to heaven. I
believe that God decides who goes to heaven, not George W. Bush."

            This won't do, I'm afraid. It was good enough to
get him a kosher certification from the Anti-Defamation League, but it makes no
sense. No one is asking Bush to "decide" or "rule on" who gets into heaven. We
can stipulate that God decides. (Some people--most Jews, for example--believe
in God, but not in heaven. Few, if any, people believe in heaven, but not in
God.) The issue is whether God has an admissions policy that excludes Jews and
whether George W. has an opinion about what that policy might be.

            Surely he does. "My
faith tells me that acceptance of Jesus Christ as my savior is my salvation,
and I believe that," Bush says. Does he think that this principle only applies
to him? Does he think that it's possible for others to achieve salvation
without accepting Christ? Even nonrecruiting religions such as Judaism claim to
be more than just a personal taste or preference. Born-again Christianity
claims to be the right answer to the most fundamental questions. So how can
Jews possibly get into heaven without converting? Only two ways that I can see.
One is if God allows exemptions. But to avoid offending any religious or
nonreligious group, the exception would have to be that anyone who does not
accept Christ need not accept Christ, which would destroy the rule. The other
way out would be if the entire belief system permits doubt about itself--for
example, if it's only 50-50 that accepting Christ is mandatory for salvation
for anybody, including George W. himself. Neither of these conditions applies
to George W.'s faith, as he describes it.

            And so what? Why should anyone care whether he or she will
achieve salvation by the terms of someone else's religion? What difference does
it make if you can't get into a heaven you don't believe in? As a nonbeliever,
I find the conventions of ecumenism baffling. I don't want to tell you people
how to run your religions. And obviously we want to avoid an outbreak of
religious war, or even lesser forms of intolerance, if possible. But why does
tolerance require people to pretend they don't believe what they do? Wouldn't
tolerance be easier if it only required agreement to disagree peacefully rather
than demanding actual sharing of religious doctrines at some level of
abstraction? After all, if Bush really believes that accepting Jesus is the
only path to salvation, he is pulling a pretty dirty trick on Jews by telling
them otherwise. Putting votes before souls: Talk about political
expediency!

            George W. is lying either
when he professes his faith or when he denies its implications. Or he hasn't
really thought it through, which itself would cast doubt on the depth of his
faith. But I doubt this particular dishonesty will keep him out of heaven,
since it is imposed on every politician--and even every clergyman with
ambitions.

            To be sure, there is a certain joy in watching a pol caught
in pandering gridlock. Bush plays up his born-again faith to the religious
right. He uses it even more than bona fide Christian-right pols do, as Fred
Barnes points out, in order to allay suspicions that he may be moderate or
indifferent on social issues. Then he has to fudge his faith so that people who
don't share it won't take it seriously.

            And if he gets this balancing act wrong, he must
pander even more furiously to make it up. Going for a twofer a couple of years
ago, Bush "confided" to Washington political columnist Andrew Glass that "he
enjoys hanging out with country music singer [can you guess? well, obviously
...] Kinky Friedman, who wrote [uh-oh] 'They Ain't Making Jews Like Jesus
Anymore.' " Does W. agree with this sentiment? Does he have some problem with
the quality of Jews being produced in America today?

         
      
   
