
   
   
      
         
            Brandi's Bra

            
               What's the
Goal?
            

            Normally, I find William Saletan to be one of the
more intelligent journalists on the mainstream beat. However, his analysis ("")
of the "controversy" surrounding Brandi Chastain's removal of her jersey after
clinching the World Cup trophy is indulgent, quixotic, and utterly
aggravating.

            He dismisses the "men do it" explanation as
superficial, when it's the only one that makes any real sense. Does anyone, on
either side of this absurd debate, really believe that an athlete, upon scoring
the winning goal in an international championship game, was actually trying to
stage some kind of cultural coup? With adrenaline pumping, in the moment of
realizing the dream of being a hero, with memories of the soccer greats running
through her head, she did what soccer players do when they can't contain
themselves. Are the pundits of the world so conceited that they really believe
that she was acting to supply them with more fodder?

            I think it was the game against North Korea when,
in celebration of a goal, one of the players did a running flip-flop-flip, a
common soccer-player's celebration. The announcer called it gymnastics.
Apparently, to him, the only sports against which women would be measured were
gymnastics and figure skating. Regardless of which side of the sports bra
debate Saletan supports, or anyone else who considers Chastain's behavior in
light of its social commentary rather than its expression of athletic
competition and pride, it's the same kind of sexism.

            Soccer in America, for
the moment, is a woman's sport. That means that the culture of soccer, with all
its grace and skill, brutality and bravado, will be exhibited by female
American athletes. It makes me wonder what people would be saying if women's
baseball became popular, and the commentariat was forced to watch women chewing
tobacco and grabbing their crotches.

            -- Chad Levinson
            

            New
York

            
               Don't Devaluate
Now
            

            Paul Krugman has been for a long time a very
critical observer of Argentina's currency board; he has suggested a devaluation
many times in the past. Almost at the end of his article (""), he says that
given that the Brazilian devaluation didn't bring hyperinflation, it could be
expected that an Argentinian devaluation wouldn't bring hyperinflation. He
concludes that from the fact that the two countries have dismal economic
histories, but dismal doesn't mean the same. On the surface both countries
might look quite alike, but people's reaction to inflation and economic
measures has proved to be very different, so we shouldn't expect to see both
countries reacting the same way.

            I deeply admire Krugman, but if he wants to write
about Argentina or any Latin American country, he should dedicate some time to
trying to understand what each country is like. They all might look the same,
but they are different; people are very different and react in different ways.
Historically, what has been good for Chile (Argentina's neighbor) has been a
disaster for Argentina, and this works the other way around. If he had
dedicated time to studying Argentina, he would have found out that Eduardo
Duhalde is desperately trying to gain votes, relying on old clichés that he
expects will still be appealing to Argentinians, and trying to show how
different he is from Carlos Menem--in part because he is different and in part
to avoid the opposition attack. Krugman would also have found out that the
Buenos Aires Stock Exchange is not representative of the way things are: Bonds
are important, and what businessmen are doing is important.

            I agree that we have a
regular recession and that the currency board prevents us from applying the
usual recipe, but it's not clear that it would work, and at this point breaking
the peso commitment would be extremely onerous. Right now we have a recession
and an increasing fiscal deficit (a comment on the virtues of keeping balanced
accounts would be very appropriate); if we devaluate, chances are we would also
have an inflation outburst, a rush against the banking system, and a capital
flight. When analyzing Argentina, it's important to keep in mind that since
we've been cheated many times, we have learned how to beat the system.

            -- María Laura
Segura
            

            Buenos
Aires, Argentina

            

               
                  Paul Krugman replies:
                
               I was, of course, aware of the politics
that led to Duhalde's remark. And in case this wasn't clear, the article did
NOT claim that Argentina's currency board is necessarily a foolish idea--only
that its downside could not be ignored. But I will say this: One should always
be suspicious of arguments that claim that one country is utterly different
from others. Yes, every country is unique--but not all that unique. Anyway,
only a few months ago many people--including Argentine economists--were
claiming that the contrast between Argentine success and Brazilian crisis meant
that Brazil must emulate Argentina's currency board; you can't take that
position and then claim that the role reversal that has taken place since
doesn't teach a contrary lesson.
            

            
               Pilot Error
            

            I agree with James Fallows' warning ("") to
inexperienced pilots who may know how to fly under good weather conditions, but
who haven't much under the belt on a hazy night. We all mourn the death of John
F. Kennedy Jr., but at the same time, I will go beyond Fallows' opinion and say
that Kennedy's decision to fly on a hazy night in a new one-engine plane over
water is not risky--it's down right reckless . I have two daughters, and
if I knew that my two daughters were going up in a one-engine plane with a
husband who lacked sufficient experience, on a hazy night over the sea, I'd do
everything in my power to prevent it from happening. If the pilot wants to take
that chance alone, fine, but once he allows passengers, he has to be
responsible enough to make the right decision for not only himself but for
those two girls as well.

            My daughters' safety is
the primary concern. Unfortunately, John Kennedy wasted his own life and the
lives of two young and beautiful girls without thinking, This isn't worth
the risk , when he knew it could be dangerous under such conditions.

            -- Sandy Shapiro
            

            
Woodside, Calif.

            
               Governer Bush, in
Deed
            

            Regarding "": I have been in the title insurance
business for 27 years, and prior to that did my master's thesis on the field at
Wharton.

            It is not true that a person must include a prior
set of restrictions in a deed when he sells his property. He may simply refuse
to include them. It is up to the buyer--and the buyer's title company--to
discover them in the "chain of title" and to determine if they have any legal
force or effect.

            Bush did not have to do anything except direct that
the restrictions be omitted or stricken from the deed he granted to his buyer.
(The only circumstance in which he would need to seek the consent of other
landowners in the development would be if he wanted to petition to change the
restrictions or permit an exception to them.)

            As a lawyer, Bush should have been fully aware of
the language in this instrument, which both he and his wife had to sign, and of
his legal prerogatives. As the governor of his state, he should have had the
decency, fortitude, and sensitivity to recognize the importance of refusing to
include these restrictions in his deed.

            Incidentally, in
Pennsylvania, the presence of a racial restriction in a set of deed
restrictions makes all the rest of that set of restrictions (e.g., as to the
maximum height of fences, the prohibition of nonsingle-family residences, etc.)
null and void. (This was a result of a case involving the will of Steven Girard
and Girard College in Philadelphia that went to the U.S. Supreme Court in the
1960s and resulted in a landmark decision.)

            -- Robert C.
Dean
            

            Lancaster, Penn.

         
      
   
