
   
   
      
         
            No. 285: &quot;Sir, Counterintuitive, Sir!&quot;

            
               Secretary of the
Army Louis Caldera has announced a plan that will put more guns in American
high schools. What is this program called?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question (No.
284)--"Gamy":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        On Sunday, speaking on CNN's Late Edition ,
White House economic adviser Gene Sperling said it reminded him of the game
Twister. What?
                     
                  
               
            

            "The
nude Greco-Roman wrestling that concludes every episode of Late
Edition ."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Puff
Daddy's new board game, 'Twizter.' "-- Alex Balk ( John J. Edwards
III had a similar, but "Bendy Reachy," answer.)

            
"Hillary's efforts to distinguish between sins of malice and sins of
weakness."-- Daniel Radosh (similarly, Rachel Thompson , Craig
Pyron , John Leary , and Sean Fitzpatrick )

            " 'Our
infantile and soul-dead, hyper-consumeristic ways in a world where sunsets go
unnoticed,' said Sperling, looking up from an essay by Bill McKibben."-- Jim
O'Grady
            

            "I
haven't read the question yet, but my answer is Talk magazine."-- Greg
Diamond
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            "In all discussion of
metaphor," writes H. W. Fowler in Modern English Usage , "it must be
borne in mind that some metaphors are living, i.e., are offered and accepted
with a consciousness of their nature as substitutes for their literal
equivalents, while others are dead, i.e., have been so often used that speaker
and hearer have ceased to be aware that the words used are not literal."
Certainly we can consign all sports metaphors to the linguistic cemetery. And
now, thanks to Gene Sperling, we can bury the metaphors of the casino--a
crapshoot, a spin of the wheel, a stacked deck--replacing them with the vibrant
metaphors of the rec room, i.e., Twister. One must be a little skeptical of
Sperling's personal experience with the game. Does he himself play, or has he
merely observed others? (Kids? Colleagues? High-priced hookers?) But even if he
lacks direct knowledge, he has chosen the perfect suburban verbal style for
this administration, an excellent advance on "soccer mom." Presumably, a
living, Clintonian Einstein would declare, "I cannot believe that God plays
Nintendo with the world."

            
               A Taxing Answer
            

            Republican economic arguments--in particular the
GOP's defense of its proposed tax cut--remind Gene Sperling of Twister.

            House and Senate Republicans passed separate $792
billion, 10-year tax-cut bills, which they hope to reconcile in conference
committee before the summer recess begins at the end of this week.

            President Clinton has
vowed to veto any tax cut of that size, saying it favors the rich over the
poor, could drive the government into deficit, and fails to provide for urgent
needs including Medicare reforms, education, and debt reduction.

            
               Metaphor Fun
Extra
            

            Can you give the literal
meaning of these figures of speech, each of which appeared in a recent
quotation in the New York Times ?

            1. A new sheriff in Dodge

            2. Another large piece of plaster

            3. A dangerous slope

            4. A bad apple in the box

            5. A bunch of ayatollahs

            6. A gangster

            7. A policeman

            8. The girl

            
               Answers
            

            1. Pat Robertson, firmly in control of the
non-tax-cheating Christian Coalition. Says Pat Robertson, "We have a new
sheriff in Dodge, and it's a brand new game."

            2. Judge Joyce Hens Green's ruling that the
Christian Coalition did not illegally distribute millions of voter guides meant
to boost Republican candidates. Says campaign finance lawyer Robert F. Bauer,
"This is certainly another large piece of plaster which is falling off the
ceiling of campaign finance regulation."

            3. The new sound system for the New York City Opera
that will not amplify voices. Worries traditionalist Lofti Mansourie of the San
Francisco Opera, "It is a dangerous slope. ... We have to fight hard not to
compromise the natural sound of the voice and its natural projection."

            4. Banker John Mathewson who gives Cayman Islands
money-laundering a bad name. Says banking lawyer Stephen Feldhaus, "There is a
very legitimate role for places like the Caymans where people want the ability
to operate in a regulatory-neutral and tax-neutral atmosphere. ... Mr.
Mathewson was just a bad apple in the box."

            5. Intolerant clergy who disdain sex of any kind.
Says the Rev. Richard Gorman of a coalition of priests and local residents
battling an incursion of hot-bed motels in their Bronx neighborhood, "We have a
very active clergy, but we're not a bunch of ayatollahs."

            6, 7, 8. China, the
United States, Taiwan. Says David Chou, a promoter of U.S. statehood for
Taiwan, "China is like a gangster; the United States is like a policeman. Every
time the gangster tries to take the girl in his arms, she has to call the
policeman to come save her. Our job is to get the girl married to the
policeman. Then there is no danger, and the protection is permanent."

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            
               Eyes Wide Shut .

         
      
   
