
   
   
      
         
            Johnny, I Hardly Knew Ye

            There will be a lot written in the coming days and
months by people who didn't really know John Kennedy. Those of us who had the
pleasure of his company, if only for a few, seemingly fleeting moments, will
have to struggle on to keep his true memory alive.

            I first met JFK Jr. at a fancy party for his
magazine in a swank Fifth Avenue apartment. It was the sort of apartment he
could have lived in, if he'd wanted to, but he chose to make his home in the
gritty industrial area of TriBeCa. John was wearing one of his trademark
tailored suits. I made eye contact and smiled. I thought I saw the flicker of a
responsive grin cross his face. He wheeled around, turning his back to me, and
started to talk to someone on the other side of the room, a malnourished blond
woman who had been trying to get his attention. I instantly recognized this as
something his mother, Jackie, must have taught him. Who else could have
disciplined him to show such natural grace and reticence, coupled with the
noblesse oblige to talk to those you might otherwise prefer to
avoid?

            After that, our
relationship stabilized. We dined frequently in New York, albeit in different
restaurants and with different people. We went to concerts and movies. One
encounter was especially evocative, I think, of the sort of man he was. One
afternoon, I was Rollerblading in Central Park when I spotted him. He was
blading a few yards away, lean and handsome as ever, wearing the tank top and
the backward baseball cap I'd come to know. I had just started to skate toward
him when he saw me. Almost immediately, he sped ahead. With his long powerful
strides, in no time at all he was a football field in front of me. He looked
back, and I recognized that old Kennedy competitiveness, the playful funhouse
spirit epitomized by the famous impromptu touch football games at Hyannis Port.
He was challenging me to catch him! I tried, panting and sweating. His
challenge called forth resources in me I didn't know I had--he had that effect
on people! But for an unfortunate encounter with an incompetent sorbet peddler,
I would have caught him and shared a good laugh.

            I had a chance to make light of the incident when I next
saw him, near the offices of his beloved George . I was in the elevator,
heading to the 20 th floor to pick up a kill fee for a piece I'd
submitted to another Hachette publication. At the 14 th floor, the
door opened, and there he was. It was just like John to use the common elevator
instead of, say, chartering a helicopter to pluck him off the 14 th
floor and deposit him on the 18 th , or buying a rocket pack, or
rappelling up the side of the building, all of which, I knew, he could have
chosen. Instead, he was here, in an elevator, with me.

            I hadn't seen him in such
a long time, I immediately burst out my greetings, perhaps a bit too
enthusiastically. I added a few suggestions for the future editorial direction
of George . He took it all in stride, pausing for a moment, obviously
wondering whether to show emotion. "Oh ... uh ... hi," he stammered. I found
this humility, this forced gracelessness--when of course some modicum of
suavity would have come so easily to him--breathtakingly charming. I could tell
he wanted to call me by my name but was afraid that would hurt the feelings of
the others in the elevator who perhaps didn't know him so well. One often had
this sense when talking to John, this sense of reserve, of intimacies
withheld.

            Then he did something that showed a side of him I'd only
heard about. He looked at me, squarely, directly--the effect was powerful--and
asked: "Who are you? Do I know you?" I was stunned by the philosophical
depth of his questions. In a few seconds, he had penetrated to the core of my
identity, indeed to the very question of identity. Who was I? Was it ever
possible to really know another person? I've pondered these issues ever
since. And to think there are some who say his good looks made up for a lack of
intellectual heft!

            And so it went for
years. I would run into him. He might say something insightful, or boisterous,
like the time he jokingly yelled, "Are you insane?" when I came up behind him
as he was using an ATM machine. But despite the warmth of our friendship, there
were clear limits, boundaries to our relationship that we both recognized. He
never took me sailing with him, for example, or included me in his intimate
family outings. Ultimately, there was no getting around the fact that I was a
journalist, his natural enemy.

            There came a time when an editor, to whom I'd casually
mentioned my acquaintance with John, asked me to write a short piece about one
of his mother's book projects. I agonized about it for several long minutes.
Was I only getting this assignment because of my connection with John? Would I
be guilty of cashing in on our relationship? Would John feel I was betraying
his trust, given his Kennedyesque obsession with privacy? And, perhaps most
difficult, could I see Jackie honestly, on her own terms, and not just as
John's mother? Ultimately, I decided to write the piece, and a few details
about John and me found their way into the text.

            John must have taken offense--though at what I can't
imagine--because our friendship foundered after that. We no longer spoke. A
gulf grew between us. It was a deeply saddening time.

            His too-early departure, therefore, is especially
tragic to me because our relationship can now never be healed. But I will
always deeply treasure the mementos of our friendship he left with me. There is
the rejection letter I received from George , which he was too modest to
put his own name on. (He must have kept the original, however, because what I
have looks like a duplicate.) And I still have a copy of the restraining order
he obtained when I attempted, in an excess of neighborly zeal, to climb the
fire escape in the loft next to his in that gritty industrial area he called
home. Characteristically, he didn't sign it, or even add one of his famous
cheery little messages. Such was the man. I will miss him.

         
      
   
