
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>America Alone</SPAN>

             

            

               
                  Economist , Oct. 23
            

            The
cover editorial argues that the United States is an
uncertain colossus, despite its military and economic dominance. The rejection
of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and cuts to international peacekeeping
funds demonstrate the spread of American unilateralism. But the United States
can't guarantee global stability by might alone: It must work with allies.
... A survey piece argues that Germany has replaced
France as the dominant player in the European Union. ... An article explores McDonald's Hamburger University--one
of 1,600 corporate universities operating in America. HU teaches the
fundamentals of hamburgerology in 26 languages to 7,000 students a year. Its
new dean hopes to acquire the accreditation to award graduates official
diplomas.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Nov. 8
            

            The
magazine celebrates its 85 th anniversary with a cover essay claiming
that liberalism has triumphed in the realm of ideas during the 20 th
century. Each nation values liberalism in a different way. In nations such as
India, democratic freedoms are most fundamental. In nations such as Korea,
negative rights--guarantees against government interference--supercede
democratic values. In China, positive freedoms--primarily welfare
guarantees--trump democratic and negative freedoms. ... An article says recent natural disasters are not evidence
of global climate change. The real evidence for global warming is two long-term
trends: The incidence of heavy downpours is increasing and the "frost-free"
season is lengthening.

            
               
                  Harper's ,
November 1999
            

            An
article describes Big Sugar's stranglehold on public policy. Taxpayers support
an irrigation system that facilitates Florida sugar growing but ruins the
Everglades. Sugar barons have funneled $13 million to federal officeholders in
the past eight years to block any cuts in sugar subsidies, which add $1.4
billion to consumers' food bills. ... A reflection on Woodstock '99
concludes that the concert was a slow-motion riot clogged with overflowing
sewage, overpriced concessions, and acoustic atrocities. The crowd's attempt to
raze the festival grounds symbolizes the collapse of communal bonds and
boundaries.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Oct. 24
            

            The
cover story claims that the Reform Party's greatest asset is its pop-culture
appeal. The piece echoes the familiar line that party members are a nut stew of
United Nations haters, pot-legalizers, and campaign-finance reformers. Juicy
detail: Jesse Ventura views Pat Buchanan as a shill sent by the traditional
parties to sabotage the Reform effort. ... An article marvels at a
"linguistic big bang" in Nicaragua, where deaf kids have invented their own
language in a generation. Teachers at a school for the deaf were so inept that
the assembled kids improvised a complex sign system, demonstrating that
language is innate, but requires community to grow. This is the first time
linguists have observed a language's birth. One creative sign: Daniel Ortega is
identified by a tap on the wrist, a mockery of the ex-president's gauche
Rolex.

            
               
                  Forbes ,
Nov. 1
            

            An
article explores McDonald's niche offerings. Since the
hamburger market is plateauing, McDonald's allows franchisees to offer new food
stuffs such as McBrat, the bratwurst on a bun in Wisconsin. McLobster Rolls are
reviving New England sales; Indophilic Brits are eating McChicken Tikka; and
Indians can enjoy the new Maharajah Mac.

            
               
                  Time , Oct.
25
            

            The
cover story spends a week in a suburban St. Louis high
school. Highlights: Twenty percent of students take psychopharmaceuticals, from
Adderall to Zoloft. In lieu of metal detectors, "Safe Teams" of faculty and
police target troubled students. The teams are assisted by 60 kids who snitch
on their peers. "Deseg" students bused from the inner-city find class
differences harder to bridge than racial ones. Some kids work 40 hours a week
to make up the allowance gap. (Read 
                  Slate
               's prescription for what
ails American .) ... An article questions television's awkward
embrace of gay characters. Nearly 30 homosexuals are featured in prime time,
but few shows are sophisticated enough to script love lives for their
homocharacters.

            
               
                  Newsweek , Oct.
25
            

            The
cover package celebrates 20 th -century American
sports with the recollections of key figures. Muhammad Ali reveals that he plans to fight an exhibition
match, despite his Parkinson's. He says the violent trash talking of his youth
was an attempt to scare white folks because "they scared us." Jesse Owens ' daughter recalls her father's pride at defeating
the "master race" during the 1936 Olympics. NBA Commissioner
David Stern details how a "generation of virtuosos" turned basketball into
a marketing machine. ... An article slaps Black Entertainment Television for refusing to
pay its talent decent wages. Comedians get a fraction of union scale, and even
BET's marquee talk-show host bristles at the network's blaxploitation.
            

            
               
                  U.S. News &
World Report , Oct. 25
            

            The
cover story argues that archeology casts authoritative doubt
on creationism but corroborates key parts of the Bible. For instance, a
ninth-century B.C. inscription memorializing a victory over the "House of
David" provides material evidence of the Jewish king's existence, while the
remains of a crucifixion victim indicate that the Romans would have killed
Jesus as the gospels allege.

            
               
                  Weekly Standard ,
Oct. 25
            

            An
editorial congratulates the Senate for killing the "arms
control fantasies" of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. It was an
unenforceable joke. Our next (Republican) president should rebuild America's
nuclear defenses. ... An article laments the decline of Dukakis Democrats. There are
no paleoliberals left for the right to lampoon. The party of Clinton and Gore
really has forged a pro-free-trade, fiscally conservative third way.

            
               
                  The Nation , Nov.
1
            

            The
chief cover story , countering basic conservative theology,
argues that peace activism helped win the Cold War. The nuclear freeze movement
undermined support for an aggressive military buildup by emphasizing the cost
and riskiness of the Cold War. The Reagan administration's own proposal to
eliminate nuclear weapons was sparked by the peacenik slogan "zero option."

            
               
                  Business Week ,
Oct. 25
            

            A
piece argues that Japan's economic slide will transform the Japanese way of
doing business. Trade agreements and the tightening of capital markets have
opened Japan to foreign investment. The Internet is energizing homegrown
entrepreneurs and increasing the national appetite for business risk.

         
      
   
