
   
   
      
         
            No. 280: &quot;Perturbed&quot;

            
               According to the
Times of London, around the first of the year, something will happen on
Long Island that scientists believe has a small but genuine chance of causing
"perturbations of the universe," which could destroy the world. What will
happen? ( Question courtesy of Jennifer Miller. )

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's Question (No. 279)--"When Worlds Collide":

                     Federal attorneys in the Eastern District of New York arrested
and indicted seven people in a case that touched on Holland, Hasidim, and
squirrels. What's the connection?
                  
               
            

            
"Burrow Park."-- David Feige
            

            "I
don't know the connection, but I did hear the Disney Channel has optioned it
for development."-- Cliff Schoenberg
            

            
"Aha--that's what Carleton Fiorina didn't want to talk about! Well, I ain't
saying anything either."--David Ballard
            

            "You
know, I thought this question was hilarious when I first read it, and then I
realized that I'd misread 'Hasidim' as 'Hinduism.' Now I think it's
offensive."-- Greg Diamond
            

            "OK,
OK, I think I know this one. A priest, a rabbi, and a squirrel are on a flight
to Holland ..."-- Bill McDermott
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            There was much grumbling
in the ranks about this question but, if imperfect, it does rest on a solid
theoretical foundation. Odd juxtapositions can produce comic results or former
Republicans who now stand among the Democrats. Squirrels are funny. Indeed,
many small and furry animals tend to be funny and, if you squint, resemble
genitalia taken disturbingly out of context and scampering about the place. The
ultra-orthodox tend to be funny, particularly when they wear unusual hats and
when they're not pelting you with stones. A small, furry, ultra-observant
Dutchman in a big black hat is funny if he's not Peter Stuyvesant, who, were he
alive today, would probably stick with the Republican Party, but could perhaps
become funny if a Jewish squirrel bit him on the ass. At least that was the
theory. But with these things, you never know.

            
               Partying the Nights
Away at So-Called "Raves" Answer
            

            Dutch drug dealers enlisted young Hasidic men
flying from Europe to New York to smuggle MDMA (Ecstasy), a drug shown to cause
brain damage in squirrels.

            Those arrested were dealers from Amsterdam and New
York. One Israeli is still a fugitive. No courier has yet been arrested.

            Each Hasid--most of those involved are from
Williamsburg--was given a plane ticket and around $1,500 to carry up to 45,000
tablets. Best excuse from a Hasidic courier: Drugs?! We thought we were
smuggling diamonds! (I swear.)

            Each squirrel--the
research was conducted at Johns Hopkins--may have shown that MDMA damages parts
of the brain critical for thought and memory, many people's favorite parts.
This work is presumably as definitive as the LSD chromosome damage studies much
published in Life magazine in 1967 and 1968. No squirrel has yet been
arrested.

            
               It's an Orderly and
Predictable Universe Extra
            

            Actual dialogue on CNN
Wednesday morning:

            SOME ANCHOR GUY (to a
remote correspondent): "Thank you for not speculating. We are not going to do
that here on CNN. Now, do you have any thoughts on what the Coast Guard will do
next?"

            ( C
               ourtesy of
Kate Wing. )

            
               Domain Name
Extra
            

            A company about to
launch its Web site may find to its dismay that its name is taken--part of the
speculative frenzy in domain names. In that case, the company must devise
something new. Participants were invited to submit examples of a claimed domain
name along with an amusing and available alternative.

            "davidduke.com is
registered by the David Duke Report.

            
hatefulnosejobbedpsycho.com is, surprisingly, available."--Brooke
Saucier
            

            "borisyeltsin.com is
registered to the Friend to Friend Foundation (and man, am I curious about what
that is).

            
worldofcirrhosis.com is available."-- Alex Balk
            

            "kevincostner.com is taken
by Tig Films Inc.

            
bigbudgetbomb.com is available."-- William York
            

            "scylla.com is already
registered.

            
carybdis.com is available!"-- Marc Cenedella
            

            "princessdi.com has been
registered.

            
princessdead.com is available."-- Floyd Elliot
            

            "getalife.com is
registered by Up at Night Productions.

            
screwaroundonline.com is available."-- Roger Hipp
            

            "masteroftheuniverse.com
is registered by Paul Cooper.

            
rulerofmysqualidhovel.com and nonentity.com are both available."-- Jim
O'Grady
            

            "beer.com, chips.com,
pretzels.com, and football.com are all taken.

            
asleeponthesofa.com is still available."-- Bruce Brown
            

            "democrats2000.com is
taken.

            
dullandduller.com is available!"-- Prabu Muthu
            

            "fatbastard.com is taken
by New Millennium Publishing.

            
eatingbabies.com is available."-- Francis Heaney
            

            "hillaryclinton.com is
taken.

            carpetbagger.com is
taken.

            
awomanscorned.com is available!"--Raphael Laufer
            

            "sexfarm.com is already
registered by Zarix Graphics.

            farmsex.com is already
registered by FarmSex.Com.

            
farmcowsex.com is available."-- Jacob Stohler
            

            "armageddon.com is
registered by Armageddon Industries.

            apocalypse.com is
registered by Apocalypse Software Inc.

            doom.com is registered by
Doom Gaming Connections.

            
mildennui.com is still available."--Jennifer Miller
            

            "seanfitzpatrick.com is
registered by Sean Fitzpatrick.

            
kathapollitt.com is available."-- Greg Diamond
            

            "randy.com is secured by
Randy Ambrose.

            
hotandrandy.com is available."-- Matthew Singer
            

            "contradiction.com is
registered to CES Marketing Group.

            newsquizandtheethicist.com
is still available."-- Tom Williams
            

            
highlycultivatedsenseofirony.com is also available. ( Randy )

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Rocky the flying squirrel, Richard the acting
Gere.

         
      
   
