
   
   
      
         
            No. 307: &quot;Scotch and So ...&quot;

            
               Alexander Graham
Bell, Mary Queen of Scots, Andrew Carnegie, William Wallace--what's the
connection?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question (No.
30)--"Faintness, Nausea, Disneyness":
            

            

               
                  Something in Disney World is irritating both Arabs and
Israelis. What? ( Question courtesy of Dave
Gaffin. )
               
            

            "The
adorable cartoon character Crusader Chipmunk (TM) who sings 'Gee, I'm glad I
have a foreskin!' "-- Andrew Solovay
            

            
"Continuing series of 'land for peace' deals with Sea World trivializes Middle
East problems."-- Jack Defevers
            

            "
'Zip-a-Dee-Doo-Dah' is considered to be a totally inappropriate soundtrack for
both Mickey's Wailing Wall and Goofy's Dome of the Rock."-- Jennifer
Miller
            

            "The
addition of the words 'and a Christian' to the sign: 'To ride Space Mountain
you must be this tall.' "-- Tom Williams ( Floyd Elliot had a
similar answer.)

            "The
centuries-old conflict over whether Epcot is the vacation capital for Israel or
Palestine."-- Peter Carlin
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Two interesting
fallacies are debunked by this little contretemps. First is the
pseudomoderate's mantra: "If both sides are mad at us, we must be doing
something right." I believe that's what the Germans said about the Russians and
Americans in 1942. It wasn't persuasive then, and I don't believe the Disney
folks will find it rhetorically effective now. When both sides are mad at you,
it's seldom because you are a model of fairness. What you probably are is
simply wrong. Second is the exciting but all too often disappointing notion
that people can unite against a common enemy. At least for very long. Although
it would be gratifying if mutual loathing of Disney brought about a Middle East
peace. Or mutual loathing of the Martin Short Show brought about a
reformed TV season. But don't count on it.

            
               Kicking

               off the New Atonement Season Answer
            

            On Oct. 1, at Epcot Center in Orlando, Fla., Disney
will open Millennium Village, featuring the company's patented phony-baloney
cheerful view of all the little countries of the world.

            Among the national displays is a "Journey to
Jerusalem," a simulation ride partly financed by the Israeli government, that
either does or does not acknowledge that city as the Israeli capital, depending
on whom the Disney board has met with most recently. But either way, somebody's
going to be mad.

            "Their statement ignores all the important issues
we put before them" said Hussein Ibish of the Arab-American Anti-Discrimination
Committee.

            "We understand Disney would like to have it a fun
world after all, but it isn't," said Abraham Foxman, national director of the
Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.

            "We are an entertainment
company and we do not take political positions," declared a delightfully
disingenuous company statement.

            
               America's

               Working Extra
            

            Eager to show concern for the right kind of people
and to make it clear that he won't shed a tear (or spend a dime) on the--you
know--bad people, Al Gore and his followers have been promiscuous with the
phrase "America's Working Families," Gore's version of the Victorians'
"deserving poor."

            Which of the following are actual displays of this
determination to smile at the good and frown at the bad?

            

               "I want to share some good news for America's working families."-- Vice
President Gore
               

               "America's working families often lack the most precious of all
commodities: time with their children; time to teach them right from wrong;
time to pass on their values."-- Vice President Gore
               

               "We need to support America's working families by providing the afterschool
programs they want to give their kids a safe place to learn and enrich their
lives with positive values."-- Vice President Gore
               

               Keene, N.H., Sept. 14, Mayor Pat Russell endorsed Vice President Gore for
president today. Russell cited Gore's leading role in improving the nation's
educational system and addressing the concerns of America's working families.
"Al Gore is the only candidate who is talking about real change to improve the
lives of working families," said Russell.

               Dover, N.H., Sept. 8, Mayor William Boc today endorsed Vice President Gore
for president, citing Gore's leading role in improving the nation's economy and
his tireless efforts on behalf of America's working families: "He has been a
tireless advocate for the working families of America."

               "Oregon has a great tradition of community and political leadership and I
look forward to working with these leaders to further Al Gore's goals of
revolutionary improvements in education, livable communities, continued
safeguarding of the environment, and bringing positive change for America's
working families."-- Tipper Gore
               

               "Al Gore will continue to work for a balanced approach and fight for a
clean and healthy environment for America's working families," said Kiki Moore,
a spokeswoman for the vice president.

               "With this new enforcement tool, we can better
protect America's working families against drug trafficking, illegal
immigration, and threats to our ocean environment," the vice president said.
"And as far as I'm concerned, the rest of you bastards are on your own," he did
not add.

            

            
               Answer
            

            All, of course, are
genuine. And pandering. And condescending.

            
               Ongoing

               Extra
            

            There's still time to
submit badly needed campaign slogans to America's working candidates, Al Gore,
John McCain, Dan Quayle, and Elizabeth Dole. Answers to run Thursday.

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            It's a bad, bad song.

         
      
   
