
   
   
      
         
            The Lazy Man's Guide to Political Obsession

            As
recently as 1996, being a political obsessive was hard work: all those
out-of-town newspapers and pricey newsletters to read, the gossipy
long-distance phone calls to other obsessives, the endless hours spent combing
campaign finance filings at the Federal Election Commission in Washington,
D.C.

            But
thanks to the Web, today's political obsessive can gather more insider poop in
a half-hour than his predecessor could in a week. Newspapers not only give
their best stuff away, they collate their campaign archives for readers'
convenience. Meanwhile, good-government liberals feed FEC data into
Web-friendly databases, making it a snap to track contributions. And political
entrepreneurs continue to fill the void with links to the sort of high-quality
information that was beyond the reach of even Nexis jockeys four years ago.

            
Because political information goes stale faster than bread, the first
destination for obsessives should be a news site. I prefer the Washington
Post 's "Campaigns " portal page for its timeliness and simplicity. The
day's top stories are front and center, as they should be, and logical links
carry you to the "White House 2000: Key Stories " archive. From here you
can connect to smartly done backgrounders on the candidates and pieces on the
campaign's key races .

            
Finishing second and third in the political news Web-stakes are the Los
Angeles Times and the New York Times . The Los Angeles Times '
"Campaign 2000 " portal page lets you submit quickie searches
of the candidates by clicking their names. The site offers a helpful link to
the primary schedule , and multimedia enthusiasts will enjoy the
audio analysis by the paper's ace political obsessive,
Ronald Brownstein.

            The
New York Times ' "Campaign " portal links to overviews of the state races from a
map of the United States. It also hosts the "Political Points " page, with more than 100 links to the Web
sites of various government branches, think tanks, political parties,
candidates, pollsters, and publications. A most valuable page!

            See
Yahoo!'s "Presidential Election 2000 " page for another superb
round-up of campaign news. Keeping with its strategy of being the Web's great
aggregator, Yahoo! gathers breaking political news stories from a variety of
mainstream print sources as well as streaming audio/video from NPR, the BBC,
and other outlets. All self-promotion aside, you should get to know ","

                  Slate
               's campaign portal page, complete with a weekly political
cartoon by Mark Alan Stamaty. And, don't miss 
                  Slate
               's "," which
watches television's weekend political talk shows so you don't have to.

            
Perhaps more useful for their sociological content than their utility are the
candidates' official Web sites, which 
                  Slate
                (as well as other
sites) has collected and evaluated . The most annoying thing about the official
sites is they tell you only what the candidates want you to know. Skeleton Closet --"All the
Dirt About All the Candidates"--shatters this reality distortion field. As
wicked as any opposition research home page, this site collects the unsavory
and annotates it with links to relevant stories in Newsweek , The
Nation , the American Prospect , and other reliable publications.
(Conducting a similar civics lesson on George W. Bush is bushwatch.com.)

            If
being there live is your idea of political obsession, visit C-SPAN's campaign
portal . If being there on tape will do, see the C-SPAN video archives
of candidate appearances, which can be searched by keyword here and
summoned to the screen. Still under construction is C-SPAN's searchable
calendar of campaign events.

            The
biggest meta-issue of the campaign--money--receives ample attention on the Web.
The gargantuan databases at the Federal Election Commission , the Center for Responsive Politics , and FECInfo
await your query about who gave what to which candidate. Contributors to the
Clinton defense fund are also searchable.

            If you
want to put your money where your political mouth is, open an account at the
Iowa
Electronic Markets with real cash. 
                  Slate
                in four of the
site's markets (the Democratic and Republican presidential races, the battle
for control of Congress, and the U.S. Senate race in New York) several times a
week. ( primer explains how the market works.)

            No
political obsessive's day is complete without a visit to the man at Political Junkie ,
the premier roundup of politics, government, and political journalism links.
Want to register to vote? Looking for census/polling data? Need the URL for Joe
Conason's columns? The addresses of members of Congress? Curious about PACs or
state governments or the courts? The state parties? Then roll up your sleeve,
tie your arm off with a mouse cord, slap your vein into view, and shoot this
site up. You're sure to overdose, but that's the obsessive/compulsive thrill
you're looking for, right?

         
      
   
