
   
   
      
         
            Witch Way Should They Go?

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I read you often and now need advice. My son
and his fiancee are getting married soon, and I have serious questions about
the ceremony. My son is 28 and very successful. His fiancee is 26 and is a very
intelligent, successful woman. They have been together many years, living
together for the last three. The problem is not their relationship, but my son
and his intended are both witches--that's right, witches--and they are having a
"handfasting," a witchcraft wedding ceremony. My wife and I are devout
Catholics, and it seems that going to a pagan ceremony goes against all our
religious beliefs. Even one of the elder priests in our parish said it would be
against God to attend such an event, though a younger priest said as long as we
didn't take part in the ceremony, it would be OK.
            

            
               I know my son
doesn't believe in Satan or evil. He's a very good boy, and I'm proud of him.
He has even allowed me to read the ceremony that will be performed. Actually,
it's just about the most beautiful ceremony I've ever read, but I'm very
confused. Should I possibly go against my faith to support my son by attending
a pagan rite, or should I alienate my son because of my own religious beliefs?
Any advice would be appreciated.
            

            

               --Charles
            

            Dear Cha,

            Oh, my, talk about
dilemmas ... your cauldron runneth over. Prudie, however, feels comfortable
with the assessment of the younger priest, and you should, too. Since you're
not participating in the actual ceremony and found nothing objectionable in the
text, you and your wife should not deny this lovely son your presence. And
Prudie hopes you appreciate the reversed roles in this situation: Usually, it's
the mother-in-law who's the witch.

            
--Prudie, matrimonially

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Your advice to "" struck me as amazing. From
years of corporate bathroom use, the rule among men seems to be nothing spoken
in the "sit-downs," banal comments of the "Hot enough for you?" variety at the
"stand-ups," and pleasant trifles at the washstands.
            

            
               By the way, an old
corporate pro once told me never to discuss anything of importance in a
bathroom or an elevator. I once was in a courthouse elevator with the other
side's counsel, who hadn't yet been introduced to me, who spent the ride down
discussing strategy with his client!
            

            
               --Faithfully,
            

            

               Eyes Front
            

            Dear Eyes,

            Thank you for one of the
better letters inviting Prudie to reconsider. Please read on.

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I enjoy your column
and often think your advice is excellent and daring. Except in the case of
"Wondering, too." I suspect Prudie was napping when she answered that one. I,
myself, not being shy, wouldn't mind a friendly chat while in the office stalls
but many would. Some would feel embarrassed at simply being identified and
addressed in a compromising position. Others would feel tense, and conversation
might interfere with the reason they are there. Not to mention that some people
go there to sit and be quiet and have a small private break. Addressing someone
by name, after identifying them by their shoes while they are sitting on the
commode, seems downright rude to me.
            

            

               --Privacy Please
            

            Dear Pri,

            Prudie has finished her nap and wishes to
acknowledge that the flub-up fairy was visiting her when she answered that
letter. Persuaded by several people, she now wishes to reverse herself and begs
the pardon of anyone who's had to suffer chitchat during a private moment
simply because Prudie said it was OK.

            An interesting sidelight
to bathroom Kremlinology is the men's room tradition articulated in the
preceding letter. Women do not have such a rigid convention, but they weighed
in, as well, with pleas for silence when nature calls.

            
--Prudie, correctively

            

               
                  Prudence,
               
            

            
               I'm 28, and my
boyfriend and I are expecting our first baby in January 2000. My boyfriend's
mother is terribly embarrassed by the fact that we are not married. (But we've
been living together for two and a half years.) I was brought up with the
values that you got engaged, got married, and then started a family. For some
reason, I was blessed with this baby much sooner than planned. What can I say
or do to convey to my boyfriend's mother that this is a blessing and not a
tragic event? Please help. Thank you very much.
            

            

               --Confused
            

            Dear Con,

            For one thing, you can tell your boyfriend's mother
that the baby is on time; the wedding is late. (Was this woman, by any chance,
a member of Congress when they decided that Ingrid Bergman should be kept out
of the country? If you have no idea what Prudie is talking about, ask your
parents.)

            In any case, your
attitude about the blessed event is most pleasing, and your relationship sounds
solid. To assuage social convention, however, and to validate Prudie's
suggested retort, perhaps you and the father-to-be might consider legally tying
the knot ... and perhaps before the little bundle of joy requires a sitter.

            
--Prudie, expectantly

            
               
                  Dear
Prude,
               
            

            
               I was ensconced in a
manly game of collegiate football-watching when I overheard the womenfolk
discussing proper breast-feeding etiquette. When asked, I indicated that as
long as the breast is hidden under a blanket with the child, I don't mind.
However, when a woman goes "National Geographic" and everything is out in the
open, I feel a bit squeamish. There was no consensus amongst the men (one
turned up the volume on the game so he didn't have to deal with the whole
thing). The women were mixed in their opinions. So what is appropriate when
breast- feeding in public? Thanks.
            

            

               --~jeff
            

            Dear ~jef,

            Though there is
disagreement on the subject, good sense and good taste would seem to dictate
that this perfectly normal function can be carried out in public with as little
obviousness as is feasible. Prudie is not sure about a total blanket tent for
both baby and breast, but an attempt at decorous draping would seem the thing
to strive for.

            --Prudie, discreetly

         
      
   
