
   
   
      
         
            No. 269: &quot;Coaching Staff&quot;

            
               Sometime Thursday,
Queen Elizabeth will take off her crown, put on a purple and green dress in a
thistle pattern, and step into her carriage. Where's she going?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Monday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 268)--"Pyramid Power":
            

            

               Today a 180-nation conference is to present the U.N. General Assembly
with an action plan to reduce world population growth by employing the Cairo
Strategy. Which is what?
            

            "Post
the Ten Commandments inside every classroom."-- Katherine Hobson
            

            "Not
having sex with Jews."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            "The
reintroduction of big cats into major urban centers."-- Jeff Brax
            

            
"Cancel plans for Straight Pride Month."--Sean Fitzpatrick ( Jim
O'Grady had a similar answer.)

            "I
missed the last couple of days because of a computer crash. Is it too late to
make fun of Giuliani?"-- Greg Diamond
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Many of you suggested
that a great way to discourage sexual urges was to flash a photo of a really
ugly person. But this seems unlikely to be effective. Such a powerful visual
image certainly didn't deter the unattractive people from mating with one
another--there do seem to be rather a lot of them--while attractive people are
in distinctly short supply. (Hence the high rates charged by Elite Models. And
try to get one over to the house: Sheesh! Like you're a criminal for asking.
Like my real name couldn't be Pierre LeCluck.) Perhaps it's because the
beauties are wan, weak, overbred: They've lost their erotic vitality like some
brittle-boned show dog or Ron Perelman's consort. Certain nations with a
history of goofball master-race ideas and a reputation for being grim and
plodding lovers--you know, Germans--have long associated sexual vigor with
Africans, Jews, and Trolls, frequently depicting us as ugly monkeys coupling
with enthusiasm, skill, and joy. Pan isn't pretty.

            
               Hey, You Kids, Keep It
Down Answer
            

            Five years ago,
countries meeting in Cairo, Egypt, agreed that the best way to curb population
growth was not to set numerical targets and launch birth-control campaigns, but
to try to improve the social status, education, and health of young women. By
one estimate, this plan would incur a rise in population from the present 6
billion to 9.8 billion by 2050, and stabilize at that level. However, at recent
meetings, conservative elements, particularly Muslims and Roman Catholics, have
sought to thwart various socially progressive aspects of the plan.

            
               Andrew Silow-Carroll's
News Roundelay Extra
            

            Participants were
invited to devise a sequentially trumping topical triad--rock, paper,
scissors--along these lines: NATO, Milosevic, Albanian refugees (NATO planes
crush Milosevic, Milosevic drives out refugees, refugees give NATO fits).

            "
'Palestinian state' issue dogs Hillary, Hillary hires Carville, Carville founds
Palestinian state."--Josh Pollack
            

            
"Republicans send big checks to George W. Bush, George W. Bush gets elected
president, President George W. Bush is appropriately grateful to said
Republicans. (John McCain unfortunately tried to skip Step 1.)"-- Doug
Welty
            

            "The
English language, the Japanese, George Bush. The English language has
infiltrated Japanese slang, Japanese cuisine caused George Bush to vomit,
George Bush mangles the English language."-- Francis Heaney
            

            
"Salinger will want Norton to return the letters to Maynard. That way Salinger
can screw Norton, too."-- Michael Brant
            

            
"Supposed Chinese spies frighten the GOP, which denounces Clinton's bombing of
Belgrade, which kills supposed Chinese spies."--Josh Pollack
            

            "God
creates world; world creates Adam Sandler the movie star; Sandler supplants
God, a thousand years of wailing and torment follow."-- Brian
Danenberg
            

            "Peter
Angelos buys Orioles, Orioles can't beat anybody, anybody would be better than
Peter Angelos."-- Josh Pollack
            

            
               Francis Heaney's
Variation
            

            "
'News Roundelay' reminds me of a game some friends and I invented in college,
which we called "Rock, Paper, Anything". Two players, on the count of three,
form an approximation of something with their hands and announce what that
something is: for instance, a butterfly vs. Rupert Murdoch. Then a third player
acts as arbiter and decides which one wins (in this case, a butterfly, because
the butterfly flaps its wings and sets into a motion a chain of events that
ends with Rupert Murdoch slipping on a banana peel and falling into a cement
mixer). Then the loser acts as arbiter for the next round. Or the winner, who
cares? This is not a goal-oriented game."-- Francis Heaney
            

            
               Patrick O'Brien's
Headline Haiku
            

            Olympic Snub Strikes

            Budget Pie And

            Sacramento's Greens
Fees

            Arid Rainy Season

            
               Orange County
Register , Front page, June 29, 1999

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Exodus.

         
      
   
