
   
   
      
         
            
<P><SPAN class=760110315-12101999>Mark Sikorski</SPAN></P>

            Captain's log: 0430 hours, underway in the South
Atlantic Ocean, steaming northeasterly along the southern coast of Brazil. The
phone ringing in my cabin awakens me; it's the conning officer on the bridge
making a report of a vessel that we have in sight approximately 12 miles away.
The conning officer is guided by my Standing Orders, which is a compendium of
actions to take when I'm not on the bridge. As directed, she is notifying me
that the vessel is on a head-on collision course with us and we need to
maneuver to pass clear of each other. Her recommendation to turn to starboard
20 degrees conforms with the International Navigational Rules; I agree and ask
her to watch the vessel until it is well past and clear. At sea, this scenario
is repeated numerous times every day. Safe navigation between ships is based
upon simple mathematics ... add the vectors representing each ship's course and
speed to determine if we are trying to occupy the same piece of ocean;
henceforth known as a collision. We have several technically sophisticated
computers that actually calculate the "closest point of approach" between our
ships. Nonetheless, each conning officer uses some common sense to verify the
computer solutions with what is actually happening. I have the final call on
all maneuvers to safely pass clear of other ships.

            0630 hours: My morning wake-up call and workout.
Since it is Columbus Day, we are in "holiday routine"; no reveille. Weather
remains very fair; it's already 66 degrees with light northeasterly winds;
barometer is holding steady; and the seawater temperature is 65 degrees. We are
all very excited that the weather is turning much warmer; it's a far cry from
the howling gale we encountered as we exited the Strait of Magellan nearly two
weeks ago. At 45 to 50 knots, the wind shrieked throughout the ship and was
actually tearing off the tops of the 25-to-30-foot seas. The seawater
temperature was 36 degrees! We beat ourselves up trying to work our way north;
the ship was rolling 30 plus degrees. All kinds of things broke free, including
a 1,000-pound box of free weights in the hangar and our 12-foot wardroom dining
table. We came through a bit battered, but thankfully no one was hurt.

            0730 hours: A second collision-avoidance report
from the conning officer; another large merchant ship trying to occupy the same
piece of ocean.

            0800 hours: Breakfast, coffee, and lots of good
conversation. Since we are on a rather long trek up the eastern coast of South
America, the routine has settled down somewhat from the hectic pace of the
previous three months. At the top of every hour, the bridge calls down to the
Engineering Control Center to record the seawater temperature from an engine
room gauge. To liven things up a bit, the engine room watch has calculated and
reported the seawater temperatures in units other than Fahrenheit: Kelvin,
Rankin, Celsius--the bridge didn't think it was too funny. In a similar vein,
several of the engineers have braved the elements by appearing at our daily
all-hands gatherings on the flight deck without coats; only to be outdone by a
petty officer who wore shorts through the frigid Strait of Magellan!

            1100 hours: Voyage planning; calculating distances
and fuel consumption rates to finalize port calls off the northern coast of
South America.

            1200 hours: Observed following daily customs:
Received ship's position report from the navigator. Current position is 28
degrees 19 minutes South latitude and 047 degrees 52 minutes West longitude
(about 1,700 miles south of the equator). The conning officer reports that all
small arms, ammunition, and pyrotechnics have been inspected. Traditional eight
bells are struck.

            1245 hours: Made a round of the ship. Clouds are
thickening; looks like rain. We are making 13 knots on a northeasterly heading;
the seawater has become bluer and has risen to 67 degrees. Engineering plant is
operating well; temperature between the main diesel engines--Jake and
Elwood--is 98 degrees; in the high southern latitudes the temperature was
barely 80 degrees. The evaporator is supplying us with enough water to keep up
with our consumption. Bilges beneath the operating machinery are dry and
clean.

            1300-1600 hours: Shuffled paperwork; reviewed
reports and signed the ship's official logs. Crew is enjoying a day of rest
watching movies and playing in the Morale Committee-sponsored spades
tournament.

            1700 hours: Ate dinner in the wardroom.

            2120 hours: Wrote Night Orders outlining
supplemental instructions for the night watches to follow.

            2300 hours: Engineer officer and I won our first
round of the spades tournament.

            0000 hours: Steaming under a canopy of stars,
gently swaying to the ocean swells; glowing lights on a distant shore. Another
day at sea is complete.

         
      
   
