
   
   
      
         
            No. 304: &quot;Hee, Hee, Hee&quot;

            
               You give the lead,
I give the headline from Wednesday's London Mirror : "He's Huge, He's
Powerful, He's Fast and He's Mean."
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
303)--"Decline and Fall":
            

            

               "That was a miserable year, when I watched a great man, a man I love
more than life--you know, one of the really fundamentally solid, decent
people--go from 92 to 38 in a very quick period of time." Who watched whom go
from 92 to 38 what?
            

            "Donny
Osmond, on a good Mormon friend's year of 54 divorces."-- Tim Carvell
            

            
"Former Chief Eunuch Li Ming on Emperor Pu-Yi's approval rating in 1911. Damn
that infernal Sun Yat-Sen."-- David Lofquist
            

            
"Gregory Peck about Charlton Heston's moving up the list of Hollywood's
All-Time Assholes."-- Marshall Efron
            

            "I
don't know, but in the metric system he would have gone from 100 to 10: Now,
really, isn't that a lot easier?"-- Floyd Elliot
            

            
"During his father's primary campaign, George W. Bush watched Pat Buchanan go
from 1992 to 1938, the heyday of Father Coughlin, dragging the Republican Party
with him. Now the party is trying to prevent him from jumping ship. Just
because you're repositioning yourself as compassionate, doesn't mean you want
to lose the wacko vote altogether."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            If Microsoft does
succeed in its takeover of Mattel, an unlikely event given that no such talks
are in progress or even contemplated, these News Quiz Action Figures will be
hitting Toys "R" Us just in time for some annual event traditionally cheapened
by ritualized gift-giving stripped of any genuine feeling. You know, for the
kids.

            

               Reagan, the senile old fool

               Quayle, the self-deceiving, middle-aged dunce

               Clinton, the horny hillbilly, and what a liar!

               Dole, the foxy grampaw--how comical are the erections of his withered old
penis!

               Madonna, the indiscriminate erotic glutton; how often she has sex!

               Thurmond, the 1,000-year-old man who still owns slaves

               Flockhart, the brittle underweight neurotic, yet still somehow appealing,
in a tense yet vulnerable way

            

            Enjoy their adventures
every week on C-SPANimation Saturday.

            
               Poll-Tested
Answer
            

            George W. Bush endured a
dark night of the soul when he watched his father's approval rating fall from
92 to 38.

            
               Beating a Dead Fish
Follow-Up
            

            "Most trout fishermen practice 'catch and release,'
although it is true that some still catch and eat. Barbaric isn't it? Almost as
bad as running cows down a chute and hammering their brains out."-- Brad
Spencer
            

            (Actually, for my
weekend recreation, I practice "run them down a chute and hammer their brains
out and release." Right into my neighbor's yard. Suckers!-- Ed .)

            
               Publishing Notes
Extra
            

            The cover of the new Paladin Press catalog (Vol.
29, No. 5, September) features this notice: "WARNING: Paladin Press does not
intend that any of the information contained in its books or videos be used for
criminal purposes. In specific cases involving such misuse, Paladin will
cooperate with law enforcement investigations."

            I believe a similar notice appears on the current
Knopf catalog.

            Just inside, on Page 3, is this announcement:
"EXPLOSIVE BOOKS NO LONGER AVAILABLE. In light of the current political and
legal climate in this country, we have concluded that it is no longer feasible
to publish or sell certain titles on explosives, demolitions, improvised
weaponry, and self-defense, or anything by that quirky but lovable Anne
Tyler."

            "We didn't really
include the Anne Tyler crack," they would have added, if they had a sense of
humor and, you know, added things.

            
               Clarification
            

            The Hard Rock Cafe does
not serve its customers poorly prepared food made with inferior ingredients;
the Hard Rock Cafe has no customers.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Bob Dole/Viagra, same as every other quiz.

         
      
   
