
   
   
      
         
            Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Grandma

            As spy
fever once again gripped Britain after the confession of an 87-year-old
great-grandmother that she had given British nuclear secrets to the Russians,
the Times of
India said Monday that "[l]ike diamonds, it seems, spies are forever."
The paper said in an editorial: "Any hope of some respite for the world from
the brigade of 'trench-coats and snoopers,' especially after the collapse of
the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, have been dashed. The world's
secret service agencies have apparently merely shifted their emphasis to the
new 'growth area' of industrial spying." It quoted Pierre Marion, a former head
of the French secret service agency, as saying, "Post-Cold War spying is happy
spying--no ideology is involved."

            In
Britain, however, it was back to the Cold War as the press raked over new
revelations of Communist treachery. They came thick and fast, starting Saturday
in the Times
of London, which disclosed that Melita Norwood (code name "Hola") had passed
atomic secrets to the Soviet Union for 40 years while she worked as a secretary
for the Tube Alloys project, a deliberately anodyne term for Britain's nuclear
weapons program. The Times linked her to the notorious "Cambridge coven"
of five male spies--Kim Philby, Donald Maclean, Guy Burgess, Anthony Blunt, and
John Cairncross. "The 'sixth man,' we now know, was a woman," it said.

            On
Sunday its sister paper, the Sunday Times , revealed that a former Scotland Yard
officer--John Symonds, 64 (code name "Scot")--had been paid by the KGB to
seduce and recruit women working for Western embassies. Symonds had been hired
in Morocco, where he fled in 1969 after being named as part of a ring of
corrupt metropolitan police officers who had taken bribes. The Sunday
Telegraph 's spy
scoops: The KGB ran a "dirty tricks" campaign to persuade Americans that
President John F. Kennedy was murdered by the CIA; the agency planned to maim
Russian ballet dancers Rudolf Nureyev and Natalya Makarova for defecting to the
West; it launched a series of plots against Pope John Paul II; and it planted
KGB agents as assistants to three successive secretaries-general of the United
Nations. All this information was contained in "the Mitrokhin archive"--a vast
haul of documents smuggled out of Russia by Vasili Mitrokhin, 77, a former KGB
archivist who defected to Britain in 1992. His book The Mitrokhin Archive:
The KGB in Europe and the West is being serialized in the Times this
week.

            The
main question in British press editorials was whether Melita Norwood should be
prosecuted for her treachery. The liberal Observer
wrestled Sunday with the logic of applauding the arrest of 83-year-old Chilean
Gen. Augusto Pinochet (as the paper had done) while objecting to the
imprisonment of an 87-year-old woman. But it said that "Mrs. Norwood's betrayal
is more than 50 years old and was conducted in a paranoid Cold War world whose
ideological extremism now seems antique and all but incomprehensible."
Furthermore, she "killed nobody" and "was fired by ideological commitment
rather than malevolence." It went on: "Memories of Pinochet's mass killings and
tortures, by contrast, are all too fresh, and the precedent of his arrest has
international ramifications." Monday's Daily Telegraph , however,
ridiculed the "predictably forgiving" opinion of the
Observer . "Now that Mrs Norwood ... has confessed, without remorse, her
betrayal of her country to the century's most brutal dictator ('Old Joe'),
should she be tried, condemned and jailed?" it asked. "Of course, and the
sooner the better."

            But in
most of the British press, as around the world, the main story Monday was
Indonesia's capitulation to international pressure by agreeing to allow a
foreign peacekeeping force into East Timor. This was generally welcomed, but
with qualifications. The Independent of London said the West had responded too slowly.
"Not until torching and killing had spread throughout East Timor did President
Clinton act," it said in an editorial. "As for Tony Blair, crusader for
universal values, theologian of the just war in Kosovo, he has been conspicuous
by his silence." In Paris, Le Figaro said Monday that the U.N. peacekeepers would arrive
so late in East Timor that they wouldn't be firemen--just gravediggers.

            The
Jakarta Post focused on the proposed establishment of
an international tribunal to investigate "the alleged involvement of the
Indonesian military in very serious human rights violations in East Timor." It
quoted Mary Robinson, the U.N. commissioner for human rights, as saying that
the international community must hold Indonesia accountable for atrocities
committed there. In an editorial, the Jakarta Post called the
international outcry against Indonesia justified. "The Indonesian government,
which has been entrusted with the task of maintaining peace and order, did
virtually nothing as pro-Indonesia militias in East Timor launched a massive
terror campaign against their own populace, killing pro-independence
supporters, forcing hundreds of thousands to leave their homes, and destroying
buildings and other property," the paper said. In Australia, the Sydney Morning Herald warned,
"[T]he evil that is done in East Timor cannot be hidden, at least not for long"
and that "ultimately there will be a calling to account for the rape of East
Timor."

            In New
Zealand, where world leaders have been discussing the crisis at the
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, the Press of Christchurch put
some of the blame on Australia. The country should have anticipated the
opposition President B.J. Habibie would face after the vote for independence in
East Timor. "Indonesia, disastrously, was allowed to provide the only security
in the territory after the vote," the paper's editorial
said. "Australia should have seen the inevitable consequences of this and
ensured an armed UN force was in place."

            In
Germany, the top story Monday was Chancellor Gerhard Schröder's latest setbacks
in state and local elections, where his Social Democrat Party was thrown out of
office Sunday in the eastern state of Thuringia. In Italy, La Repubblica described
Schröder's series of electoral defeats--another is predicted next month in
Berlin--as his Via Crucis and "a black page for German social
democracy, the lynchpin of the European Left." In Britain, where former Defense
Secretary Michael Portillo gambled on his political future in the Conservative
Party last week by admitting to youthful homosexual experiences, the Mail on
Sunday published an opinion poll showing that "seven out of ten voters
would accept a prime minister who had been homosexual in the past, and six out
of ten would accept one who was openly gay."

         
      
   
