
   
   
      
         
            No. 289: &quot;No Problem&quot;

            
               Quoted in the
Wichita Eagle , Kansas Gov. Bill Graves said, "This is a terrible,
tragic, embarrassing solution to a problem that did not exist." What
is?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 288)--"Futurific":
            

            

               
                  Wal-Mart's present is rosy, with second quarter sales up 15
percent and profits up 21 percent to $1.25 billion. And its future is even
better. Marketing consultant Burt Flickinger sees something coming that is "the
best possible thing that can happen to Wal-Mart and the worst thing that could
happen to every major competitor." What?
               
            

            
"September has been declared 'Celebrate Sweatshops Month.' "-- Evan
Cornog
            

            
"Wal-Mart's coup in being named 'Gun Supplier of Choice' by both the Crips and
the Bloods."--Floyd "My News Quiz Responses Cost Way Less To Make Than
The Blair Witch Project " Elliot
            

            "Les
Moonves has been named president and CEO of every major competitor."-- Larry
Amoros
            

            "It
will be featured prominently in Episode 2 , as the place Obi-Wan takes
Anakin to get his first cheap, nonunion light-saber."-- Matt Sullivan
            

            "And
good afternoon to you, too, President Reagan. Can you point me to
housewares?"-- Ed Foley
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            To News Quiz
participants, Wal-Mart means sweatshop labor and easily available guns, but
it's so much more. It's censored music. And censored videos. And denying women
emergency contraception. For years the store has declined to sell "stickered
music," i.e., pop songs whose lyrics are too saucy for your mall. Wal-Mart
still won't stock "adult videos," although it no longer carries its own store
editions of mainstream hits with the naughty bits edited out, as it was once
rumored to do. America's biggest gun retailer, the chain will not fill
prescriptions for the morning-after pill Preven. I'm no reproductive rights
attorney, but if this isn't overtly promoting infanticide as a form of
population control, it's coming awfully close. Crawl, little baby! Crawl for
your life!

            
               You Can't Find a
Cheaper Answer
            

            "A consumer downturn is the best possible
thing that can happen to Wal-Mart," says the sanguine Mr. Flickinger.

            The competitive advantage the world's largest
retailer enjoys over its rivals in a robust economy would be even greater
during hard times, when those puny competitors would be battered by economic
gales, which to the mighty chain are but gentle zephyrs, Flickinger breezily
implied.

            "Even if the consumer
environment does slow down, we still think Wal-Mart is extremely well
positioned," said Jeff Feiner, a retail analyst with Lehman Brothers. "In fact,
if a meteor crashed into the Earth, sentencing everyone on the planet to a slow
and hideous death, I'd expect Wal-Mart to do swell," he did not add.

            
               Riotous Assembly
Extra
            

            Can you name the mob
that fomented each of these recent riots around the world?

            
               The Riot
            

            1. Indonesia. "Streets have been blocked by the
mobs. No one has dared go out, even to buy basic needs in the nearest market,"
said an unnamed civil servant from Maluku province.

            2. Nairobi. Speaking from his hospital bed, Mr.
Miricho, who is the chairman of Gakoe and Mung'aria factories, said the mob of
more than 100 people stormed his house, baying for his blood. "They said they
wanted my head because I had blocked their move to split the 18,000-member
society."

            3. Dar Es Salaam. Thirty people who participated in
a riot in the Tanzanian capital were charged with unlawful assembly and
procession and malicious damage to property. Rioters threw stones, bottles, and
iron pieces at the police while policemen fired tear gas and used pistols,
dogs, and horses to disperse the mob.

            4. Kosovo. A French soldier was seriously hurt
during a melee as a mob of around 150 men tried to charge across the bridge to
north Mitrovica as soldiers strung barbed wire across it.

            5. Hondo, Texas. Spokesman Larry Fitzgerald says a
dozen inmates were hurt in fighting at the Torres medium-security prison unit;
two remain hospitalized with stab wounds.

            6. Connecticut. "They
apparently came to drink and party and have what they thought was a good time.
Then the mob mentality took over," said Sgt. Neil Dryfe of the Hartford Police
Department.

            
               The Mob
            

            1. Christians who hate Muslims and vice versa

            2. Opponents of the Tetu Coffee Growers Cooperative
Society

            3. Students who reject school uniforms

            4. Ethnic Albanians eager to storm the Serbian part
of town

            5. Members of the Raza Unida and Mexican Mafia
prison gangs

            6. Fans of the Dave
Matthews Band

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The fashion gaffes of
the poor.

            
               Editor's Note
            

            Chris Kelly will be the guest host for next week's
News Quiz, and Tim Carvell will take over the following week, while I am on my
listening tour of the jockeys' lounge in Saratoga Springs.-- R.C.
            

         
      
   
