
   
   
      
         
            Dead Kennedys

            Drawn
by the scent of blood in the water, the media have swarmed the crash site of
John F. Kennedy Jr. While pedestrian reporters investigate the disaster,
pundits debate the more entertaining question: Why does this keep happening to
the Kennedys? Some say the whole family is "reckless." Others argue that the
Kennedys are admirably bold and that it's unseemly to criticize them. Each camp
oversimplifies the truth. There are two Kennedy traditions: courage, gravity,
and martyrdom on one side; recklessness, frivolity, and mayhem on the
other.

            The
"recklessness" spin, fueled by talk radio and the Internet, says the Kennedys
seek "adventure," "live close to the edge," are "wild" and "addicted to risk,"
and have a "dangerous streak." This spin laughably equates all dangerous
behavior. "Taking physical risks is a Kennedy family tradition," says
Newsweek . "During World War II, the oldest son, Joe Jr., ... died on a
virtual suicide mission. ... Jack Kennedy chose PT boats, rickety crafts whose
crews boasted that 'they were expendable.' Bobby Kennedy's children always
seemed to be falling out of trees."

            To
prove that young John Kennedy was reckless, these spinners paste together weak
bits of evidence. As a boy, he used to evade his Secret Service agents. He once
took a survival course. Another time, he went to Africa and was charged by a
rhinoceros. "He learned through all these experiences to make light of danger,"
asserts Newsweek . Later, he enjoyed rock climbing, paragliding, scuba
diving, kayaking, and Rollerblading. He asked permission to rappel down Mount
Rushmore. He launched a magazine--demonstrating, according to Reuters, that
"like other members of his legendary family, Kennedy had a taste for danger and
took risks." He invited Larry Flynt to a black-tie dinner. He even lived "in an
edgy warehouse district."

            The
"courage" spin puts an equally simplistic gloss of nobility on the family's
escapades. As questions about recklessness bounced around the Sunday talk
shows, Kennedy pal Douglas Brinkley argued that "John Jr. and the Kennedy
family [are] 'in the arena,' and they're living a vigorous life." "They're
bold," agreed Sen. Joe Lieberman, D-Conn. "They have always had courage.
They've always wanted to live to the fullest." Washington Post columnist
Richard Cohen admonished critics, "It is an active family, an achieving family,
and so its members have taken some chances." The New York Times boasted
that "the Kennedys have always been risk-takers, in play, politics and war. At
its best, there is a certain nobility to the Kennedys' refusal to let life
intimidate them."

            But
not all the family's risk-taking has been "bold" or "wild." Some Kennedys have
been far more reckless than others. Was John Kennedy's death reckless? Let's
consider the criteria.

            
               1.
Who caused the tragedy? Most of the coverage depicts John as the victim of
a family "curse." The Kennedys are "stalked by tragedy," suffering "bad luck"
or a "near-biblical blight" that has been inflicted, according to Mario Cuomo,
by "gods." Not only were Jack and Bobby assassinated, but "the younger
generation of Kennedys has been haunted by bad news as well," says the
Post --"as if fate were picking them off," laments Time .

            This
passive language obscures an important distinction. Whereas Jack and Bobby were
murdered, the "younger generation," far from being "haunted" or "picked off,"
caused its own grief. Joe overturned a jeep, leaving his brother's girlfriend
paralyzed. Bobby Jr. introduced mescaline to his 13-year-old brother David, who
eventually died of a drug overdose. Michael slept with his kids' teen-age baby
sitter and later skied into a tree. William Kennedy Smith, their cousin, went
out on the town with Uncle Teddy, brought home a woman, and ended up being
tried unsuccessfully for rape.

            Which
of these traditions does John Kennedy belong to? The Times argued that
like Jack and Bobby, John was "cut down far too early." Again, passive language
distorts the facts. John was at the controls when his vehicle crashed--just
like Cousin Joe and Uncle Teddy.

            
               2.
Who's the victim? On Meet the Press , Tim Russert played the
30-year-old video clip in which Ted Kennedy tried to explain to the nation why,
having driven his car off a bridge after a party on Chappaquiddick Island--and
having swum to safety while his young campaign aide, Mary Jo Kopechne, drowned
in the car--he had failed to report the accident to police. In the clip,
Kennedy raised the question "whether some awful curse did actually hang over
all the Kennedys, whether there was some justifiable reason for me to doubt
what had happened and to delay my report."

            
Russert offered the clip as an omen of the "curse" that would strike John
Kennedy 30 years later. Russert's guest, columnist Mike Barnicle, heaped praise
and sympathy on Ted Kennedy for having "borne so many" family tragedies. Nobody
pointed out that at Chappaquiddick, unlike Dallas and Los Angeles, the person
most responsible for the tragedy was a Kennedy, whereas the victim was not--and
that Ted Kennedy's invocation of the family "curse" was a clever way of
papering over these differences. Thanks to this blurring of the
victim-perpetrator distinction, Ted's nephew Joe was able to get elected to
Congress despite his own car accident, which likewise devastated his passenger,
four years after Chappaquiddick.

            Which
tradition does John Kennedy belong to? Most pundits, recalling Jack's and
Bobby's assassinations, have cast his family as the ultimate victim of his
crash. "Stop blaming John. It is enough that tragedy once again punished the
Kennedys," wrote Cohen. But attention is gradually shifting to the Bessette
family, whose daughters were passengers on John's plane. The Chappaquiddick
analogies can't be far behind.

            
               3.
For what purpose was the risk taken? To illustrate the Kennedys' penchant
for "adventure," "recklessness," and "disaster," the Post compares
John's crash to the death of Joe Kennedy Jr., in a World War II bombing mission
and to Michael Kennedy's fatal "crash" into a tree while playing football on
skis. Newsweek 's Jonathan Alter likens John's flying to his father's
piloting of a PT boat in the war: "They both grabbed life by the lapels." These
comparisons obscure the difference between risking one's life in war, as Jack
and Joe did, and risking it playing football. Which tradition does John belong
to? He was flying to a wedding--a more commendable pursuit than the one that
killed Michael, but nothing like the war that killed Uncle Joe.

            
               4.
What precautions were taken? Critics point out that John Kennedy was an
inexperienced pilot, took off after sunset, wasn't licensed to fly in the poor
visibility he encountered Friday, flew the more dangerous route over water, and
never contacted air traffic controllers for assistance. His defenders point out
that he was trained at a top-flight facility and usually brought along a flight
instructor but that Friday's weather reports offered no warning of poor
visibility. Barnicle, like Cohen, argued that to accuse Kennedy of "poor
judgment is way out of bounds," because "he could just as well have been killed
in a subway accident."

            By
enumerating Kennedy's usual precautions, his defenders show that he was more
careful than many of his cousins. But against that background--and comments
from other pilots who say they decided the weather was too dangerous for
flying--his decisions last Friday appear all the more unwise. John Kennedy
would be alive today if he had taken his usual precautions--and certainly if he
had taken a train instead.

            
               5.
Was the protagonist morally reckless? Recklessness theorists associate John
Kennedy's "lack of judgment" with his cousins' debauchery. According to the
Post , the family's "fearless adventurism has sometimes played out in
scandal: for example, the drug problems of Robert Jr., Patrick and David ... or
Michael's notorious involvement with his teenage babysitter." Time says
of John, "If he was less reckless than his cousins, it was not saying much;
there were friends who turned down the invitation to take to the skies with
him." The magazine quotes one family member who said, "The Kennedy story is
really about karma, about people who broke the rules and were ultimately broken
by them."

            This
critique confuses different dimensions of "judgment" and "breaking the rules."
To err in assessing the weather is human; to pork the baby sitter is depraved.
John Kennedy knew the difference: In 1997, he observed in George that
his cousin Michael had "surrendered his judgment." Recklessness theorists such
as Newsweek --which casually associated John's "succession of stunning
girlfriends" as a bachelor with his father's "sexual snacking" as a married
man--show far worse judgment than John ever did.

            
Barnicle and other Kennedy defenders, however, gloss over the same moral
differences when they demand that the nation stand with Uncle Teddy and mourn
the loss of "another Kennedy" instead of "assessing judgment." Judgment is
precisely what should be assessed. John Kennedy should never have taken off
last Friday. The risk was unnecessary, and two people who entrusted him with
their lives are dead because he screwed up. But let's not confuse one
catastrophic misjudgment with a pattern of decadence. John Kennedy's death was
far less noble than the tragedies suffered by the best men in his family--and
far less blameworthy than the tragedies wrought by the worst.

         
      
   
