
   
   
      
         
            Peaceable Pagans

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Hey
Pru,
               
            

            
               I've got a very
wicked idea about who you really are. I think you're a fat, balding guy in his
middle 50s who smokes cigars while reading those heart-rending missives from
perplexed readers. Très cool.
            

            

               --Rick St. T.
            

            Dear Rick,

            And what do you plan to
read now that you've finished Miss Lonelyhearts ? Actually, Prudie is a
knockout. (And modest, too.)

            
--Prudie, laughingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               What you really need
to tell "" is that Wicca and paganism are simply other religions. Of course
their followers don't believe in evil or worship Satan. For one thing,
Christians created Satan--so he's their guy, not ours. To be evil is to go
against everything you're taught by the Wiccan religion.
            

            

               --Just Concerned
            

            Dear Just,

            Talk about toil and
trouble ... Prudie was inundated by lotsa mail on this subject. Interestingly,
the Wiccan mail was friendly, polite, and informative. Blessed be. The few
stinky letters were from clergymen. Go figure.

            
--Prudie, bewitchingly

            

               
                  Prudie,
               
            

            
               I recently married a woman who is a devout
Mormon. Needless to say, she has spent a fair amount of time trying to convert
me. I believe that a person's views on religion, divinity, and so on are
individual. I respect the right of anyone to believe as he or she sees fit, but
honestly, I find the whole Latter Day Saints faith a load of dingo
kidneys--restrictive, racist, and condemnatory. I also find their attitudes
sanctimonious and superior and in line with many fundamentalist "Christian"
faiths.
            

            
               So, how do I tell my
young (much younger) wife that I want her to cool down the rah-rah Mormon bit?
I love her dearly, but this is driving me nuts.
            

            

               --Alisdair
            

            Dear Al,

            Prudie is astounded that you and the little woman
did not discuss this rather loaded subject--on which you differ
profoundly--before the strains of "Here Comes the Bride" filled the church. And
she wonders if resolution will even be possible ... what with the Mrs. trying
to convert you to her religion ... which you view as a load of dingo kidneys.
If you love her dearly, as you say, it will be necessary to reach an agreement,
probably with a referee, whereby you both hew to your own beliefs and do not
discuss them. You might tell the beloved that you have decided to become Jewish
just to end the discussion. (Prudie is kidding.)

            It is a storm signal,
however, that you use the words "racist, restrictive, condemnatory,
sanctimonious, and superior" about your wife's faith and her fellow
practitioners. Prudie can only hope that, as a counterbalance, her personal
qualities are "gorgeous, loving, brainy, witty, and rich." Not to be
pessimistic, but Prudie envisions another letter from you down the line.

            
--Prudie, worriedly

            

               
                  Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am a gay divorced
father who also happens to work in a Catholic school. I am out to my ex-wife,
family, and some close friends but am hesitant to come all the way out for fear
of the implications. I do not care what people think about me, but I don't want
to bring any negative publicity to the school. I love education and would hate
to leave it. I want to find a life partner to share my days with, but my
current employment prevents me from doing so. I am tired of living in the
closet and want to be me without having to live two lives. Can you
help?
            

            

               --Mr. Q.
            

            Dear Mr.,

            Closets are for clothes, and two lives mean split
personalities. Prudie would encourage you to reorganize your life so that it is
honest. The first thing to try would be to talk with someone in authority at
your school about your sexual preference to ask if it poses a problem. The
answer may well be in the affirmative, seeing as how one parochial school
sacked a female teacher because she was divorced . But this will at least
be a start. Prudie is a little unclear as to why your being gay would bring
publicity to the school, but only you know why you think this is so.

            Because you say you
would hate to leave the educational field, why not move to a public or private
school if your Catholic school boss finds homosexuality a problem? Take it from
Prudie, all schools have gay and lesbian teachers. It's a percentage
thing. And Prudie wishes you all the best in your private, romantic life.

            
--Prudie, openly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My boss is a really great guy and the best boss
I've ever had. There's just one problem: He whistles incessantly.
            

            
               I find whistling
irritating at best, but it is positively nerve-wracking when I'm trying to
concentrate at work. My office is two doors down from his, so there's no
escaping the sound. I've tried to discreetly play music, but it doesn't drown
him out. I've also tried shutting my door, but in our office culture, that's
considered uncomfortably secretive and standoffish. Any ideas on how I can save
my sanity (and my job)?
            

            

               --Whistler's Brother
            

            Dear Whis,

            Prudie finds whistling annoying, too. It is an odd
sound and, like chewing gum, should best be done in private. You may have blown
the problem out of proportion, however. Surely this "really great guy," the
best boss you've ever had, could not be so unreasonable--or thin-skinned--as to
take umbrage at your request for a whistle-free workplace.

            Make your remarks
positive. Tell him, in your own words, that it pleases you that he manifests
such happy feelings, but the musical expression of his joy distracts you and
keeps you from putting out your very best work. A really great guy is not going
to react with anything but understanding. Unless he is so dense that light
bends around him, he will accede to your request and be grateful that you spoke
up.

            --Prudie, fearlessly

         
      
   
