
   
   
      
         
            No. 276: &quot;Circuit Breaker&quot;

            
               
                  Fill in
the blank as ACLU lawyer Pamela Summers disdains an opinion handed down by the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the 11 th Circuit: "The courts are saying
'We'll just have a local option on the Constitution, and you people down there
in Alabama can go ahead and _____________ all you want.'
"
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 275)--"Symbolic Logic":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
A federal judge has ordered Republic, Mo., to make a change in its official
city seal. What
change?
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "They
have to remove the Nike swoosh and replace it with the Ten
Commandments."-- Eric Fredericksen
            

            
"Remove the hidden hologram of Bess Truman lifting her dress over her
head."-- Larry Amoros
            

            "City
motto, 'Drive out the Jews,' must be translated from brazen English into the
more subtle Latin."-- Greg Diamond
            

            "The
judge ordered trigger locks to be painted onto the crossed musket
emblems."-- Ananda Gupta
            

            "It
now says, 'Federal Judges RULE! State Courts SUCK!' "-- Peter Carlin
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Unlike a modern
corporate logo designed by professional graphics people, where minimalism and
self-justifying folderol are key, a government seal ought to embody clutter and
boneheaded symbolism. The seal of Republic's home state of Missouri is perfect.
It's got bears! Two of them, standing up (rampant). The 1960 World Book
says that means Missouri supports itself and the United States, although it
looks more like a poster for animal boxing, which might be the state sport of
Missouri. (Formerly the state sport was catching and returning runaway slaves.)
The bears are holding up what might be a dinner plate that says, "United We
Stand Divided We Ball," indicating a surprisingly open marriage or that the ink
smeared. In the middle of the dinner plate (or is it a base drum?) there is a
crescent moon (or a set of cattle horns, symbolic of a self-deluding cow who
thinks she could beat a bear in a fair fight, but I don't like her chances).
Below the moon (or cow) is a sheep (or dog) who also seems ready to rumble, and
to the right of the sheep (or dog) is an eagle with a cloud above its head, or
maybe a cartoon balloon showing what the eagle is thinking (it's tough to make
out), probably something very funny, indicating that the eagle hopes to get its
own comic strip some day. Also shown are a lot of stars--24 or 25, one of them
could be a dust speck--symbolizing something to do with the sky or night time
or celebrities or spaceships or celebrities in spaceships like in Star
Wars . There are a helmet and some ferns or laurel, some kind of leaves, and
a Latin motto, "Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto," which, if I remember my Latin,
means "The Best People in This State Don't Have To Obey the Traffic Laws."
That's a lot more than you get out of the Nike swoosh. Or swish.

            
               Show Me Answer
            

            They've got to remove their ichthus .

             

            Judge Russell Clark gave the town 30 days to
eliminate the "Christian fish" that adorns the 8-year-old city seal, as well as
its trucks, flags, street signs, and stationery. He noted that the fish "is
exhibited extensively throughout southwest Missouri to denote Christian-owned
businesses."

            The case was brought by the ACLU on behalf of Jean
Webb, a Wiccan. The town was represented pro bono by the National Legal
Foundation, a "Christian public interest law firm."

            See the city's
unreconstructed seal at www.republicmo.com. (Thanks to Sean Fitzpatrick.)

            
               America's Prissy
Overpriced Attic Extra
            

            Match the evocative
description from the current Smithsonian catalog with the item it
describes:

            
               Catalog Copy
            

            1. "Graces your home with artful opulence worthy of
the gods."

            2. "Brightens your home with a whimsical
touch."

            3. "This ladybug holds a timely surprise."

            4. "Brings to your home the splendor of
18 th -century Venice."

            5. "Kids love these working replicas of the Guns
That Killed the Presidents."

            6. "Designed and personally signed by
world-renowned nutcracker artist."

            7. "The banker's chair swivels freely, just like
its life-size counterpart!"

            8. "Sends wave after wave of erotic pleasure
surging through her body."

            9. "Place this intriguing gadget near the kitchen
door to welcome wayfaring kids."

            10. "Nestled in a
knothole."

            
               Item
            

            A. Heirloom Bombè Chest, $1,295

            B. "Grape Arbor" Murano Glass Chandelier,
$2,495

            C. Fanciful Frogs Bowl, $27.50

            D. Ladybug Pendant Watch, $35

            E. Steinbach "Scarecrow" Nutcracker, $250

            F. Miniature Office Furniture, $35

            G. Wooden Candy Dispenser, $32

            H. Eastern Bluebirds
Wall Plaque, $99.50

            
               Answers
            

            
               1-B, 2-C, 3-D, 4-A,
5-(I may have misread that one), 6-E, 7-F, 8-(That's from a different
catalog--sorry), 9-G, 10-H.
            

            
               Bill McDermott's Online
Headline Haiku
            

            Award to Hillary
Republicans push President
Plan mass resignation
Descend on Reno

            --cnn.com, 10:30 a.m.
ET, July 15, 1999

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Aquatic mammal puns.

         
      
   
