
   
   
      
         
            Disordered Diana

            

               
                  Editor's note: Some of the letters below originally
appeared in "The Fray," Slate 's reader feedback forum.
            

            
               Who's Deliriously
Mean-Spirited?
            

            Your review of my book Diana in Search of
Herself was so confusing that I scarcely know how to respond (see the Sept.
2 "" posting). Your writer asserts in the first sentence that it was
"deliriously mean-spirited"--a surprising statement, given that reviewers for
Time , Newsweek , and the Washington Post among others have
remarked on the even-handedness of my book. In fact, Judith Shulevitz is
herself "deliriously mean-spirited," and I resent the fact that she relies on
material from my book in an effort to make her arguments.

            Your writer assesses the book in only one other
place, noting that Diana suffered "from what Smith dubiously diagnoses as a
borderline personality disorder." The review promptly lists seven psychological
problems that plagued Diana, all of which are common in those afflicted with
borderline personality disorder. For the record, I used the term as a framework
for understanding Diana--in particular how its symptoms interacted to produce
the chaotic behavior that so many close to her witnessed over the years. I
emphasized that while I couldn't say with certainty that Diana had the
disorder, the evidence (as presented throughout the previous 363 pages) was
compelling. As it happens, a number of psychiatrists have approached me since
the book's publication to say that Diana was a classic borderline.

            I suppose that I should
be flattered that the three meatiest paragraphs (of five) in the review were
drawn entirely from my biography. But as someone who read a vast amount of what
had been written about Diana, conducted 150 interviews (many with her
intimates), and included 60 pages of detailed footnotes, I find it dismaying
that 
                  Slate
                would run such a disingenuous review.

            

               --Sally Bedell Smith
            

            
               Sucking Up to the
Boss
            

            "" always makes for interesting reading; whether or
not it really gets anyone to give (besides maybe Bill Gates) is open to
question, but I'm sure it can't hurt. At least it's better than trying to rank
colleges.

            I have a question about that $225 million gift that
heads the list, though. As far as I can see, the gift was made by the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation, not the Gateses themselves. Obviously, most (all?) of
the foundation's assets have come from the Gateses, and I don't want to
diminish the generosity of surrendering $17 billion for the public good. But
strictly speaking, there doesn't seem to be any other foundation on The

                  Slate
                60 list, nor are Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie, or the very
living Walter Annenberg listed. (In truth, I don't know how much the Annenberg
Foundation gave away last quarter, but let's pro-rate its annual giving and
guess that it was around $25 million, based on 1998's figures. Here is the
summary if you want to look it up.)

            In fact, if I understand the rules, a $17 billion
foundation will have to give away roughly $170 million per quarter and, in
today's market and economy, ought to have considerably more than that to spend,
even after hedging against inflation. Aside from the occasional Ted Turner
bombshell, the Gateses seem to have just about guaranteed themselves the top
slot on The 
                  Slate
                60 for the rest of their lives, even if they
never give another nickel away.

            As I said, I don't want to suggest that Bill Gates
isn't a generous person nor even that his giving doesn't represent considerable
sacrifice on his part (though it must be nice to be able to give that kind of
money away). But as this edition is constituted, it looks an awful lot like
sucking up to the boss.

            (Of course, if it helps
keep you in business, by all means carry on.)

            -- Chris Hammett
            

            New
York

            
               
                  Ann Castle
replies:
                
               You're right that the head-of-the-list gifts come from the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. The funds in that foundation were given by
the donors themselves, so they meet our criteria as gifts from living
individual Americans. The Gateses use the foundation as their giving vehicle,
as do some others on the list.
            

            
               You mention Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie, and
Walter Annenberg as examples of foundation founders who are not on the list.
Ford and Carnegie are easy to explain--they are no longer living, and we
decided to list family foundation gifts only when one of the original donors is
still alive.
            

            
               The Annenbergs--Walter and Leonore--have
appeared on the list previously. But, according to a cursory search done today,
the Annenberg Foundation announced gifts totaling $1.78 million in July 1999, a
total that under our terms would not have met the minimum for the second
quarter of 1999. This total was composed of 24 gifts ranging from $40,000 to
$150,000.
            

            
               Our method looks for single large gifts. There's
nothing sacred about that technique; others have ranked cumulative giving over
a lifetime, etc. We count pledges as well as paid gifts. I look for gifts
announced by the donor or the recipient as gifts from individuals--that's why
you saw the Rockefeller name appear for the first time on The Slate 60
this quarter. I also search for foundation gifts from individuals and have set
an arbitrary minimum of $1 million.
            

            
               We don't list gifts that we can't verify. A gift
was announced earlier this year from James E. Beasley to Temple University Law
School as "the largest endowment in the history of [the university]" to the law
school, which has been named the James E. Beasley School of Law in his honor.
We couldn't verify any amount, so this gift was not included in The
Slate 60, although it almost certainly would have qualified.
            

            
               Some people make all their gifts through their
foundations; others do a portion of their philanthropy that way. Some give at a
particular time of year; others spread it out. Many of the same people making
announced large gifts also give anonymously, and I don't try to ferret those
out. Our goal is to celebrate both donors and recipients, so we list gifts as
they are made out of a foundation to a separate nonprofit. That's why the
Gateses were not credited with the even larger amount that was announced in all
the papers: If we recognize them for the $6 billion they put into their
foundation, then we can't recognize the organizations that receive that money
down the road or we'd be double-counting.
            

            
               The fact is that the
Gateses now have created the largest personal foundation in the United States
and will probably continue to make the top or near the top of the list.
However, as Jack Shafer noted in , there are plenty of other people out there
who could meet and exceed their 1999 running total of $255 million and not even
wince.
            

            
               At Lager Heads
            

            Don't get me wrong. I vastly enjoyed James Fallows'
deep, probing piece on blind beer tasting (""). But Fallows does perpetuate a
few common mistakes that should be cleared up.

            1) "Lagers are the light-colored, relatively
lightly flavored brews that make up most of the vattage of beer consumption in
the United States."

            2) "Sam's success could reflect its
quasi-mislabeling, presenting a strong-flavored beer as a 'lager.' "

            Both of these statements are incorrect in their
definition of "lager." Lager is one of the two main types of beer, the other
being ale. Lager beers come in all varieties of flavors, strengths, and colors,
from the pale, crisp Pilsener (what most American beers are modeled on, albeit
weakly) to thick, deep brown, rich, strong (8.5 percent) "doppelbocks." What
defines a beer as lager is its method of fermentation: at cool temperatures,
using a specific type of "lager" yeast, with an extended cold maturation
period. Ales, on the other hand, tend to experience warm, rapid
fermentations.

            Sam Adams is a lager
beer that happens to be brewed in a slightly fuller-flavored style, something
akin (perhaps) to mainstream American beers in the '40s and '50s. But it is as
much a lager as any of the other beers in Fallows' tasting.

            -- Ben Myers
            

            
Author, Best
American Beers
            

            
               Defending the First Boy
Scout
            

            Geoffrey Wheatcroft's article "" portrays all adult
scout leaders as pedophiles who are involved with scouts for nothing more than
a steady diet of young boys. How tragic that this is the legacy that our
prurient minds attach to one of the finest civic-minded organizations of the
century.

            I was a Boy Scout throughout my childhood years. I
attained the rank of Eagle, and never once did I feel as though I was in danger
of being molested, attacked, leered at, or otherwise harassed by an adult
leader. The men who were adult leaders while I was a scout were in many ways
more influential on my life than my own parents were. To lump these pillars of
respectability in my life and in my community with the few bad seeds that slip
through the cracks of the organization is a grave disservice to the thousands
of men and women who willingly give their evenings, weekends, and dollars to an
organization whose core goal is to mold impressionable boys into upstanding,
moral men.

            In the future, please
research a story more before sniggering and laughing at a man in a scout
uniform ... he's trying to make his son and boys like his son into better men,
something that articles like yours will never do.

            -- Bill Maly
            

            Cedar Rapids, Iowa

         
      
   
