
   
   
      
         
            No. 299: &quot;What Would Jesus Sue?&quot;

            
               In England, a
group of 40 independent Christian schools plans to petition the European Court
of Human Rights to have the ban lifted. Ban on what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Monday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's
Question(No 298)--"Fair Play":
            

            

               
                  
                     "I'm so excited!" hairstylist Richard Ferris said
Monday at the Syracuse, N.Y., State Fair. "This is the most exciting thing that
has ever happened to me." What happened to
Ferris?
                  
               
            

            "He
invented a ride to sell to the fair that involved stationary painted horses
that revolve on a circular platform to calliope music. He called it the Ferris
Go Round."-- Merrill Markoe
            

            "He
won a blue ribbon for best hairdresser. Nobody has the heart to tell him that
this simply means he'll fetch a higher price at auction, where he'll be sold
off to a rendering plant."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "A
representative of the news media asked him a question and wrote down his answer
and his name in a spiral notebook."--William Considine
            

            "Doing
a wash and comb-out to a stick of spun sugar."-- Sean Fitzpatrick ( Ben
Heller had a similar answer referencing the bearded lady's beard; as did
Ian O'Henley referring to the Ape Woman from Borneo)

            "He
was touched by a Hell's Angel."-- Francis Heaney (similar, but less
tender, Floyd Elliot )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            "And Jacob said to Rebekah, his mother, 'Behold,
Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man, so maybe I should take
him to a good stylist who would no doubt be, as so many of them are, gay. And
attending a state fair.'" (Genesis 27:11)

            All well and good, but what really intrigued News
Quiz participants was the coincidence of names between a certain hair stylist
(no doubt gay; they all are) and a giant amusement park attraction. And
because, refreshed by my vacation, I want only to please you, here is the
uncharacteristically melancholy entry from the 1960 edition of the World
Book Encyclopedia describing the invention of the popular ride:

            "The first Ferris wheel was the largest of all. It
was much larger than wheels seen today. It was built by G. W. Gale Ferris, a
mechanical engineer of Galesburg, Ill., for the World's Columbian Exposition in
Chicago in 1893. The wheel was 250 feet in diameter and had 36 cars. Each of
the cars could carry 60 persons. After it was used at the exhibition in St.
Louis in 1904, the wheel was sold for scrap metal. By heartless bastards
without an ounce of poetry in their souls. You pour your guts into something,
trying to create a little beauty and wonder--250 feet tall!--and they just use
you up and throw you away. Why try? Why live?" Last few sentences added by an
autumnal News Quiz, if it matters, which hardly seems likely, so ephemeral are
the works of man, as transient as the mood-lifting effects of a vacation.
"Vanity of vanities; all is vanity." (Ecclesiastes 9:2)

            Hey, I'm back from Bible
camp. Did you miss me?

            
               Fair
               ,
Fairer, Ferris Answer
            

            Richard Ferris kissed the right hand of Hillary
Clinton, who was not an official exhibit at the fair but was, rather, a
visitor, in the sense that someone working the crowd for money and votes is
visiting. "And I want to do her hair!" exclaimed the giddy Ferris, "I've always
been mad about corporate lawyers, especially when they're pro-death penalty,"
he did not add.

            Accompanied by her
husband, Mrs. Clinton took in an exhibition of quilts but skipped the
Freakathon.

            
               Augmented

               Quotations Extra
            

            (Final sentence added by News Quiz.)

            

               "There appears to be every reason to believe that the police officers acted
in accordance with police procedure and acted in a responsible way to save
human life. And of course by 'save human life,' I mean 'shoot some idiot.'
"--Unapologetic New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani responds to the fatal
shooting--12 bullets from six cops--of a mentally ill man armed with a hand
tool.

               "It is almost as if she never existed. If we are not very careful, there is
a real danger that she will disappear. Although, as Mayor Giuliani said, the
police were right to shoot her; she might have had a gun."--Amusingly named
British social scientist J. Mallory Wober assesses his country's reaction to
the late Princess Di on her two year deathaversary.

               "The conclusion I've reached is that no one is doing what I believe needs
to be done. I refer, with my trademark belligerence, to gay-bashing and
encouraging the police to gun down the mentally ill; well actually, I suppose
Mayor Giuliani is doing one of those."--Pugnacious presidential hopeful Alan
Keyes explains why he enjoys being a losing candidate in the Republican primary
race.

               "It makes me nervous, because I've seen what these things can do. It is as
if Mayor Giuliani had sent over a boatload of New York City policeman to patrol
our streets and shoot us."--Homeless Turkish carpenter Yusuf Okul, who often
wields a hammer, reacts to recent aftershocks.

               "These judges have their heads in the sand. Thank goodness they don't have
to govern a city because things would be really dangerous. There'd be cops
gunning down the mentally ill--you know, in accordance with police procedure
and in a responsible way to save human life; is that my phone?"--Puffed up New
York Mayor Giuliani disagrees with a federal appeals court judge's decision
that even those expressing unpopular views have the right to speak in New
York.

            

            
               Common

               Denominator
            

            The Wheel.

         
      
   
