
   
   
      
         
            WWW.Dubya.Com

            
               SUBJECT:
gwbush.com is just a cybersquatter

            
               FROM:
Matt Maddox

            
               RE:
            

            

               DATE: Wed Sept 29

            Actually, the article fails to include one critical
fact: Zack Exley's Bush parody site was not set up to express opinions--or even
to parody Bush. Exley is a cybersquatter who demanded $20K from the Bush
campaign for the rights to the domain name. When they refused, he set up an
anti-Bush site. The guy even claims to be non-partisan. This is just a case of
electronic blackmail that the media blowhards want to turn into a free-speech
case.

            (To respond, click
here.)

            
               SUBJECT:
G.W. Bush is the real cybersquatter

            
               FROM:
Diane

            
               RE:
            

            

               DATE: Tue Sept 28

            Personally, I think the Bush camp is acting like
brats that didn't get everything they wanted at Christmas. As I'm sure y'all
know, the Bush campaign purposely combatted the possibility of competing with
mock spoof sites like gwbush.com by BUYING domain names (over 60 sites, from what I got
from the Newsweek article). Some examples (and go ahead and try them):
www.georgebushbites.com, www.georgebushblows.com, georgebushsucks.com,
www.bushbites.com, www.bushsux.com. All these sites will
automatically lead into George Dubbawya's Web site (www.georgewbush.com). Neat, huh?

            GWBush.com and another Zack Exley site squeaked by
this, and since the campaign couldn't buy it, they decided to get rid of it.
Funny, I thought that politics and campaigning were about freedom of speech and
the ability to compete. The Bush campaign has a sweet monopoly on that.

            If you would like more information, you should go
to the site that is actually handling this case: www.rtmark.com. It has everything from the cease
and desist letter to any articles remote to the subject.

            (To respond, click
here .)

            
               SUBJECT:
"Analysis" from 
                  Slate
               's adman

            
               FROM:
Michael

            
               RE:
            

            
               DATE: Wed
Sept 22

             

            How ingenious of 
                  Slate
                to
publish a sales pitch under the guise of analysis. This column is tantamount to
having an ABC account exec go on World News Tonight to deliver a special
report on why Drew Carey gives you more bang for your media buck.

            The impact of the Web on the campaign is a worthy
topic, but a little more objectivity, please.

            (To respond, click
here.)

            
               SUBJECT:
The weatherman is just a middleman

            
               FROM:
R. Wells

            
               RE:
            

            
               DATE: Mon
Sept 27

             

            Your comments about weather hysteria were generally
right on, but I felt your comments about the role of the Web in promoting that
hysteria missed the point. Access to weather information on the Web is a giant
leap forward in weather media because it allows one to avoid the hype and
hysteria with which the general news media covers extreme weather. Check out
www.wunderground.com. The
information is straightforward, but interestingly displayed. I could track
Floyd, read Weather Service bulletins, and follow satellite images without
having to suffer through moronic anchor-blondes screaming into microphones over
the sound of the wind. Weather sites on the Web eliminate the media middleman,
and isn't that the point?

            (To respond, click
here.)

            
               SUBJECT:
Conservatives w/ compassion are "wimps"?

            
               FROM:
Mike

            
               RE:
            

            

               DATE: Thu Sept 23 

            A conservative shows genuine compassion and he gets
called a wimp!? Maybe he should have called a news conference and told the
wounded to "put some ice on it." Here's a news flash: Conservatives are human
too. They have wives, children, pets; they love and make love, have gardens, go
to church and make friends.

            (To respond, click here .)

         
      
   
