
   
   
      
         
            What Did You Do in the War, Junior?

            The
draft issue is back. On July 4, the Los Angeles Times reported that George W. Bush avoided Vietnam by being admitted to
the Texas Air National Guard with unusual speed. That same day, the Dallas
Morning News presented Bush's side of the story. Did Bush use his connections
to dodge the draft? That depends on the standards by which his conduct should
be measured, which in turn are the subject of a vigorous spin war.

            
               1.
Morality vs. legality. The moral argument against sons of the elite who
joined the Guard to avoid Vietnam is that they jumped the line--that they used
their connections to leapfrog ordinary Guard applicants, leaving those
applicants to be drafted into Vietnam to die in their place. The Times
focused its story on the alleged unfairness of Bush's "quick" admission but
concedes that "there is no evidence of illegality or regulations broken to
accommodate Bush's entry and rise in the service."

            Since
the moral question is tricky but the legal question is open and shut, Bush's
supporters want to focus on the latter. So far, the media are obliging them.
"If [Bush] didn't do anything illegal or didn't break any regulations, how
important or serious is this allegation?" asked Tim Russert on NBC's Meet
the Press . Richard Serrano, the author of the Times piece, replied
that "it's serious in the sense that others probably had to go into the regular
service because of the favoritism that he got." But that answer didn't cut it.
Fox News' Brit Hume concluded that "no rules or laws were broken," and even
Bush's fiercest rival, Steve Forbes, confined the issue to whether "anything
illegal was done."

            
               2.
Preference vs. qualification. The Times constantly compares Bush's
experience to that of other Guard applicants. "Although getting into the state
units was difficult for most others, Bush was soon in the Guard," says the
Times . Bush got a "special commission making him an instant second
lieutenant" and "was able to jump into the officer ranks without the
exceptional credentials many other officer candidates possessed." The
News adds that in the pilot aptitude section of the written test for
pilot trainees, Bush scored "in the 25 th percentile, the lowest
allowed for would-be fliers." In short, when Bush's merits and treatment are
examined relative to other applicants', his story looks fishy.

            Bush's
response is to shift the analysis from a relative to an absolute standard, from
whether others were more qualified or more slowly admitted to whether he met
the Guard's minimum "qualifications." "I met all the criteria, I met all the
qualifications," he told reporters who asked about the Times story July
4. His spokeswoman used the same term: "The military found him absolutely
qualified to be commissioned."

            
               3.
Treatment vs. string-pulling. Bush's enemies want the story to be about how
he was treated. Bush wants the story to be about whether he pulled strings.
That's because if your dad is the local congressman, you can get special
treatment just by introducing yourself. You don't have to pull strings. The
Times says Bush "received favorable treatment," and "doors were opened"
for him. Note the passive voice. The Times found "no sign that political
influence helped Bush along," and the News adds, "Officers who
supervised Mr. Bush and approved his admission to the Guard said they were
never contacted by anyone on Mr. Bush's behalf." For the pundits, that ends the
discussion. "The favoritism was all on the side of the military reaching out to
him rather than anything he or his father did," observed Hume. ABC News' Sam
Donaldson agreed: "I am sure he got preferential treatment. But what is he
supposed to do? [Say] 'My name is Gonzalez, not Bush?' " No strings, no
story.

            The
question pundits are too coarse to contemplate is whether there's a zone
between passive innocence and active manipulation. The Guard official to whom
Bush applied for admission told the Times that Bush mentioned his father
right away: "He said he wanted to fly just like his daddy." Bush's spokesman
pointed out that Bush, "because of his circumstances, made an ideal subject for
National Guard publicity." In short, Bush knew the deck was stacked in his
favor. All he did was play the cards.

            
               4.
Location vs. job title. Bush flew fighter jets in Texas. Al Gore served as
an Army reporter in Vietnam. Gore's location sounds more manly, but Bush's job
title looks better. The Times focuses on Bush's location, warning that
he "will be asked to explain how he did not come to serve in America's least
popular war." To underscore the Texas-Vietnam comparison, the Times
notes that one of Bush's rivals, Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., "has joked that as
a prisoner of war in North Vietnam he slept more soundly knowing that Bush was
defending the shores of Texas from invasion." On Meet the Press , E.J.
Dionne of the Washington Post , a Gore sympathizer, suggested that the
difference between Gore and Bush is that one "went to Vietnam" and one "did
not."

            Bush
has several weapons with which to combat this characterization. Since pundits
are journalists, they find Gore's portrayal of his journalism as military
service somewhat preposterous. Gore served "as a reporter, not as a combatant,"
observed Fortune 's Jeffrey Birnbaum on Fox News Sunday . Gore
"went to Vietnam, but as journalist, not as an infantryman," agreed USA
Today 's Susan Page on CNN's Late Edition . Bush also points out that
he tried to volunteer for a Guard program that sent several pilots to Southeast
Asia. (The News indicates that he was rejected because he was clearly
unqualified. Whether Bush deserves admiration for volunteering or deserves
suspicion because he knew he would be rejected can be debated.) But Bush's most
effective point is that he was, as he told reporters July 4, "a fighter pilot."
Bush never had to fight, but he did fly fighter jets, and "fighter pilot"
sounds a lot better than "reporter."

            
               5.
How you served vs. whether you served. Investigative journalists and
critics of Bush assume that his Guard service should be compared to an
alternative scenario in which he served in Vietnam. Bush wants to highlight a
different alternative--dodging the draft and ducking military service
altogether--against which the course he chose looks better. In Vietnam, he told
the Houston Chronicle this year, "[y]our options either were to avoid
the draft or sign up, and I signed up." After the Times story broke this
weekend, Bush told reporters, "I asked to become a pilot," "I served my
country," and "I'm very proud of my service."

            Bush
has several decisive advantages on this question. Most people of his generation
know someone who avoided the draft in a less respectable way than Bush did.
Meanwhile, voters younger than Bush know little of the military and therefore
tend to be impressed that he served at all rather than concerned with how he
served. Moreover, Gore's patron, Bill Clinton, overshadows the campaign as a
constant reminder of the contrast between serving and not serving. Clinton used
the Reserve Officers Training Corps to escape the draft, then backed out and
never served in the ROTC. Against this background, Bush's Guard service looks
noble. "A lot of other people did not do nearly as much as he did," argued
Steve Roberts on Late Edition . "He did something honorable. At least he
actually joined the military." Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, a Bush rival, agreed:
"Here is a fellow that went and flew airplanes and learned to be a pilot and
was prepared to go, if he had to go. That is a lot."

            Who's
winning the war over the draft? Since the talking heads agree with Bush's
competitors that it's a "non-story," Round 1 goes to Bush. But the contest
between the pro- and anti-Bush spins is less interesting than the reality that
lies between them. A pilot who flew with Bush in Texas told the News
that their service was "a non-threatening way to do your military, get paid
well for some long shifts, and feel good about your own involvement. ... It was
a cushy way to be a patriot." Perhaps the story worth telling about Bush's
military service is not whether it was cushy or patriotic, but how it was
both.

         
      
   
