
   
   
      
         
             Culture War

            After the Columbine tragedy, one faction held guns
responsible for the slaughter, and another blamed the culture. Since the guns
question has been debated into the ground, I confine myself here to the culture
question.

            The culture that was blamed for Columbine was never
clearly defined. Its nature was suggested by terms such as "the '60s,"
"liberal," "permissive," "sex and violence," and "Hollywood, television, and
video games," and it was the media that bore most of the complaint. Hollywood
was told to clean up its act, and theater owners were urged to enforce the
ratings system, to avoid exposing young people to sex and violence.

            Then along comes the Midwest assassin, who earlier
this month killed a black man and a Korean-American man and wounded nine other
blacks, Asians, and Jews (coming out of a synagogue). This time around, nobody
is blaming the culture--at least, not the culture that supposedly caused
Columbine.

            The Midwest killings
were categorized as "hate" crimes. Hate crimes include crimes not only against
blacks, Jews, and Asians but also against gays, "the government" (Oklahoma
City), and the technological age (the Unabomber). They are not crimes against
an individual known personally to the perpetrator or against whom he has a
grievance. (If a man shoots his brother-in-law that is not called a hate crime,
although there is probably hate involved.) They are crimes in protest against
the culture, intended to make a statement of their hostility to the
culture.

            Of course, nobody can blame the '60s culture or Hollywood
for these crimes. The '60s' slogan was "Make love, not war," and the Hollywood
culture is a culture of acceptance--of blacks, Jews, and gays. In fact, it is
that very culture of acceptance that infuriates these madmen.

            The Columbine killers, on
the other hand, shot people they knew, some of whom they had real or imagined
grievances with. But they also fancied themselves as Nazis. They were making a
deadly statement against the American dream, of respectable, middle-class,
suburban life. To that degree Columbine was also a hate crime.

            According to one poll, in the two weeks bracketing the
Columbine incident, the percentage of Americans who thought that the country
was on the wrong track rose from 49 percent to 60 percent. This remarkable
swing is commonly attributed to shock over the shooting. While I can understand
the national bewilderment the event caused, I cannot understand why it should
be interpreted as a judgment against the way the country is going. Two
estranged young men who acquired Nazi attitudes--which they certainly did not
get from Hollywood--made a deadly protest against the way the country is going.
This is not a sign that something is going wrong, except for the ready
availability of guns.

            If you compare the
murders linked to hate crimes with the murders linked to street crimes, the
most obvious thing you notice is how the number of street killings dwarfs that
of hate killings. But despite this, street killings do not cause revulsion
against the way America is going, though they may more legitimately raise a
question about the media than hate killings do because they more resemble
Hollywood depictions. Most cinemaland murders are committed by bad guys whose
motives are pragmatic, not symbolic. Also, these murders are marked by
indifference: The perpetrator does not value life, and he feels neither guilt
nor glory at having killed someone. The hate killer values life and thinks he
is committing a great deed and making a grand statement when he kills.

            Despite these similarities, one should be cautious about
assigning Hollywood responsibility for the culture in which street crime
flourishes. The screen is not the only place--and probably not the most
influential place--where young people acquire ideas of what is acceptable
behavior. They learn these ideas at home, in school, at the shopping mall, on
the street corner, and everywhere else where they observe life and people.
Young people in the ghetto don't have to go to the movies to hear shooting.
What they see on the screen seems real to them because it conforms to what they
see in life. Otherwise it would have no more effect on them than seeing the
feud and swordplay between the Montagues and the Capulets.

            When I was a boy in
Detroit we used to go to the movies on Saturday afternoon and watch the
violence between cowboys and Indians. We knew it wasn't real. Though we played
cowboys and Indians in the street, we did not kill any real Indians. The
reaction of Native Americans to those movies may have been different.

            There is something in American attitudes that condones or
glorifies murder, at least more so than in other countries. If we want to
change that attitude, Hollywood should not be the main place we look.
(Remember, most of the rest of the world watches Hollywood movies without
engaging in orgies of violence.) We have to try to do something about the real
world in which children are growing up. The crucial part of that world is the
home where parents relate to children. What to do about that, I don't know.
Probably there is little that public policy can do. But the fixations on the
media and on the '60s culture do not help in the search for remedies.

            It would also help our thinking if we could avoid
the "sex and violence" mantra. Sex on the screen, or the abundance and
explicitness of it, has only a distant connection, if any, with the homicides
that worry us. Context isn't everything, but it's worth noting that the TV
channel that shows the most violence is the History Channel, with its endless
replaying of World War II: I have not heard anyone say that is an encouragement
to crime.

         
      
   
