
   
   
      
         
            A Shot From the Pews

            
               Cross Check
            

            I agree with most of Steve Chapman's conclusions in
"." I will say unashamedly that I am a "born-again" Christian. But I will also
say that you are very correct in pointing out the basic statistical mistake of
implying causation from correlation. I think it is naive to think that simply
posting copies of the Ten Commandments is going to solve the nation's crime
problem.

            I also think it is damaging to the faith to try and
"use" religion to solve social problems. God becomes a means to an end instead
of an end in Himself. He is not a magical potion that you can sprinkle on your
problems to make them go away. I do think that genuine faith and a relationship
with God will cure violence and murder and such; however, imposing religion on
people is not the answer. I think one of the reasons there is a positive
correlation between religion and crime in the States is because large portions
of so-called "Christians" in this country are nominal at best.

            Also, I think that the
number of churchgoers in a given area is relatively inconsequential in this
whole equation. If someone could prove that it was the Christians committing
all the crimes, then we would have an interesting situation. But if that is not
the case, then it makes no difference how many Christians there are. The real
issue then becomes the motivations for the population of criminals, which are
things such as the social structure and the justice system.

            -- Jonathan
Minter
            

            
Lynchburg, Va.

            
               In Order To Form an
Imperfect Union
            

            It is wrong, I think, to suggest, as William
Saletan does in "Frame Game" (""), that our current health-care crisis is
caused by the unreasonable expectations of the people who seek medical care.
The reason "patients expect better care than they're willing to pay for" is
that they have already paid for it. Medical advances are made through
government subsidy: directly, through tax-supported universities, or
indirectly, in the form of tax write-offs for private-sector research and
development. The hospitals that we go to and our doctors practice in
essentially all receive some level of governmental funding. Our doctors
attended medical school with the aid of federally guaranteed student loans or
outright grants. We paid for the ability to provide the best care in the world,
and we continue to pay far more, in terms of percentage of gross average annual
individual income, than any other Western society.

            Most of the doctors I know are hard-working,
compassionate professionals. They certainly provide an essential service. They
all make a ton of dough, and I don't know anyone who begrudges them that. The
current medical payment scheme in the United States makes the very best medical
care available but is also an active barrier to many who seek basic care and
cannot afford it. Radical reform is clearly called for but will never happen as
long as free-market principles control access to this service. Our current
dilemma has come about because we tried to shift cost control away from the
service providers. This has had the effect of driving many capable physicians
out of their own practices and into exactly the kind of alienating, impersonal,
bean-counting HMO setting that has caused the American Medical Association to
try and become a union.

            It is sad that the best
technical health-care system in the world is delivered so poorly that the
professionals charged with caring for us feel compelled to sacrifice their
independence in this way. Unionization is a bad idea that will only make things
worse.

            -- William C.
Altreuter
            

            
Buffalo, N.Y.

            
               Mistaken
Condemnation
            

            Eric Alterman's in your letters column of June 30
that my colleague Harvey Klehr and I felt the need to "condemn" a Jacob
Heilbrunn article in the New Republic is mistaken. We disagreed with a
judgment Heilbrunn advanced in his essay, but disagreement is not condemnation.
Indeed, that one disagreement aside, we have a very high regard for Heilbrunn's
writings. In view of the fact that in the letter to which Alterman referred, we
clearly expressed our appreciation of other remarks Mr. Heilbrunn made in his
essay, no responsible commentator could use the characterization used by
Alterman.

            
-- John Earl Haynes
            

            
Kensington, Md.

            
               
                  Eric Alterman
replies: I dunno. This seems a semantic issue at best. Heilbrunn's article
attacked Yale's Annals of Communism series and the decision by its editorial
director, Jonathan Brent, not to offer Heilbrunn's old professor, Vladimir
Brovkin, to edit a series of books about the Gulag. He then accused Brent and
Yale of having "caved" in to the ethos of "historical correctness" governed by
"revisionists who dismiss as cold war humbug the notion that the Soviet Union
was a totalitarian country."
            

            
               Klehr and Haynes wrote a strong letter in
support of Brent's "editorial leadership" and of Brent himself. They maintained
that he had "steadfastly insisted on the academic integrity of the series and
staunchly defended [their] work." In other words, virtually everything
Heilbrunn wrote about Brent and his alleged cowardice--as well as his many
criticisms of the Yale series--was wrong. Haynes says this does not constitute
a "condemnation." Fine, I'll grant it if he feels the distinction to be an
important one. I only hope no one ever decides to demonstrate his or her "high
regard" for my writings in this peculiar fashion.
            

         
      
   
