
   
   
      
         
            Good News for Middling English Majors

            

               
                  Editor's note: This week Slate introduces
an improved version of "The Fray," our reader feedback forum. The Fray now
features threaded discussions of Slate articles. If you'd like
to discuss something you've read on the site, scroll to the bottom of that
article and click on "Post a Message." (You can also click on "Comment on This
Article" from the Utilities dropdown at the top and bottom of a page.) Or, if
you'd rather just lurk, click on "Read Messages" at the bottom of a page to
find out what everyone else had to say. In the future we'll incorporate the
most insightful postings from The Fray into "E-mail to the Editors," and
eventually we'll replace E-mail to the Editors with "The Best of the
Fray."
            

            
               Why Grades Don't
Matter
            

            While Steven E. Landsburg's "" gives interesting
insight into the psychology of grade inflation, his economic angle is warped at
best. As someone two years out of Dartmouth College, I can tell you that never
have my college grades or those of any friend with whom I've spoken had the
slightest effect on salary. Even those friends of mine who interviewed with
large financial firms while still in college were never accepted or rejected on
the basis of their grades. Anderson Consulting and Smith Barney seem much more
interested in hiring middle-of-the-pack English majors who happen to have good
interpersonal skills and dedication than math whizzes with 4.0 GPAs.
Interviewing talent and "well-roundedness" (that bugbear of American
universities) make the difference.

            This is not to say that academic achievement isn't
important to employers. But it is ludicrous to suggest, as Landsburg does in
his Mary and Jane example, that employers assign tasks and corresponding
salaries based on grades. Although employers often do, for better or worse,
give respect to which college an employee graduated from, grades simply do not
enter the picture. Moreover, employees themselves in their late 20s--those who
were in the graduate's very position a few years ago--do most of the
interviewing and hiring, especially in these larger companies. Wise to what
really makes a good employee at that age, they're much more likely to hem and
haw about that summer you spent watching the tube instead of taking a good
internship than they are to have doubts about your D in organic chemistry.

            Even if grades did have
the link to salaries, which Landsburg suggests they do, no professor with
integrity would let this enter his mind. Speaking of the role of the teacher in
his book What Is Called Thinking? Martin Heidegger tells us what any
good teacher from kindergarten on up knows: "The real teacher lets nothing else
be learned than learning." No, not knowledge for its own sake, but knowledge
for the sake of the individual's intellectual, moral, spiritual, even physical
growth. The doctor, lawyer, or business woman is always more professional for
continuing to pursue these issues outside of his or her profession. This seed
can be sown by good professors regardless of what kind of grades they give. To
follow Landsburg's reasoning would not only be to turn America's best
universities into technical schools, it would be to ignore this fundamental
purpose of higher education.

            -- Peter Campion
            

            
Cambridge, Mass.

            
               Is the Pope a
Heretic?
            

            I have just read Michael McGough's "." It seems to
me to really miss the point. The real point is that his papacy dramatically
diverges from that of the past 1,650 years, and his theology is anathema to a
great deal of theology that has been considered Catholic for 1,650 years. It is
this divergence from traditional theology's most basic teachings that offends
traditional Catholics so much. The insistence on Mass in the vernacular is by
far the least objectionable to me: It is the new Mass itself that offends
deeply against the age-old traditional teachings, not the vernacular languages.
There are many too many divergences to mention here. They range from
theological importance of the first magnitude to common practices that
traditionally supported the theology being taught.

            This pope often violates what was taught for many
centuries as holy tradition without any kind of respect for those of us who
lived under the old church. It was a mortal sin to worship with non-Catholics
before Vatican II. Mind you, not just something wrong, but something that would
separate you from God and send you to hell if death came before confession.
Now, the pope himself attends Lutheran and Jewish services as a participant!
You can see why many of us do not see this as progress!

            If traditionalists
sometimes sound bitter, it should not be something at which to wonder: From
being called all sorts of unpleasant names, to overt discrimination, public
humiliation, and ostracism, traditional Catholics have every reason to distrust
and dislike the Vatican II apparatus. And count me among those who do.

            -- Rev. Fr. Andrew R. L.
Jeffers, O.S.B.
            

            Priest and director, St.
Athanasius the Great International English School

            Terre
Haute, Ind.

            
               Rating
Nixon
            

            In "," David Greenberg
writes: "In the latest ranking of presidents by professional historians,
conducted by Arthur Schlesinger Jr. (admittedly no Nixon fan), RN finished in
the bottom tier, alongside Andrew Johnson, Ulysses Grant, Warren Harding, and
Herbert Hoover. Twenty of 32 historians surveyed judged Nixon's presidency a
'failure'; none called it 'great.' " This seems to say more about the
historians than about the presidents. I suspect that someday historians who
were not Nixon's contemporaries and didn't feel the emotions of that era will
be able to give a more objective ranking--perhaps higher, perhaps lower.

            -- C.W. Bergman
            

            South
Windsor, Conn.

            
               Back When
Everything Was Black and White ...
            

            Just read the "Moneybox"
"Blair Witch 's Lessons for Hollywood" that says the reason the movie was
so big was because of the word-of-mouth theory and the slow, gradual opening. I
do not deny that this was the perfect way to sell the movie, considering
the scary witch story behind it; however, I think James Surowiecki is missing
the whole point. Please remember what is going on in the movies today. I go to
the movies and see a bunch of blood, guts, and sex. I love black-and-white
movies because back then, people were required to write a story that had
meaning and hire actors who could act . The writing was so good
that there was no need to shock the audience with eye-catching filth and
stupidity. This movie was good because it was believable and because it was
psychological instead of eye candy. Think about that for a change.

            -- Jennifer
Vaslik
            

            Chicago

         
      
   
