
   
   
      
         
            What Would Buddha Do?

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My significant other
is driving me berserk. He changes religious beliefs like some people change
clothes. This might be only peculiar (and therefore tolerable), but he expects
me to accompany him, as well as get into the philosophy of the moment. I really
do not have time for this and, to be truthful, do not share his passion for
religious theory. I gave it a try but can no longer play along. How would you
recommend I deal with this? (And him?)
            

            

               --Pulling My Hair Out in Chicago
            

            Dear Pull,

            Your trendy friend sounds like a handful. If you
are interested in maintaining the relationship, you need to spell out that
lovers need not share every interest, and that his searching for new belief
systems is particularly tiring for you.

            It would be helpful if
you had a religion that you started with and said you wished to retain but,
failing that, tell the theologian that you are making a new beginning: that he
has your blessings, pardon the expression, to pursue the religion of his choice
... alone. If he throws it up to you that you used to go to all the various
services with him, tell him that was Zen, this is now.

            
--Prudie, individually

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               My wife of eight
years is starting to make me wonder if she is mature enough to even be married.
She spends more time with her girlfriends, most of whom are from high school,
than she does with me. (We have no children.) I wind up doing many things alone
on weekends and in the evenings because she always has plans with "the girls."
My wish is to make this marriage work because I love my wife, but I am feeling
like second fiddle to a gang of girls. Any ideas?
            

            

               --Stumped
            

            Dear Stump,

            Do you know the saying, "We're all grown-ups here?"
Well, that seems not to be the case in your life. Your wife sounds immature to
the max. Prudie is at a disadvantage, however, not knowing the details and the
dynamics of your marriage.

            Just regarding the
complaint about reliance on girlfriends, though, Prudie suggests you have a
loooong and serious heart-to-heart with your wife, outlining your disturbance
with her choices. Ask if she wishes to be married. Ask if she has complaints
about you . If she is willing, a couples therapist might be helpful. One
way or the other, you have to resolve the situation.

            
--Prudie, amicably

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My father was married once before my mother and
has three children from his earlier marriage. I am 25, and my stepbrothers are
in their late 30s. All three are intelligent (two are lawyers, one has an MBA)
but have never found themselves in stable situations. All three have been
bankrupt at one point during the past three years. All three apportion a great
deal of guilt to my father, who did not win custody of them when they were
younger. Their mother was not a good one, and I recognize that they have
emotional scars. However, my father never fails to bail them out of a financial
crisis. While my father has done well, he is by no means wealthy. I know he has
dipped into his retirement fund several times to help my siblings out.
            

            
               What bothers me is
that while my childhood was far more "normal," I demonstrate more
responsibility in my financial obligations (school loans, etc.) than my elder
siblings and, frankly, would be embarrassed to ask my father for money because
I couldn't get a handle on life. My father came from a poor family and I would
like him to enjoy his retirement. Is it appropriate for me to say anything to
him regarding this matter? I do love my elder sibs but feel they are exploiting
my father with guilt.
            

            

               --Concerned in D.C.
            

            Dear Con,

            It sounds as though you have your father's
well-being at heart, so you might gently engage him in a conversation about
your concerns. Do articulate that you do not feel competitive with your
half-brothers and try to bring up the question of "making reparations" out of
guilt. Also mention that bailing out these boys may not be in their best
interests. He cannot help but be touched if you tell him of your concerns for
his comfortable retirement. He may be amenable to what you have to say--or he
may not. Once you've brought the subject up, however, know that you can take it
no further. In the end, it is his money ... and his guilt.

            It is admirable that you
regard responsibility in a different way than the three boys you write about.
It is interesting, too, that the two lawyers and the MBA display financial
incompetence. Prudie recommends, by the way, that you not bring up this subject
with your brothers. That way lies fireworks.

            
--Prudie, gingerly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               This is going back a
bit, but I was struck by the letter from . As a psychology professor, a
previous psych major, and an avocational singer, I agree with your advice to
"Go for it" but think there's yet another option that Carpe should consider
before running away from home or from college. Since Carpe is already enrolled
in college, why not take a minor in music or even double major in psychology
and music? Surely Mom and Dad can't object to that, but more important, Carpe
has this wonderful opportunity to increase her musical skills, develop her
talent, and make important connections that could lead to jobs. Why not take
the four years to do all that and then "run away" to pursue her dreams, fully
prepared?
            

            
               --Sincerely,
            

            

               One Who Has Her Singing Dream and Her Psychology Job
            

            Dear One,

            Why not, indeed? What
you suggest is very sound advice, and Prudie thanks you for being a Prudie.

            --Prudie, rationally

         
      
   
