
   
   
      
         
             Fatal Attraction 

            The struggle among Patrick Buchanan, Donald Trump,
Jesse Ventura, and Ross Perot's lieutenants for control of the Reform Party
only looks like the clash of celebrity egos. Actually, the Reform Party is
splitting along the fault line between American progressivism and American
populism--rival traditions represented most recently by presidential candidates
John Anderson (1980) and George Wallace (1968). Natural allies and
natural enemies, progressives and populists simultaneously attract and repulse
each other. In 1992, and to a lesser extent in 1996, Perot managed to unite
both Anderson progressives and Wallace populists, but if history is any guide,
nobody will pull off that miracle in this election.

            John Anderson's progressive Republicanism belonged
to the distinctive political tradition of Greater New England--a territory that
arcs from Maine to the Pacific Northwest and was settled by
19 th -century Yankee Protestant settlers. The Yankee's secularized
Puritanism combines an enthusiasm for social reform--such as abolitionism,
Prohibition, women's suffrage, civil rights, eugenics, and the anti-smoking
crusade--with an often-priggish moralism and an apocalyptic horror of
"corruption." Most third-party movements have originated in Greater New
England. The name of one movement launched during World War I tells the whole
story: The Nonpartisan League.

            The Germans and
Scandinavians who settled in western Greater New England reinforced the secular
puritan ethos, although they were more likely to be socialists than the
Yankees, whose fear of corruption has often made them enemies of big
government. And Prohibition divided liquor-hating Northern Protestants from
beer-loving Germans. Even so, the Protestant pietism of many Germanic Americans
meshed neatly with the Puritan religious culture of New Englanders and their
western cousins, while socialist enthusiasms were easily merged with Social
Gospel Protestantism in the northern-tier states. It is no coincidence that
Anderson, the standard-bearer for the Yankee-Germanic tradition in 1980, is of
Swedish descent--nor is it a coincidence that in 1984, Anderson, formerly a
Republican, voted for Walter Mondale, a fellow Swedish-American.

            Southern populism, which earlier had produced Huey P. Long,
Georgia's Tom Watson, and the Southern supporters of William Jennings Bryan,
spawned George Wallace. Populism has more often found a home in the Highland
South than in the coastal "black belt," which has been dominated since colonial
times by the elitist conservatism of ruling-class Bourbon families and their
allies. Drawing on the traditions of the Scots-Irish settlers of Appalachia and
the Ozarks, Highland Southern populism encourages a tribal approach to politics
and rewards leaders who are flamboyant and bellicose. Andrew Jackson was an
early example of this type; Patrick J. Buchanan is its latest incarnation.

            Perot united Anderson
progressives and Wallace populists, but in an unstable pairing. Wallace's
supporters were social conservatives who favored activist government, as long
as it benefited them and their families, while Anderson's voters were social
liberals more concerned with good government than with expensive government.
The Wallace voters tended to be white working-class Democrats on their way into
the Republican Party; the Anderson voters by contrast were often former liberal
Republicans in transit to a new home in the Democratic Party.

            In the federal deficit, Perot found an issue that resonated
with both progressives and populists. In the minds of the skinflint
progressives, spending money one does not have is a form of moral depravity.
The deficit issue mobilized Jacksonian populists because it spoke to their
fears about a remote government dominated by the rich and powerful. Unlike
deficit reduction, the trade issue divided populist protectionists from
progressives, many of whom favor free trade.

            Thanks to his
deficit-reduction coalition, Perot won more votes in 1992 than any third-party
presidential candidate since "Bull Moose" Progressive Theodore Roosevelt in
1912. Perot's 19 percent of the total bettered Wallace's 13.5 percent in 1968
and Anderson's 7 percent in 1980. The core of Perot's support that year was New
England and Greater New England, with his best state--no surprise--Yankee
Maine. While his rhetoric was populist, his positions were progressive. The
progressives preferred government by experts to mob rule; Perot claimed that
"smart people" in Washington already had the plans, all that was lacking was
the will to implement them. Progressive reforms such as initiatives and
referendums, like Perot's vague notions of direct democracy, tended to bypass
legislatures and to concentrate plebiscitary power in allegedly nonpartisan
executives--the president, governors, city managers.

            Ignorant Perot critics called his technocratic approach
"fascism," when it was old-fashioned American progressivism. The progressives,
like their predecessors among the Mugwumps--the independent-minded Republicans
who spurned their party's presidential candidate in 1884--and Liberal
Republicans and Whigs and Federalists, have long favored fiscal conservatism.
Perot and his Concord Coalition allies, the New Englanders Paul Tsongas and
Warren Rudman, were as horrified by the federal deficit as the Mugwumps had
been appalled by the support of Bryanite populists for bimetallism and as the
Liberal Republicans, a generation earlier in the Gilded Age, had been
frightened by paper money.

            Perot, then, has the mind
of a Greater New England progressive but the heart of a Highland Southern
populist (his native Texarkana belongs to the western fringe of the Highland
South). If Perot's message appealed to Yankee and Nordic progressives in the
northern tier, his anti-establishment populism, and no doubt his flamboyant
persona, appealed to the kind of voters whose ancestors had cheered on Huey P.
Long and "Sockless Jerry" Simpson. Perot did very poorly in the conservative
South--but his showing was best in parts of the South that had voted for George
Wallace.

            With the federal deficit removed as an issue by 1996,
Perot's coalition of Snow Belt good-government reformism and give-'em-hell
hillbilly populism dissolved. The puritan crusaders of the North and the
alienated populists of the South may share common political enemies, but little
else. A century ago, Northern progressives such as The Nation 's E.L.
Godkin viewed populists such as William Jennings Bryan as barbarians, and they
returned the favor by viewing Mugwumps as enemies rather than as potential
allies.

            Then, as now, economic
policy divided rather than united the opponents of the two-party system. In the
1890s, Mugwumps such as Godkin crusaded for free trade and against tariff
protection for corrupt manufacturers. In the 1990s, northern fiscal
conservatives such as Anderson, Tsongas, and Rudman have backed free-trade
agreements such as NAFTA. For their part, Highland Southern populists tend to
rally around harebrained economic programs, elevating them from an instrument
of policy into a symbol of a crusade against their enemies. For the followers
of Andrew Jackson, the destruction of the Second Bank of the United States was
the panacea; for the disciples of William Jennings Bryan, the panacea was
silver coinage; for the followers of Ronald Reagan, supply-side economics was
the crackpot quick fix. For Buchanan, the symbolic economic issue is a revival
of high tariffs on manufactured imports.

            The factional war within the Reform Party, then, represents
the decomposition of the movement into its Northern progressive and Southern
populist wings. Buchanan can be described as a Southern populist, as can Pat
Choate and Ross Perot, whose populist sentiments appear to have triumphed over
their progressive principles. Former Colorado Gov. Richard Lamm, who attempted
to wrest leadership of the party away from Perot, is a classic Greater New
England progressive, as is former Connecticut Gov. Lowell Weicker, whose name
was circulated as a possible Reform Party nominee. Jesse Ventura is the product
of Minnesota political culture, with its mix of Yankee and Germanic reformism
and its long history of influential regional third-party movements such as the
Nonpartisan League and the Farmer-Labor party. And it's not stretching to
assign Donald Trump to the Northern progressive camp.

            If Perot backs Buchanan, then the capture of the
Reform Party by right-wing Southern populists is likely. At that point, the
progressives will do what they have always done best: They're never happier
than when they are demonstrating their moral, political, and religious purity
by heading for the exit and starting their own small but pure church or party.
New Englanders, fearing British corruption and tyranny, provoked the American
Revolution. A generation later, during the War of 1812, many New Englanders
considered seceding from the United States, whose federal government was then
dominated by Southern politicians. In the antebellum era, New England-based
Conscience Whigs denounced the North's pro-South Cotton Whigs as corrupt. After
the Civil War, high-minded liberal Republicans walked out on their partners,
the sleazy Stalwarts. In the early 20 th century, the Progressive
Republicans, led by Robert La Follette and Theodore Roosevelt, stormed out of
the GOP to form their own Progressive Party.

            So look for the Reform Party's displaced
progressives to declare the purity of their principles, denounce the corruption
of the populists who have taken over the party machine, and march out--to found
a new party, perhaps, from which, in time, they can secede.

         
      
   
