
   
   
      
         
            Rotten Eggs

            

               The Yankees won their 25 th World Series. Pitcher
Roger Clemens shut out the Braves into the eighth inning, leading the Yanks to
a 4-1 win. Commentators agreed that the Yanks performed even better than they
did last year and that the Braves did even worse than in recent post-seasons.
(David Plotz what baseball and politics have in common.)

            

               The Republican presidential candidates met for their second
forum. George W. Bush, who did not attend, still managed to draw more
attention than any of the candidates who showed up. (Click for Jacob Weisberg's
account of Alan Keyes' deranged performance.)

            

               Former Sen. Bill Bradley and Vice President Al Gore held their first
debate. Pundits awarded victory to: 1) Gore, who started early, stayed
late, and showered questioners with declarations of heartfelt warmth; 2)
Bradley, whose low-key manner made Gore look desperate; 3) the Yankees, because
nearly everyone watched the game instead. (See "" for a full assessment.)

            

               Armenia's prime minister and several other government leaders were
killed. Dozens of others were hurt when gunmen opened fire on
parliament during a speech by Prime Minister Vazgen Sarkisian. The assailants
finally surrendered after a day, claiming that they had only meant to scare
members of parliament and that shooting by government security guards had
forced them to fire back. The motives of the assailants, who yelled that they
were staging a coup and demanded to meet with the president, are unknown. The
Armenian government downplayed the incident, claiming that "the city and
country are quiet and the only events are taking place around the parliament
building." Western analysts suggested it further underscored the instability of
the Russian Caucasus region.

            

               The House ordered a 1 percent cut in federal spending. The
bill also provides $85 billion for labor, health, and education. Its Republican
drafters claimed that it doesn't use Social Security monies to fund federal
agencies. Congressional auditors disagreed, finding that the bill depends on
$43 billion in "creative accounting" and that the budget would have to be cut
by 4.8 percent to be balanced without Social Security funds. Democrats gloated
over the findings, and President Clinton threatened to veto the measure.

            

               The House voted to ban doctor-assisted suicide. Senate
approval is expected, but the president has not yet said whether he'll veto the
measure. If ratified, the bill will overturn an Oregon law that allows doctors
to prescribe lethal medication to terminally ill patients. Pro-euthanasia
advocates warned that this would make doctors wary of prescribing painkillers
to any patients, for fear of being accused of assisting a suicide.

            

               The online auction of models' eggs may be a fraud. Five of the
eight models have already dropped out, and journalists who tried to place bids
received no response. The proprietors' explanation: We're inundated with
responses and will be up and running shortly. The journalists' explanation: The
site is a sham, intended only to drive traffic to the owner's porn sites.
(William Saletan dissects the ethics of the sale in ".")

            

               Golfer Payne Stewart died in a plane crash. The Learjet
carrying him and five others lost contact with air-traffic controllers shortly
after takeoff from Orlando, Fla. It traveled on autopilot for 1,400 miles
before crashing in South Dakota. Investigators suspect that a sudden loss of cabin pressure caused the passengers to lose
consciousness or die early in the journey, but they say they are unlikely to
ever find the definitive cause. Stewart, a two-time U.S. Open champion and
member of five Ryder Cup teams, was recognized for his unconventional golfing
uniform--knickers and a tam-o'-shanter hat. The Orlando
Sentinel said Stewart's charisma, charm, and emotional play were his
true legacy.

            

               The Dow Jones industrial average is changing four of its 30
stocks. In: Home Depot, Intel, Microsoft, and SBC Communications. Out:
Chevron, Goodyear Tire, Sears Roebuck, and Union Carbide. Dow Jones' spin: The
new index reflects that the economy's future is in
high-tech . Investors' spin: Duh --what took you so long?

            

               Pat Buchanan and Donald Trump joined the Reform Party. After
criticizing the GOP openly for weeks, Buchanan announced that he would seek the
Reform presidential nomination, which would bring him $12 million in federal
funds. Trump, who said he would decide by March whether to run for president,
would likely spend $100 million to $200 million of his own money on a campaign.
Buchanan's spin: The Democrats and Republicans have become 
too similar and bland. Trump's spin: The Democrats and Republicans have
become too
polarized and extreme. Pundits debated whether the candidacies would: 1)
take votes from Republicans; 2) take votes from Democrats; or 3) create a
self-destructive battle for the soul of the Reform
Party. ("" outlines how the Reform Party selects its presidential nominee.)

            

               President Clinton signed a $268 billion military spending
measure. He has threatened to veto the five remaining appropriations
bills in the 2000 budget because of Republicans' proposed cuts in social
programs. Clinton criticized the military bill for including budget gimmicks
and pork-barrel projects but said that he could not "allow our national
security needs to be held hostage by this budget battle." Skeptics said the
president simply realized that contesting defense spending would be unpopular.
Republicans' spin: We're winning the budget fight by convincing Clinton to
compromise. The White House spin: Now it's your turn to compromise.

            

               Russia continues to bomb Chechnya. Hundreds of civilians have
died and at least 160,000 have fled the breakaway republic since Russia began
military operations there in the wake of Moscow terrorist bombings. Russian
troops are gathering near the Chechen capital of Grozny, though they have not
announced plans to invade the city. Chechen leaders called for peace talks, but
Russia rejected the offer, saying that Islamic militants would use a cease-fire
to rebuild their forces. The Chechen spin: Russia is trying to take us over
again. The Russian spin: No, we're simply preventing terrorist attacks on our
people. The American spin: Either way, Russia risks restarting a bloody
and futile war.

         
      
   
