
   
   
      
         
             The Love Bloat

            A day doesn't go by that I don't read in the press
... or some Microsoft customer sidles up to me ... or even my girlfriend says,
"Hey, Shuman, why is Microsoft software so bloated, so full of junk, sucking up
megs of space on my hard drive, hogging memory, and taking forever to load! The
toolbar buttons look like they were lifted from the cockpit of an F-16." My
grouchy critics are ramping up again as the very large Office 2000 software
suite hits the stores: "Shuman, why don't you and the other boy developers at
Microsoft write some trim and tight code?"

            Well, ladies and
gentlemen, I'm going to let you in on a little secret. The problem with
software today is not that it is bloated. The problem is that it's not
bloated enough!
            

            What is bloat? Bloat is the American dream: bigger, better,
and everywhere all at once. Supersize it! From VCRs to food processors to Ford
Expeditions, industry has historically provided consumers with features to
have , not necessarily to use. How many of you have programmed your VCR?
Minced carrots with your Cuisinart? Or gone off-roading in your SUV?

            Why should software be
any different? Do you really think software developers add features just for
fun, like some cackling tormentor? If only that were the case. Sadly, it is
you, the customer, who demands bloat, forever clamoring for new features.
Software companies take your wish lists seriously, and then make them happen.
It's like the violence-in-the-media argument: We hate it, but we buy it.

            Now, I don't deny that software is getting, um, alarmingly
large. A complete installation of Office 2000 requires 200 megabytes of
hard-disk space. This compares to the puny installation requirement of 5 megs
to 10 megs of hard-disk space for a similar array of DOS applications, circa
1988: WordPerfect, Lotus 123, dBase, Crosstalk, etc.

            But thanks to Moore's Law and its corollaries,
computer power continues to double every 18 months and prices keep falling.
Most computer users want to do fancy new things with their speedy
Pentium chips and mongolarge hard drives, not just run their old applications
faster. So if computers are getting more powerful, shouldn't we developers
harness that capacity?

            The anti-bloat whiners
would have you believe that Microsoft is coercing them into using our
extralarded software products! I call their bluff. The elegance of the Windows
98 operating system is that it runs practically every application from the DOS
days and all those goofy Windows 3.1 programs. If you want to run unbloated
legacy programs such as WordStar for Windows or Bitcom for DOS instead of new
applications, be my guest. (Also, you lovers of legacy applications should know
that one of the reasons Windows 95 and Windows 98 are so "bloated" is so that
they can run the old applications.)

            It is precisely because users can ignore the new releases
from Microsoft or Lotus or Corel that the software industry works overtime to
add new features to software, features that will convince users to spend $300
on an upgrade to do the same computing as they're doing now, only with more
bells and whistles and excitement. The day that Microsoft fails to convince you
to upgrade--i.e., to buy a product that the malcontents call bloated--is the
day that Redmond becomes a ghost town.

            Most bloatware complaints
come from users who own 2- to 3-year-old machines. They don't understand that
the new (bloated) versions of software are meant for the new 400-megahertz
machines and the wickedly fast machines to come in the next 18
months--including 1-gigahertz computers--not their Pentium 133 doorstops. Or
the complainers single out features that they never use, such as AutoSummarize
in Word or the Journal feature in Outlook (that can slow even the fastest
computer to a crawl). My advice to these complainers: Turn these features off
or ignore them.

            Having praised bloat, let me confide that when I worked on
the Microsoft Outlook team, bloat was my biggest enemy. A mean boss named Biff
routinely yelled hurtful things at me when I wrote indulgent, fat code, because
his bosses wanted programs to load and work quickly. Outlook SWAT teams swooped
down daily to reduce the size of our code. I remember endless hallway
discussions about how to balance the demand for lean and quick code against the
bloat required to add new and nifty features. (We were ultimately successful:
If you compare Outlook 2000 to the first version, Outlook 97, you'll see a vast
improvement in performance and stability. You'll also see a lot more cool
features, such as HTML mail and Preview Pane, to name but two.)

            The struggle between
concise code and bloated code plays out under the threat of a deadline. If our
software is occasionally too fat, we developers fall back on the same excuse
philosopher Blaise Pascal offered three centuries ago for his verbose letters:
"I have only made this [letter] longer because I have not had the time to make
it shorter."

            If you're truly anti-bloat, there's a whole subgenre of
dainty, low-bloat computers out there for you: The PalmPilot and Windows CE
handheld devices. They pack a lot a power into little boxes, but let's not kid
anybody: Sometimes you can make do with a bicycle, but other times you need a
car. A fast car. A fast car with a big noisy engine and a bone-crushing CD
sound system. A Bloatmobile.

            I began this column with the provocative thesis that
software isn't anywhere near bloated enough. By that I meant that if we
software developers were really doing our jobs instead of resting and vesting
our stock options, word processors would have already bloated into 99.999
percent reliable voice-recognition software. Your computer would have fused the
functions of your telephone, television, and fax machine into one seamless
whole. Your computer would have become the instantly searchable repository of
all your correspondence, financial transactions, data searches, and phone
conversations. Plus, it would be making smart connections between your data and
actions. For instance, it will tell me, "Hey, Shuman, you can get a better auto
insurance policy from GEICO." Or, "Hey, Shuman, lay off the fatty, fried food,
why doncha? You want to get bloated or something?"

         
      
   
