
   
   
      
         
            Bill Bradley's Air Ball

            Last
week, announcing his candidacy for president, Bill Bradley compared politics to
basketball, recalling his love of discipline, teamwork, and "the swish of the
net." Pundits ate up the speech . Paul Gigot called it "a character and ethics assault"
on Bill Clinton and Al Gore. Fred Barnes applauded Bradley for "slam-dunking"
the case against Gore. "It's the best speech I've ever heard him give," said
Margaret Carlson. A video replay of the speech, however, shows that the swish
was the sound of a jump shot missing the rim altogether. Bradley continues to
think up new ways of saying nothing while making it look like something.

            

               1. 
               Leadership. A speech can set a direction, define an
agenda, and explain what the candidate has done or would do. Instead of
fulfilling these responsibilities, Bradley simply asserts that he has fulfilled
or will fulfill them. He promises to act on his "convictions" but doesn't say
what they are. Rather than explain where America should go, he says he has "a
strong sense of where America is and where we need to go." Rather than define
America's role in the world, he pledges to "define more clearly America's role
in the world." Rather than challenge his listeners or tell them where he plans
to lead them, he says they deserve "leadership that respects the people as well
as challenges them." Rather than say what he would do, he promises, "There are
two kinds of politicians: those who talk and promise, and those who listen and
do. I know which one I am."

            

               2. 
               Depth. Bradley, like George W. Bush, says prosperity
isn't enough. "What we need in America is a deeper prosperity ... a prosperity
that makes us feel rich inside as well as out," he argues. "The leadership that
is called for at this moment goes beyond a presidency, and into every home and
heart. ... A leadership that understands the people's fears as well as their
hopes." By exuding profundity, Bradley shames those who wonder what it means to
"feel rich inside," and why this is more important than rising incomes and
declining unemployment. The problem isn't that Bradley's message is empty. The
problem is that you're too shallow to understand it.

            

               3. 
               Immeasurability. "The Dow Jones is at record
heights," Bradley concedes, but "such numbers are not the measure of all
things. They do not measure what is in our heads and our hearts. They do not
measure a young girl's smile or a little boy's first handshake or a
grandmother's pride. They convey nothing about friendship or the
self-fulfillment of helping a person in need. They tell us little about the
magic of a good marriage or the satisfaction of a life led true to its own
values." As 
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg , these things have nothing to
do with the presidency. But never mind. The point is that they can't be
"measured," and therefore, no one can disprove Bradley's suggestion that
they're lacking today and that his presidency would restore them.

            

               4. 
               Wholeness. Bradley speaks constantly of elusive
wholes. "America should be made whole," he says. He proposes to build "racial
unity," "confidence in our collective will," and "a prosperity that adds up to
more than the sum of all our possessions." "A team is not just about winning,"
he adds. "It's about shared sacrifice; it's about giving up something small for
yourself in order to gain something large for everyone. It's the same for our
country." What is the "something large"? What does "unity" entail? What does
our "collective will" call for? Bradley doesn't dwell on such coarse concerns.
The point is wholeness itself.

            

               5. 
               Things. Lest anyone doubt Bradley's substance, he
touts his record of doing "things." In the Senate, he "reached across party
lines to get things done. I attempted to do big things without ever losing
sight of the little things." If elected, he'll "do some of the big things that
need to be done. ... We will do fewer things, but they will be essential
things, and we will do them more thoroughly." And what exactly are these "large
and essential things"? Bradley cites only one example: the Works Project
Administration. How he would apply a Depression-era public jobs program to
today's roaring economy remains unclear.

            

               6. 
               Reality. To those who suspect him of empty idealism,
Bradley asserts a firm grasp of "reality." "Isn't it just common sense that we
make sure every child in America is covered by health care?" he asks. "Isn't it
just common sense that we protect our natural world from destruction, and do
what it takes to achieve racial unity? Isn't it common sense that all our
schools should perform well, and that more Americans should do better
economically? What others may call idealism is a common sense reality I know we
can achieve." How will Bradley realize these "realities"? He doesn't say. The
point is that he will "do what it takes." Really. It's just common sense.

            

               7. 
               Possibility. "The American Dream," Bradley argues,
"is not just an ideal to wish on. It should be a possibility available to all.
... The renewal of the American Dream has to shine so bright that we can dream
dreams we never thought possible before. ... I want that hope, that
encouragement, that sense of possibility to be a reality for everybody." Since
possibility can't be measured, no one can disprove Bradley's claim that the
American Dream is impossible for too many people today, and no one can disprove
him if he claims four years from now that he has made it possible again.

            

               8. 
               Poetry. Bradley relies heavily on metaphors.
Americans should "be fixing our roof while the sun is shining," he says. As
president, he pledges to "set the table for future economic growth," "put every
American on the train of that deeper, broader prosperity," and "urge Americans
to bridge the divide of prejudice." What any of this means is left to the
imagination. As a child, Bradley recalls, he learned from his father that
"character is where you find it." As a senator, "I tried to help people where
they lived their lives." As president, he will "invest in our common future."
So, if you want a president who invests in the past, finds character where it
isn't, and helps people where they don't live, vote for someone else.

            

               9. 
               Skepticism. "Our campaigns often end up doing the
very opposite of what they intend," Bradley laments. "Instead of engendering
hope and optimism, they breed mistrust and cynicism. Just last week in Iowa,
after I spoke about political involvement, once again making our nation better,
a woman came up to me and said, 'It all sounds so wonderful, if only it could
be true.' ... Yes, the American people have a right to be skeptical. But I have
a right to try to change that skepticism. ... I am trying to run a different
kind of presidential campaign. I'm calling us to renew our faith in each
other."

            
Skepticism, as Bradley defines it, is about whether a big-money political
system will let his vision come "true." This obscures a more sophisticated
skepticism about whether he has a substantive vision to begin with, much less a
serious plan to achieve it. Bradley isn't asking us to overcome that
skepticism. He's asking us to overlook it. And by planting what looks like a
bold idea--that the purpose of campaigning is to "engender optimism" and "renew
our faith"--he erases his obligation to tell us how he would govern. Bradley's
campaign, it turns out, isn't about the presidency. It's about campaigning.

            The
pundits can't believe Bradley has nothing to say. Some surmise that he's
cleverly waiting to unveil his platform. Others infer that he's already
mounting a brilliantly oblique attack on Gore. Both camps read insight into his
every remark. If you don't recognize his wisdom, you must not get what the
election is about. Does Bradley get it? Don't be a cynic. Ask not whether your
candidate is worthy of you, but whether you are worthy of your candidate.

         
      
   
