
   
   
      
         
            Clinton's Poverty '99 Tour

            

               President Clinton finished his poverty tour. He spent four days visiting
poor areas such as Appalachia, Watts, and the Mississippi Delta to "shine the
spotlight on places still unlit by the sunshine of our present prosperity."
Critics on the right dismissed the tour as a simplistic photo op, and Peter
Edelman, a former Clinton official who quit to protest the 1996 welfare reform,
called it cosmetic, arguing that Clinton "cannot admit the extent of the
problem because his Administration has a vested interest in the notion that
welfare reform has been a success." But the New York Times ' Jason
DeParle chides politicians and the press for their "Skepticism and Indifference," and the Washington
Post interprets the tour as a plug for a "Third Way" strategy of using tax incentives for businesses
to help the poor.

            

               Hillary Clinton endorsed Israel's claim to an "indivisible" Jerusalem.
She said this in a letter to a conservative Jewish group. This comes several
months after she antagonized some Jewish groups by endorsing the idea of a
Palestinian state. Cynics suspect she's reversing course to curry favor with
Jewish voters and organizations for New York's Senate race. The Washington
Post faults her not for reversing course but for endorsing what it deems an
unwise position . Meanwhile, the Chicago Tribune

               applauds her for "breaking the mold" by running for
the Senate, and the New York Times 
               complains that both her campaign travel and that of her
Republican rival, Rudolph Giuliani, "are being subsidized--by the taxpayers in
Mrs. Clinton's case and by private jet owners in Mr. Giuliani's." (Hillary's
campaign will probably end up paying for the subsidized travel says a

                  Slate
                ".")

            

               Serb rallies against President Slobodan 
               Milosevic are
growing. Unpaid Yugoslav army reservists have reportedly
joined the rallies. A news article in Thursday's New York Times played
up expectations "that Milosevic's survival in power might now be measured not
in years, but in months," but Friday's Times editorial throws
cold water on that hope.

            

               Tobacco companies lost another big liability case. A Florida jury found
them liable for damages for conspiring to conceal how addictive and harmful
cigarettes are. This increases the chances that the companies will have to pay
for treatment of smokers' health problems. The Chicago Tribune observes
that smokers, too, are responsible for knowingly
endangering their health. But the Washington Post argues that if the
companies don't pay for smokers' medical care, taxpayers will .

            
               ABC
Radio hired Matt Drudge. His weekly talk show, which has been running on
ABC's New York radio station for a year, will now be syndicated. ABC's spin is
that Drudge's show is part of ABC entertainment, not ABC news. But according to
the Washington Post , even ABC News President David Westin isn't buying that .

            

               Hillary Clinton 
               formed a 
                     a U.S. Senate bid from New York and
announced plans for a "summer-long listening tour" of the state. An
experienced Democratic fund-raiser sounded
the lonely note in a New York Times op-ed that star-struck local
pols have chickened out of the race in deference to a carpetbagger. Political
analysts noted that whatever her drawbacks, she appeals to soccer
moms.
               
            

            

               Ehud Barak was sworn in as Israeli prime minister after taking seven weeks
to assemble his government, which comprises two-thirds of the parliament.
Israeli Arabs complained that they were not included in the new Cabinet. The
ousted Likud Party, which tried to form a coalition with Barak but was rebuked,
accused the former general of being autocratic. In his inaugural speech, Barak
reached out to Palestinians and Syrians. The American press, including the
Washington Post editorial page, received Barak warmly. (For more on
Barak's reception, see ".")

            
               The
suspect in the Chicago-area racist killing spree committed suicide.
Benjamin Smith (who had changed his name to August because he thought Benjamin
sounded too Jewish) allegedly killed a black man and a Korean-American man and
wounded two other Asian-Americans and six Orthodox Jews before shooting himself
as the cops closed in. The media found plenty of racism and anti-Semitism in
Smith's past but little history of violence. The shooting spree has made the
World Church of the Creator, the hate group to which Smith was linked, the new
poster child of American racism.

            

               George W. Bush's military record is under fire. The Los Angeles
Times reported that he got "favorable treatment and uncommon attention" when he was admitted
to the Texas Air National Guard in 1968, thereby avoiding being drafted to
fight in Vietnam. However, the Times found "no evidence of illegality or
regulations broken to accommodate Bush's entry." The Dallas Morning News
reported that Bush nearly flunked the Air Force pilot aptitude test but "scored high as
a future leader." Bush says he "served my country" and got no special
treatment. Pundits and Bush's Republican rivals are largely blowing off the
story.

            

               Pete Sampras won Wimbledon. He has now set the record for
Wimbledon singles titles in this century (six) and tied the record for most
Grand Slam victories (12). Sports pundits likened him to Michael Jordan and
Jack Nicklaus. "In a
League of His Own," gushed the New York Times . However, the
computer that ranks tennis players by their recent
performance in tournaments elevated Andre Agassi, who lost the Wimbledon final,
to the top rank, with Sampras third. Lindsay Davenport won the women's title,
inspiring much chatter about American dominance on the Fourth of July.

            
               The

               U.S. women's soccer team advanced to the World Cup finals , beating
Brazil 2-0. The team now faces China, which crushed defending champion Norway
5-0. While soccer writers remain emotionally attached to the U.S. team, some,
such as ESPN's Jamie Trecker, fault their sloppy play and predict a
Chinese victory.

         
      
   
