
   
   
      
         
            FBLie

            

               The FBI 
               admitted lying about its actions in the Waco
disaster. After six years of denials, the agency confessed it had aimed
"pyrotechnic" tear gas at the Branch Davidian compound. "We continue to believe
that law enforcement did not start the fire," said the bureau. Janet Reno
commissioned an investigation and vowed to "get to the bottom" of the
misrepresentations. She admitted, "I don't think it's very good for my
credibility."

            

               The Bank of 
               New York may have laundered money for the
Russian mafia. Investigators are examining whether mobsters diverted
funds--including foreign aid--out of the country through an offshore network
built by a former International Monetary Fund official. According to the
Washington Post , Steve Forbes and George W. Bush are
criticizing Al Gore for naively accepting Russian pledges of economic
reform.

            

               Sprinter 
               Michael Johnson broke the world record for the
400-meter dash. The Associated Press tallied his long list of medals and
called him "the
most dominating track and field athlete of the 1990s." "I can do better,"
Johnson commented.

            

               The U.N. 
               war crimes tribunal caught a suspected Bosnian war
criminal. Gen. Momir Talic, the highest-ranking Serbian official to be
arrested so far, was seized in Vienna. The Washington 
               Post
predicts that the arrest will remind other suspected war criminals not to travel abroad .

            

               The Federal 
               Reserve raised short-term interest rates.
The hike was widely expected, but Fed officials surprised analysts by hinting
that they may raise rates again in October. The stock market, which had rallied
in anticipation of the move, remained stable, and bond prices inched up. The
New York Times warned Congress not to sabotage the Fed's actions by
passing tax cuts.

            

               American Airlines employees were caught smuggling drugs to the United
States. They stashed cocaine and marijuana in food trays and used their
security clearances to transport the contraband.

            

               China will prosecute the leaders of Falun Gong
               . A
government order excused most followers saying they had been brainwashed into
joining a subversive political organization.

            

               Samuel Sheinbein will serve a murder sentence in Israel. The American
teen-ager had fled to Israel after allegedly committing murder in Maryland. The
Israeli Supreme Court refused to let him be extradited back to the States.
Under a plea bargain, he will serve 24 years in prison. Prosecutors from both
countries decried the way he manipulated the discrepancies between the two
legal systems.

            

               Cleveland's school voucher program was ruled unconstitutional.
A Federal judge ruled that the program's publicly financed scholarships to
parochial schools violate the separation of church and state. City officials
wondered what to do with the 3,800 students who were scheduled to begin private
school classes today. Critics and supporters of vouchers wondered whether the
Supreme Court will finally address the issue.

            

               An earthquake in Turkey killed at least 18,000 and possibly as many as
45,000. The Turkish newspaper Hurriyet in effect charged
construction authorities with , and international papers roundly condemned
their shoddy building standards. The London Independent noted that while
the Turks "could assault the [Kurdish] PKK with US attack helicopters, for
Turkish civilians 24 hours after the earthquake." David Plotz explains why the
Turks to bury their dead. "" reports that the grassroots relief effort could
strengthen Turkish democracy.

            

               The Los Alamos whistleblower resigned. Colleagues had called
Notra Trulock's allegations against Wen Ho Lee racist and had said there was
not a "shred of evidence" against Lee . Trulock
countered that only three of the 12 initial suspects in the case were of
Chinese background and called a recent report exonerating the Clinton
administration "a whitewash."

            

               Hurricane Bret 
               hit Texas. Meteorologists had predicted
the storm would equal 1992's Hurricane Andrew in power and destruction, but
Bret hit the least-populated stretch of the Gulf Coast and was quickly
downgraded to a tropical storm.

            

               George W. Bush said he 
               hasn't used drugs since 1974.
After vowing never to discuss his drug history, he admitted that he had "made
some mistakes" but said he would have passed a 15-year background check in
1989. The media debated whether Bush's drug history should be probed.
Presidential contenders Gary Bauer and Sen. Orrin Hatch said Americans are
entitled to know about felonies committed by a candidate. Time 's John
Stacks argued that past dabblings with cocaine could make Bush's drug
enforcement policy hypocritical. Maureen Dowd chastised Republicans for protecting Bush's past
after years of investigating President Clinton's. William Bennett chastised
Democrats for investigating Bush's past after years of protecting Clinton's.

                  Slate
               's "" blasts the media for hounding Bush while
pretending that the story is driving itself.

            

               Three Japanese 
               banks will merge to create the world's
largest financial institution. Bank executives hope the union will
resuscitate the Japanese banking industry and thus the entire economy. The
New York Times hails the move as "a long-overdue effort to deal with the
realities of an overcrowded market, massive bad loans and woefully low profit
margins."

            

               Scientists 
               found evidence of a previously unknown ancient
primate. They say that a 15 million-year-old fossil of an African ape
provides new evidence of a common ancestor of gorillas, chimps, and humans.

            

               A study alleges 
               that 6 percent of Internet users are
addicted to being online. "Marriages are being disrupted, kids are getting
into trouble, people are committing illegal acts," warns its author. "If you go
back far enough, I guarantee that the defenders of cultural normalcy were
terrified by the invention of the toaster ," retorts Joel
Achenbach on the Washington Post Web site.

            

               French prosecutors 
               blame Dodi Fayed for Princess
Diana's death. The Guardian reported that Fayed commanded an intoxicated chauffeur to drive them and that
both could have survived had they been wearing seatbelts.

            

               Jenny Thompson swam 
               the world's fastest 100 - meter
butterfly race. The record, set by Mary Meagher in 1981, was the
second-oldest in swimming.

         
      
   
