
   
   
      
         
            The Vine

            
               (posted Wednesday,
Sept. 24)
            

            To hear Robert Pinsky read
"The Vine," click .

            The term "phallocentric"
finds one of its more ludicrously explicit instances in Robert Herrick's funny
little poem about a wet dream. In contrast to contemporary writing about sex,
however, the 17 th -century poet Herrick does not really put the male
organ--or any organ--at the center of his poem; for him, imagination--both
erotic imagination and literary imagination--is central. He smiles a little
mockingly, but affectionately, at his own body. The helplessness of Lucia in
this fantasy, and the idea of "Bacchus ravisht by his tree," may make us uneasy
on feminist grounds; but the corrective reality of the last line--the physical
fact of the helpless erection--corrects and undermines the imagination's unreal
fantasy of domination. The reality sunnily undermines the preposterous
fantasy.

            Herrick's
poem is a loose translation of a piece by the ancient Greek poet Anacreon. The
quality of civilization--and civilization accepting that it is made of and by
the human body, laughing at that body fondly, putting it in its place--is part
of what makes the poem interesting and appealing.

            
               --Robert Pinsky
            

            I dream'd
this mortal part of mineWas Metamorphoz'd to a Vine;Which crawling one and
every wayEnthralled my dainty Lucia .Me thought, her long small legs
& thighsI with my Tendrils did surprize;Her Belly, Buttocks, and her
WasteBy my soft Nerv'lits were embrac'd :About her head I writhing
hung,And with rich clusters (hid amongThe leaves) her temples I behung:So that
my Lucia seem'd to meYoung Bacchus ravisht by his tree.My curles
about her neck did craule,And armes and hands they did enthrall;So that she
could not freely stir,(All parts there made one prisoner.)But when I crept with
leaves to hideThose parts, which maids keep unespy'd,Such fleeting pleasures
there I took,That with the fancie I awook;And found (Ah me!) this flesh of
mineMore like a Stock , than like a Vine .

         
      
   
