
   
   
      
         
            Frankfort Laundromat

            By Mark
Halliday

            
               (posted Wednesday, July
9)
            

            To hear the poet read
"Frankfort Laundromat," click .

            Plastic chair, my eyes
closed, my father walked in,he had his bag of laundry. My laundry was in a
machine already, thirty-eight years prior to my death. Like memy father was
alive, he was eighty-one. We were bothsunburned and tired, this was after hours
on the beach,after the picnic, after when the Honda got stuck in sand,this was
after, then came the laundry; my father said"Did you get burned much?" I said
"Not too bad" and he put his clothes in a machine. Small box of Tide.My eyes
closed over The Burden of the Past by W. J. Bateand my eyes opened, hot
room smell of soap and hot fabric,and my father's shirt was dark pink, like a
heart.But my eyes closed, after the hours in the sun andbuying the stuff for
sandwiches for everybody andmaking sure Nick and the girls didn't really hurt
the seagullsand after Asa felt sick at lunch and after the humid tennisso my
eyes closed. Then opened apparently for more living,I put my laundry in a dryer
and my father was reading The New Republic --concentrating, with his
reading glasses,and caring about the truth, despite all the sun and all the
sandwiches and tennis and driving, and I lovedhim reading there in his dark
pink shirt. But my head wasgravitational to the floor, my chin to my neck, I
tried The Burden of the Past and closed my eyes thirty-eight yearsbefore
my death unless it comes sooner, and a fly shiftedfrom People magazine
to my father's shirt to a Certs wrapperand the fly was the word "and." Then my
clothes were dryand awfully hot and I held my face to a hot dry towel.I wanted
to live--to live enough; but to live all day--the sunburn and the
gravitation--but my father was stillreading. Therefore with the normal courage
ofany son or any daughter I folded my laundry and carried itout to the Honda
for more living, as my father went on reading for truth in his shirt dark pink
like a heart.

         
      
   
