
   
   
      
         
            My Other Self

            By Michael
Ryan

            
               (posted Tuesday, Oct.
22; to be composted Tuesday, Oct. 29)
            

            To hear the poem read by
the poet, click here or on the title.

            He could have smacked
youfor running out of gas, at midnight,in December, at a middle-of-nowhere
place,coasting a few sorry yards toward home on the shoulderas a passing
eighteen-wheeler's Hawaiian-sized wave of airwhomped the side of the car like a
two-story pillow.As we sat there immobile--the four of us (including him),as if
waiting for the show to begin at a surreal drive-in--he wanted to reach into
the front seatand bonk your heads togetherthe way the leader of the Three
Stooges didwhen the other two did something stupid.What had been road was now a
cold placewithout a house light in sight in the rural South.What had been a
passionate highway talkabout the culture's indifference to the artist's
workwould have been silence except for himgiggling at us, at how danger
dissolves discontentand flashes before us a life lost to pettiness,which we
soon start to lose again."Who said there are no neurotics in wartime?"he
planned to mock us with my voice, but when I got outto see where we were, he
didn't. He brooded in the car.He didn't feel the pleasure of a skyful of
starsso cold and clear when you look upits light illuminates your breath.Nor
was he worried about anyone but himself,being the only one with nothing to
worry about,not made of flesh. He was cryingI wanna go home inside the carlike
a child trapped in a junked refrigerator.

            This was one
time I felt exactly like him,as we three stood pondering our dilemma calmly,
maturely.And I did again when he yelled I'm scaredas the clunker with wide
headlights and bad muffler("Hell Wagon" or "Devil's Dream" no doubt inscribed
on the fender--voted Car Of The Year by escaped convicts and serial
killers)glided like a crocodile toward our throbbing, imported taillightsand
idled there. But when I approached the monsteralone--my other self was having
none of this action--what I found when the window inched downwas reality: a
couple with a baby asleep between them: country peoplewho still stop for anyone
in trouble,although they were wary. So was I,squinting into the warm darkness
in which they stirredas if to the bottom of a moonlit pool,as if what should
surface nonetheless was a gun in my face.They got back with a can of gas so
fastthe whole event took about the time of a Howard Johnson hamburger,and
probably less time than a Howard Johnson hamburger off a lifein which it's
almost impossiblenot to feel blessed. How lucky we are,we said on the smooth
way home again,trying to etch it into our brains.At least I was, since we had
ditched him back there

            thumb out
and grinning into the high beams of every approaching carbecause this one's got
to be the starlet in the Jaguarwrapped in a mink with nothing underneath.

         
      
   
