
   
   
      
         
            Waiting for the Barbarians

            
               (posted Wednesday, June
25)
            

            To hear Robert Pinsky read
"Waiting for the Barbarians," click .

            In this cunning, amusing
poem, with its punch line that never wears out, the Greek poet Constantine
Cavafy penetrates deep into the nature of political life. The atmosphere of
civic pride and civic hypocrisy, the mingled air of awe and contempt toward
governmental institutions, rings not the bell of cliché but many eerie
tintinnabulations: the gongs and chimes of public life, the distinct sounds of
what we say, what we know we mean and what we don't know we mean.

            
               --Robert
Pinsky
            

             

            What are we waiting for,
assembled in the forum?

               The barbarians are due
here today.

            Why isn't anything going on
in the senate?Why are the senators sitting there without legislating?

               Because the barbarians are
coming today.   What's the point of senators making laws now?   Once the
barbarians are here, they'll do the legislating.

            Why did our emperor get up so
early,and why is he sitting enthroned at the city's main gate,in state, wearing
the crown?

               Because the barbarians are
coming today   and the emperor's waiting to receive their leader.   He's even
got a scroll to give him,   loaded with titles, with imposing names.

            Why have our two consuls and
praetors come out todaywearing their embroidered, their scarlet togas?Why have
they put on bracelets with so many amethysts,rings sparkling with magnificent
emeralds?Why are they carrying their elegant canesbeautifully worked in silver
and gold?

               Because the barbarians are
coming today   and things like that dazzle the barbarians.

            Why don't our distinguished
orators turn up as usualto make their speeches, say what they have to say?

               Because the barbarians are
coming today   and they're bored by rhetoric and public speaking.

            Why this sudden bewilderment,
this confusion?(How serious people's faces have become.)Why are the streets and
squares emptying so rapidly,everyone going home lost in thought?

               Because night has fallen
and the barbarians haven't come.   And some of our men just in from the border
say   There are no barbarians any longer.

            Now what's going to happen to
us without the barbarians?These people were a kind of solution.

         
      
   
