
   
   
      
         
            Two Poems

            To hear the poet read the
first of "Two Poems," click .

            You said you had lunch in
Pittsfield, was it on North Street?That reminds me of when we lived on the
farm.It must be eighty years ago.We went to a one-room school house, didn't you
drive past it once?Each row was a different grade.I sat in the first seat of
the first row.The teacher's name was Miss Brown.She was so pretty.I wonder if
she's still alive.The day before we left the farm our cat disappeared.We
couldn't find her anywhere.I was sad for weeks.Three months later she showed up
at our new house in Pittsfield.Robbins Avenue.I can't think of the number
now.My sister was in New York.She didn't like the people she was living with so
she'd visit us.She fell in love with the young man who lived next
door.Maurice.Your uncle Maurice.They got married and moved to Cleveland.They're
both gone now, aren't they?You know, I can't picture her.A few years later we
moved to New York.This just jumped into my mind: I must have been three years
old.We were still in Russia.Mir.A small town, but famous for its Yeshiva.My
oldest brother--Joe--took our horses down to the river.They were the two best
horses in the town.My father had a phaeton.A beautiful old buggy.He was like a
taxi driver, he took people to Minsk.Or Vilna.That day he was at the
station.The passenger station, waiting for customers.My brother was still just
a kid.He must have been washing the horses in the river.I can remember--it was
a hot day.Maybe he was giving them a drink.And while I was watching the reins
got caught around a pole in the river.The horses kept twisting the reins around
that pole.It was slippery, the reins kept sliding down under the water and they
were pulling the horses down with them.I ran into town and got my father who
came running back with a knife in his teeth.He jumped into the river with all
his clothes on.He took the knife and sawed away at the reins until he finally
cut through.He saved the horses.I haven't thought about this in a thousand
years.It's like a dream: you get up it's forgotten.Then it all comes
back.Didn't I ever tell you?Look at me, I'm starting to cry.What's there to cry
about?Such an old, old memory, why should it make me cry?

            To hear the poet read the
second of "Two Poems," click .

            I'm writing
a poem about you.

             

            
               You are? What's it
about?
            

             

            It's the
story about your childhood, the horses in the river.

             

            
               The ones that nearly
drowned? ... I saved them.
            

             

            You told it
to me just a few weeks ago.

             

            
               I should dig up more of
my memories.
            

             

            I wish you
would.

             

            
               Like when I lived on the
farm and one of the girls fell down the well?
            

             

            Yes.

             

            
               I forget if it was Rose
or Pauline--it was a deep well.
            

             

            I remember
that story.

             

            
               Have you finished your
poem?
            

             

            I'm still
working on it.

             

            
               You mean you're
correcting it, with commas and semicolons?
            

             

            
Exactly.

             

            
               When can I see
it?
            

             

            As soon as
it's finished.

             

            
               Is it an epic?
            

             

            It's not
that long.

             

            
               No, I mean all my
thoughts, the flashes of what's going through my life, the whole family history
... living through the woe, the river and the water.
            

             

            I know.

             

            
               Will it be
published?
            

             

            I have to
finish it first.

             

            
               It's better to write
about real life, that's more important than writing something fanciful.
            

             

            I try to
write all my poems about real life.

             

            
               You see, the apple never
falls far from the tree.
            

             

            I guess
not.

             

            
               You're my apple.
            

             

            There's
probably a worm crawling through that apple.

             

            
               Then it's got something
sweet to chew on.
            

             

            Well,
you're my tree.

             

            
               Yes,
I'm your tree--you're an apple, I'm a tree.
            

         
      
   
