
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Feb. 22
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Feb. 22)
            

            Deng
Xiaoping's death leads the Economist . The cover story credits him with "wealth-creation on a scale unparalleled
in modern history," but concludes that China's prosperity depends on
establishing democratic freedom and the rule of law. The magazine also warns
that China's economic reforms might stall if it doesn't dismantle its
inefficient state enterprises, something Deng was unwilling to do. An article hints that Italy is moving toward--believe it or
not--political and economic stability. Also, a 26-page survey of India
determines that its economy is growing too slowly.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Feb. 23
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Feb. 21)
            

            "Clinton
Crazy" disparages the anti-Clinton conspiracy theorists--on the Internet, in
the fringe press, and on talk radio--who believe that Vince Foster was
murdered, that Clinton cronies dealt drugs, and that Clinton ordered hit jobs.
An article describes the horrific child abduction-molestation-murder case in
Belgium, and predicts that the government might fall on account of it. A
profile of Turkish Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan can't decide whether his
Islamism will radicalize Turkey (à la Iran) or clean up its corrupt government.
Also, the magazine issues its semiannual "Women's Fashions of the Times." As in
recent editions, "Fashions" depicts no models, only "real" women. Most of the
real women seem to be professional dancers.

            
               
                  New
Republic , March 10, and Weekly Standard , Feb. 24
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Feb. 21)
            

            Both pick the week of Deng's
death for their China cover packages (what timing!) and take a hard line toward
the Middle Kingdom, warning that the United States must discipline China now or
face a "rogue superpower" later. The New Republic , published the day
after Deng's death, denounces his legacy in an editorial: "In Deng's China, the
politics of communism was joined to the economics of fascism." Echoing a recent
Nation story, a TNR piece describes how former U.S. officials
(notably Henry Kissinger, Alexander Haig, and Brent Scowcroft) shill for U.S.
companies doing business in China. A long piece describes China's suppression
of Hong Kong, and another argues that China is, contrary to popular belief, a
small and difficult market for U.S. goods.

            The Standard ,
published a few days before Deng's death, covers similar territory. Sen. Jesse
Helms opposes granting China permanent MFN status, calling it a reward for bad
behavior. Several writers condemn Clinton's policy of "constructive engagement"
as appeasement: They favor economic sanctions instead. An article says the
United States must not sacrifice its democratic ideals "in order to sell a few
more Big Macs." And Hong Kong legislator Martin Lee deplores China's plan to
wipe out the colony's democratic government.

            Also in
the New Republic , Jefferson-mania continues: A long book review
celebrates the third president as a "great democrat," albeit a slave-owning
one.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , Feb. 24
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Feb. 18)
            

            "Echoes of the Holocaust" on
the cover details how Swiss banks have stonewalled attempts by Jews to retrieve
ancestral money. A sidebar recounts Switzerland's awful World War II history:
It turned away 30,000 Jews and served as Germany's money launderer, but has
denied responsibility for its actions. An article pegged to the three current
volcano movies says that the world's 550 active volcanoes threaten 500 million
people (including everyone at Slate headquarters!). Also, an article on the
averted American Airlines strike: Time cautions that walkouts are
possible at USAir, United, and Northwest, too.

            

               Newsweek 's cover story, "Mammogram War," agrees with the National
Institutes of Health advisory panel's findings: Mammograms don't really protect
younger women from breast cancer. Breast guru Dr. Susan Love contributes an
article, saying scientists must develop a breast-cancer blood test. Also,
more Madeleine Albright hoopla, this time about her Jewish ancestry: A
long article contends that family secrets usually do more harm than good ("lies
beget other lies"). Albright is interviewed: She says she is proud of her
family history, but vehemently denies having known about it. (For Slate's take,
see "Did She
Know?") Newsweek speculates about whether Democratic fund-raiser
John Huang was a Chinese spy. "A classic technique is to use Chinese nationals
who have made their fortunes abroad--and thus gained access to the ruling
establishments of capitalist countries."

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Feb. 24
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Feb. 18)
            

            The
cover story warns of the growing power of Mexican drug gangs,
which now control 70 percent of the U.S. cocaine trade, and whose intimidating
tactics and bribes have all but paralyzed the Mexican government. A sidebar claims that the gangs are buying off U.S. border guards,
paying them as much as $1 million to ignore a single drug shipment. U.S.
News profiles Trent Lott: Like the New York Times Magazine and the
Standard , it finds him ambitious and extremely willing to compromise.
Also, a photo essay on ultimate fighting, the popular, savage spectator
sport.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Feb. 24 and March 3
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Feb. 18)
            

            The
special issue on "Crime and Punishment" contains more of the former than the
latter. An article on the roots of violence argues that nearly all violent
people have brain damage--often caused by childhood abuse--that makes them
incapable of controlling their rage, and reprises liberal ideas about crime's
environmental causes. An article lionizes Jack Maple, the eccentric cop who
devised New York City's crime-tracking program. He is credited with much of the
city's crime drop. A story explores a new phenomenon of urban juries: Black
women jurors are causing mistrials by refusing to convict black men despite
overwhelming evidence of guilt. As for "punishment," a convict in Virginia
describes the deterioration of prison conditions.

            

               --Compiled by David Plotz and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
