
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Aug. 30
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Aug. 30)
            

            The
lead editorial embraces evolutionary biology's new insights
into human behavior, but warns against eugenics. A companion piece elucidates two of these new insights:
Bodily symmetry largely determines physical attractiveness, and humans may use
smell to assess the quality of a potential sex partner's immune system. An
article predicts that the "kretek," an Indonesian clove cigarette that controls
90 percent of that country's market, may challenge American tobacco's worldwide
dominance. Also, a story wonders why the weight-loss industry isn't booming.
Problems: It lacks a safe, effective drug, and is challenged by the
"fat-lash"--proponents of "big is beautiful." (For more on getting down the
pounds, see Slate's "Medical
Examiner.")

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Aug. 31
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Aug. 28)
            

            The
"successful bureaucrat" issue profiles Rudy Crew, chancellor of New York City
Schools, and Yuri Luzhkov, mayor of Moscow. The cover story says Crew is
promoting higher standards citywide, rather than focusing on a few flagship
schools. His efforts have not boosted test scores as much as had been promised,
but modest improvements and Crew's political clout make him the beleaguered
system's most impressive chief in decades. The article on Luzhkov echoes the
now-familiar line that Moscow is great (see Newsweek summary, below).
The eccentric mayor ignores corruption, but effectively micromanages Moscow's
building boom. Notable statistic: Prime office space costs more in Moscow than
in New York City. Also, can rapper Marky Mark become film star Mark Wahlberg?
He's the latest of many musicians (Will Smith, Courtney Love ...) to make the
leap to movies.

            

               
                  Time , Sept. 1
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Aug. 26)
            

            The cover
story on billionaire financier George Soros says that his philanthropy provokes
as much controversy as gratitude. Having given more than $1 billion in aid to
Eastern Europe, Soros is now spending tens of millions of dollars in the United
States to promote medical marijuana, rights for legal immigrants, alternatives
to incarceration, and better care for the dying. These donations are intended
to rectify U.S. government inaction. Notable statistic: Soros' 1996 aid to
Hungary, Yugoslavia, and Belarus tops U.S. aid to those countries. A story
argues that New York City's recent police brutality belies general reform in
the nation's police departments. Many cities now give cops clear anti-brutality
messages and better training on the use of force. An article by a baby boomer
contends that modern teen-agers have nothing left to rebel against, save
rebellion.

            

               
                  Newsweek , Sept. 1
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Aug. 26)
            

            

               Newsweek 's ninth health cover of the year warns that E. coli food
contamination is more common than is reported and won't be eradicated with
simple beef recalls like the one at Hudson Foods. New, tougher food-inspection
standards will help, but "no one predicts a day in which all food will be
perfectly free of disease." A companion piece advocates destroying food
bacteria with low-level radiation. Activist groups are dubious. A story says
that the Japanese mob exerts too much control over that nation's finance
industry, hindering Japan's ability to compete in the global market. An article
on Moscow concedes that it has high crime rates, but asserts that a growing
middle class and booming night life are revitalizing the city.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Sept. 1
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Aug. 26)
            

            Harvard
and Princeton tie for first in the 11 th annual "Best
Colleges" rankings. Duke cracks the Ivy monopoly by sharing third place
with Yale. University of Virginia is the top public school (but 21 st
overall), and Swarthmore repeats as best liberal-arts college. One
accompanying article says that students who apply for early admission have
a better chance of being accepted. Another reports that fraternities and sororities are cracking down
on drinking, and promoting studying: The National Panhellenic Conference has
declared 1997--this is not a joke--"The Year of the Scholar." U.S. News '
bad beef article is a revolting description of what really goes
into cattle feed--chicken manure, grease, cement dust, newsprint, and human
sewage, among other things. The feed is safe when treated properly, but many
farmers aren't careful, raising the risk of beef contamination. And a piece
chastises the Red Cross for dumping 3 million pints a year of perfectly safe
blood donated by people with hemochromatosis. Those with the disease must
donate blood regularly to rid their body of excess iron, but blood banks refuse
to use the plasma even though it would solve blood-supply shortages.

            

               
                  Harper's , September 1997
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Aug. 21)
            

            A
two-story cover package damns and praises higher education. An essay by a
University of Virginia professor says that today's college students seek only
ironic entertainment in the classroom. Raised on the cool medium of television,
undergrads are skeptical about passionate ideas, doubtful of genius, and
intellectually timid. Even worse news: Bottom-line-obsessed universities won't
challenge this complacency because they can't afford to offend their paying
customers. The other piece glorifies an experimental humanities class for
low-income, undereducated adults. The author contends that philosophy, art, and
literature are empowering, because they teach the disenfranchised how to
challenge the elite without violence. Evidence: The once-hopeless students have
gone on to college or better jobs.

         
      
   
