
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  New 
                  Republic , Mar. 3
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Feb. 14)
            

            The
cover story criticizes America's favorite drug prevention
program, Drug Abuse Resistance Education. The folks behind DARE, TNR
says, suppress studies showing that it doesn't work and harass academics and
journalists who criticize it. An editorial slams Clinton's budget for papering over the
entitlement crisis with "rosy scenarios." An article asserts that the Republicans are supporting the budget in
exchange for Clinton's acquiescence to a capital-gains tax cut. The "TRB" column calls for the appointment of an independent counsel
to investigate the Democratic fund-raising scandal. And Robert Brustein
continues his brawl with August Wilson over race and theater.

            

               
                  Economist , Feb. 15
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Feb. 14)
            

            The
cover story and an editorial predict trouble for Helmut Kohl,
who's presiding over a weakening German economy. An article suggests that the German economy's troubles might
postpone the European currency union. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright
contributes an article about why NATO should expand into Eastern Europe. Sen.
Dan Coats' idea of a tax credit for anti-poverty charities wins the magazine's
praise. And a long article summarizes research on circadian
rhythms. Most interesting fact: City-dwelling males lose the ability to adapt
to seasons. They don't sleep longer in winter than they do in summer, but they
should.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Feb. 16
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Feb. 13)
            

            The
smuggling of exotic and endangered species takes the cover. In Madagascar and
elsewhere, populations of snakes, primates, and turtles are being destroyed by
locals. The First World is blamed: A turtle worth 30 cents in Madagascar can
fetch $10,000 in Germany, Japan, and the United States. Also, Garry Wills says
multiculturalism, not conservatism, is fueling the revival of classical
literature. "The ancient texts have become eerily modern in what they have to
say about power relationships between men and women, gay men and war, superiors
and subordinates." And the magazine visits actress/activist Vanessa Redgrave,
who is more self-righteous and obsessive than ever about her causes. She's keen
on immigrants these days, not Palestinians.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , Feb. 17
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Feb. 11)
            

            
               Time 's O.J. cover goes inside the Brown/Goldman camp, revealing
evidence that the plaintiffs didn't use, including a witness who saw O.J.
demonstrate how to kill someone with a knife. Fred Goldman says he doesn't care
about the money, only about the vindication. Newsweek 's cover considers
"The O.J. Legacy," predicting that he will keep custody of his kids but lose
his appeal of the civil decision. A Newsweek columnist says that the
case did not divide blacks and whites; it merely revealed a breach that already
existed.

            Revisiting the Martin Luther
King Jr. assassination, both magazines doubt James Earl Ray's
latest reiteration of his "I was a patsy in a government conspiracy"
theory.

            Also in Time , a
Madeleine Albright profile, which reaches the same
conclusions as Newsweek 's cover story last week: Albright is media-savvy
and hardheaded, though not a grand visionary.

            

               Newsweek sings the praises of Michelle Kwan, "America's next great
figure-skating queen." And an article tries to explain why the Euro (Europe's
unified currency) matters.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Feb. 17
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Feb. 11)
            

            The
cover story excerpts Confessions of a Spy , a new book
about Aldrich Ames, calling the convicted spy the "most destructive traitor in
American history." The piece claims that Ames exposed 25 "CIA assets" to the
KGB--more than twice as many as had been reported. He also crippled dozens of
covert operations, including a wiretap on a private communication line in KGB
headquarters. Also, an article demystifies love (just in time for Valentine's
Day), explaining that a chemical called oxytocin, triggered by breast-feeding,
makes mothers love their kids and mates. (To learn more about familial love
genes, see Robert Wright's recent article in Slate.)

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Feb. 17
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Feb. 11)
            

            A long
article by Whitewater specialist James Stewart examines Susan McDougal's
refusal to cooperate with Kenneth Starr's investigation. She says she won't
testify because Starr is engaged in a political witch hunt; the piece
speculates that she may be trying to hide an affair she had with Bill Clinton.
A story describes the West Indian island of Montserrat, where a long-dormant
volcano is threatening to erupt. If it does, it will probably bury the island
(and the few thousand inhabitants who remain) in lava and ash. Also, an article
praises House Budget Committee Chairman John Kasich as one of few Republicans
brave enough to offend big business for the sake of a balanced budget.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , Feb. 17, and National Review , Feb. 24
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Feb. 11)
            

            The conservative magazines
savage the American Bar Association as a tool of big-government liberals.
Nearly identical articles condemn the ABA's recent endorsement of a
death-penalty moratorium and denounce the ABA's judicial rating system for its
left-wing bias. The Standard 's cover story, "The Truth vs. Larry Flynt,"
echoes similar pieces in Slate, the New Republic , and The Nation by
arguing that Flynt is much scummier than his movie persona. The piece does
reveal a few sickening new details, notably a tape recording in which Flynt
allegedly admits telling his 13-year-old daughter to strip so he could look at
her naked. Also, a Standard article defends Marine hazing rituals as
"macho bullshit" integral to military culture.

            Also in
the National Review , an article praising Social Security privatization.
And a long adulatory essay about Austrian economists Friedrich Hayek, Ludwig
von Mises, and Carl Menger.

            

               
                  Vanity Fair, March 1997
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Feb. 7)
            

            A profile
lionizes tycoon/World Jewish Congress President Edgar Bronfman Sr. for his
campaign to recover Holocaust victims' savings from Swiss banks. Bronfman, whom
some consider the "Jewish pope," is portrayed as a relentless crusader who
single-handedly "unhinged" Switzerland. Vanity Fair investigates the
truly weird saga of Madalyn Murray O'Hair, America's most notorious atheist.
After 30 years as a troublemaker, bully, and media hound, O'Hair vanished in
late 1995 along with her son and granddaughter. About $700,000 of her
foundation's money, stashed in New Zealand, also seems to have disappeared. The
author claims O'Hair is lying low in New Zealand; others think she's dead; God
has no comment. VF pays tribute (for 25 pages?!) to "swinging" London,
which has recaptured its 1960s hipness: Oasis and Blur are much admired; so is
fashion enfant terrible Alexander McQueen. Also, Slate is panned:
"familiar names like Joe Queenan, Katha Pollitt, Wendy Kaminer, Louis Menand,
Paul Berman, Nicholas Lemann--all-purpose oxygen depleters who wash up
everywhere." (Articles by all these oxygen depleters are available in Slate's
"Compost.")

            

               --Compiled by David Plotz and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
