
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Aug. 2
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Aug. 2)
            

            The cover
editorial calls for America and Europe to rethink their
Iran policies when moderate Muhammad Khatami assumes the presidency next week.
Khatami has been a hero of the West ever since he was removed as culture
minister for being too permissive. A related story raises questions about an energy deal between
Turkey and Turkmenistan, since natural gas will be piped through Iran. And, an
article on the double bombing in Jerusalem says the explosion "could prove a
mortal blow" to Prime Minister Netanyahu's government. Just one hour before the
attack, Netanyahu's advisers were mocking Labor leaders for their inability to
curb terrorism.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Aug. 3
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, July 31)
            

            It's
trendy to be young and Jewish in Poland, says the cover story. With the end of
communism, the country is witnessing a revival of the religion. But tension
with the Catholic Church and a history of anti-Semitism still haunt the small
community. An article looks at one of the remaining '60s communes, which has
survived by making hammocks. No longer a refuge for idealistic and transient
twentysomethings, the Virginia "campus" is now home to middle-aged men and
women who move in for up to a decade. Also, a profile of disgraced boxer Roy
Jones Jr. details his struggle to distance himself from a controlling father
and to restore his reputation.

            

               
                  Newsweek and Time , Aug. 4
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, July 29)
            

            Two covers on the rich.
Newsweek explains how stock options created the new billionaires. But
the article warns that the laws of financial gravity have not been repealed and
that the super-wealthy must eventually return to earth. Time 's "Mormons,
Inc." cover story details the riches of the church founded by Joseph Smith: It
values the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints' assets (which include
the country's biggest cattle operation) at $30 billion. Church membership is
approaching 10 million and is growing faster than most other religions'.

            Both magazines chronicle the
final days of suspected serial killer Andrew Cunanan. Time offers a
brief psychological profile. Newsweek offers a piece by a Cunanan friend
who says he was "a hard guy to read."

            A package
of stories in Newsweek examines India 50 years after independence. The
country's economy and culture are booming. For the first time, the standard of
living for the nation's poor (although not the very poor) is rising. A piece in
Time asks if the U.S. military's softer boot camps ill prepare soldiers
for war.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Aug. 4
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, July 29)
            

            The
cover story finds the day-care industry woefully under-regulated
and under-supervised. Laced with horror stories of toddlers dying while in day
care, the piece blames lobbyists who have blocked government oversight. Also, a
piece on the $1.5 billion hair-replacement industry explains that
you don't buy new hair, you rent it. Consumers of hair ointments, "systems,"
and surgeries must continue to pay to maintain their new growth. An article reports on the states' increasing dependence on gambling
taxes.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , Aug. 4
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, July 29)
            

            The cover
story describes how Clinton's "attack machine" of private investigators,
lawyers, and spin doctors deflects the various White House scandals
(Travelgate, Paula Jones, Troopergate, etc.). The machine defends the president
by attacking the attackers' characters. Currently, Clinton's men are taking aim
at independent counsel Kenneth Starr. The magazine debunks "whole-math," which
is the rage in some elementary school curricula. Whole-math focuses less on
arithmetic and more on "real-world concerns." Also, three more post-mortems on
the botched House GOP coup.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Aug. 4
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, July 29)
            

            Two
articles on coups. "Continental Shift" examines the recent Congo revolution:
The alliance of nearly a dozen African countries that helped topple Mobutu Sese
Seko may permanently realign the region's politics. The Letter from Washington
looks at the failed House coup from Speaker Newt Gingrich's perspective,
predicting that Gingrich will follow his support base and shift from
conservative revolutionary to moderate. Also, an article on an Alabama
children's beauty pageant: Contestants' parents believe that beauty will
catapult their children from the working class.

            
               
                  The
Nation , Aug. 11-18
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, July 29)
            

            The cover
story uses Justice Department data released after Freedom of Information
Act requests to portray the FBI as sloppy and ineffective. The bureau
concentrates its energies on convicting thousands of drug dealers and bank
robbers (who should be chased by local authorities), but mostly ignores
white-collar crime. Despite its poor track record, the agency has expanded its
power.

         
      
   
