
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , June 7
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, June 7)
            

            The
cover story observes that public opinions in France and Germany
are moving against European Monetary Union--in different directions. The French
have backed a party that favors loose interpretation of Maastricht Treaty
criteria, while the Germans have cheered for the Bundesbank's strict financial
bookkeeping. Nevertheless, the article predicts that an inclusive euro will be
launched on schedule, through fudging the original criteria. The editorial laments that the treaty's "misguided" fiscal targets
have harmed the "great opportunity that the single currency might have been"
and argues that they should be revised immediately. A killjoy article on the
McVeigh trial says it doesn't really vindicate the American judicial system,
because the proceedings were biased and conspiracy theories were not aired. An
admiring article on Israel's new Labor leader, Ehud Barak, speculates that
the besieged Likud government is headed for more trouble and may turn to Barak
for support.

            
               
                  New
Republic , June 23
            

            
               (posted
Friday, June 6)
            

            The cover
story by Jonathan Rauch warns that workplace-harassment law is destroying the
First Amendment. Courts have equated discriminatory speech with discriminatory
action, causing lawsuit-shy employers to enforce "speech codes." Proposal:
Apply First Amendment protection to workplace speech, even though there will be
some unrestrained bigotry. The editorial celebrates the "obtuse and suicidal"
choice of the French electorate, particularly because it will kill hope for a
common European currency. An article argues that Timothy McVeigh's view of the
Constitution--people may judge and overthrow a government that has exceeded its
authority--is consistent with the vision of the Founding Fathers (but Lincoln
forged a "new Constitution" based on "nationhood, equality and democracy"). And
an article explains how the military has adopted a radical-feminist view of
rape in order to survive in the '90s.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , June 8
            

            
               (posted
Friday, June 6)
            

            A special
issue on "How the World Sees Us" asserts that the United States has reached a
new level of cultural domination and asks whether the world is enjoying it.
Foreign writers in 18 countries respond. In the featured essay, a German
political analyst announces the end of Cold War anti-Americanism: Europeans who
used to hate obnoxious Americans (because of forced allegiance) now want to
imitate them (because they are relentlessly innovative). Some other responses:
A Nigerian denounces "the shameless glorification of self-exposure," a French
nanny complains that American children are spoiled, and a German observes that
Americans are obsessed with their teeth (hence the cover). An accompanying
column frets that we are embarrassing ourselves by dumping the worst of
American culture ("Rambo-esque violence and Disney-esque sentimentality") on
foreign markets that enjoy having negative American stereotypes confirmed.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , June 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 3)
            

            Paula Jones makes
Newsweek 's cover. The gist: The president's advisers and insurers want
him to settle the case, because no matter what the outcome, pretrial discovery
would be humiliating. Newsweek contributor George Stephanopoulos urges
Clinton to seek a fast trial and clear the air for the 2000 campaign.
Time 's feature argues that settling is trickier than it sounds: Can
Clinton acknowledge Jones' claim and not admit to any wrongdoing?

            
               Time 's trend cover
story concludes that Generation Xers are not slackers: They're
materialistic, ambitious, and entrepreneurial. The piece is accompanied by the
requisite sidebars about a go-getting movie director, a fabulously successful
cosmetics manufacturer, and a hip young environmental activist.

            Both magazines write
skeptically about the "Torah codes" phenomenon, which claims that the Bible
contains encrypted messages prophesying events. (See Slate's "Cracking God's Code.")

            

               Time alleges that an Al Gore associate who owns a toxic-waste-disposal
company received a lucrative Department of Energy contract after making large
donations to the Clinton-Gore campaign. And the Golden Arches slump: McDonald's
U.S. business is flagging, Time says, because Americans increasingly
favor tasty food over fast food. Also, Time publishes a special issue
devoted to American Visions , the TV show and book by the magazine's
longtime art critic, Robert Hughes.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , June 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 3)
            

            The
annual retirement guide offers the usual advice: Buy better mutual funds and
pay attention to your 401(k). One piece declares that anyone can become a millionaire by investing
more, spending less, and buying used cars. A long
article describes a massive, 40-years-in-the-making study of aging. Among
its findings: People don't get crankier as they get older, at least half
of senior citizens have no heart problems at all, and senility is not
inevitable. U.S. News ' Paula
Jones scoop: Her lawyers have stashed three copies of her affidavit about
Clinton's "distinguishing characteristics" in hiding places around the country.
A story notes that biologists have discovered dozens of new mammal
species in the past few years, including a new whale and a "giant barking
deer."

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , June 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 3)
            

            The
magazine profiles Nolanda Hill, who was business partner, best friend and, as
she reveals, mistress of late Commerce Secretary Ron Brown. A brash Texan who
made a fortune buying TV stations, Hill is under federal investigation for her
business deals with Brown. Funniest tidbit: Brown loathed Clinton's
touchy-feely Cabinet retreats, calling them "moongazing." An article rips
celebrity doctor Susan Love for misleading women about estrogen and grossly
distorting (or misunderstanding) Centers for Disease Control statistics. Love
advises middle-aged women not to take estrogen, saying it raises breast-cancer
risk. In fact, estrogen therapy vastly reduces the risk of heart disease and
bone disabilities, while increasing that of cancer only minimally. Also, The
New Yorker publishes from the 45-year correspondence between Gore Vidal and
Louis Auchincloss.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , June 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 3)
            

            Another
"what's wrong with conservatives" cover package blames the conservative
collapse in Britain, France, and the United States on the clever but vacuous
politics of the left. But not to worry: The left's victories are rear-guard
actions. Conservatives are winning the intellectual war. Editor William Kristol
bemoans the "Clintonization" of Trent Lott and other GOP leaders, who have
replaced their old firmness with vague, pandering rhetoric. A piece criticizes
feminists for valorizing Air Force pilot Lt. Kelly Flinn and ignoring jilted
wife Gayla Zigo. Also, at long last, a writer pans Rosie O'Donnell as a
sycophant (in public) and a bully (in private).

         
      
   
