
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , June 28
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, June 28)
            

            An
optimistic cover editorial says that Hong Kong may take over China,
rather than vice versa. Hong Kong has inspired capitalism in China--60 percent
of Chinese investment is routed through it--so perhaps it can inspire political
freedom there too. Hong Kong could serve as China's political "laboratory,"
proving that free elections and the rule of law are not destabilizing. A
related article speculates that Hong Kong is safe from
excessive Chinese meddling: China doesn't want to alienate Taiwan or the
international community, and Tung Chee-hwa is making sound, relatively liberal
decisions. A story on the world environmental summit says that developed
nations are breaking their promises to curtail emissions of greenhouse gases.
And they can't agree on how to do better. A piece on Bosnia says there is a
teensy, tiny bit of hope that new economic laws will help unify the three
feuding ethnic groups.

            
               
                  New
Republic , July 14 & 21
            

            
               (posted
Friday, June 27)
            

            

               TNR finds a new angle on Hong Kong. The cover article, "Hong Kong Is in
Worse Trouble Than You Think," warns that the colony's "triad" gangsters have
forged an alliance with Chinese officials. China will let the triads extort,
smuggle drugs and arms, pander, and counterfeit. The triads, in turn, will
maintain order in Hong Kong and may act as the de facto secret police. Several
tycoons with ties to the triads and Beijing are investigated. Also, philosopher
Amartya Sen argues that the idea of "Asian values"--collective identity,
absence of individual rights--is bunkum. Asia's authoritarians are wrong:
Freedom, tolerance, and respect for individual rights are integral to the
Confucian, Buddhist, and Hindu traditions.

            

               
                  New 
                  York 
                  Times 
                  Magazine , June 29
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, June 26)
            

            The diary
of a breast-cancer patient takes the cover. The piece's main themes: the
writer's fear that she won't be able to have children, anxiety about the
appearance of her breast, and gratitude toward her husband and her cancer
support group. After a lumpectomy and radiation, she has an excellent
prognosis. A story sings the praises of the federal Legal Services Corp.,
describing how one of its lawyers has served a poor Appalachian town devotedly
for 25 years. The message: Conservatives in Congress should think twice before
defunding the program. A piece chronicles the struggles of Firefly, a tiny
Internet startup: Its "agent" software, an artificial-intelligence program that
helps consumers choose and buy online, may be the Net's next killer
application, but only if Microsoft or another software giant doesn't create a
knockoff first. Also, an elderly widow writes about rekindling a sexual affair
with her first lover, a man she slept with 50 years ago.

            

               
                  Newsweek and Time , June 30
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 24)
            

            
               Newsweek runs its
seventh health cover story of the year. "How to Live to 100" advises exercise,
low-fat food, and perseverance. Centenarians, it notes, are the fastest growing
segment of the population. A "Longevity Test" lets you calculate your life
expectancy (e.g., add two years if you're a happily married man, and subtract
three if you don't exercise), while a sidebar explains the many benefits and
few risks of estrogen therapy.

            
               Time puts the
cigarette deal on the cover. It describes the negotiations (extremely civil) and
the agreement. Anti-tobacco forces fear that the industry will find a way to
evade regulation. Industry folks fear they have given too much away. Cigarette
historian Richard Kluger praises the deal, saying that FDA regulation of nicotine
content is a huge defeat for the industry. Newsweek 's cigarette story
cautions that Congress may spike the agreement: Liberals think it's too soft on
the industry, while conservatives think it's too harsh.

            
               Time 's 20-page special report on Hong Kong reaches the same
conclusions as all the other special reports on Hong Kong: The colony's
residents are optimistic; corruption and crime will seep in from China; no one
knows whether China will quash political freedom. Accompanying articles
describe three Chinese towns: One town is decrepit, polluted, and filled with
idle, state-owned factories; one is experimenting with private farming and
local democracy; one is bustling with capitalism. Also in Time , the
movie critic pans the summer blockbusters for their similarly idiotic
plots, brutality, and witlessness.

            Also in
Newsweek , a package of articles cheers the capture of Pol Pot--"the last
monster of the 20 th century"--but notes that Cambodia is still
corrupt, lawless, and scarred by Pol Pot's genocide.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , June 30
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 24)
            

            "Extreme"
sports are on the cover. Kayaking, sky diving, radical skiing, street lugeing, etc.,
are booming. The pop-psychology explanation: The elimination of risk in daily
life has made Americans hungry for danger and excitement. Dramatic photos of
ice climbers, BASE jumpers, and sky-surfers accompany the article. A piece describes the moronic things tourists do in national parks:
hike the Grand Canyon in high heels, run at midday in Death Valley, dip their
hands in 200 F geothermic pools. An article says that both the Republican and Clinton tax plans favor
the rich too much, but that the Republican plan is much worse.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , June 30
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 24)
            

            Another
cover package on the Republican crackup--the second this month. One of the
cover pieces predicts that Newt Gingrich will be ousted as speaker by the end
of next year: His lieutenants (Richard Armey, Tom Delay, John Boehner, Bill
Paxon) are abandoning him because he has betrayed them repeatedly. An article
contends that China's behavior toward Hong Kong proves the failure of Clinton's
"constructive engagement" policy, which holds that China will become more
democratic as it becomes more capitalistic: By gutting the Joint Declaration,
China proves that it will never allow democracy to flourish, even if it
lets capitalism flourish. Also, the Standard apologizes to Deepak Chopra
for a 1996 cover story that called him a "huckster." The magazine retracts a
charge of plagiarism and an allegation that Chopra hired a prostitute.

            
               
                  The
Nation , July 7
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, June 24)
            

            An
ambivalent cover story cheers Richard Gephardt's new commitment to old-time
liberal populism, but frets that he's a political chameleon who has adopted
this cause for political reasons (i.e., the 2000 presidential campaign). It
also criticizes him for being a follower. An article warns that the growing
power of Orthodox Jews will weaken American Jews' staunch support of Israel.
Orthodox Israeli Jews are alienating American Jews by refusing to recognize
them as Jews.

         
      
   
