
   
   
      
         
            Airline English

            In an opening monologue not
long ago, Late Night host Jay Leno told his audience that Air Force One
had hit a patch of turbulence during a recent trip, forcing President Clinton
to return the flight attendant "to her full upright and locked position."

            What
social historians of the future may find most notable about Leno's joke is not
what it says about popular perceptions of Bill Clinton's sex life, but what it
says about the language of air travel, and how its sui-generis vocabulary
("seat pocket," "ground personnel," "emergency flotation"), its stilted
constructions ("We are now ready to pre-board those passengers who ..."), its
sometimes counterintuitive rhythms and emphases ("The captain has turned
off the seat-belt sign. ..."), its unblinking, look-you-in-the-eye reliance on
euphemisms ("In the unlikely event of a water landing ..."), its blasé
invocation of an all-enveloping legal regime ("We remind you that it is a
federal offense to tamper with, disable, or destroy any lavatory smoke
detector. ..."), and its utter regularity across corporate and international
boundaries--how all these things have become matters of mass familiarity.

            
Airline English has, in a way, become the
linguistic equivalent of the worldwide nonverbal graphic system that conveys
such meanings as "ladies' room," "no parking," "first aid," and "information."
It is just as streamlined, just as stylized, often in the same oddly archaic
sort of way. The worldwide symbol for "cocktail lounge" is a martini glass with
olive, even though martinis themselves are a relatively uncommon sight these
days. The symbol for "pharmacy" is a mortar and pestle. Airline language is
similarly atavistic. Whenever else does one hear the word "stow" being used,
except as part of the command to "stow your belongings in the overhead
bins"?

            Actually, the other place
where "stow" is frequently used is on board boats and ships. One significant
element of airline language, including many of its archaisms, derives from the
nautical terminology that the pioneers of air travel appropriated--not
unnaturally, given the obvious parallels between the two modes of
transportation (fragile means of conveyance, built to negotiate a boundless,
often turbulent medium of fluid or gas). An airplane is a "craft," and its
"crew," including a "captain," "first officer," and "purser," operates from a
"deck" inside a "cabin." The aircraft is segmented by "bulkheads." Its kitchens
are "galleys." It carries cargo in "holds."

            But the
compressed time of air travel gives its language a focused, liturgical quality
that oceanic travel has never had (at least for passengers), from the initial
welcome aboard to the cautionary homily to the ritual meal--on more and more
flights, a merely symbolic activity--to the final "Good-bye. Good-bye.
Good-bye. Good-bye. Good-bye." The linguistic contours of a typical airline
flight are every bit as scripted as those of a religious service. For American
carriers, the Nicene Creed of official cabin talk comes in the form of a number
of Federal Aviation Administration regulations, such as No. 121.571 ("Briefing
passengers before take-off") and No. 121.573 ("Briefing passengers: extended
overwater operations"). The subject matter of these dense passages of text,
which in their original versions date back to the early 1960s, concerns
everything from seat belts and life jackets to emergency exits and oxygen
masks. The regulations are distilled by each airline into detailed scripts
which are reviewed by company lawyers and must be approved, finally, by the
FAA. The scripts are then circulated to in-flight personnel.

            
Credal formulations aside, airlines have
considerable latitude when it comes to routine announcements; again, though,
the language is often fastidiously scripted, down to even the most casual
remarks. ("Would you like Coke or Sprite?" appears in a script provided by the
Association of Professional Flight Attendants.) Most of the dozen or so
airlines contacted were reluctant to furnish actual transcripts of approved
language manuals, although one veteran pilot (with United) asserted: "You're
gonna hear the same thing, but you'll hear it just a bit differently."
Southwest Airlines did provide an example of an unusual rap announcement that
some of its ground personnel have used. It reads, in part: "We board in groups
of thirty,/ According to your card;/ One thru thirty boards first,/ It's really
not that hard." And it goes on, "Federal law prohibits smoking/ On most
domestic flights./ No smoking is permitted,/ So don't even try to light."
Southwest's corporate culture of officially sanctioned iconoclasm, if there can
be such a thing, is far from typical.

            From time to time,
passengers may notice a crew member reading an announcement from a laminated
text--changes do get made and are distributed airline-wide--but for the most
part the scripts are committed to memory, and the habits born of rigorous
training die hard. Not long ago, one of my sisters discovered that she was to
be the only passenger on a commercial flight, and settled in for the journey.
As she prepared for the plane to push back, a flight attendant materialized for
the safety briefing, and in the one concession to the circumstances, sat down
in the seat next to my sister instead of standing in the aisle at the front of
the cabin. The dull monotone was the same as ever. "As we prepare for takeoff,"
the flight attendant said, looking at my sister from six inches away, "please
check that your seat belt is fastened"--and here she made the requisite
clicking and unclicking movements with the demonstration model--"and do
take time to look through the safety information in the seat pocket in front of
you. Our aircraft is equipped with four emergency exits. ..."

            As you might imagine, my
sister, at that point, was ready to use them all.

         
      
   
