
   
   
      
         
            Foreign Entanglements
            

            Dear David:

            Nice point about the lack of scandals in the American press, at least the
major papers we read. We were abroad for a month in September and October, but
I do not recall the American press featuring the story of Newt Gingrich's
divorce case, and the revelation that he had a mistress for almost as long--or
was it longer?--than Bill Clinton was succored by Monica Lewinsky. Could it be
that there are fewer scandals, or is it that the Times and the
Washington Post feel that they have gone overboard in the last few
years?

            By contrast, almost all the newspapers in England and Germany and Belgium
and Spain and Italy--let alone Russia--are full of stories about scandal and
corruption, and some of these make the American stories, including Ken Starr,
pale by comparison. What is extraordinary is how scantily this is written about
in the American press.

            Take the story in England that has been running for the past two weeks and
more--the revelation that Jeffrey Archer, the famous novelist and a Tory
parliamentary whip, who had announced his Conservative candidacy for the mayor
of London, was shown to have lied and covered up a liaison with a prostitute a
dozen years ago. The News of the World , a paper that specializes in
sleaze, had paid Archer's friend Ted Francis 14,000 pounds to reveal that he
had given Archer a false alibi in 1987, when the Daily Star accused
Archer of marital infidelity with a prostitute, Monica Couglan. Francis
disclosed that Archer had persuaded him to write a letter to Lord Archer's
lawyers falsely stating that they had had dinner that night, and Archer had
altered his diary to show a meeting. Archer had sued the Daily Star and
won a million pounds in the libel case. Now Archer is disgraced and faces the
prospect of even going to jail for perjury and conspiracy. William Hague, the
Tory leader, has egg all over his face.

            In Germany, it has now been charged that Helmut Kohl had secret campaign
funding accounts. All this emerged from an investigation of a
million-deutsche-mark cash donation to the Christian Democratic Party by a
Canadian arms dealer, Krakheinz Schreiber.

            The most vehement accusations have been surfacing in Belgium. There is new
speculation that Andre Cools, the former deputy prime minister who was shot
dead in 1991 as he left his mistress's flat in Liege, was about to expose
corruption in his party. A trial in Brussels had convicted Willy Claes and two
other ex-ministers in the Walloon and Flemish socialist parties of channeling
bribes to party funds into their own bank accounts.

            I suppose where these stories merge with the American scene--leaving out the
other sex scandals, such as Robin Cook, the British foreign secretary, being
forced by Tony Blair to choose between his mistress and his wife, as he was at
an airport ready to fly off with his mistress (and he finally chose her,
leaving his wife, later, to write a bitter newspaper account of their life)--is
with the problem of campaign funding. We have had detailed exposés of the
Clinton Lincoln-bedroom sales, but nothing as lurid as the European tales. But
one last note, the failure of the American press to give much play to these
stories. Is it that these names are unfamiliar to American readers? Yet Jeffrey
Archer's novels, such as First Among Equals , and I think you have
probably read them all, for relaxation--have sold extremely well here. So why
has the American press, or even 
                  Slate
                for that matter, neglected
this reportage?

            Love,
Dad

            P.S.. If we had "newsbreaks" in this correspondence, I would report the
headline in a London Times story last month: "Bishop's Wife Runs Away
With a Vicar." The title, of course, would be, as Trollope might say, "There
will always be an England."

         
      
   
