
   
   
      
         
            <i>Magnolia</i> Goes to "11," and Beyond
            

            Roger, I loved your piece on this new film technology--you write about the
subject with infectious excitement. And you got to go to San Luis Obispo! But I
wondered why you didn't dwell in that piece on what, for me, is the most
salient fact of digital filmmaking--not so much the means of exhibition as the
means of production. As you've pointed out in your entry above, what thrills
filmmakers is that shooting on digital video is, like, a thousand times cheaper
than shooting on 35 mm. (or even 16 mm.). We all know that in low-budget films,
it's not the actors that are your greatest expense, it's the film stock. (David
O. Russell made his great Spanking The Monkey on "short ends" snatched
up by his wife, Janet Grillo, then a New Line executive.) Digital will be the
great equalizer. You shoot as much footage as you like and you don't have to
convert it all to "telecines"--it's computer-ready. Any fancy effect you do in
the editing--wipes, dissolves, superimpositions--won't have to be transferred
to film (which is what costs a fortune). The kind of arduous catch-as-catch-can
process that Mark Borchardt goes through in American Movie will be a
thing of the past. Most filmmakers don't care if digital projection looks
better than celluloid; they'd be thrilled if it looked as good.

            As to the question of perception, it's fascinating--mind-blowing. In Michael
Almereyda's Sundance documentary of a few years back, Atom Egoyan ruminates on
the distinctions between film and video--on the fact that film goes at 24
frames a second and that a lot of what you're looking at is blank space and
flicker. There's a distinct difference in his films between the video state and
the film state. Can video approximate the effect of film? Maybe not--but if
there's a way to simulate a digital equivalent, George Lucas will finance it.
One more question: What is the distinction is between "hypnosis" and "reverie"?
It sounds like mystical poetry to me.

            I think it's great that anyone will be able to do what Harmony Korine
does, since what he does he does so badly. We really disagree on Julien
Donkey-Boy . It can be exciting when directors and actors are willing to put
themselves on the line like that, but Korine just pummels you with the same
idea over and over. He isn't trying to capture reality, he's trying to rub your
nose in it. And underneath, he has the same huckster's mentality as Roger
Corman or even H.G. Lewis: He throws in a bloody dead baby to get your
attention. As for the idea that the movie mimics the perceptions of a
delusional schizophrenic, it's hardly in the other the other the other shut up
I say shut up. Not not not the loser of the egg that's not a mountain--you
fool!--that's a hill my screen my screen is flashes on and off and on and off
and yarrrggghhhhh!

            See? I can do it, too.

            
               Magnolia is Six Actors in Search of an Oscar. Make that Twelve
Actors. Any bit could be taken out of context and shown at the Academy Awards.
The whole movie is actors with their backs against the wall emotionally--actors
peaking. They start peaking at the end of Hour 1; I didn't see how they could
get any bigger. But it's like the Spinal Tap amplifiers. They go to 11.
They go to 12. When it's time to go to 13 something very strange happens. That
strange thing isn't thematically unpredictable. It has the same logic as
the earthquake at the end of Altman's Short Cuts , except there it was
short and brutal and here it's a full-scale, surreal black-comedy routine. I
thought it was terrific--I think the movie is terrific. I don't care what Paul
Thomas Anderson is smoking--what matters is that he loves actors. I think Tom
Cruise is (I can't believe I'm writing this) brilliant. I think John C. Reilly
is brilliant. I think Julianne Moore is--well, sorry, gotta go to "11"
here--whee!--our Vanessa Redgrave. At a screening the other day, I had the
pleasure of listening to Joel Siegel make fun of the movie behind me and John
Simon (in a separate conversation) make fun of the movie in front of me. That
clinches it--it's one of the year's best movies!

            Which might be a good segue for talking about the year's great performances,
of which there are so many. Sarah, you're right--the actors are keeping pace
with the filmmakers, daring to leave dreary realism (and other misapplications
of the Method) behind. I don't care if they'e rocket scientists in life or
not--on screen they seem so smart. A performance like Reese Witherspoon's in
Election isn't realistic; it only seems that way, because she's making
imaginative leaps that are so psychologically credible. Chloë Sevigny pulls off
some uncanny transitions in Boys Don't Cry , and they're all
subterranean: Great as Hilary Swank is, it's Sevigny's performance that really
captures the mystery at that movie's core. (In Julien Donkey-Boy , she
looks like a dumb actress stuck in an improv that won't end.)

         
      
   
