
   
   
      
         
            The Crash of 2002? What Would George W. Do?
            

            Dear Dad,

            Many thanks for the thoughts on technological change. As for identities, I
suppose I could continue on the subject with a lengthy disquisition on the
construction of national identities in early modern Europe, drawn from my new
book. But somehow, I think this would be getting a little too specialized for
the Breakfast Table. So I hope you don't mind if I change the subject and
pontificate a little about the presidential campaign. Living in Washington,
it's hard to resist the temptation.

            I must say, though, that since I spend much of my time immersed in the
18 th century, the crazily ritualistic aspects of the campaign strike
me very forcefully. The weirdest thing, to my mind, is the way the candidates
and the media all seem to pretend that we are electing a benevolent dictator
who, once elected, will snap his fingers, and the thousands of pages of
position papers drawn up by his campaign staff will automatically become the
law of the land. Elect Gary Bauer and abortion will be abolished. Elect George
W. and we will get a tax cut. Elect Al Gore and gays will be welcomed into the
military. Elect Alan Keyes and everyone will be required to wear underwear on
the outside (to continue my homage to Woody Allen's Bananas ).

            At the very least, it seems to me that reporters could make more of a
distinction between three very different types of campaign promises: those it
would take a constitutional amendment to fulfill (e.g. abortion, maybe campaign
finance reform, because of first amendment concerns); those that would require
congressional action (health care, tax cuts, etc.); and those that could be
done with a presidential order. Why even waste much time on the first category?
Let's pretend, as a thought experiment, that a conspiracy of vintners
contaminates the champagne supply with powerful psychedelic mushrooms just
before Jan. 1, and that as a result, the entire country goes on a year-long
hallucinatory head trip and elects Gary Bauer president, only sobering up after
his inauguration. Will abortion still be legal in 2005? Of course it will.
Ronald Reagan was strongly against abortion, too. We can be pretty cautious
about the second category as well, especially when it comes to the details of
health-care plans that will be rewritten and amended time and again before
(possible) passage. In fact, one of the few big issues where the candidates'
specific promises really matter is gays in the military, since that can be done
by executive order. That's why Gore's promise to end Clinton's policy and let
the gays in is probably the most important campaign news today.

            This general problem is why I get steamed when pundits moan about how
candidates are ignoring "the issues." Get real. What matters is not the
candidate's position papers, but their basic principles, the three or four
things they care most about; their experience; their advisors; their political
savvy (as our shared favorite spy novelist, Charles McCarry, emphasized in the
Times yesterday), and yes, their character. And this is all the more the
case during a time when there are no big national disasters to be faced, at
least not the sort that require urgent responses. If peace and prosperity
continue, and there are no major wars, pretty much any of the serious
candidates now running could probably muddle through all right (not counting
Steve Forbes as serious, that is). But what about the stock-market collapse of
2002? The Russian invasion of Estonia? The terrorist bombing of Las Vegas? All
those things that the candidates don't have position papers on? What really
matters is to choose a president who can deal best with a real crisis, rather
than worry about what's going to happen to ethanol subsidies (anyone care to
bet the subsidies will be gone in 2004, even if John McCain is elected?--of
course, as Jacob Weisberg remarks in "Ballot
Box," the issue itself is still a good test of character). Thinking in
these terms, do we really want to elect George W?

            Love,
David

         
      
   
