
   
   
      
         
            Minutes of the Media Conspiracy

            This afternoon I attended a top-secret meeting of the media conspiracy's
central committee. Being there was very exciting for me, because I've heard
about this organization for years without ever being invited into its inner
sanctum. It was also an honor for 
                  Slate
               , because we are
apparently the first online publication to be included in one of these
sessions.

            The committee gathered in a private room in back of the bar at the Savery
Hotel in Des Moines, Iowa. Present were all the legendary figures in political
journalism. David Broder is the chairman of the central committee--though he's
known as "The Dean" to all and sundry. The Dean takes his journalistic
responsibilities very seriously. He has spent the last three years living on a
hog farm outside of Cedar Rapids in preparation for this year's caucuses. The
Dean is also apparently working on another very big book--and this is very
hush-hush--on the role of certified public accountants in Washington
policy-making.

            Anyhow, the Dean called the meeting to order and explained that the
conspiracy had only a few hours to choose the winner of the debate. He said he
thought the committee had made the right decision in handing the previous two
debates to John McCain and in portraying George W. Bush as the new Dan Quayle.
He added that he thought the committee was making healthy progress toward its
medium-range goal--apparently established in meetings on Martha's Vineyard last
summer--of creating a tight, two-person race in the Republican primaries.

            William Safire--I get to call him "Bill" now--responded to the Dean by
saying that he was getting bored with the Bush-as-Quayle line and wanted to say
that Bush had improved. Safire didn't go so far as to propose that Bush win
tonight's debate, but he wondered whether Bush might be criticized for
something other than being a lightweight.

            "Such as what?" Jeff Greenfield asked.

            Well, Safire explained, Bush blows up whenever he reads anything negative
about himself in the newspaper. Why not order up a question designed to provoke
him--and then raise the issue of whether he has a thick enough skin to be
president?

            Cokie Roberts didn't like Safire's idea. She reminded him of the rule of
pre-existing conditions (Al Hunt leaned over and explained this rule to me.
It's the one that says all new evidence has to confirm established personality
traits.) Stupidity is already Bush's liability, Cokie said, and while the
committee might decide that this was not a serious problem later in the
campaign, it couldn't suddenly give him a new drawback without any advance
notice.

            Besides, Tim Russert added, casting Bush as a hothead would tread on
McCain's pre-existing condition, namely his temper. Two candidates running
against each other in the primaries couldn't very well have the same character
flaw.

            Safire agreed with all of this but wondered whether Bush couldn't at least
show some improvement in tonight's debate. He said that some groundwork needed
to be laid for a "CWR" (this stands for conventional wisdom reversal, Hunt
explained to me) once it became clear that Bush was going to get the GOP
nomination. Johnny Apple bristled at that comment, accusing Safire of "eating
my lunch." This was not a literal reference to the capon carcass resting on the
platter in front of him but a metaphor for "invading his journalistic turf."
Apple sees it as his sole responsibility to establish the conventional wisdom
and rejects any attempt by the rest of the media conspiracy to assist him.

            Judy Woodruff had a compromise. She proposed that Bush simply be
"underwhelming," making one moderately serious gaffe to fuel concerns about his
preparedness for office while also "exceeding expectations." She said members
could have a quick caucus during the period set aside for closing statements at
the end of the debate to decide what the gaffe had been.

            Russert objected again. He said the McCain surge needed to be held back,
lest it crest too early--which could have the effect of making Bush the
Republican nominee by late February. He said McCain's performance should be
judged merely adequate.

            So who should win, Greenfield asked? The hour for decision was drawing
near.

            Liz Drew had a surprising idea--Steve Forbes. While she said that this
violated the unwritten code against taking more than two candidates in the race
seriously at the same time, she noted that since McCain wasn't running in Iowa,
Forbes would be his surrogate as "not Bush." Touting Forbes would hold back the
McCain wave. Drew said there would then be an entire week to write off Forbes
between the Iowa caucus and New Hampshire.

            This proposal initially drew some jeers from pundits whose contempt for
Forbes is pretty obvious. It especially upset Jack Germond and Howard Fineman,
who said they had already filed their columns declaring McCain the winner. But
in the end, Drew's point proved persuasive. Declaring Forbes the surprise
victor would aid McCain without showing excessive "media bias" against
Bush.

            Greenfield then asked about the danger that McCain might actually defeat
Bush for the nomination. Everyone agreed that this was not a serious risk,
though Greenfield was right to raise it. "The Dean" then adjourned the
meeting.

         
      
   
