
   
   
      
         
            Proposal: A Candidate Quality Control Board
            

            M. Honey:

            Alas, you are right that there are negatives to John McCain, his humor and
honesty aside. Your imaginary McCain line, "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall,
and remove that splotch!" was wicked. Go to your room. I am cranky, as you can
tell, becoming more and more distressed by the people who put themselves
forward to run. And I have lots of company. We need a Candidate Quality Control
Board. But then, who would decide on them ? There is a collective longing
for someone clearly first-rate, capable, and untainted. That kind of person
somehow seems to be unattainable and in our past. As Dick Morris quipped, "If
Al Gore were alive today ..."

            As for my outing with a book and a latte in Harvard Square yesterday (and
here I know I am kissing goodbye a few dinner invitations from some Harvard and
Nightline friends), I think the Esther Williams memoir is great fun. And
let's put it this way: She is easily as smart as Dubya.

            Rising earlier than usual this morning, I have fished out a small nugget
about the previously mentioned (by you, let the record show) Puff Daddy, or
Puffy for short. Henry Kissinger asked someone, "Why does he call himself
Fluffy?" I admit to feeling sympathetic to his mishearing the name. When I was
in college (when ice covered the earth), I unfortunately became known as the
girl who thought she was working for St. Nuclear and His Policy and bragged
that she was tackling James Joyce's "Useless." I think that was probably my
Dean Acheson book.

            In an ecumenical spirit, I want to agree with Christian Coalition founder
Pat Robertson. He told an Oklahoma City audience that President Clinton "has
the morals of an alley cat" but is one of the most brilliant politicians ever.
"The man is a genius, an absolute genius. He's managed to stymie the Congress."
Not to mention Mrs. Clinton.

            ever thine,
M.

         
      
   
