
   
   
      
         
            The Future Ain't What It Used To Be
            

            Dear Dad,

            For as long as I can remember, more than 25 years, reporters have been
asking you to make predictions about the future. And you have always given an
answer along the lines of what you told the ABC producer yesterday. It's
convincing, and sober, and intellectually responsible, and it frustrates them
to no end. Just once, perhaps, you should give them what they want. "Watch for
the invention of flying cars in 2006, which will drastically affect the course
of World War III when it breaks out in 2008. There'll be a Mars colony by 2020.
And by the way, make sure to sell all your Xerox stock by next Wednesday."

            More seriously, I have one question for you about all of this, and one
demurral. The question concerns patterns of technological change. As a lot of
commentators have been noting recently, the future isn't what it used to be.
When I was a kid, visions of the future were heavy on, yes, flying cars and
Mars colonies and the like. Everyone was confidently predicting that by the
year 2000 the human race would be well on its way to settling the solar system,
while at home we'd be casually buzzing from continent to continent in our cars,
and the robot servants took care of cleaning the house.

            These seemed reasonable enough predictions, actually, given the pace of
change up till then in the 20 th century. It's hard to believe that
in just 66 years, less than a lifetime, we went from Wilbur and Orville Wright
on the beach at Kitty Hawk to Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin on the moon. 66
years! If that pace of change had continued, I would probably have been sending
you this e-mail from Jupiter orbit. But it didn't continue. In fact, it's hard
not to think that in a lot of areas, technological change has slowed to a
crawl, with incremental improvements around the edges, but no great leaps
forward. We are 30 years past Apollo 11, and have gone from a Moon landing to
... the space shuttle. Thirty years ago we were flying on 747s, and now we are
flying on ... literally the same airplanes. In the United States, at least,
transport by car and train is mostly slower than it was then (trains are one
area in which the French have beaten us hands down--if we had their high-speed
TGV train, you could come down from Boston to see your grandchildren in
Washington with a two-hour train ride, instead of the seven-plus Amtrak
currently takes). The same is true of other sectors: generation of energy
(where we've stepped back from nuclear power), and even, with the exception of
computer-guided bombs and the like, weaponry. Where are the stun pistols and
blast rays we were supposed to be using by the year 2000? (The NRA has missed
out on a great slogan here. "Personal blast rays don't destroy whole city
blocks. People destroy whole city blocks.")

            But on the other hand, obviously, some technological sectors have been
holding to the same, incredible pace of change that aeronautics went through
earlier: information technology and biotechnology, first and foremost. Why is
this? And how does it relate to the broader structural changes in the economy
that you talked about in your message?

            Here's my demurral. Is there really such a thing as "primordial identities,"
in the way you suggest? This is certainly what the present-day nationalists
would like us to think. They would like us to imagine that for 40 years, every
Serbian mother put her children to bed whispering, "We must put up with this
regime for now. But someday, someday, Serbia will awake!" I'm sure some of them
were doing exactly that, but lots of others adjusted just fine to the communist
regime. It was only when the regime collapsed that certain people saw an
advantage for themselves in highlighting ethnic and linguistic differences, and
in, not so much resurrecting eternal, unchanging, primordial identities so much
as creating new identities based on the old myths and loyalties. And I think
they would probably abandon these new identities easily enough if it suited
them. If the people of Serbia could vote freely and had the choice between
possession of Kosovo and membership in the European Union, which do you think
they would choose?

            Love,
David

         
      
   
