
   
   
      
         
            Siege of State

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with Boris Yeltsin's blunt reaction to President
Clinton's criticism of Russia's Chechnya operation: Don't forget that Moscow
has a vast nuclear arsenal. The Wall Street Journal flags Yeltsin at the top of its
front-page news box. The New York Times
carries Yeltsin's remarks inside (as do the other papers), somehow leading
instead with the promise made Thursday by Russian officials that refugees
who've flooded out of Chechnya recently will be able to return to
Russian-controlled parts of the region by the end of the year. The paper
explains this is intended to signify that Russia is making progress towards
stabilizing the Chechen situation. The Washington Post goes with the Army's newest recruitment
lure: offering entry-level soldiers an array of virtually no-cost college-level
courses over the Internet leading to an associate's degree. This unprecedented
educational expansion for G.I.s , the WP explains, is a sign of the
difficulties the Army is having trying to compete with the booming civilian job
market. USA
Today leads with a new outside study blaming government and industry
for failing to sufficiently ensure the Y2K-compliance of the nation's drinking
water and sewage systems.

            The LAT calls Yeltsin's comments, which came while he was in China to
win support for the Chechnya operation, an "outburst," and compares it to
Nikita Kruschev's "We will bury you." But the paper depicts both President
Clinton and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin as trying to de-escalate. The
other papers agree on these points with this slight difference: The NYT
see Yeltsin's performance as "apparently calculated."

            The WP lead explains that the Army's new educational initiative is
particularly well suited to Hispanics, who make up 40 percent of those
potential recruits who show high military aptitude despite lacking a
high-school diploma, and to deployed soldiers, who, it is thought, should be
able to keep up with course work via Internet-aided "distance learning" far
better than they could via traditional classroom-based coursework. A question
the story doesn't address: Why is this change only being proposed by the Army?
Wouldn't it also help the other branches with their recruitment woes?

            
               USAT , the WP , and LAT front (while the NYT
stuffs) the fascinating spy story unfolding in Washington, where the day before
yesterday it was announced that a career Russian intelligence officer was sent
packing after being caught engaging in an eavesdropping operation against the
State Department. The coverage reports that the Russian was, without ever
having set foot in the building, communicating with a bug that had been
professionally secreted in spaces near Madeleine Albright's offices--the first
ever known penetration of Foggy Bottom. It is reported that some 50-100
sensitive meetings took place there during the bug's deployment.

            The NYT and WP report that the Russian operative was caught with a device hidden in his clothing
that turned on a receiver and tape recorder in his car. The LAT quotes
one "senior official" who denies that there was a recorder involved, but also
others saying there was. The LAT says officials refuse to say whether
disinformation was fed to the Russians after the bug was discovered, while the
WP says this is precisely what was done.

            The LAT points out that the former Soviet Union excelled in this sort
of high-tech bugging, and gives a nice history of the known Soviet operations
of this sort undertaken against U.S. facilities. The story also quotes former
CIA director Robert Gates as saying that 15 years ago the U.S. was concerned
about the Soviets' "ability to read conversations from the vibrations of window
panes in Washington." A question about that: Presumably the window pane
technology and U.S. worries about it are classified. So who says private
citizen Gates can mouth off about it to the LAT ? Today's Papers guesses
that if this statement came out of the mouth of say, Daniel Ellsberg, handcuffs
might be involved.

         
      
   
