
   
   
      
         
            And the Winner for Best Entrance Is ...
            

            Hey y'all:

            I'd have to agree with you about this being the year for ensemble work,
Sarah. One of the best performances of the year came in a movie with an
ensemble cast not enough people saw. Malcolm Lee's The Best Man featured
a turn by Terrence Howard that should've propelled him into movie-star orbit.
He had the best entrance I saw in a movie all year--strumming a flamenco guitar
solo while clocking the honeys in a Manhattan club. Then, as he strolled off
the stage, he strummed the neck of the guitar. Sassy and charismatic, as was
Melissa DeSouza, as the spoiled buppie who played her ma like a 12-inch. There
it is, as they used to say back in the '90s. Given all the trends that have
been tagged and tracked this year, and all the excitement that Roger mentioned
about films in general, it's still a troubling time for black performers. Had
Howard or DeSouza been in a movie officially sanctioned by the hip media--a
contradiction in terms if ever there was one, they'd have three picture deals
with Miramax. Or at least Dimension. Instead, there's still a
separate-but-equal division for actors of color for the most part. I cringe
when I think of the hunger there must've been among African-American actors for
what will end up being the highest profile part for a black man this year: the
John Coffey role in The Green Mile . Michael Duncan Clarke handles the
role with all the dignity he can muster, and it's undeniably a well-meaning
movie. But to have a gentle black giant hang his head and say "Yes, Boss,"
while almost every guard in a Louisiana prison circa 1935 is portrayed as a
forward-thinking, tolerant humanist is the biggest backhanded slap I've seen in
a studio movie in a long time.

            Which is why I was so impressed by Three Kings . It spins the race
issue from all angles--all the stuff about what derogatory term is proper for
an Arab, co-signed by Ice Cube, until he glimpses the Rodney King beating on a
TV inside the bunker. And the self-hatred speech about Michael Jackson may have
been, if you'll pardon the expression, too on-the-nose, but so what? The movie
whipped along so quickly, I'm happy it took a moment for a breather at that
point. Sure, the atrocities heaped on the children throw you out of the movie
the same way the hospital scene in The Third Man does--but if the point
of the movie is that war isn't fun and games, then it should be equally
assaultive on all points.

            And that will be all I have to say about Three Kings . Unless until
this check from David Russell clears my Los Angeles bank. Incidentally, did
anybody see a remarkable Australian movie about an intense, and doomed, love
affair called Praise ? Because its frankness and heat bring to mind
another suffering genre--the adult-relationship film. Most of the best stuff of
the year was playful but missed, y'know, human interaction.

         
      
   
