
   
   
      
         
            The Resumption of History
            

            Dear David:

            In re the millennium: A camera crew from ABC News was here yesterday morning
to interview me for the Peter Jennings news hour. Every Friday evening,
Jennings has a seven-minute segment called "The American Century." The segment
focuses on a single topic. The one I saw last Friday was called "Feminism." The
theme was carried principally by Jennings' narration and documentary footage,
and this was interspersed briefly with some comments by the Chilean novelist
Isabel Allende and the cultural historian Ann Douglas. It is hard to recall
what each of them said, for they were literally sound bites (or is it
bytes?).

            The Jennings producers have scheduled a segment called "Prediction," and I
was called because in 1965 I had initiated the Commission on the Year 2000, of
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and our major report, "Toward the
Year 2000," had been reprinted last year by the M.I.T. Press; as was this year
my book The Coming of Post-Industrial Society , by Basic Books, with a
new 30,000-word foreword.

            I spoke with one of the producers for about 40 minutes on camera. What they
will make of it I do not know, for I began by saying that one could not
predict the future, if by the future one meant point events such as: Who will
become president of the United States in the year 2000? Who will succeed Boris
Yeltsin as president of Russia, if Yeltsin does not create a ruse to succeed
himself? What will happen in Iraq after Saddam Hussein? Or in Cuba after Fidel
Castro? No one knows. There are too many imponderables.

            I think of an episode of my friend Zbigniew Brzezinski, who had been a
member of the Commission of the Year 2000. He was being baited on television by
a hostile commentator, who began: "Professor Brzezinski, you are a
Kremlinologist." "Yes," said Zbig, "if you like that clumsy word." "You tell
the State Department what goes on in the Soviet Union," the man continued.
"When they listen," said Zbig. The man then sprang his trap: "How come you
failed to predict the ouster of Khrushchev?" And Zbig, who is quick on his
feet, replied: "Tell me, if Khrushchev couldn't predict his own ouster, how do
you expect me to do so?"

            The simple point is that one can "predict" only if you have an algorithm, a
decision rule that tells you how to sort things out. Or where there is a firm
set of rules for institutional succession. When I initiated the Commission on
the Year 2000, I went to John Gardner, then the head of the Carnegie
Corporation, for funding. John said: "You have written an interesting
memorandum, but give me a prediction." "It is very difficult to predict," I
said. "Well, if you don't give me a prediction, you don't get the money."

            To paraphrase Dr. Johnson, there is nothing like the loss of money to
concentrate the mind. So, without much forethought, I said: "This is 1964. In
November there will be an election for president; equally, in 1968, 1972, 1976,
1980 ... 2000." "You call that a prediction?" Gardner asked incredulously.
"Well," I replied, "there are today about 120 nations in the world; about how
many can you make such a prediction?" (This was shortly after the French Army
in Algeria had been preparing to send in the paras to overthrow the government
of Guy Mollet, until de Gaulle stepped in to assert authority.) "Oh," Gardner
replied. We got the money.

            This is running on, but to anticipate you, or any reader: Can I return to
John Gardner's question and give one prediction about the next century? No, not
a prediction (for that is not the way to think about it) but a relevant social
framework to identify issues and problems. What we are witnessing is a change
in the "axis" of world socio-political organization; namely, one of widening
economic integration (crossing national boundaries) and increasing political
fragmentation (within national boundaries).

            The economic dimension is a "change of scale," as all national economies are
absorbed into a global framework. The fragmentation is occurring because (as I
remarked a decade ago) the national state is becoming too small for the big
problems of life, and too big for the small problems. The national state was a
19 th -century innovation in response to the breakdown of local
economic exchange. Now the national state becomes defensive against the
international onrush of capital, currency, commodity, and even demographic
flows. And in imposing social programs from a national center, it becomes
unresponsive to the varieties and needs of different localities.

            More than that, we are witnessing not the end of history but the resumption
of history. Communism was a large smothering blanket thrown across societies
and suppressing primordial identities. With the end of the Soviet and Tito
regimes, those societies have broken open. But it is not only those ideological
empires; the re-assertion of defensive primordial identities is taking place in
Africa, and Belgium, and even the United Kingdom. Today there is an independent
Scottish parliament, a Welsh assembly, and a self-governing Northern Ireland.
All this is called devolution, to rhyme with "evolution" (and not to rhyme with
"revolution").

            Some people think you have it easier. You are a historian specializing in
18 th -century France. They think that "the past" is now over. You
know better. It is not. The past is itself ever subject to revision and new
interpretation. As we said when we adopted an epigraph for the Commission on
the Year 2000: "The past is never finished, for the future is yet to come."

            Love,
Dad

         
      
   
