
   
   
      
         
            Archer's Follies
            

            Dear Dad,

            Yes, sad to say, I have indeed read most of Jeffrey Archer's novels. If you
excuse the analogy, they're something like sordid one-night stands. You stay up
late in bed with them, breathless and excited, but when you wake up in the
morning next to them you feel ashamed and disgusted with yourself.

            Still, it's nice to know you're not bothered by the fact that I've read
them. The thing about growing up the son of two New York intellectuals is that
reading trashy fiction somehow seems worse--more of a "transgressive act," as
some of my academic colleagues would put it--than many other minor crimes and
misdemeanors (even more than using the word "hopefully" incorrectly). The
nightmare scenario runs as follows. I'm sitting in a quiet corner somewhere,
devouring the latest Michael Crichton, the cover carefully hidden from sight.
Suddenly, from nowhere, in walks Diana Trilling. "Ah, the son of Daniel Bell
and Pearl Kazin," she says, her great eyes shining sternly. "What are you
reading? Proust? Dostoyevsky? Faulkner? The Liberal Imagination ?" I
tremble so hard the book falls out of my hands, and she sees the cover. The
shame! The humiliation! Of course, Woody Allen captured this idea perfectly in
Bananas , in the scene where he buys a pile of intellectual journals, and
tries to slip a copy of a pornographic magazine in with them, only to have the
shop owner holler, "Hey Harry, how much for a copy of Orgasm ?" Later,
Allen sits on the subway, gazing at the offending item, which he has neatly
tucked into the latest edition of Commentary , with an article by Irving
Kristol on the cover (another favorite Woody Allen line, of course, comes in
Annie Hall , when he quips that Dissent and Commentary have
merged to form a new magazine called Dysentery-- I was probably one of
the few 11-year-olds to laugh at that one).

            But getting back to Jeffrey Archer. Even if Americans read his books, they
don't know much about him, and in any case, the current scandal is much too
convoluted, with all its references to a previous scandal 12 years ago,
to generate much coverage here. Besides, when it comes to illicit goings-on by
European politicians, I'm afraid the usual American responses are, in order: 1)
Who? 2) Do we care? 3) Aren't they always getting up to that sort of stuff
anyway? I mean, take a trio of scandals which, in America, would have blown the
top of the White House into low earth orbit. The president is revealed to have,
not just a mistress, but an entire second family, whom he has been housing, for
years, in a government-owned apartment. The same man is revealed to have been
essentially a youthful Fascist fellow traveler who later helped shield Nazi
collaborators from the law. And just to make things really juicy, he covered up
the fact that he suffered from cancer throughout much of his presidency. That
was François Mitterrand. But I would guess 10 times as many Americans know the
details of Princess Di's bulimia as have ever heard of François
Mitterrand. As for the Belgian deputy prime minister (the Belgian deputy prime
minister??!!), he could set off a small nuclear device while simultaneously
engaged in an unnatural act with a hippopotamus in the middle of the
Grand-Place in Brussels, and even the Times would probably give it three
column inches on Page A13. Is this too cynical?

            But enough about this. We're just two and a half weeks away from the year
2000. Any thoughts on the millennium?

         
      
   
