
   
   
      
         
            "Kyle's Mom Is a Bitch": An Exegesis
            

            Good morning, all:

            Roger: Doubtless Elvis will be responding to you about Michael Clarke Duncan
in The Green Mile , but I've got to say I flinched when I read that "his
function is essentially to absorb and process white pain, suffering, disease
and guilt, which he does visibly--which is a novel change from the decades of
films in which black characters have done the same thing invisibly." That's
exactly what drives some of us crazy about that character--that he has no
autonomous existence, that he's there solely to help "process" white pain.
Poitier might have humanized Steiger, but Mr. Tibbs is nominally flesh and
blood, a man with a full range of emotions. John Coffey is another of Stephen
King's mystical black martyrs with extra-sensory perception. In the scene in
which he heals Patricia Clarkson, he hovers over her bedridden form in a way
that's meant to summon up rape fantasies of fragile white Southern flowers
menaced by darkies--and to miraculously invert them. But to me a miraculous
inversion of a rape fantasy is almost as cheap and false as the thing
itself--the black saint as much of an unhealthy projection as the black
demon.

            Before I drop the film-vs.-video, reverie-vs.-hypnosis issue, let me say
that a) I'm salivating over your home theater setup and b) I'm slightly wary of
anecdotal evidence. Your fears about the medium might be warranted (and let's
find out before all those theaters get converted!), but the tendency to trance
out in front of a boob tube (even a mega-mega-boob tube) has a lot to do with
the setting and the quality of your attention. You can stretch out, glance
around the room, go to the toilet, read a newspaper--and even if you don't, you
know you have the option. I've had most of my really intense aesthetic
experiences at live theater (and a few at the opera), and I've always figured
that's because I'd been forced to make more of an investment in what I was
watching--to commit to it in a way I don't when I watch TV.

            I want to apologize, Roger, if I gave the impression yesterday that Joel
Siegal and John Simon were making fun of Magnolia at a showing of that
film. They were each discussing it--not discreetly but not "publicly"--at a
screening for critics of The Talented Mr. Ripley , and I'm certain that
they didn't think some smartass like me would report the gist of their
conversations to the world. (I gather, however, that Joel Siegal has lambasted
the picture on an upcoming program of yours. And John Simon has never been
ashamed to have his opinions widely broadcast.) I suppose I invoked them
because they represent such wildly divergent sensibilities--one populist, the
other defiantly highbrow--and both were united in a kind of ebullient loathing
of this poor picture. I'm glad you're putting Magnolia on your 10-best
list, because it needs champions; it seems to me so poignantly vulnerable to
ridicule.

            Sarah: In your final post yesterday you asked: "Can it really be that
difficult to write a song called 'Kyle's Mom Is a Bitch?' I bet any number of
people reading this exchange could do as well or better."

            I don't wish to discourage anyone from doing as well or better--my mailbox
is open (as, I'm sure, is yours, Sarah). But I'd like to speak up for that
number, which is emblematic of many of South Park 's strengths. "Kyle's
Mom Is a Bitch" is an infantile playground chant raised to the level of comic
art by a) Cartman's speed-freak/squalling-baby vocal, b) the sophisticated
Broadway-style orchestration, and c) the happy notion that people in other
cultures (the Netherlands, Holland, China, Africa) would come out in full
national regalia to sing about Kyle's mom being a bitch. In form, it's a
showbizzy patter song, but because of its lightning tempo (which makes the
words barely intelligible) and the steady repetition of "bitch" on the
downbeat, it has the primal force of an incantation:

            

               Kyle'sMomisaBITCHshe'sabigfatBITCH
she'sthebiggestBITCHinthewholewideworld ...
OnMondayshe'saBITCHonTuesdaysshe'saBITCH ...

            

            OK, it's not Noel Coward, but it makes me as blissful as anything has since
I was toilet-trained.

            Yours,
David

         
      
   
