
   
   
      
         
            Weimar Russia
            

            Dear Dad,

            Well, I'll accept "recycled platitudes" as covering most political life in
the United States and the U.K. these days, and I certainly don't want to devote
any more of this space to the dreadful Taki. So let me turn from the ridiculous
to the sublimely horrible, and from Britain to a place where they can only
dream of a politics of contented, recycled platitudes: Russia.

            Has ever a man been a better metaphor for the society he governs than Boris
Yeltsin? He stands there, an awesome wreck: drunk, corrupted, angry, in pain,
delusionary, his vital organs putrifying, but still possessing surprising
reservoirs of strength, and still capable of delivering vicious and
unpredictable blows. In his shambling gait and glassy, uncertain stare he
reminds me all too closely of another awesome wreck of a man who led another
awesome wreck of a country: Marshall von Hindenburg at the end of his life. And
that scares me, because the similarities between Hindenburg's Weimar Germany
and Yeltsin's Russia seem all too exact. In both cases there is the society in
a state of collapse, the government tottering dizzily from crisis to crisis,
and the people increasingly gripped by resentment and rage against a West they
blame for abandoning, betraying, and exploiting them. Does Russia have a Hitler
in waiting? Putin? Lukashenko? Lebed? Zyuganov? It's hard to take any of them
seriously. But then, again, Hitler wasn't taken very seriously at the start,
either, with his preposterous rhetoric and silly little moustache.

            Of course, historians easily get carried away by historical comparisons.
But, if you forgive me for tooting my horn a little, you may remember a little
piece I wrote for the New Republic in 1988, called "Paristroika," laying
out the uncanny similarities between the situation of the then-Soviet Union and
the situation of France on the eve of its 1789 revolution (the pompous
Sovietologist Jerry Hough wrote a condescending letter to the editor, scolding
me for my ignorance in failing to realize that the Russians would never let
things get to the point where Ukraine or Lithuania might secede. Oops). I
devoutly hope I am wrong this time.

            But assuming things do continue to get worse in Russia, what should the
United States do? We can always sit around and flagellate ourselves for letting
it happen through our "antagonizing" of the Russians with NATO expansion and
the Kosovo war (and look! Here's Thomas Friedman of the New York Times ,
running up with a selection of nice, dry, leather bullwhips). Personally, I
doubt that there was anything we could have done, given the thieves and thugs
thrown up into leadership positions by the Soviet collapse, and the
disintegration of anything that might have evolved into civil society. Check
out David Remnick's excellent column in this week's New Yorker for more
on this, and on Al Gore's willful blindness to the corruption of his good
friend Viktor Chernomyrdin.

            But regardless of how we interpret our own actions in the 1990s, it seems to
me that there is one critical historical lesson we can't afford to forget. In
the 1930s, the road to appeasement was paved by Western guilt over post-World
War I policy toward Germany--over the harshness of the Versailles Treaty and
reparations. The Germans have a point, the statesmen said. We were too hard on
them. Give them a little slack now, and everything will even out and get back
to normal. Well, we know how well that policy worked. So by all means,
flagellate away. Lay in with a strong will and a strong arm. Howl to the
heavens that our earlier Russian policy was a failure. But don't let it stop us
from having a strong will and a strong arm when it comes to what Putin and
Yeltsin are doing in Chechnya, or it will encourage them to do it again
somewhere else.

            Love,
David

         
      
   
