
   
   
      
         
            Long Live Celluloid
            

            Dear Friends,

            No quarrel from me about the excitement of being a film critic in 1999. This
was one of those miraculous years like 1974 when new talents, and revitalized
old talents, came bursting forth. The year was a slow starter, despite such
early exceptions as Altman's Cookie's Fortune and Kore-Eda's After
Life , but starting with the Telluride and Toronto festivals there was an
unveiling of riches that went on week after week after week.

            I agree with the praise for Being John Malkovich and Three
Kings --movies that were free . Watching them, we had absolutely no
idea what would happen next, and the last half hour of Malkovich was as
inventive and unexpected as the first. Having been pounded through the '90s
with predictable, upbeat film endings dictated by test audiences ("Does Joan
really have to burn at the stake?"), I was so exhilarated to see films that
gave themselves the liberty to surprise and amaze me.

            At year's end, there was another film like that, Paul Thomas Anderson's
Magnolia . I would not dream of revealing what happens at the end of
that movie, but I wanted to cheer when it did happen, because Anderson
was demonstrating in a way both comic and bizarre that all narrative is
arbitrary--that no matter what happens next, it need not, and that no director
need feel shackled by audience or studio expectations.

            I imagine Magnolia will get widely divergent reviews (I know of one
national critic who has put it on his "10 worst" list), but I thought it struck
the right note to close this season of invention. Yes, some will argue that
Anderson's surprise is cheating, or arbitrary, or a trick--but the way for it
is prepared by Ricky Jay's witty narration at the beginning of the film, which
all but tells us to expect learned pigs.

            I was disappointed that David, having applauded so much innovation, put
Julien Donkey-Boy on his worst list. I think Harmony Korine demonstrates
here that he has the soul of a real filmmaker. Yes, the movie is frustrating
and aggressive, but after it is over it has revealed a shape and purpose, one
suited to its style (the whole story is seen through the eyes of a
schizophrenic).

            
               Julien serves another symbolic function this year: It was shot on a
video camera, and (if we can judge by the outtakes on the Web site) its style
was created mostly in post-production on a computer much like the one I am now
using. Julien and The Blair Witch Project are the foot in the
door of digital production; these days anyone can make a movie, and if
it is good enough, can find an audience for it. Cassavetes would rejoice (maybe
not at those two movies--but think how he would have welcomed the freedom of a
digital video camera).

            I was told last January at Sundance that 1999 would be the last year in
which more of the movies had been shot on film than video. We shall see. I am
as firmly in support of video production as I am opposed to the alarming
specter of digital video projection in theaters--a subject that most movie
critics have ignored.

            Most people in the industry believe the hype that digital projection is
destined for the near future. The fact is that digital projection is nowhere
near being practical or affordable, and even if it were--are video and film the
same thing? Some perceptual scientists believe video creates a hypnotic mind
state, and film creates a reverie state. Why is it that we sense, however,
vaguely, a different mental state in a movie than while watching television?
How ironic if Hollywood threw out a century of film to adopt a technology that
did not evoke the mind-state that people buy movie tickets in order to
obtain?

            Elvis knows this is an obsession of mine; in Sunday's Chicago Sun-Times I published a long article that questions
widespread beliefs about the Texas Instruments digital projection system and
extols a much cheaper film projection system called MaxiVision48, which uses
existing, proven technology, and produces a picture its patent holders claim is
500 percent better (not a misprint) than existing film or digital projection,
take your choice.

            As we bow gratefully to this wonderful final year of the first century of
film, let us hope it is not one of the final years of celluloid itself.

            Roger Ebert

         
      
   
