
   
   
      
         
            Great Performances
            

            Dear Everyone,

            Roger's entry captured it perfectly: From minute to minute in the movies
this year, you didn't know what was going to happen next; you couldn't spot the
formula, because there wasn't a formula in sight. Roger, I'd really like to
explore your comparison of 1999 and 1974. That fabled year has been
mythologized so much. Did you feel, at the time, like the movies had more in
common than just sharing in a sudden outburst of creativity? I'm asking because
I wonder if this year's highlights, wildly disparate as they are (from the
slickly commercial Toy Story 2 to the uncompromising Boys Don't
Cry ) don't have some concerns in common--the way, looking back, we can see
that some of the great early-'70s films took messed-up, naive, hypocritical
America as a theme.

            David, I agree with you about Chloë Sevigny, and thank you, too, for
singling out Reese Witherspoon, playing the pathological goody-goody in
Election , as one of the year's best performances; your description of
her leaps and bounds brought back images that match any this year for
memorability: the scene where she's alone in the hallway, bouncing higher than
a pogo stick, her feet kicked way back behind her in unison as she leapt. (I
know people who have tried to imitate this upon leaving the theater.) Also the
freeze-frame on her in the classroom, her hand waving in the air like a
tentacle, her eye-lid half closed, her lips moving into position for that grin
that wants to ingratiate but looks like a grimace. It's hard to write about
this performance, because it's so natural that it looks tossed off, and
especially because Witherspoon, quite deliberately, doesn't put across much
presence --compared with an old-time star, or a technical wizard like
Meryl Streep, she seems kind of small. But if you think of her as representing
a whole new style, a generous style, a kind of post-narcissism, she looks
pretty great. She's quite real but at the same time abstract, almost cartoony;
she's loose and free-associative but attentive, above all, to the needs of the
story.

            Also David, sorry for the slam on South Park . You could be right that
a packed, whooping theater would have helped. But you know, I reserve my right
to find the South Park phenomenon a little toxic; I can't cut it too
much slack because I don't sense half as much going on upstairs as you do. I
mean, forget about art. Can it really be that difficult to write a song called
"Kyle's Mom Is a Bitch?" I bet any number of people reading this exchange could
do as well or better.

            All best,
Sarah

         
      
   
