
   
   
      
         
            Why Global Warming Is Good for Gore

            If you are an Al Gore supporter, pray for a mild winter. This is the message
Chatterbox gleans from a "to be sure" paragraph in a Page One article by Steve
Liesman and Jacob Schlesinger in the Dec. 15 Wall Street Journal . The
article explains why the doubling of oil prices this year has failed to disrupt
the economy. The reasons cited include: the shift to natural gas and coal; the
growing relative importance of the service sector; more efficient futures
markets that allow manufacturers to lock in low prices for fuel; more
energy-efficient technology in planes and cars; cost-cutting associated with
(what else) the Internet; and Alan Greenspan. According to the Journal
piece, the main reason oil prices have spiked to $25 a barrel--the highest in
nearly 10 years--is that there's been more compliance than usual with OPEC's
current effort to cut production. Even so, when you factor out inflation and
taxes, a gallon of gas costs 10 cents less than it did in 1973.

            But let's take a look at that "to be sure" paragraph. A "to be sure"
paragraph is exactly what it sounds like--a paragraph that carefully lays out
significant caveats to the story's main hypothesis. (Nowadays at the
Journal , it's considered somewhat hackneyed actually to include the
phrase "to be sure" in your "to be sure" paragraph.) In Liesman and
Schlesinger's story, which is appropriately judicious, there are more than one
"to be sure" paragraphs, but here's the one that interests Chatterbox:

            
               The real test may be yet to come. If industries stock up on fuel ahead of
the New Year or a lengthy cold snap grips the Northeast, some analysts think
oil prices could creep above $30 a barrel--a level seen only briefly during the
Gulf War. That scenario worries some economists. If prices reach that height
and stay there, "economic activity slows, and the trade deficit worsens," says
oil economist Phil Verleger of the Brattle Group, a consulting firm based in
Cambridge, Mass. "It can be a prescription for a fairly serious and sharp
recession."
            

            Remember recessions? These were economic downturns, once thought to be
cyclical in nature, that caused unemployment and general unhappiness. They
frequently ejected sitting presidents (such as Jimmy Carter and George Bush)
from the Oval Office. Assuming that recessions haven't been rendered
permanently extinct by the eight-year Long Boom, the reappearance of one before the 2000 election would
be extremely inconvenient for Al Gore, whose platform essentially boils down
to: "I don't like what Bill Clinton did with his wanker, but I sure do like
what he did with the U.S. economy."

            That's where the necessity for a mild winter kicks in. If a frigid winter
pushed oil prices high enough to trigger a recession, it would be very bad for
Gore.* His chances of winning the general election--and maybe the
nomination**--would be greatly diminished. On the other hand, if the
temperature stayed warm, there would be no oil price spike, hence probably no
recession. This is the sense in which Gore is an ironic beneficiary of
global warming , the ongoing natural catastrophe that Gore's been issuing
jeremiads about for several years. (There is a complex argument that also
blames cold snaps and other forms of extreme weather on global warming, but for
simplicity's sake Chatterbox will ignore it.) An added benefit of a warm
winter, of course, would be that it would make it clearer than ever that Gore's
concern about global warming is well-founded.

            If you are a Gore supporter, however, please do not interpret this to
mean that you should climb into your SUV and drive around the block 12 times in
order to dump more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Most obviously, reducing
carbon dioxide emissions is more important than electing Al Gore president.
Secondarily, it probably wouldn't cause the Earth to warm up quickly enough to
make a difference in weather patterns for January, February, and March 2000.
And, finally, if lots of people suddenly increased the number of miles they
drove in their cars, oil prices would of course shoot up and create the very
risk of recession that Gore supporters want to avoid.

            
               *To-be-sure footnote: George W. Bush's ties to the petroleum industry
wouldn't be looked on favorably during a recession triggered by high oil
prices. But Bush would still probably reap a net benefit from not being
associated with the current administration . If by some chance the
nominee were instead John McCain, he would reap a larger benefit, since McCain
isn't associated in voters' minds with the oil industry.
            

            
               **A cold winter might conceivably help Bill Bradley win the nomination,
but as a Democrat in the general election he'd have to contend with accusations
that his party caused the recession.
            

         
      
   
