
   
   
      
         
            For Cooks With Commitment Issues

            This may be hard to believe, but Culturebox has discovered a "best-of" list
with solid, practical value. It's a brand extension of the "Best American"
literary franchise--you know, The 
               Best American Essays ,
The 
               Best American Short Stories , etc. This iteration of the idea
is called The Best American Recipes 1999: The Year's Top 100 From Books,
Magazines, Newspapers & the Internet , edited by book editor Fran
McCullough and food writer Suzanne Hamlin (Houghton-Mifflin, $26).

            
               The Best American Recipes , Culturebox wishes to warn you in advance,
is not for readers of Cook's 
               Illustrated magazine or anyone
else pledged to uphold gastronomical values. On the other hand, it's not for
"dummies" either, as the other leading introductory series likes to put it.
This cookbook's brow-level is all over the place. One minute you're cooking the
first-prize-winning recipe in the Pillsbury BAKE-OFF® (chicken thighs with a
sweet-and-sour Old El Paso® salsa, currants, and honey sauce, served on
couscous), and the next you're composing the sternly Mediterranean endive,
fennel, and orange salad from the latest cookbook by Paula Wolfert, the most rigorous scholar in American cookbook
writing. The recipes are Indian and Brazilian and French
and Italian and Texan and Minnesotan. They're culled from
regional cookbooks, Robert Redford's kitchen and Sophia Loren's memoirs, and
the kinds of sample recipes you find inside the box when you open your new
Kitchen Aid. The introduction lists emerging food trends of the year, albeit a
bit cursorily, and without really specifying how the trends are certified as
such. There are marginal notes explaining how to secure obscure ingredients or
perform difficult procedures, and menu recommendations that allow you to
assemble an impressive three-course meal using this book alone. In short, it's
the perfect purchase or gift for those among us with bare kitchen bookshelves
and larger culinary ambitions that dwell in latency, stymied by a grave--though
common--psychological flaw: being unable to commit to a single technique or
ethnic cuisine at a time.

            Which brings us to the question raised by The Best American Recipes
1999 : Why, in a world besotted with mindless applications of the "best-of"
conceit, did it take so long to come up with this one? The answer surely has
something to do with the sociology of cooking right now--you're supposed to
crave purity, or at least authenticity. If you're going to cook Italian, you'd
best get the works of Marcella Hazan, or else a food anthropologist who has
interviewed all the grandmothers in Italy and discovered the best
liver-and-grappa pasta sauce to be found north of the Arno. Ditto with Spanish
and Penelope Casas, Indian and Julie Sahni, and on it goes around the globe. If
your tastes are downmarket, you can be a purist in that department too--just
buy the works of white-trash aficionados Jane and Michael Stern, all of whose
dishes must be presented with the requisite ironic appurtenances, such as trays
and swizzle sticks. Reference-style cookbooks, such as Fannie Farmer, range
fairly broadly over the American basics, but if you want to get higher-end than
that, you're hard-pressed to find anything but books devoted to individual
cuisines. Foodies don't believe in mixing and matching--it's the culinary
equivalent of putting an Eames chair in a room full of frilly French antiques.
Look at the harsh waves of criticism that greeted Maria Guarnaschelli, the
editor who asked food experts and celebrity chefs of all stripes and
preferences to contribute chapters to the 1998 update of The Joy of
Cooking .

            But cooking is one of the few areas in which anthologizing actually makes
sense. A best-of collection of recipes is a much more satisfying creature than
most other genres of best-ofs. When it comes to poetry, for instance, such
compilations always lack context: Who can grasp the greatness of a poet on the
basis of a single poem? Anthologies of essays, on the other hand, just make you
feel oppressed. No one wants to read that much of the same thing--that much
folksy, digressive argument--in a single sitting. But The Best American
Recipes 1999 reflects life as it is lived. This is how Americans eat--at an
Italian restaurant one night, a Chinese one the next. America the melting pot
has become American the food court, and The Best American Recipes makes
a virtue of that fact.

            McCullough and Hamlin say they plan to repeat The Best American
Recipes in 2000, which is good, because there's room for improvement here.
Some things are strangely delicious, such as the salsa-and-couscous chicken and
the Lemon-Almond Pound Cake, which is essentially baked marzipan dough. Other
dishes, such as the cloyingly sweet lamb with olives and oranges from celebrity
chef Mario Batali's Simple Italian Food , just don't measure up. The
times given for cooking are not to be relied on. Culturebox tested everything
in or on a gas range viewed favorably by Consumer Reports , and found
that some things were done in the time recommended, but the so-called Perfect
Brownies--a dry, crumbly, tasteless contribution from a book presumptuously
called The Perfect Recipe --would have been overbaked, and Batali's lamb
dish understewed, if Culturebox had followed the recipes strictly. The fault
may lie with the authors of the original cookbook or recipe, but since Hamlin
and McCullough allege that they tried everything out, they share the blame.

            There are other faults. Eclecticness guarantees waste and inefficiency.
Should you shell out $25 for a bottle of Italian lemon liqueur you will use
once, then store in your liquor cabinet? Or should you make your own, which
would take about four days? The writing can be breathless and schmaltzy--it was
not necessary to say of the Turkish poached eggs with garlic yogurt from a
cookbook written by a couple that "this is a Sunday morning meal from two
people whose love for garlic is as intense as it is for each other." The
emphasis on trends leads to a knee-jerk over-reliance on ingredients that
happen to be fashionable right now, such as cumin and coconut milk. But these
are quibbles, which could well be obviated by next year's anthology. And
besides, they're in keeping with the basic idea. This is a cookbook that's
pleasingly shallow and imperfect, just like those of us who are drawn to
it.

         
      
   
