
   
   
      
         
            Sense and Inessentiality
            

            Dear Dad,

            That was a lovely letter. A long time ago you talked to me about British
obituaries, and since then, when I've had time, I've tried to read the obituary
page of the Daily Telegraph . After getting your message, I went back to
it on the Web, and saw again what you mean about the differences from American
obits. Here's something from last Friday, from a short notice written by the
poet P.J. Kavanagh about his late brother-in-law, Lord Milford: "He could not
help having a creative laugh: unfeigned, joyous, it made you feel much funnier
than you thought you were, which is among the kindest of social gifts." I can't
imagine an American newspaper printing an obituary with a sentence like this,
which might certainly help get readers through a cold day. There's a certain
delight in the inessential things in life which is one of the most pleasant
things about British (and also Irish) culture. I suppose it's one reason why
poetry remains so much more of a vital force in Britain and Ireland than in
America, for what is poetry if not inessential?

            Tony Blair, of course, doesn't seem to have much time for the inessential.
His Britain has to be dynamic, forward-thrusting, fully charged. In this, he
resembles no one so much as Margaret Thatcher, whose attitude toward the
inessential was one of brusque, snarling contempt. Speaking as an American,
this trend in British politics is something I deplore, and my opinion has only
been strengthened by reading British authors like John Mortimer (of Rumpole
of the Bailey fame), and magazines like the Spectator , which have
made a fetish out of the British attitude toward inessential things. Long live
fox-hunting, the House of Lords, High Table and High Church and High Tea, Horse
Guards and public schools and the royal family! But as a historian, I can't
resist remarking that the cultivation of the inessential is a trademark of
aristocratic societies (aristocrats deliberately spend their time on trifles to
show that they can , and others can't), and that as charming as it
appears to outsiders, most native members of the society are unlikely to be so
well disposed, since the burden of the aristocracy falls on their shoulders.
And having seen one of the famous public schools at rather too close quarters
back when I was 14, during your sabbatical year in London, I think that if I
were British, I'd be more likely to approach those charming and inessential
aspects of British society with a box of explosives than with the
Spectator 's pious reverence (and on the Speccie in particular,
you'll remember Ian Buruma's devastating account of the place in his book
Anglomania ).

            But back to the news. The most amusing thing I saw in the paper yesterday
was that a man legally named DotComGuy (formerly, Mitch Maddox), is going to
move into an empty house carrying only a credit card on January 1 and not leave
again for the entire year, relying exclusively on the Internet for furniture,
food, services and entertainment. His Web site claims that he will spend the
year "living inside the Internet," as if this were some great foray into new
and unexplored regions of cyberspace. Talk about being behind the curve! I
think the real challenge for a currently employed middle-class professional
today would be to spend a year living entirely outside the Internet: no
e-mail, no eToys or E*Trade or Amazon, no MP3s or game demos, no online banking
or selection of benefits through the company intranet, not to mention, of
course, no 
                  Slate
               . I don't think I'd survive for more than a few
days (which is why your daughter-in-law, alas, once referred to herself as a
"wwww", for "world wide web widow"). You may have a different opinion, not
being anywhere near as much a regular user of the Web as I am. But then again,
here you are, in 
                  Slate
               : the public intellectual as content
provider for Microsoft.

         
      
   
