
   
   
      
         
            Toast, Coffee, and the Obituaries
            

            Dear David,

            At the Breakfast Table these days, quite literally, the first thing I turn
to, after scanning the front page of the Times , is the obituaries. Years
ago, some people had a prurient interest in these, such as those who went to
the funeral of the thuggish Hollywood producer Harry Cohn to make sure that he
was dead. But nowadays, so many of my contemporaries and colleagues are
going--five at Harvard and MIT in the past months--that I turn to those pages
with what Kierkegaard called "the concept of the Dread."

            The other day I read in the Times of the death of Niccolo Tucci, at
age 91. I had not thought of Tucci in years. He had come to the United States
just before World War II as an Italian cultural attaché, and a fascist. A
fascist? Yes. People forget, or most never knew, that in its early years,
fascism was a powerful intellectual movement. Mussolini had been a prominent
left-wing socialist and editor of the party's newspaper. Marinetti, the founder
of Italian futurism, was a fascist. As were the modernist playwright Luigi
Pirandello, the poet d'Annunzio, and the major Italian philosopher Giovanni
Gentile, who influenced Collingwood and was minister of education in
Mussolini's government. Tucci had been a follower of Gentile, but broke with
fascism during the war and became a member of Dwight Macdonald's circle around
Politics , where I met him. He had a tart wit.

            In 1945, when I was managing editor of the monthly magazine Common
Sense (my editor was Varian Fry, who had returned to New York after saving
countless lives of artists and writers by arranging for their exit from Vichy
France to Spain and Portugal and then to safer havens), I had asked Tucci to
write a monthly column. On what? He asked. Oh, I replied, on, say, "Travels to
America." Strange country, he said. Why do they call this America? It was the
first name of the man (Amerigo Vespucci). Why not Vespuccia? Fine, I said, we
can call it "Travels in Vespuccia," and you can write about the Daughters of
the Vespuccian Revolution, or the Vespuccian Legion march down the street. He
did not. It reminded him too much of fascism.

            There are, or have been, strong differences between obituaries in the
American and in the English press. Those in the American press are usually dry
and thin and fail to catch the personality of a man or woman. Those in the
English press are often quite personal and written at times by a friend of the
individual. This month, Hugh Massingberd published in England The Fifth
Volume of Obituaries from the Daily Telegraph ! Obituaries are history. Yet
the times are changing. Witness the long obituary of Joseph Heller in the
Times yesterday, beginning with two columns on the front page and
continuing, after the jump, to almost a full page inside.

            One of the older arts of homage has been poetry. Alfred Lord Tennyson
published "In Memoriam AHH," more than a hundred verses of elegy and sorrow for
his friend Arthur Henry Hallam. And W.H. Auden published "In Memory of W.B.
Yeats" (d. Jan., 1939):

            
               He disappeared in the dead of winter;
The brooks were frozen, the air-ports almost deserted,
And snow disfigured the public statues; ...
The day of his death was a dark cold day.
            

            Yeats, of course, wrote his own "death poem":

            

               Under bare Ben Bulben's head
In Drumcliff churchyard Yeats is laid ...
On limestone quarried near the spot
By his command these words are cut!

               

                  
                     Cast a cold eye
On life, or death.
Horseman, pass by!
                  

               

            

            For us, as Jews, the eulogy is not literary but religious. In going each
year to the cemetery, we place a stone on the monument, in commemoration of the
acts of Joshua and Samuel in giving praise to the Lord. But the most affecting
act is the kaddish , the statement of mourning that a son says on the
death of his father. It is haunting its recurring refrain, and keeps pulsing
through my mind, now, every day. I think of my close friends, Dick Hofstadter,
Lionel Trilling, Sidney Hook ... They are now part of history.

            But the breakfast is finished, and here is the rest of the cold day ahead
...

            Love,
Dad

         
      
   
