
   
   
      
         
            Bush and Bradley at a Crossroads?
            

            Issue 1 is John McCain's continuing surge in New Hampshire. Issue 2 is Al
Gore's heated attacks on Bill Bradley.

            Most pundits think that George W. Bush's mediocre performance in his two
debate appearances has made him vulnerable, but pundits disagree over just how
vulnerable. On NBC's Meet the
Press , the Des Moines Register 's David Yepsen predicts that
McCain will do well in Iowa even without campaigning there, but John Bachman,
of Des Moines' WHO-TV, says that his station's recent poll shows McCain still
behind Bush by 40 points. On Fox News
Sunday , Tony Snow points out that Bush's national lead hasn't
budged--despite his trouble in New Hampshire--but Brit Hume predicts that
Bush's debate performances will start a popularity slide in the early primary
states. On CNN's Late
Edition , Steve Roberts asserts that Bush supporters are uneasy with
his debate performance, but Susan Page notes that Bush is still the
overwhelmingly likely nominee.

On ABC's This Week , Bill Kristol, ever the neoconservative, continues
to support reformist underdog McCain, while George F. Will, ever the Tory,
continues to argue for establishmentarian front-runner Bush. Will points out
that the GOP establishment's endorsement of Bush was completely voluntary and
that grassroots uprisings, as McCain is attempting to bring about, are not
always good for the party--look at what George McGovern did to the Democrats.
Kristol counters that despite McGovern's failure as a presidential candidate,
his empowerment of the Democratic Party's grassroots was healthy. Kristol then
predicts that once Bush debates in Iowa tomorrow his polls will start sliding
there.

            With a few exceptions--such as Mark Shields (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) and Jack Germond ( Meet
the Press )--the pundits agree that Bill Bradley must respond to Al Gore's
charge that Bradley would raise taxes as president. Paul Gigot
( NewsHour and Meet the Press ) and Tucker Carlson ( Late
Edition ) both think that Bradley must fight back to stay alive. (Gigot
calls it Bradley's "moment of truth.") Juan Williams ( Fox ) and Tucker
Carlson say that Gore's attack-dog campaigning has reminded the Bush people
that a general-election fight against the vice president would be no cakewalk.
Most pundits agree that Bradley's recently disclosed heart problem is not a big
deal.

Interviews et cetera: The Fox panel makes up for its
kid-gloves treatment of Kenneth Starr several weeks ago (see the Nov. 15 "Pundit
Central") by grilling John McCain--and McCain rises to the occasion. Tony
Snow asks McCain who his favorite Supreme Court Justice is, and when McCain
says Sandra Day O'Connor, Snow asks him to name an area in which she has had a
lasting effect on constitutional law. After a short pause, McCain answers:
Native American rights. When Brit Hume asks McCain about Dean Acheson's role in
the firing of Gen. Douglas MacArthur, McCain responds that he admires Acheson's
involvement because the dismissal was necessary to assure civilian control of
the military at the start of the Cold War. ... While McCain is on the program,
the Fox producers flash a message on the screen asserting that, with
an IQ of 133, McCain would be "among the most intelligent Presidents in
history."


John McCain No Vive La Vida Loca
               
            

            
               
                  Fox : Your favorite rock band is ...

            
               McCain: Nine Inch Nails. My daughter, who is now 15, has
kept me up to speed. I think the Backstreet Boys are her favorite, but I'm
terribly concerned--she seems enamored with Ricky Martin. I know that he's a
handsome guy, but that's not the one I want her to marry.

            

               Last Word
            

            The practical effect of that will be that the New York Times , the
trial lawyers, the labor unions, and the Sunday shows will have all the
influence over the presidential campaign from about March [until the
election].

            

               --Senator Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., on John McCain
and Bill Bradley's agreement to forego soft money donations if they become
their respective party's presidential nominees ( Meet the Press )

            

            Gore and Bush, I hear, are going to have a joint event funded by soft money
on K Street--to contrast the McCain-Bradley campaign-finance-reform
event--co-hosted by Terry McAuliffe, Bill Clinton's fund raiser, and Haley
Barbour, the former Republican [National Committee] chairman.

            

               --Bill Kristol, joking on This Week
               

            

         
      
   
