
   
   
      
         
            The Beginning of Wisdom Is Disaggregation
            

            Dear David:

            Many questions. Many "methodological difficulties." How can I sort these
out? The old method, in cheder , is to tell a drusha , to tell a
story. (In my old age, I regress to the methods of my youth.)

            In 1946, William Fielding Ogburn, the leading sociologist of social change,
wrote a sober book, The Social Effects of Aviation , in which he sought
to trace out the possible impact of airplanes for the remainder of the century.
He looked to see how aviation might affect our lives in 21 different areas,
such as population, family, cities, religion, health, environment, recreation,
crime, education, marketing, agriculture, public administration, international
relations--you name it. Quite an exhaustive list for effects from a single
cause.

            Ogburn began with population, since those changes "affect almost all the
phenomena of social life," and went on to say : "Aviation will probably have
the effect of reducing the number of births slightly." One rubs one's eyes in
"slight" astonishment.

            Ogburn was reasoning from the economist's model of the introduction of the
automobile, since "families postponed the expense of ... rearing a child in
order to own an automobile. ... In a similar manner some families will be
smaller than would otherwise be because of the expense of owning and operating
an aircraft."

            What? What? What? (as George III would say). Yes, at that time the
government had made that assumption. Eugene Vidal, the undersecretary of
commerce (and father of Gore Vidal), had said that with the development of
helicopters, about 710,000 families (out of 32 million in the United States)
would have private airplanes, the reason being that these were the ones with
incomes of more than $10,000 a year. A lot of people today fly a private
plane--I do not know the number. But the initial assumption was flat wrong.

            A number of years ago, Dennis Gabor won the Nobel Prize for inventing the
hologram. Many people thought that this would "transform" our lives. Fifteen
years ago, AT&T "predicted" that we would all have picture phones in our
houses. What? What? What? I do not mean to jeer, but the point is that,
beginning with Future Schlock (endorsed by Richard Nixon and later by
Newt Gingrich), every technological change is hailed with a whiz, boom, bang,
etc.

            You use the phrase "the rate of technological change." The only trouble is
that we do not know how to measure it. Technology is a large globule of many
diverse components. Rate is a metric, but what is it? Economists measure
technology as part of total factor productivity, but usually as a residual
after all the other factors (capital, labor) have been measured. Not very
glamorous. And of limited use, since it does not deal with institutional and
organizational changes.

            Some technologies can be "predicted"--some forecasters define it as
"envelope curve" projections--if you can define the narrow parameters and the
physical constraints of particular items, such as Moore's Law on computer-chip
speeds and size, or more broadly, the change from a propeller drive plane to a
jet engine--but there, the upper limits are 16,000 miles an hour, for that is
escape velocity and you are then not in cyberspace but real outer space.

            The beginning of wisdom, I suppose, is disaggregation and particularity, and
once these have been carefully defined, to begin to generalize through
theory (which brings me back to where I began yesterday).

            On primordial identities: I don't believe in single identities, but
there are root identities such as being a Basque, a Catalan, a Kurd, or
an Occitan, especially when there is a need to assert such a root identity
against a larger, sometimes more smothering polity or culture. But let me
reserve that for another day.

            Love,
Dad

         
      
   
