
   
   
      
         
            A Very Un-Sucky Year
            

            Dear Colleagues:

            Let me open with a flashback to the '80s, which is when I started writing
movie reviews and when it seemed as if all my wrap-ups began with a variation
on "This has been the suckiest year for movies in history ." We were on a
downward spiral. In the wake of Jaws and Star Wars , studios had
been infected with blockbuster fever. Yes, they'd always been profit-oriented,
but now they were run by publicly held corporations instead of whimsical
moguls, and development offices had only recently become umbilically attached
to marketing departments. We were suddenly drowning in teenpix,
Simpson-Bruckheimer-style Go For It movies, and mismatched-buddy cop flicks.
The MTV aesthetic hadn't enlarged the vocabulary of storytelling--it had dumbed
it down. The "indie" movement was but a trickle. Spike Lee hadn't emerged and,
if you believed the conventional wisdom, never would. Movies that many in my
generation regard as touchstones were freaks. Blue Velvet came about
because a nutty guy named Dino wanted David Lynch to make another Star
Wars : Dune . My Beautiful Laundrette was financed by and for
British TV. Really interesting "mainstream" pictures-- Something Wild ,
say--were seen by almost no one.

            I flash back to those dark times because I think of this past year--the last
year of cinema's first whole century--as the most hopeful since the 1970s. It's
not that there have been so many masterpieces. It's that movies have become
expansive again. There's an anything-goes quality to even studio
pictures that suggests an impatience with old ways of telling stories--a desire
to create a new syntax to capture a new kind of flickering consciousness.
Narration has returned, along with novelistic, free-associational leaps in
imagery. In part, this is the upshot of digital editing technologies, which
permit noodling around as never before; and in part it's an indication that the
aforementioned "MTV aesthetic" is beginning to come of age. Thank God--and
Godard. In mainstream film, you have to go back to the silents to find imagery
this unfettered.

            I'm not talking about the undiscriminating, amphetamine-soaked pyrotechnics
of Oliver Stone (or even the discriminating amphetamine-soaked pyrotechnics of
Martin Scorsese). It's David O. Russell making a big-budget war movie ( Three
Kings ) that revels in both physical and moral confusion. It's Being John
Malkovich , in which the fluid craziness turns audiences on--they love not
knowing where they're going. Steven Soderbergh's The Limey is one of my
favorites this year not because I think it's such a great film (or even as much
fun as Out of Sight ) but because I'm so exhilarated by its doubling and
tripling and quadrupling back. Soderbergh messes up its surface the way an
artist hacks at a canvas with an X-acto blade, reshuffling footage in a way
that, ultimately, dovetails with both the solution to the movie's mystery and
to its larger themes. (I'm aware of the counterexample: the dread Harmony
Korinne, whose hacking at his canvas is an attempt to disguise his limitations
as bold artistic choices.)

            Our colleague Jonathan Rosenbaum, who shared this space last year, will
doubtless make fun of my sanguinity. He has argued in the Chicago Reader
that the most challenging foreign and independent films are not being bought by
U.S. distributors (or worse, they're being bought by Miramax and left
unreleased in the United States). He might be right--I can't say. But from
where I sit, the medium looks damn healthy. Maybe former "indie" titan Miramax
is busy churning out Brit-inflected Oscar vehicles, but Warner Bros. and
Paramount are putting their stamp on such gutsy fare as Three Kings ,
Election , and South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut .

            Tomorrow I plan to talk about some of the amazing performances in this
year's movies--as well as responding to your comments and to those of our
readers. But first, my choices for the best movies of 1999.

            1. South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut . This breathlessly vulgar,
hyperbolic, Swiftian satire of the notion that movies "warp our fragile little
minds" is our generation's Duck Soup --not to mention the most inventive
movie musical in decades. My only question: Why does the TV show blow chunks
this year?

            2. Three Kings . One of the most audacious war movies ever made, with
an original, off-kilter sensibility that captures the madness of Iraq (and the
betrayal of the Kurds by the United States) in the days following the Gulf War.
It might have been even better if it had been less bound by formula; the
writer-director, David O. Russell, is working at such a high level of
inspiration--and outrage--that the structure he has employed can't fully
contain the emotions he kicks up.

            3. Being John Malkovich . Close to pure farce yet grounded in
loneliness, impotence, self-loathing, envy. The action is surreal, the emotions
are violently real. The screenwriter, Charlie Kaufman, is a genius at finding
slapstick correlatives for people's nebulous sense--or non-sense--of
themselves.

            4. Election . See the entry above. Alexander Payne's caustic comedy
tells the story of a high-school election from four different
perspectives--none of them remotely rational.

            5. The Iron Giant . Brad Bird's cartoon evocation of "leftist" '50s
sci-fi is uncannily lyrical: It sums up an entire era of ideological genre
moviemaking--and transcends it.

            6. Boys Don't Cry . Starkly beautiful, Kimberly Peirce's debut film
has at its core a tragicomic irony: That the cross-dressing Brandon Teena, a k
a Teena Brandon (the rapturous Hillary Swank) feels most at home among the sort
of roughnecks who would kill her if they knew her true gender.

            7. The Buena Vista Social Club . A triumphant concert that, in the
hands of director Wim Wenders, is also a triumphant act of reanimation--of a
culture, a city, a way of life.

            8. The Limey . See above.

            9. The Straight Story . David Lynch's implacably untwisty road
movie--call it Found 
               Highway --with a performance by Richard
Farnsworth of unbounded soul.

            10.

            I'm leaving number ten symbolically blank, because I couldn't decide among
so many terrific films. Any other year it could have been Dogma ,
Sweet and Lowdown , Topsy-Turvy , All About My Mother ,
Rosetta , or even (laugh all you want, you ungrateful swine)
Magnolia . It could have been A Map of the World , one of the most
painful movies I've ever had to sit through (I couldn't finish the novel,
either), but one that ultimately pays off. It could have been A Walk on the
Moon , My Son the Fanatic , The End of the Affair , Dick ,
Sleepy Hollow , Run Lola Run , Toy Story 2 , Princess
Mononoke , Cookie's Fortune , American 
               Movie , or the
barely-noticed black comedy Six Ways to Sunday . It could have
been--whatever their problems-- The Sixth Sense , American Beauty ,
The Blair Witch Project (backlash schmacklash, it scared me), October
Sky , or The Matrix . It could have been a poignantly silly comic-book
movie that I seem to be alone in loving: Mystery Men .

            It could have been Joel and Ethan Coen's The Big Lebowski , which I
inexplicably missed last year but has given me--and, I suspect, many
others--more pleasure in repeated cable viewings than all but two or three of
the movies above. It will survive its box-office flop and become a classic.

            It could have been a movie I haven't yet seen: Tim Roth's The War
Zone , Hurricane , Any Given Sunday , Errol Morris's Mr.
Death .

            It could not have been anything on my Worst list:

            
               20 Dates , which gives obnoxious heterosexual Jewish males a worse
name than we deserve.

            
               Life is Beautiful --the English version. (Okay, I admit it, I didn't
actually see the English version. I just think it's cool that I can put
this movie on my worst list two years in a row. Maybe I should make it a
permanent fixture.)

            
               Julien Donkey-Boy . See above. See anything but Julien
Donkey-Boy .

            
               The Haunting . The antithesis of The Blair Witch Project --and
everything that's wrong with overexplicit big-budget horror.

            
               Star Wars: The Phantom Menace . Jar Jar Binks. Enough said.

            
               Body Shots . A great case for date rape.

            
               Happy Texas . How many lame homo jokes can fit into a single
movie?

            
               Playing by Heart . Just mediocre until a mother reads Goodnight
Moon to a son on the verge of expiring from AIDS. Then, monstrous.

         
      
   
