
   
   
      
         
            Nothing Like a Dane

            The Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times lead with the resumption in Washington this week of Israel-Syria
peace talks. Both papers emphasize that prospects for an end to the 51-year
state of war between the two countries are excellent. The New York Times leads with a U.S.
surgeon general's report, to be released today, stating that although in any
given year one in five Americans experiences a mental disorder and that half of
all Americans do so at least once in the course of their lives, most never seek
treatment. USA Today goes with the Census Bureau's release today of a
special edition of its annual statistical abstract of the U.S. that offers a
snapshot of how the country has changed during this century. Some examples: In
the century's first decade, there were 2 million immigrants from Italy and
50,000 from Mexico, and in its last, the numbers were approximately the
reverse; America's air is 10 times as polluted today as in 1900; the population
of Buffalo is almost exactly the same as in 1900, while that of L.A. is about
35 times larger. A NYT inside story on the abstract notes that two of
the most popular girls' names in 1900 were Florence and Bertha, while today,
neither is in the top 10,000.

            The reporting on Israel-Syria makes it clear that the most sensitive issues
to be hashed out are whether Israel will keep an intelligence-gathering post in
the Golan Heights and its access to the Sea of Galilee. The WP account
states that in the run-up to last week's announcement of the talks, the U.S.
engaged in much secret diplomacy, including a dozen phone calls between
President Clinton and Syria's Hafez Assad. Last week, the LAT reported
that Yasser Arafat was not pleased by the Israel-Syria thaw, but today's
LAT doesn't follow up on this.

            The NYT says the surgeon general's report finds that most people with mental
disorders don't get help because they don't think effective treatments exist,
or they fear being stigmatized, or because they lack applicable insurance. The
report endorses, says the paper, equality between mental health insurance
coverage and that for physical illnesses and claims that such a coverage
increase needn't be costly.

            The LAT is alone in fronting the International Olympic Committee's
weekend reaction to the past year's 2002 Winter Games bribery scandal: voting
in a reform package designed to restore the IOC's reputation. The package's
most prominent measure is a ban on members' visits to bidding cities. The story
quotes IOC chairman Juan Antonio Samaranch as saying the vote means the problem
is solved, but it also notes that the House of Representatives will be
questioning him this week at hearings looking into Olympic corruption. In
addition, says the LAT , a DOJ investigation continues.

            A WP front-page in-depther on Bill Bradley, second in a series, portrays him as driven
and insecure as a young scholar-athlete. The story says that as a Knick, he
routinely held on to an opposing player's shorts and even garners a quote from
the man 26 years later: "He was one of the dirtiest players I ever played
against." (And the story also relates that at Princeton, Bradley dated Diane
Sawyer, seriously enough that she and her parents visited his house over
Christmas one year. Neither Bradley nor Sawyer would comment to the Post
about the romance.) Meanwhile, on the USAT front Barbara Bush mounts a
defense of George W.'s gravitas: "People don't know that he is a very smart
history buff and that's what he reads." (For 
                  Slate
               's
take on another aspect of GWB's persona click
here.)

            Sunday's NYT "Week in Review" confuses with a graphic about "Saturday
Night Specials." The text says they are a favorite among criminals, but the
stats go the other way: one box shows that SNSs only account for about 15
percent of all guns traced to crimes, and another shows that five of the nine
models with the shortest time-in-existence-before-use-in-a-crime are not
SNSs. In other words, it's clear from all this that "good" guns are more of a
problem.

            
               We remember when "Gilded Age" was just an expression: The
Wall Street Journal front reports a "microtrend" in
men's fashion: weaving gold into suits.

            
               USAT reports that the U.S. is the third happiest country in the
world. No. 2 is Australia, and No. 1 is Denmark.

         
      
   
