
   
   
      
         
            The Drama of the Gifted VP

            The Washington Post and New York Times lead with the Israeli
parliament's vote of confidence in Prime Minister Ehud Barak's peace
negotiations with Syria, set to begin this week in Washington. The Wall Street Journal flags the story at the top of its
world-wide news box. USA Today goes with a study released yesterday showing that
the insurance costs of businesses are rising--at nearly three times the rate of
inflation--but because of the tight labor market, companies are absorbing most
of the added costs. In fact, says the paper, workers' contributions to their
insurance coverage dropped in the past year. The top non-local story at the
Los Angeles
Times is one that led the NYT yesterday: the Surgeon General's
report regarding the surprising prevalence of mental disorders in the U.S. and
the alarmingly low rate of treatment.

            The NYT lead's headline emphasizes the closeness of the Israeli
parliament vote, which the paper says is far from the strong victory Barak
expected, while the WP 's stresses that Barak is making it clear to his
Cabinet and the parliament that he is willing to cede the Golan Heights back to
Syria in return for security guarantees. The Post says that the
diplomatic development has provoked "shouting matches, shock and hope among
Israelis, as well as a 7 percent rise in the Tel Aviv stock market." The paper
explains that the next internal political hurdle is a referendum on territorial
withdrawal. This, says the NYT , will be the first in Israel's history.
The Post says that both the government and the opposition may bring in
American political consultants for the campaign over that.

            The WP off-leads Al Gore's pronouncement--prompted by the publicity
surrounding that conviction of an Army man for murdering a gay fellow
soldier--that the Clinton administration's "don't ask, don't tell" policy
should be abandoned. The paper calls this Gore's "sharpest public break" yet
with President Clinton's policies and says that it represents a change from the
position Gore had been taking as recently as this past weekend. Gore aides
differ, saying that the VP is just now reiterating a stand he's taken inside
the White House. The WP says the Bill Bradley campaign noted that with
his shift, Gore has just arrived at the position Bradley has been espousing for
months. The paper also reminds that this controversy underscores the importance
of the gay vote in Democratic politics but could cause difficulties for
Democrats in the general election.

            Gore's statement comes as the Secretary of Defense ordered a Pentagon
investigation to determine whether homosexuals in uniform are being harassed.
The NYT fronts that investigation and Gore's stance as does USAT .
The investigation raises a question that is only lightly touched on by the
papers: How can it work without violating the current policy wholesale? After
all, an investigator can't ask soldiers if they are being harassed for being
gay without in effect "asking" them if they're gay, and a soldier can't tell an
investigator that he is being harassed for being gay without "telling" the
investigator that he is gay.

            A NYT inside story reports that Great Britain has decided to abandon
its proscription of homosexuals in the service in favor of a policy that will
ban all on-duty sex but not care about sexual orientation.

            The fronts at the LAT , NYT , and WP feature obits for
Catch-22 author Joseph Heller, who died Sunday at age 76 of a heart
attack. Both Times remember to get past the famous war book's humor to
also include Heller's overwhelming depiction of the death of the gunner
Snowden. Both the LAT and WP note that later on in his career,
Heller wrote for McHale's Navy .

            An inside story at USAT reports that the outgoing director of the
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms says he thinks the prime suspect in
the 1996 Atlanta Olympics bombing, Eric Rudolph, is dead. Rudolph, on the ATF's
and FBI's Most Wanted lists, hasn't been sighted in more than a year.

            The NYT goes inside with word that some Democratic donors and some
major corporations have collectively contributed $1 million to a private fund
for making improvements to the vice presidential official residence. (The story is based on a
report coming out today from the Center for Public Integrity.) Gifts include a
billiard table, a hot tub, and landscaping. Donors include individuals (not
subject to the usual $1,000 limit because the money at issue was spent on Al
Gore's house, not Al Gore) such as Bill Gates, Hollywood producer Kathleen
Kennedy, and a tobacco exec. Corporate donors include Atlantic Richfield, MCI
Worldcom, and Microsoft. The story doesn't mention it, but all three of these
companies have issues of tremendous financial consequence currently being
considered by the federal government.

            The WP front serves up the late-breaking bulletin that online chat
has bred a new cluster of acronyms such as IMHO and LOL. And the paper was
fortunately able to get a minute with Robert Kraut of Carnegie Mellon
University to get his explanation that it's very natural for human beings to
shorten words. Kraut, by the way, or so the Post informs, is "professor
of social psychology and human-computer interaction" there. Where's an acronym
when you really need one?

         
      
   
