
   
   
      
         
            Remember Los Alamos

            The Washington Post and the New York Times lead with the arrest of
former Los Alamos nuclear physicist Wen Ho Lee. Lee is being held without bail
on 59 counts of mishandling nuclear weapon design, construction, and testing
information. The indictment alleges that Lee downloaded data onto 10 portable
tapes and that seven tapes are missing. Lee is not specifically accused of
leaking secrets to the Chinese. Yet, the NYT notes, to convict Lee on
all counts the government must prove that he intended to injure the United
States and benefit a foreign power. The Post explains that the
indictment might be an attempt to squeeze new leads out of Lee. The charges
carry life sentences. Lee's attorneys claim he is innocent of wrongdoing. A
LAT front-pager underscores that the indictment does not clarify how
China acquired nuclear secrets.

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with Turkey's acceptance of an offer to apply for
membership in the European Union. Ankara was reluctant to accede because of
fears that the EU would pressure Turkey to relinquish its claim to Cyprus. To
join, Turkey must improve its human rights record by abolishing the use of
torture and loosening free speech strictures. A NYT front-pager mentions
that two years ago the EU angered the United States and embarrassed Ankara by
voting not to extend an offer of accession to Turkey. None of the papers note
that Turkey has been seeking EU membership since the 1960s.

            A Post front-pager stresses that the EU expanded its applicant pool
by extending offers to Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia, and
Malta. Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Poland, and Slovenia are
already negotiating EU entry. If all applicants are approved, the EU will
become a 28-nation union that encompasses nearly all of central and eastern
Europe. (The EU also endorsed a plan to create a European rapid-reaction force
of 60,000 troops.)

            The NYT fronts the death of Franjo Tudjman, the first president of
independent Croatia. The Times provides plenty of biographical detail:
Tudjman rose to power as a Communist general, in the 1970s and 1980s he was
imprisoned for nationalist activities, and he died of cancer-related
complications. The Post and LAT reefer their obits.

            The Post highlights Tudjman low points--he forced the exodus of
600,000 Serbs (200,000 according to the LAT ), hindered the search for
suspected war criminals, and neglected Croatia's economy.
(
                  Slate
               's "Assessment" explains that Tudjman was
the Balkans' lesser evil.) The LAT reports that during Tudjman's reign
he enriched his family by about $700 million. The Croatian Constitution
dictates that Parliament Speaker Vlatko Pavletic will serve as interim
president until a new leader is selected.

            The NYT fronts Bill Bradley's timeout. After suffering a bout of
heart palpitations, the candidate cancelled a campaign appearance and three
fund-raisers. He went to the hospital but did not require treatment. In 1996
Bradley was diagnosed with atrial fibrillation--a heart rhythm problem that
afflicts former President Bush and about 2 million other Americans. The
LAT reefers the story but notes that health questions dogged the late
Sen. Paul Tsongas' 1992 presidential campaign. The paper indicates that Bradley
received mild electrical shocks to treat his arrhythmia on three occasions
prior to 1998. (The NYT reports that Bradley underwent the
"cardioversion" treatment twice.) In a reefer, the Post downplays
Bradley's health problem.

            Wilderness programs for wayward kids are the latest frontier of the therapy
industry, according to a NYT front-pager. Hundreds of programs aim to
rehabilitate troubled teens by forcing them to brave the rigors of the great
outdoors. The Redcliff Ascent Outdoor Therapy Program provides group counseling
and forbids sarcasm. Although the concept is as old as Emerson, parents pay as
much as $350 a day.

         
      
   
