
   
   
      
         
            The Paper Chase
            

            Dear David,

            It has been 20 years since you left home, and we have been talking
intermittently since then by telephone. You have gone far geographically, and,
I was going to say, careerwise, but as your mother is a strict grammarian I
knew she would wince at that "wise" ending. (We used to say that when you were
an undergraduate at Harvard, you were one of the few students who knew that one
should not begin a sentence with "Hopefully," and more, why one should not do
so.) In any event, meander as I am wont to do, you have gone far in your chosen
field. (I used to say that your sister and yourself, both Ph.D.s in early
modern European history, would go to any lengths to find a subject for which
your father could not give you a bibliography.)

            Now we are talking by e-mail, an unfamiliar venue for me. Your mother has a
computer; I don't, though I use hers fitfully. This is in spite of the fact
that I taught courses on technology for more than 10 years before I retired and
have even written books on the new technology. But as you know, I always
consider myself in the position of the young man drafted into the Israeli navy
who, when asked if he knew how to swim, replied: I know the theory of it. My
interest is in theory because I am interested in the logic of technology and
how that unfolds. And as a sociologist, I have long argued for the priority of
theory, since theory allows one to take a finding or a proposition out of one
context and apply these to different, and even unfamiliar ones. I stand by the
old saw: If something works in practice, does it also work in theory?

            As you can see, I am seeking to avoid getting started over this unfamiliar
route and talking, as we are supposed to do, about the day's events as they
unfold in the morning newspaper. But the morning newspaper, for me, is
something I read at a distance, so to speak. Though we have now lived in
Cambridge for almost 30 years, I do not see the Boston Globe , our local
paper. Each morning, before we get up, the New York Times and the
Wall Street Journal are delivered to our door. I have always found the
Globe to be somewhat dull and parochial, and I would know what was
playing at the New York nabes, rather than in Boston. But now the Times
has a Boston edition, with the Boston weather and television schedule, and the
"Tab," a "community" paper with special town editions, such as Cambridge, tells
me what is playing at the local movie houses.

            We get the Times because it is the Times and has all the news
that it sees fit to print. And having recently been in Paris and London, we
appreciate the Times all the more for its detailed news coverage, as
against all the nattering about Tony and Gordon and Alistair Campbell that
fills to overflowing the quality London papers. And the Wall Street
Journal , for its intriguing front-page news stories and the succinct
presentation of business and political news in two columns, even though the
editorial page makes me gnash my teeth. I would prefer the London Financial
Times , which is the only decent newspaper in England (and I mean decent in
many senses, since they do not show tits and bums or print gossip about the
marital adventures of cabinet members), but it is too expensive to get here
daily. Besides, we read the Economist regularly, such a prize for its
fine and lucid prose and its comprehensive worldwide coverage that fills the
gaps left by the Times and the Wall Street Journal .

            All right, to the news. ... But I have gone on nattering for the asked-for
page and a half, so why don't you begin?

            Love,
Dad

         
      
   
