
   
   
      
         
            Heard of Any Good Scandals Lately?
            

            Dear Dad,

            I agree with you entirely about the Times versus local newspapers. As
you know, when we moved down to D.C. a few years ago, we thought we would save
a little money and a few pounds of trash per week by getting the Times
only on weekends. But right from the start, we went into serious Times
withdrawal. Sure, the Washington Post is a good enough paper, and we
like its local reporting, but its foreign coverage doesn't compare to the
Times , the Op-Ed page tends to counteract the effects of my morning
coffee (with the exception of the divinely cranky Michael Kelly on
Wednesdays--long may he rant), and the editors often seem clueless about how to
put together an attractive and readable paper. They still haven't figured out
that it's a good idea to put all the high-technology features in a single
weekly section, the way the Times does. However, thanks to the Internet,
I have been indulging my Times addiction for several years now without
any additional cost or trash (it makes me wonder how many other people are
doing the same, and just how much money the Times has lost as a
result).

            As you say, we're supposed to be talking about the news. But what has been
most interesting to me about the news in the past few months is what has
not been there, namely, scandal. It's as if the Lewinsky business was
such a big, greasy, nauseating chunk of scandal to swallow that the politicians
and chattering classes subsequently lost their appetite for the stuff, at least
temporarily. Before Monica, it seemed as if we had entered the age of the
Permanent Floating Scandal. There always seemed to be at least three or four
stacked up over Washington at any one time, like planes waiting to land at
National Airport: Whitewater, Travelgate, the FBI files, the campaign-finance
scandals, not to mention the extra, auxiliary scandals around half the cabinet.
Since Iran-Contra, it's seemed as if there's been scarcely a week in which some
Washington scandal didn't hit the front page of the Times or the
Post , with the reporters dropping hopeful hints about there being Much
More to Come, and how this might all ultimately Bring the President Down.

            But since the Much More came, and several additional, large, indigestible
helpings on top of it (and still the president didn't fall!), it's as if the
press and the politicians have gone on a scandal diet, sneaking in only an
occasionally guilty snack like Newt Gingrich's mistress. Ironically, Clinton's
last two years in office seem certain to be more free of scandal than Bush's or
Reagan's. And along with the demise of the special prosecutor, the tone of the
coverage has changed. I certainly haven't seen much recently of the prestige
media's dreadfully sententious hand-wringing along the lines of "Should we be
dignifying with our attention these allegations about presidential fondling, as
detailed in the following 62-page special report (and make sure not to miss the
amazing revelations from the alleged victim's college roommate about her
attitudes toward oral sex!)." Instead, the tone has been pretty
straightforwardly condemnatory in regard to excess prosecutorial zeal and
prurient exposures of private life. Still, this is an eminently self-correcting
situation. The longer Washington remains without its traditional appetite for
scandal, the more careless powerful people will get, and eventually one of them
will get blown up in a big, juicy affair which will have the politicians and
pundits joyfully going off the diet and gorging on all the sordid details.

            Of course, as our sainted editor here at 
                  Slate
               , Michael
Kinsley, has often said, the real scandal is not what's illegal, but what's
legal and going on all the time. Do you think there's any chance that the
media's temporary diet will encourage more reporters to look at this other kind
of scandal, instead of dreaming about being the next Bob Woodward?

            Well, I see I've gotten to the end of my page and a half, and haven't
gotten to the news, either (like father, like son?). So why don't you
begin? Any thoughts on Chechnya? John McCain?

            Love,
David

         
      
   
