
   
   
      
         
            Hollywood and Race
            

            Dear David,

            Re our discussion of the function of the Michael Clarke Duncan character in
The Green Mile : I agree with you about his presentation as an
embodiment of mistaken southern rape fantasies. My description of his function
in the film was just that, a description, not a defense. I intended to convey
more or less the same thing you conveyed, that his character was yet another
example of a movie's black character functioning as the absolver of white pain
and guilt.

            I think movies work in mysterious ways, however, and if The Green
Mile reaches a large audience, not all of them, perhaps not most of them,
will share the sophistication of the members of this discussion. Most people
just go to a movie. They react to the story on levels they do not articulate to
themselves. It may be that for some of them, the scene where John Coffey heals
the warden's wife will play in a positive way. They will think (not in so many
words) that appearances are misleading, that you can't judge a man by your
prejudices, that it is wrong to fear a man like Coffey just because of his
imposing physical presence.

            The fact is, of course, that the moment the John Coffey character and his
story are established, we know without any question or additional exposition
that he did not assault and murder the two little white girls, because no
Hollywood movie of this sort would ever present an African-American character
in such a light. By and large, when black characters are presented as guilty in
films, it is only so that their innocence can be established, as a
demonstration of racist assumptions.

            We know that, but many members of the audience will not. The film may work
on them like a useful parable. I think that was King's intention in writing the
story, and would possibly be Darabont's justification for the character.

            Has race so sensitized us that no black character can appear in any movie
without being analyzed as a black character? I do not argue that the
viewer of The Green Mile should be colorblind: John Coffey is obviously
presented as an imposing black man, and that is one of the points of the
way his character is developed. I just say that if every black character must
be passed through a prism of political correctness, that is not fair to the
character, the actor, or the author. For example, the character of Little
Melvin the pimp in Barry Levinson's Liberty Heights made me
uncomfortable, and yet doubtless such characters existed at that time, and
Orlando Jones does a lively job with the performance, and if I am watching a
movie about a (Jewish) man who runs a numbers game, is it not possible one of
his customers might be like this man?

            Re Magnolia : I did get the idea you were discussing critics'
reactions at the Magnolia screening, not their post-mortem at another
screening. I was told, however, that there was laughter and derision at a New
York Magnolia screening. And also at one in Boston.

            But let me ask you: Do you think critics should make their opinions known
publicly at a screening? My own feeling is that the film deserves its chance to
develop in the minds of its viewers before being defined in a tidal wave of
buzz. At film festivals, when I'm asked what I thought of a film I just saw, I
often reply, "I don't like to discuss them until I've written my review." I
have often violated that rule in private conversations, but try never to
publicly broadcast my opinion to my fellow viewers after a screening.

            Best,
Roger

         
      
   
