
   
   
      
         
            New York Manners
            

            David,

            I quite agree that filmmakers are enthusiastic about the considerable
freedom given them by digital production. But then you write, "Most filmmakers
don't care if digital projection looks better than celluloid; they'd be
thrilled if it looked as good." And I wonder.

            I think most filmmakers do care about the picture quality of their films, as
evidenced by the fact that those who broke through with video (like Rodriguez)
turned to real film the moment they had the money. And besides--sod the
filmmakers! I care! While I am perfectly able to enjoy films shot on video,
such as Blair Witch , El Mariachi or American Movie , I also
enjoy the voluptuous pleasures of great celluloid cinematography in a film like
Fargo or The Double Life of Veronique .

            You write of Magnolia : "At a screening the other day I had the
pleasure of listening to Joel Siegel make fun of the movie behind me and John
Simon (in a separate conversation) make fun of the movie in front of me. That
clinches it--it's one of the year's best movies!"

            It's also on my best-movie list (No. 2). I also heard there was a lot of
derision at the Boston screening. ("If you can keep your head when all about
you," etc.) That's one difference between New York screenings and Chicago
screenings: In Chicago, unless a movie is really bad and everyone senses
that everyone else thinks so, the critics do the director the courtesy of not
distracting from his work by vocalizing their own opinions. I have been to a
lot of New York screenings over the years, and have been surprised a) at how
some critics feel the right to laugh scornfully or even talk back to the
screen, and b) how so many of them loudly share their opinions of a film as
soon as it's over. In Chicago we have a rule that we do not talk about
films with each other after the screening. I have zero need to know what my
colleagues think, and they have the same interest in my opinion.

            As for Magnolia , it is so exciting to see a director (and yes, you
are right, actors) swinging for the fences, not holding back, not playing it
cool, going for it. What a movie.

            I agree, too, about Chloë Sevigny's work in Boys Don't Cry . She
provides our entrance into the story, and her reactions to Brandon let us know
who Brandon is and how he/she is perceived. It is a superb performance.

            I fully expect that many critics snorted and hooted all the way through
Titus , too, but Harry J. Lennix was superb in the film's key role, as
the villain Aaron. And Anthony Hopkins was splendid, too, in a role that
provides the definition of thankless. In a season when directors have been
breaking free of timid generic expectations, why not an audacious film of
Shakespeare's least accomplished and most wretchedly excessive tragedy?

            Roger

         
      
   
