
   
   
      
         
            English Class
            

            Dear David:

            Don't get me started on the British. You know that for the past 45 years
(until recently) we have spent considerable portions of every other year or so
in England. I was a fellow at St. Antony's College in Oxford in 1957, a
visiting scholar at the London School of Economics in 1976-77 (the year you
went to Westminster), and the Pitt Professor at Cambridge in 1987-88, one of
the happiest years of our life. The British can be so deft. In 1976 we had a
flat on Regent's Park Road, facing Primrose Hill, and down the street was one
of the familiar blue-and-white plaques that said: "From 1873 to 1895, here
lived Frederick Engels, Political Philosopher." Not stalwart fighter for the
working class. Or enemy of the capitalist class. Just political
philosopher.

            Yet there has also been an ugly strain of anti-Semitism that has run through
British life, associated with the identification of Jews with money.
(Aristocrats have land, even penniless, not money.) It is there in Graham
Greene's pre-WWII novel Stamboul Train , with its picture of the greasy
currant merchant. It is there in T. S. Eliot's poems ("Burbank With a Baedeker:
Bleistein With a Cigar"), the subject of a disputed book by Anthony Julius just
a year ago. (Mrs. Thatcher, interestingly enough, had at one time four Jews in
her cabinet--Keith Joseph, Malcolm Rifkind, etc.--and her intellectual
biographer was our late friend Shirley Letwin.)

            So many of these contradictions come to a head in The Spectator , the
Tory magazine that is full of sparkling writing. Yet a number of years ago,
Auberon Waugh (familiarly called Bron, as the British are wont to do with
public figures), the son of Evelyn Waugh, had a column in The Spectator
in which he remarked: "We are all familiar with being in strange places and not
knowing exactly where we are. I woke up one morning and was served a filthy
kosher breakfast, and I realized that I was in Tel Aviv." I wrote a note to
Alexander Chancellor, who was then the editor (and who now writes
"International Papers" for 
                  Slate
               ), and asked how Waugh knew that
it was a "filthy kosher breakfast," unless it was filth recognizing filth. Not
the best of repartee; but one loses wit in anger.

            And then there is the unspeakable Taki, who still writes a weekly column for
the Spectator , called "High Life," about the party-going and boozing and
womanizing in New York, London, and Gstaad. There is often that globule of
anti-Semitic spit that he drops into his column. Yet in his writings for
American magazines, he is careful to refrain. I remarked on this once at a
party in London and was overheard by Noel Malcolm, who said: Do you want him to
double his anti-Semitism? Sir, I replied, you are too clever by half.
Repartee.

            You know that I began a book on England many years ago that I never
finished. What prompted it was the realization that while Marx had lived in
England for more than 30 years, and that in Capital he told the Germans
that England mirrored their fate, his writings on English society are so thin.
(Curiously, he never tried to meet Mazzini or Alexander Herzen, fellow exiles,
let alone John Stuart Mill or Matthew Arnold. He remained within the closed
circle of his German devotees.)

            While Marx was preoccupied with economic class, he never understood
English society, which has been ruled by social class. England has been
a fairly rigid class society--made "visible" by accent--but with relatively
open access for talented grammar-school lads, such as Allan Bullock or Asa
Briggs, who become Lords and occupy the major positions in English cultural and
educational life. Isaiah Berlin first made his mark by conversation.

            Status ruled. People bought status by buying land--in three generations, a
gentleman--or entering a profession. (In Trollope's Palliser novels, the vade
mecum; of English society, a character says: I am not in trade; I have a
profession.) Or they renewed the blood, and money, by American heiresses. I
don't think that Marx would have liked the novels of Henry James; he loved the
blood and gore of Eugene Shue.

            And now Tony Blair. Blair has finally achieved what Tony Crosland wrote
about 40 years ago--that Labor could not be a class party (after all, the
working class was shrinking in a post-industrial world); he has made it a
"middle-class" party. Blair is a brilliant, ruthless politician (albeit with an
authoritarian streak) but vacuous in his rhetoric and ideas. His house
intellectual, Tony Giddens, the director of London School of Economics, has
told him (40 years late ) that left and right have no meaning today on the
ideological spectrum. So, they have formulated the Third Way. What is it? No
one seems to know. My friend W. G. (Lord) Runciman, the businessman and
sociologist at Trinity (quite a combination), calls it "recycled platitudes."
Les mots justes . Is that not the definition of political life today--in
the United States as well as in the U.K.?

            Love,
Dad

         
      
   
