
   
   
      
         
            To Wit
            

            Thanks, Sarah, for your skepticism--although I'm not sure we're in as much
disagreement as your crackly tone would imply. The level of invention this year
has been amazingly high, but few movies have maintained it consistently. My

                  Slate
                reviews of Three Kings , Being John Malkovich ,
and The Limey are full of qualifications, but many of the most exciting
films in a given year are messed up in one way or another. (The last film for
which I have unqualified admiration is Robert Duvall's The Apostle .) I
was enraged by the killing of the Iraqi mother in Three Kings and
resented some of the jokiness and formula machinations that followed in its
wake. But if David O. Russell can't (yet) make his absurdist vision mesh
perfectly with his moral outrage, he deserves our awe for having pulled off the
mixture as well as anyone since Coppola in Apocalypse Now . (And Three
Kings is a lot less messed-up than Apocalypse Now .)

            I didn't spot microphones in Being John 
               Malkovich (depending
on how a film is masked, you can see microphones in movies by the greatest
directors and cinematographers), but there are flatfooted patches and a
distinct falling off in the last half hour (despite some marvelous puppet
work). Fear of women is indeed one of the picture's sub-themes; it's a theme of
many great sex farces and not ipso facto a bad thing. The movie's too-casual
discarding of its protagonist (John Cusack) suggests more self-loathing than
unchecked misogyny--although the two impulses are clearly linked. It seems to
me that when you're braving as many weird psychosexual areas as Charlie Kaufman
does in Malkovich , you're going to lose control at some point; he does.
The larger point is that his work--like Russell's--is an inspiration; it makes
you makes you realize that, The Anxiety of 
               Influence
notwithstanding, there are an infinite number of possibilities for framing our
experience.

            As for your South Park rant--them's fightin' words, Kerr. I'm going
to cheat by pointing out that I know you didn't see the movie in a packed,
responsive house, or you would, I'm certain, have been thrilled by the screams
of glee that attended each fabulous number. The second half boring? The whole
damn film is a scant 80 minutes, and its second half features, among other
things, Satan's soulful "Up There" number (please oh please let them do this at
the Academy Awards), Saddam's pleas for sex, "Kyle's Mom Is a Bitch" with a
multinational chorus, Kenny's trek through the underworld, Cartman's obscenity
chip, the blaspheming French resistance fighter, and the staggeringly brilliant
medley on the eve of Armageddon--not to mention Winona Ryder's best performance
ever (courtesy of Minnie Driver). If this is witless then I might as well pack
it in because I wouldn't know wit if it bit me on the ass.

            More later, alligators.

         
      
   
