
   
   
      
         
            From Clay to Silicon
            

            I find, as you suggested, that computers are having an impact on student
writing. More and more students compose at the keyboard, and some are even
becoming comfortable editing on-screen. Students spends lots of time using
computers, and right now that means they're writing and reading a lot, since
using the Web and sending e-mail requires lots of writing and reading.

            In the bookstore yesterday I was looking over Clifford Stoll's new book
attacking computer use in education. I haven't read the book, so I can't
summarize his stance, but on one page he was complaining that students spent
too much time interfacing via computer, to the detriment of face-to-face
experience. He cites a teen-age boy who boasted of spending his entire summer
vacation online and quotes one 13-year-old girl who insists the only way to
meet boys to is log on. I think Stoll's probably overestimating how much time
teen-agers spend wired, though I do see that computer technology often blinds
us to the possibilities of using more traditional technologies. I remember once
a colleague who came running into my office complaining that his e-mail was
down and he needed to get some vital information from a colleague several
states away. While we scratched our heads figuring out how he could e-mail his
colleague from my workstation, a third friend came up and suggested, "Why not
use the telephone?" We hadn't thought of that!

            I would argue that all writing is a technology, and to emphasize the
technological aspect of writing I have my students spend an hour writing in an
old, unfamiliar technology. I give each student 4 ounces of children's modeling
clay, a wooden skewer, a length of ¾-inch dowel, and a writing assignment.
Their task is to fashion the clay into a writing surface, then do the writing
assignment using the clay and the wooden stylus. When they are done, we talk
about how this was different from the more conventional writing technologies
they are used to: pencil and paper, computer (few seem to use typewriters
anymore). As Sam Johnson might have put it, writing on clay really concentrates
the mind. It forces you to think about elements of writing that have become
more or less automatic in a more ordinary setting. Here are some of things my
students find: You look at writing differently if you have to prepare the
surface. Inscribing on clay means you can't use cursive very easily, or even
rounded print characters. Clay's not easy to edit. And it's not that easy to
read the final product. You can't put a lot of writing on four ounces of clay,
and you can really only use one side, so you have to make all the space count.
Clay could get heavy if you had to carry around more than a few "pages" of it.
And clay allows you to play with document design in ways you might not with
pencil and paper.

            Will computer use improve student writing? Not necessarily, although there's
some suggestion that writing a lot does help, and students are writing more
with computers than they were before, so far as I can tell. It's certainly
easier to revise on a computer: Students tend to forget that "cut and paste"
once involved literal scissors and glue, a laborious process that I used to get
me through a dissertation almost 30 years ago. I myself can write for longer
stretches using a computer, with less physical and psychological strain, than
when I was using an electric typewriter. New writing technologies have their
downsides, inevitably. There was a complaint voiced in the New York
Times when typewriters were coming into favor in offices that the
typewriter depersonalized the written word, since the reader seemed further
removed from actual contact with the human element in writing. To some extent
this was true, but it was also a bit silly, since before the typewriter there
was a great emphasis on people developing uniform, depersonalized handwriting
to ensure legibility. The computer allows us to revise, true, but in that
process I see that we lose what I call the "archeology" of the text, the stages
through which it passes from first to final draft. I used to miss that. Now I
don't.

            But here's something to ponder, and let it be my farewell to this chat,
which I've found interesting and hope that the readers over our shoulders did
as well: The next generation of text processing with computers promises
sophisticated voice-to-text programs. Is the keyboarding of text only a
temporary phenomenon, then? Will we, or our children, be talking their essays
into microphones, composing peripatetically and out loud like Wordsworth
"writing" his poems, or bosses dictating letters to secretaries in 1950s TV
sitcoms? I trust that that will still count as "writing," though I imagine some
technophobes will insist that it is not writing since the composition will be
untouched by human hands. In any case, Jesse, I leave it to you to have the
last word.

            Best,
Dennis

         
      
   
