
   
   
      
         
            The Magna Jakarta

            The Washington Post and New York Times lead with the
surprising result of Indonesia's first truly contested presidential election in
nearly 50 years: the victory (in a vote taken in the national legislature, not
among the general public) of a first-time office-holder, an aging, frail, and
nearly blind Muslim cleric named Abdurrahman Wahid. This is also the top
nonlocal story at the Los Angeles Times . USA Today
puts Indonesia deep inside and leads instead with Department of Justice
documents made public yesterday showing that the DOJ believes the clemency
release of convicted Puerto Rican terrorists last month by President Clinton
increases the threat of violence posed by their separatist group, FALN. The
paper also reports that documents made available yesterday show that the DOJ
weighed in with the White House against clemency in 1996. The WP runs a
similar story inside. A NYT front-page story based on those same
documents paints a diametric picture, reporting that Justice took extraordinary
steps to maximize the terrorists' chances for clemency, including the highly
unusual step of making their applications for them and having supporters
persuade them to write statements of repentance.

            Wahid's victory came despite his having only recently declared his
candidacy, at the expense of the prohibitive favorite, the daughter of the
nation's founding president, Sukarno. Wahid was, the papers report, sworn in
almost immediately after the legislature's vote. Both the NYT and
LAT note that he is a moderate, with the LAT stating he has
something that will be much needed as Indonesia tries to dig itself out of two
solid years of political upheaval and economic failure--good relations with all
the major blocs of Indonesian society: the military, former presidents Suharto
and Habibie, and the country's students. That said, the coverage still notes
the outbreak of street violence upon the announcement of the election outcome,
although the NYT says it didn't approach what was feared if Sukarno's
daughter lost. (Thanks to the WP , by the way, for answering a question
nobody asked: Wahid's favorite all-time hit is Janis Joplin's "Me and Bobby
McGee.")

            Everybody fronts (with accompanying photos) Elizabeth Dole's announcment
yesterday that she was abandoning her presidential campaign. The papers all
basically credit Dole's explanation: Money has come to mean too much in
presidential politics and she had too little of it. The NYT reports
inside that President Clinton seized on Dole's announcement to take a shot at
George W. Bush, calling him the first candidate in the history of the modern
era who's given up federal funding so that he could raise an unlimited sum of
money, something Clinton says he'd been urged to do in the past but did not
because it "wasn't fair." The paper notes a Bush spokeswoman's response: "We
appreciate the President's advice. ... But we don't intend to use him as a
model for how Governor Bush will raise money or lead the nation." The
Times sees in Clinton's comment the strategy of provoking Bush so Al
Gore doesn't have to.

            The LAT front turns in an exclusive on a topic it first broached a
few weeks ago: The New England Journal of Medicine 's apparent violation
of its own ethical policies requiring the disclosure of authors' possible
conflicts of interest. Out of 36 recent NEJM drug reviews examined, the
LAT finds eight in which researchers reviewed a drug's performance but
had undisclosed ties to its manufacturers.

            A Wall Street Journal feature flagged in its
front-page news box explains how the recent settlement between General Tire and
the union workforce at the company's facility in Charlotte, N.C., is the wave
of the future: the union set up a Web site to give the union's take and also
made it easy for strikers to e-mail company management in Charlotte and at the
company's corporate parent in Germany. And in chainlike fashion, workers at
other tire plants were notified about the strike and its issues and encouraged
to email their solidarity to HQ as well. It's called, says the Journal ,
cyberpicketing, and it takes a lot of the logistics out of doing a labor
action.

            The WP and NYT report that yesterday the SEC issued a cease-and-desist order against three people for trying to
sell securities on the Internet. The three agreed to stop and as a result are
not facing criminal charges. And eBay reacted by banning stock auctions at its
site. But neither story explains why stock sales are wrong at eBay, but right,
say, at Datek. The Times suggests the key factor is ensuring that
investors have access to good information regarding any stock to be purchased.
But doesn't this imply that if an eBay seller were to post a prospectus along
with his sales offer he'd be in compliance?

         
      
   
