
   
   
      
         
            Why Down't You Lose Some Weight?

            The Washington
Post and USA
Today front the incorporation of Intel and Microsoft into the Dow
Jones industrial average starting next Monday, a story fronted (above the fold)
by the Los Angeles
Times and reefered by the New York Times . The NYT leads with a White House scoop: Today President Clinton will
propose sweeping privacy protections for medical records, stricter than those
included in the recent bill deregulating the finance industry. Both Clinton's
proposal and the finance-industry bill would require insurance companies to
share their privacy rules with customers, but Clinton's proposal would bar
these companies from sharing customer information with other insurance
companies without the customer's explicit permission.

            The Post 's headline, "Dow Adds Microsoft, Gets Less Industrial,"
encapsulates the thrust of the stock-index change: new
money (tech stocks) is pushing out the old ("smokestack" stocks). Besides Intel
and Microsoft, Dow is adding Home Depot and SBC Communications; it is booting
Chevron, Sears, Union Carbide, and Goodyear. "Intel is to the economy what U.S.
Steel was 50 years ago," a stock analyst says in the Post . "It's the
producer of the product that's ubiquitous in a lot of other products." The
NYT calculates that if the four new companies had been added in 1997,
the index would have risen 71 percent since then--better than the 62 percent
performance of its leading competitor, the more tech-rich S&P 500, over the
same period. (The Dow actually rose 49 percent over that period.) The
LAT notes that while the S&P 500 is more popular with
investors--$700 billion is invested in portfolios mimicking the S&P, while
only $165 million tracks the Dow--the Dow has a bigger influence on investor
psychology. (Both get license fees for the tracked portfolios.) (For Moneybox's
take on the Dow change, click 
here.)

            Yesterday's special issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association , on
obesity, lands on the fronts of the Post , NYT , and
LAT . Every paper spins it differently. The LAT story is the
most comprehensive. Under the headline "As Obesity Rate Soars, Hormone Offers
New Hope," the paper lists JAMA 's sobering statistics: The percentage
of obese Americans--those 30 percent heavier than their ideal body weight--has
increased nearly 50 percent in the '90s, from 12 percent in 1991 to 17.9
percent in 1998. Obesity now kills at least 280,000 people a year, making it
the highest preventable cause of death after smoking.  However, obese people
given injections of the hormone leptin in a study lost weight proportionate to
dosage and lost fat cells only (25 percent of weight loss from diet and
exercise is bone and muscle).

            But what the LAT does not report, the NYT seizes on: Under the headline "Hormone That Slimmed Fat
Mice Disappoints as Panacea in People," Gina Kolata (who last year came under
fire for over -hyping a cancer study) gives a dour prognosis. Leptin
patients lost a "moderate amount of weight at best" and many participants
receiving the highest--and most effective--doses tired of the daily injections
and dropped out of the study. The NYT does not mention the national
obesity figures at all. The Post --"A Hormone Helps Obese Lose Weight:
[But] Study Finds Leptin Has Drawbacks"--paints the leptin results more optimistically than the
NYT ; it, too, neglects to mention the obesity figures. USAT and the Journal , by contrast, mention the
obesity figures but not the leptin study.

            In an almost postmodern bit of media-criticism-cum-self-confirmation, the
NYT runs an Associated Press story in which Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., accuses
the presidential campaign of George W. Bush of "planting" a story critical of
McCain in ... Monday's NYT . The AP duly notes that in the original
NYT story, the governor of Arizona, a Bush supporter, had argued that
McCain was too sensitive to personal criticism. "It's totally ridiculous to
think that we control what the New York Times writes," a Bush
spokesman said. Question: Would the NYT run an AP story in which a
government official claimed to identify an anonymous source for a NYT
story?

            Newt Gingrich may no longer be speaker of the House, but he still can't
escape the press. Yesterday's Post reported that Gingrich--who is accusing his recently dumped
wife, Marianne, of mishandling their money--spent $450 for a bottle 1983
Chateau Latour while dining with his new squeeze, a former House aide. Today,
Marianne's lawyer tells the Post that she is "delighted to hear that
Newt is now making enough money to share with Marianne."

            In yesterday's
edition, Today's Papers confused the bank associated with Russian
money-laundering investigations with his own. The bank associated with the
money-laundering investigations is the Bank of New York. TP regrets the error
and has fixed it in the text.

         
      
   
