
   
   
      
         
            Don't Cry for Menem, Argentina

            Analyses of budget and spending battles lead at the New York Times , the Washington Post , and USA Today .
The NYT highlights a fringe benefit to the current spending impass:
national debt repayment. The WP notes the rise of "earmarking," a
popular form of pork barreling, in this round of the spending fracas.
USAT focuses on the GOP's proposed across-the-board spending cuts,
which the other papers covered on Saturday. The cuts are depicted as a measure
designed to leave Social Security untouched and placate seniors. According to
another story on the USAT front, this is because seniors are the swing
voters of the 2000 elections. The Los Angeles
Times leads with massive demonstrations in Colombia, where over 10
million people took to the streets urging a swift peace between the ruling
government and leftist insurgents.

            The NYT paints the debt reduction measures as a major policy event
brought about by default. Since Congress and the White House can't agree on how
to spend budget surpluses, most of the money will likely go to pay off the
nation's debt, including $3.6 trillion in public-owned Treasury bonds. This
component of the debt could be paid off in 10-to-15 years, putting downward
pressure on interest rates and freeing up capital.

            Earmarking, the process of tacking pork-heavy provisions to spending bills,
is on the rise in Washington, according to the Post. Though most
politicians say such measures benefit the majority, and help speed bills
through the House and Senate, critics feel that earmarking undermines the
executive branch: By the time administrators get ahold of discretionary funds,
most of the money has already been allocated, rendering the administrators
nearly powerless.

            Colombia's government and representatives of the leftist Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia (FARC) will try to hammer out agreements on such topics as
judicial reform, human rights, drug trafficking, and agricultural policy. The
conciliatory overtures began early this year, after nearly four decades of
violence, when the government removed security forces from a large
FARC-controlled territory, but stalled when officials requested that an
international verification committee monitor the zone. Talks began again on
Sunday, after the government withdrew this request. 

            Buenos Aires mayor Fernando De la Rua's projected presidential win is a
setback for the ruling Judicialist/Peronist Party, but a victory, according to
the Wall Street Journal , for democratic capitalism.
The election marks the first time the Peronist Party has lost power by popular
mandate (as opposed to a coup). A NYT below-the-fold article quotes an
observer who claims that the election signals the "end of the era of the
caudillo (strongman)." De la Rua has pledged to maintain the fiscal successes
of his predecessor, included a fiscal policy that helped stem the nation's
hyperinflation. He also pledges to combat the corruption and tax evasion that
have plagued previous administrations, an angle emphasized inside the
WP. Carlos Menem, the current president, did not seek re-election, but
is expected to remain a formidible force in Argentine politics.

            Two related WP fronts discuss Bill Bradley's campaign. One paints
him as a reluctant but incredibly effective fund raiser, whose outsider image,
basketball superstardom, and Senate Finance Committee background have activated
a network of super-rich, generally apolitcal supporters, including Warren
Buffett and Rupert Murdoch. The other discusses how his committment to
old-guard liberal issues such as child poverty and health-care woes have helped
distance him from Al Gore's more centrist policies. The biggest problem with
these passions? There's little evidence of them in Bradley's extensive
political past.

            
               Not exactly Ossi and Harriet: The NYT runs a
front-page story that is nearly a decade old: the continued economic and
attitudinal rift between Western and Eastern Germans (known as Wessies and
Ossies). The controversy re-emerged this summer with a book written by a Wessi
woman, relocated to the east, who is very critical of her Ossi neighbors. Aside
from lots of Ossi/Wessi name-calling (a phenomenon much older than the German
republic), the NYT offers no evidence for its portentous claim that
nostalgia for the old Eastern Germany is spreading. Despite this mildly
alarmist tone, the NYT is quick to remind us that "There is nothing
inherently sinister about a unified Germany." One can almost hear Poland and
France sighing with relief.

            
               Stale gender roles: In one of its twin Bradley articles,
the WP notes an interesting gender split in a poll of New York voters:
gentlemen preferred Bill 56 percent to 33 percent, while women favored Gore 48
percent to 29 percent. Why? Maybe, the Post suggests, because Bradley
is a former pro ballplayer. It's an interesting assertion, but one that should
be supported by more than the reader's own sexist preconceptions. Without facts
to support their analysis, the WP may as well argue that women
preferred Gore because of his sculpted jaw and tight buns.

         
      
   
