
   
   
      
         
            Social Insecurity

            Both the New York Times and
Washington Post lead with President Clinton's announcement
Saturday that he plans to send a proposal for shoring up Social Security to
Congress by the end of the week. Yet the papers give the story wildly different
spins. While the NYT paints Clinton's comments as a "concession" meant
to build bipartisan support for the measure, the WP describes them as an
attack on the GOP and an example of "escalating rhetoric." The Los Angeles
Times--which fronts the Social Security news in a story that splits the
difference between the other two papers--leads instead with a story about a
Maryland biotech firm that has made remarkable progress in cracking the genetic
code and is seeking patents for 6,000 of its research finds. The news has
raised fears among some scientists that what the paper calls "fundamental
advances in a genetic revolution" will wind up being controlled by a handful of
for-profit companies.

            Clinton and congressional Republicans have been trading barbs for several
days about the state of Social Security legislation, which aims to confront a
looming shortage of funds when Baby Boomers retire. For a time Clinton favored
investing up to 15 percent of current S.S. reserves in the stock market as a
hedge against that future deficit, but in the face of GOP opposition he has
withdrawn the idea. The NYT sees that as a significant olive branch. The
Post focuses instead on Clinton's negative comments about the GOP's own
Social Security proposal--and doesn't mention that Clinton has abandoned the
stock market idea until the eleventh of twenty paragraphs.

            The LAT calls Clinton's comments part of "sparring" between the
parties, and says he "returned to the political offensive Saturday."  The paper
puts the news about the dropped stock market measure in the seventh paragraph,
and explains Republican opposition to that plan more succinctly than the other
papers, citing "fear that this could eventually lead to government control of
corporations."

            The NYT 's off-lead reports that the U.S. Embassy in Moscow is making
it increasingly difficult for Russian students to obtain visas to attend
American universities. The rejection rate for student visas has doubled even as
the total number of applications has declined. Embassy officials apparently
worry that chaos in Russian economic and political life will prompt students to
stay on illegally in the U.S. after their visas expire. This comes at a time,
the paper notes, when the Clinton administration has been outspoken about the
need to bolster cultural ties between the two countries.

            The WP fronts a story that examines the limits of George W. Bush's
much touted "compassionate conservatism." Early this year, legislators in
Texas--which has more uninsured children than all but one state--introduced a
bill designed to enroll poor Texas youth in a federally funded health care
program. Bush, worried that the law would also lead more Texas children to
enroll in Medicaid, a program that requires a hefty state contribution per
child, fought to limit eligibility for the federal program. The legislature
ultimately won the fight, "but the governor fought us tooth and nail," one
lawmaker is quoted saying.

            A NYT front-pager reports that much of Bill Bradley's early
fundraising success can be explained in two words: Wall Street. Bradley has
amassed nearly $20 million in donations this year, and the top six sources of
that income are all investment houses. Bradley was never particularly kind to
financial interests as a senator, the paper notes. But the relationships he
forged during his 18 years on the Senate Finance Committee--plus a stint with
J.P. Morgan after he left office--seem to have outweighed policy differences.
And the two NBA championship rings Bradley earned with the New York Knicks have
also helped, since so many on Wall Street are sports fans.

            A WP front-pager reports that the newly elected president of
Indonesia, Abdurrahman Wahid, is helping calm the country's unsettled political
climate with an avuncular style. But his grip on power, the paper reports, may
be fragile: Wahid is frail and almost totally blind. (The story never gives his
age, though.) Even his supporters began to worry when military aides had to
help him sign his name after his inaugural speech.

            The NYT fronts the news that it's a good time to be a butler looking
for work in the U.S. As the number of wealthy families has soared--there are
now 275,000 American households with assets of more of than $10 million, up
from just 65,000 a decade ago--demand for well-trained help has risen apace. In
Manhattan, "household managers" (that's the favored term these days) now
command salaries as high as $120,000 per year.

            In a lengthy cover piece in the New York Times Magazine , James Bennet
assesses the Reform Party as it stumbles toward the 2000 election. After
interviews with Reform veterans and newcomers alike--including Jesse Ventura,
Ross Perot, Donald Trump, and Pat Buchanan--Bennet reports deep policy
divisions as well as plenty of eccentricities. (Trump hates shaking hands, for
example, which might make pressing the flesh as a presidential candidate a bit
difficult.) "The upshot," Bennet writes, "is that the Reform Party is entering
a critical election torn by what is essentially a civil war."

         
      
   
