
   
   
      
         
            Unlucky Lady Liddy
            

            Issue 1 is the presidential race, including Elizabeth Dole's decision to
call it quits. Issue 2 is the GOP's looming budget face-off with President
Clinton.

            Most pundits are skeptical of Dole's claim that she simply couldn't raise
enough money to compete with George W. Bush. She had "no message," repeat a
score of opinion makers--Fred Barnes ( Fox News Sunday ), Bob Novak and Al Hunt (CNN's Capital Gang ), Susan Page and Tucker Carlson (CNN's
Late Edition ), and George Stephanopoulos (ABC's This Week ). (The first woman president will, like Golda Meir
and Margaret Thatcher, make no mention of gender, argues Capital
Gang 's Kate O'Beirne.) On Fox , the panelists agree that most of
Dole's supporters went to Bush and note that nationally Bush leads his
challengers by 60 points. But Bill Kristol ( This Week ) and Hunt think
John McCain could be competitive: The latest New Hampshire poll puts him only
12 points behind Bush.

            Paul Gigot (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) and George F. Will ( This
Week ) think Dole could have stayed in the race had she not been handcuffed
by the $1,000-per-head contribution limit imposed by the quarter-century-old
campaign-finance laws. Some pundits think Dole may get the vice-presidential
nomination; Steve Roberts ( Late Edition ) notes that whatever money
problems she may have had, she was the GOP's best weapon against the 26-point
gender gap between Bush and Gore (Bush has a 21-point lead among men, Gore a
5-point lead among women). On the Democratic front, Gloria Borger (PBS's
Washington Week in
Review ) observes a focus group of Maryland Democrats. One third of
those selected were Gore supporters, one third Bradley supporters, and one
third undecided. By the end of the focus-group discussion, Borger reveals,
nearly everyone had come around to Bradley.

            Two un-telegenic GOP leaders, House Speaker Dennis Hastert and Whip Tom
Delay, make the talk-show rounds to support their party's budget strategy--a
1.4 percent across-the-board spending cut to avoid using the Social Security
surplus to balance the budget. Many pundits--such as Carlson, Novak, and
Hunt--think Clinton, as usual, has the upper hand, while some--such as
Page--think the GOP's across-the-board cut will win over the public. (A
bitter-sounding Novak says the "real, dirty little secret is that the
non-Social Security surplus has been spent for this year and there is no tax
cut and the Republicans should be ashamed of themselves.")

            Appearing on NBC's Meet the
Press , Donald Trump announces he will join the Reform Party Monday and
says there is "a very great possibility that I will run" for the party
nomination for president. "It's something I'm very serious about," Trump adds,
"and I wouldn't do it unless I thought I could win" both the nomination and the
presidency. Tim Russert grills him on the issues: Trump advocates a pre-emptive
strike on North Korean nuclear facilities and declares nuclear proliferation
his highest priority. He wants a "substantial tax cut in line with the top
Republican numbers" and says he's opposed to NAFTA. Would he support gay
marriage and gays in the military? His instinct is yes, he says, but since he's
spent most of his life in Manhattan, he'd want to listen to Americans in the
heartland and to military advisers to get their views. He claims that his life
has been "a very, very open book"--both his personal life (which is always
under media scrutiny) and his financial life (the casino and real-estate
industries are heavily regulated). The pundits mostly snicker and scoff; Steve
Roberts calls Trump a celebrity airhead without ideas.

            Also on Meet the Press , Ken Starr concludes that, in retrospect, a
separate independent counsel should have been appointed to look into Flytrap.
The broad scope of his investigation saved the taxpayers the cost of another
prosecutor, Starr notes, but it hurt public confidence in his impartiality. He
also thinks that it was a mistake for him to continue practicing law while
serving as independent counsel; he speculates that, had he not allowed himself
to practice privately from the start, he might not have been able to accept his
appointment as independent counsel.

            

               Pensive Poppy
            

            
               Fox conducts a charming interview with a reflective, avuncular
former President George Bush. He expresses regret that as president he couldn't
communicate his sense of humor, his empathy, and his religious faith as well as
his predecessor, President Reagan. He thinks there is no place for a third
party in American politics; when asked whether Ross Perot sunk his re-election
campaign, he says, "Yeah, yeah. Am I bitter about it? Not anymore. I didn't
like it [chuckling]." He claims "no animosity toward Pat [Buchanan]" ("you
can't help but like the guy") and threatens to sue Fortunate Son
author J.H. Hatfield for his "slanderous" charge that Bush bribed a judge to
expunge his son's putative drug record. (To read Ballot Box's take on the
notorious Bush bio, click 
here.) He says the press has gone overboard in its investigation of
President Clinton's personal life--although Clinton's lies in Flytrap have only
justified the media's rapaciousness, he laments. He plans to parachute from a
plane again on his 80th birthday. His first jump "said to old people, 'Hey, you
can still do stuff--no matter what the stuff is.' " Interviewer (and former
Bush Administration employee) Tony Snow praises him for his "superhuman
humility."

            

               Last Word
            

            From Fox 's interview with former President Bush:

            
               I had led a very sheltered life and my closest friend [upon joining
the Navy] was my mother. ... I think we lost 9 pilots out of 15 original pilots
in our squadron. ... So it was traumatic. And then I saw, right in front of my
eyes, on the deck of the carrier, a chief petty officer sliced into three parts
by a propeller blade. ... Boy, it woke me up in a hurry. ...
            

            
               In our family we have two sons in public life. Both of them can
interact with people better than I did. ... I felt [empathy] in my heart [as
president], but I didn't do it as well--outreach, showing compassion and
concern--as well as our sons did.
            

         
      
   
