
   
   
      
         
            King of the Valley?
            

            Jim Clark as Dennis Rodman: I like that analogy of yours, but I also think
that in using it, you've stumbled across the biggest problem with The New
New Thing . (See? There I go again.) Dennis Rodman is (or, rather, was) the
most colorful, bizarre and interesting player in professional basketball--and
he was also a helluva talent. You could undoubtedly write a more interesting
book about Rodman than you could about, say, Michael Jordan--who, despite being
the greatest player of all time, is bland as toast off the court, and a tougher
nut to crack in any case. It takes a lot of work to write about Jordan. Even
David Halberstam, who wrote a book about Jordan's exploits during his last
season, couldn't wrest an interview from him. But if you were to decide that
Rodman was your subject--and why not, since he's so much more fun to write
about, and since he's also much more accessible than Jordan?--could you then
say that your book was about The Man Who Single-handedly Changed Professional
Basketball? Nobody would dare make such a claim, would they?

            Yet isn't that what Michael Lewis has done here? His main character--nay,
his only character--is truly fascinating. He's deeply eccentric. He
boils over with absurd resentments. He bubbles over with interesting ideas. He
spends half the book building the biggest yacht in the world. He must have been
a ton of fun to write about. (And he was accessible to the author!) But can it
truly be claimed--as Lewis, in fact, claims--that Jim Clark, more than any
other single person, shaped the current ethos of Silicon Valley? Or is it more
likely that having landed his subject, Lewis created a thesis to justify his
choice?

            My own suspicion is that the truth is closer to the latter than the former.
This is not to say that Clark isn't a big deal, but there are others who are
bigger deals, and have done more to change the Valley than Clark. The venture
capitalist John Doerr springs instantly to mind. In addition, there are a ton
of forces at play that conspired to create modern Silicon Valley. My guess is
that the various changes Lewis documents would have happened with or without
Jim Clark.

            Of course, the biggest force was (and is) the Internet. Here Lewis would
probably point out that as the co-founder of Netscape, Clark played a
singularly important role in making the Internet a mass-market medium, which is
what changed everything. (And oh, how I longed for a detailed inside history of
Netscape in The New New Thing . But, alas, it was nowhere to be found. As
you correctly pointed out, once Clark loses interest, so does Lewis.) But
Mosaic, the first browser, had already been invented by Marc Andreessen,
Clark's co-founder. And as Lewis himself points out, Clark's greatest
contribution with Netscape--the actual thing he did that made the biggest
change in the way Silicon Valley works--was to take it public before it was
profitable. Once that offering took off, it was as if a light bulb went off all
over the Valley. YOU DIDN'T HAVE TO HAVE A PROFITABLE COMPANY TO GET RICH! What
an insight! What caused Clark to have this insight? Here, I'm afraid, is where
Lewis loses me completely. He says that Clark pushed for a Netscape IPO because
he wanted to build a new boat, and this was the only way he could think to pay
for it. I'm sorry, I just couldn't buy that one. Could you?

            Clark, in fact, is such a one-of-a-kind character that he doesn't really
stand in for any Silicon Valley "type." "I can't be a venture capitalist
because I'm not that kind of person," Clark tells Lewis at one point. "And I
can't be a manager, because I'm not that kind of person. All I can do is start
them." That's the claim Clark makes for himself. But then Lewis goes on to
write, "His role in the Valley was suddenly clear: he was the author of the
story. He was the man with the nerve to invent the tale in which all the
characters--the engineers, the VCs, the managers, the bankers--agreed to play
the role he assigned to them." Jim Clark? Maybe you could say that about J.P.
Morgan once upon a time. (Or is that journalistic myth-making, too?) But that
kind of claim for Clark just doesn't hold up, at least not to my mind.

            There is one way Clark is representative of the Valley. In his open lust for
money, Clark is willing to say out loud what everyone else there thinks--but
doesn't dare say. And Lewis captures that exquisitely. There is another of
those wonderful Lewis scenes in which Clark is saying that if only he can be
richer than Larry Ellison, who's worth $9 billion, he'll stop. Lewis reminds
him that not long ago, Clark had said he would be satisfied with "$1 billion
after taxes." Clark just shrugs. When Lewis asks him if he wants more than Bill
Gates, Clark laughs off the suggestion as ludicrous. But a few minutes later he
adds, "You know, just for one moment, I would kind of like to have the most.
Just for one tiny moment." Beautiful.

            I wind up thinking that to really enjoy The New New Thing , you have
to forget about the claim the author is making for his subject and simply revel
in scenes like that one. But for me, at least, that's awfully hard to do. I
keep seeing Dennis Rodman being described as Michael Jordan.

            P.S.: I realize that we haven't yet talked about MyCFO, and I promise to get
to that tommorrow. In the meantime, though, I couldn't help noticing that just
last week, Clark brought on a senior guy from Charles Schwab to be the CEO.
Betcha they're already planning the IPO.

         
      
   
