
   
   
      
         
            Embarrassment of Riches
            

            Michael Lewis' The New New
Thing is the best book ever written about Silicon Valley.

            There. I've said it. Said it to you (wondering, to be
sure, whether you agree--do you?); said it to the readers of 
                  Slate
               ; but most of all, I've said it to
myself. Michael Lewis' The New New Thing
is the best book ever written about Silicon Valley .
There. I've said it again. I suspect I'll be saying it a few more times before
our back-and-forth is finished three days hence.

            From my point of view, the reason for keeping this
central truth front and center at all times is that the book's flaws are the
kind that tend to drive me completely batty. And so my natural tendency is
going to be to harp on what he's done wrong rather than what he's done right.
And what he has done right is something big and important: He has absolutely
captured what Silicon Valley is like at this moment in history--how crazy it
is, how the old rules have been turned upside down, how it is filled with the
sense that anything is possible, and that everyone will soon be rich, if they
aren't already. You would think other people would have done this by now, but
they haven't. And that is because very few people have Lewis' ability to
capture something deep with a few deftly written scenes.

            There is a wonderful scene, for instance, that comes
shortly after the book's central character, Jim Clark, decides to start a
health-care Web site, eventually named Healtheon. Now, the first point, of
course, is that Clark doesn't really have a clue what this company is going to
do. Doesn't matter: The venture capitalists are practically pleading with him
to be allowed to invest in it.

            Then he goes out and hires one person, an engineer he
knew back at Silicon Graphics (which he also founded). That night the engineer
goes home only to find that his fax machine is already overflowing with résumés
from all the other engineers who want in--not even caring what the company will
do. All they know is that it's an Internet startup headed by Jim Clark--the man
with the magic touch, as Lewis describes him--and that's all they need to know.
And then, after that engineer has hired a handful of his buddies to start the
company, they fly to Boston to meet with the bureaucrats at Blue Cross/Blue
Shield to explain how they're going to transform the health-care system. Which
they know nothing about. "We sat up all night reading all this literature about
health care," Lewis quotes one Healtheon employee as saying. "We asked, 'What's
the problem we are going to solve here?' " Even more amazing, Clark by then has
largely wandered off. After all, his job (in his view) is to come up with an
idea, however unformed, and then cause money and people to coalesce around it.
("The trick," Lewis writes in one of those wonderful Michael Lewis sentences,
"was for Healtheon to get itself designated by the financial markets as the
Official Health Care Sponsor of the Miracle Economy.") For this, Clark reaps
billions once the IPO takes place (as it inevitably does), and gets to be
viewed as great Silicon Valley visionary. It's all quite mind-boggling, and as
I say, I really think Lewis has done a terrific job rendering this new world in
all its insane particulars. (There is another scene I feel compelled to
mention--the one in which the investment bankers and the company executives
meet to decide about taking Healtheon public--that is, by itself, worth the
price of the book.)

            And now please allow me to gripe for a few minutes. Is
it possible that Michael Lewis has too much talent for his own good? After
reading this book, I think it is--and that's what made me so nuts as I was
reading The New New Thing . There is no problem he
can't solve, no hole he can't fill, with a graceful turn of the phrase. But
that also means that when confronted with the choice between doing a little
extra digging and writing his way around a problem, he chooses the latter every
time. The thing that struck me particularly in this regard was Healtheon's IPO.
The original IPO was canceled, because at the time it was scheduled to take
place, the market was tanking, and the company's road show had been a bust. But
then, some months later, Healtheon goes public and is a huge success. What
happened in the interim? We have no idea, because Lewis never bothers to tell
us. All he says is, "No one asked how a company the stock market deemed
unworthy was now, suddenly, desirable. It just happened." Well, that may be
nice writing, but it's pretty unsatisfying journalism.

            In fact, I don't know if you noticed or not, but Lewis
never once explains what Healtheon is supposed to do. It is supposed to somehow
insert itself in the system--but how? Lewis has a lot of fun showing how fuzzy
the concept is at the beginning, but by the end of the book, Healtheon is an
actual company with an actual product that does ... what, exactly? I couldn't
begin to tell you.

            Of course, maybe the problem is that this book was
written with great haste. There seems to be a belief among publishers that if
you don't get your Silicon Valley book out fast, it will be outdated before
it's published. And maybe they're right. What do you think? And what do you
think of the amount of time Lewis lingers over Clark's damn boat? I'll be happy
to tell you what I think about that tomorrow, though I guess I've already
tipped my hand.

         
      
   
