
   
   
      
         
            Bradley and Gore Slug It Out Over Poverty

            BROOKLYN, N.Y.--In the Democratic primary, revised version, Al Gore plays
Avis to Bill Bradley's Hertz. Bradley was scheduled to give a major address on
child poverty at a Baptist church in the Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood of
Brooklyn today. So Gore cobbled together his own proposal and launched a
preemptive strike at a Methodist church in a black neighborhood in Washington,
D.C., yesterday. This new Gore is a cheeky bastard. A Gore aide even showed up
at the Bradley campaign's pre-address press briefing to hand out fact sheets
criticizing Bradley's anti-poverty record.

            Irksome as the feisty new Al is to Team Bradley, his aggressiveness is
already making for a better and more interesting campaign. When both candidates
lay out their proposals on a given subject at the same time, we journalists are
impelled to compare and contrast them. And in this case, the exercise is
illuminating. What the two anti-poverty proposals make clear is that while Gore
may be trying to steal Bradley's thunder, he isn't imitating his proposals at
all. The two agree about some of the main points--increasing the minimum wage,
expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit, and fully funding Head Start. But they
have fundamentally different attitudes about how the federal government should
go about helping poor people.

            The most striking difference is in the way the two candidates frame the
problem. Gore takes a thoroughly Clintonized, New Democratic approach to
poverty, emphasizing the need for personal responsibility and New
Covenant-style reciprocity between government and benefit-recipient. He cast
this week's proposal as the "Next Step in Welfare Reform"--an effort to "Strengthen
Families, Reduce Child Poverty, Promote Responsible Fatherhood." The nuances of
language are significant. Note that Gore avoids separating out his proposals
for helping the poor. Subscribing, like Bill Clinton, to the idea that suburban
voters don't like Democrats enamored of liberal spending programs, Gore
sandwiches his generosity toward the poor between more middle-class friendly
ideas. The objective of reducing (not eliminating) poverty comes attached to
two other ideas--"helping parents make time for their children" and what he
characterized in his speech as "cracking down on deadbeats who abandon their
children." Gore's proposal is filled with coercive and punitive mechanisms. He
would require poor mothers to sign "individual responsibility plans." He would
require fathers who owe child support to go either to work or to jail.

            Bradley, by contrast, talks like an only slightly chastened Mondale liberal.
His "Child Poverty in America" speech (available at www.billbradley.com) offers
the soaring aspirations of LBJ's war on poverty--though without the
programmatic reach or generous funding. "I am issuing a simple challenge
today," he said. "Let us eliminate child poverty as we know it in America by
the end of the next decade." In place of the Clintonian buzzword
"responsibility," Bradley calls for "justice." Where Gore favors "tough love,"
Bradley offers "unconditional sympathy." And instead of proposing coercive
systems to make poor women work and poor men support their families, Bradley
suggests various ways of raising their incomes to the poverty line. In other
words, where Gore views poverty as partly a moral failing, Bradley views it as
simply a lack of money. If in the end he doesn't offer very much money to
address the problem, it's because he knows that any Democratic president
elected in 2000 would lack the political capital for more than a modest
"down-payment," which is how he described his plan.

            There are two specific areas that highlight these differences in approach.
Perhaps the clearest difference is on the issue of the 1996 welfare-reform
bill, which Gore supported and Bill Bradley voted against, on his way out of
the Senate. "As a result of welfare reform, millions of families have moved
from the dependency of welfare to the dignity of work," Gore said in his
speech. Bradley, on the other hand, didn't refer at all to the welfare-reform
bill of 1996, which required states to adopt time limits and work requirements.
Asked what Bradley thinks now of welfare reform, his press secretary, Eric
Hauser, said "that it had some fundamental flaws in terms of the federal
government simply handing money over to the states" and that Bradley continues
to harbor "some doubts about its long-term viability." The problem for Bradley
is that welfare reform is working remarkably well. Someday soon, Gore will club
him over the head with this issue, and Bradley will deserve it.

            A similar distinction in tone and approach marks what the two have to say
about "deadbeat dads." Bradley takes a kind of Ad Council approach. In his
speech, he called on fathers to realize "that having a child is a lifetime
commitment." Gore would give them no other option. He wants to take away their
credit cards, on top of their driver's licenses and passports, while attaching
their bank accounts and garnishing their wages. Gore then proposes throwing
them in jail if they refuse to work. Somewhat comically, he follows this call
for relentless harassment and involuntary servitude with a proposal to
"encourage more fathers to acknowledge paternity."

            In general, I think both Gore's and Bradley's approaches are somewhat
flawed. Many of Gore's ideas seem gimmicky and poll-driven. There's a Dick
Morris-1995 flavor to the inventive punishments applied to absent fathers, the
public enemies who have no friends. The more substantive part of what Gore
proposes--an increase in the EITC, marriage-penalty relief, an expanded
family-leave act--is fine, but unduly modest in its ambition. There are other
things we as a country can do about poverty: offer last-resort jobs to welfare
recipients and replace public housing projects with more humane alternatives.
But Gore seems to lack the guts to confront the issue of poverty directly. And
despite his reputation for wonkery, most of Gore's ideas are far too
vague--much more so than Bradley's. His fact sheet doesn't explain how his
measures would really work. Nor does it acknowledge how much they would cost or
say where the money would come from.

            Bradley's plan has many of the opposite defects. His rhetoric is bold and
sweeping but bears little relation to the substance of his $9.8 billion plan,
which is modest and incremental. Eliminating child poverty in a decade, which
is what Bradley says he can accomplish (albeit with the old "as we know it"
hedge), is simply an absurd goal. It's war-on-poverty-style over-promising
without any war-on-poverty cavalry to back it up. Continuing to reduce poverty
at the rate it has been dropping during the past eight years would be a far
more plausible aspiration.

            Since the 1980s, the conventional wisdom has been that Democrats who are too
interested in helping poor people get their heads handed to them. Gore's
problem is that he seems to believe this. Bradley's problem is that he seems to
believe it, too, but pretends he doesn't.

         
      
   
