
   
   
      
         
            Weekend Cocktail Chatter
            

            It was a mood-swing week on Wall Street, though I don't think there's anyone
left out there who feels confident enough to tell you what the market's going
to do next. (Well, it will fluctuate, of course.) Beaten down by last week's
producer price index number and the myriad 
misreadings of Alan Greenspan's comments, stocks came roaring back this
week after the consumer price index for September was reasonable and Microsoft
reported blowout numbers--no doubt all due to 
                  Slate
               , in some
complicated way that not even we can fully comprehend. But then IBM came in on
Wednesday night with a melancholy forecast for the next six months, which sent
stocks tumbling for much of Thursday until they just stopped. It was actually
an impressive feat of discriminating between good and bad stocks on the part of
the market, instead of the perhaps more common "Kill 'em all and let God sort
'em out" approach.

            I hope nothing else important happens between the time I write this and you
read it, but if it does, just ask the closest 7-year-old about it. He'll
probably give you a version much like the one in the previous paragraph. And
so, on to the Cocktail Chat!

            1. "AOL announced that it would be investing $800 million in PC maker
Gateway , and that it would be entering a partnership with Gateway that
should give AOL easier access to people who buy Gateway PCs, and Gateway easier
access to AOL customers. Since Gateway's company mascot is a cow ,
speculation has immediately arisen that its version of the online service will
be called America MOOnline."

            1a. "Think of that as a Henny Youngman joke for the age of the New
Economy."

            2. "IBM met Wall Street estimates but saw its market capitalization drop
by a staggering $40 billion after it warned that its sales in the next two
quarters, well into next year, would be sharply lower because customers are so
worried about the Y2K problem . Curiously, other tech giants, like Sun
Microsystems, Microsoft, and EMC have said that Y2K concerns are having little
or no effect on their business. But this does raise an interesting question:
What will be the latest date that a company mentions Y2K as a reason for poor
performance? I'm guessing July 2002."

            3. "Tobacco companies' stock prices dropped yet again, with Philip Morris
plummeting 24 percent in two days and R.J. Reynolds falling 15 percent.
Director Michael Mann must be astonished at the powerful effect the
early screenings of his anti-tobacco-company movie The Insider have had.
Though it's possible that a Florida jury handing down a verdict in a
class-action suit that could mean the companies will be shelling out even more
multibillion-dollar payments might have something to do with the downturn."

            4. "Gillette, which in the past year has made a habit of letting Wall
Street down , did so again Thursday when it announced that sales in the next
quarter would be lower because it was going to trim its inventory of razor
blades . Gillette also said it was contemplating selling off some of its
poorly performing divisions. Reuters reported that Gillette's shares were
'bludgeoned' in after-hours trading. Presumably with a 'blunt, heavy
object'?"

            5. "A bus-stop ad for a personal-injury lawyer here in Brooklyn tells
potential clients to call this number: '1-877-I-CAN-SUE .' Doesn't
Matlock have that on his business card, too?"

            6. "Martha Stewart Omnimedia went public Tuesday and nearly doubled
in its first day of trading, after some dubious trading shenanigans in its
first hour. According to the New York Times , 'The offering was hot in
large part because the founder of the company is so well known .' Ah,
yes. I'd almost forgotten that legendary chapter in Graham and Dodd's
Security Analysis : 'On the Importance of Fame in Valuing Stocks.'"

            7. "Drug maker Eli Lilly saw its profits rise 15 percent in the most
recent quarter, meeting estimates, but its shares fell nonetheless when it
announced that Prozac sales were down significantly. Count depression as
yet another casualty of the booming U.S. economy."

         
      
   
