
   
   
      
         
            Blow Book Blows

            The Washington Post leads with a Russian rocket attack on
Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, that killed more than 100 people--mostly
civilians--and wounded several hundred more. The assault is also the top
nonlocal story at the Los Angeles Times . It is carried inside elsewhere. The
LAT leads with news that the Los Angeles police scandal is mushrooming,
based on a reporter's unadvertised attendance at a special briefing for LAPD
officers at which they were told that investigators are now looking into seven
questionable shootings of Angelenos, and into the police theft and resale of
street drugs. USA Today leads with the latest evidence of the U.S.
military's recruiting difficulties: the cost per enlistee is now at an all-time
high. This is, the paper points out, money therefore not available to spend on
service members' training or housing. The New York Times front is a campaign
manager's dream: The lead is Al Gore's vow yesterday that if elected president,
he would ban offshore drilling for gas and oil along both the California and
Florida coasts (the Clinton administration policy is a mere moratorium), and
nearby is a reefer reporting that Bill Bradley yesterday advocated attacking
child poverty by raising the minimum wage, increasing child-care spending, and
providing working parents with various tax benefits. Pictures of the candidates
dominate the page.

            The WP goes bottom front with a dispatch about how the batch of
appropriations bills currently on Congress' plate are salted with discreet
little money plums for business: for auto companies, defense contractors,
utilities, agribusiness, shipbuilders, chemical companies, and even an
ammunition manufacturer. Bennies like the $15 million for research on
supersonic aircraft noise reduction, a subsidy that will help Gulfstream
develop a supersonic business jet, apparently to meet the pressing national
need for fat guys in loud pants to get to golf tournaments quicker.

            The WP front reports that Australian investigators operating as part
of the peacekeeping forces in East Timor are beginning to arrive at an
understanding of why, despite eyewitness accounts of the mass murder of
independence advocates by Indonesia-affiliated militias, they have found very
little murder evidence. They now believe, says the paper, that the
militiamen took pains to cover their tracks, in one case burning their victims'
bodies and then dumping the ashes into crocodile-filled lakes, in another
putting bodies in a boat and sinking it at sea. "In Kosovo, they didn't care
what the world saw," one investigator is quoted saying. "The Indonesians are
extremely concerned about saving face. They want to be able to deny any of this
happened."

            The NYT and WP go inside with a new study of Americans' investment practices. The big news: Nearly half
of all households are in the market now, compared to just 19 percent in 1983.
The other major finding: far more Americans practice buy-and-hold investing
than all the headlines about day traders would suggest, with 55 percent of
investors not making a single trade last year. And only 11 percent made trades
over the Internet. And the Wall Street Journal reports that a survey of nearly 400
U.S. companies indicates that corporate profits are up huge: their aggregate
third quarter total is 27 percent ahead of last year.

            The NYT fronts and the rest of the papers go inside with what is
perhaps the world land speed record for credibility disintegration: not only
does that St. Martin's Press book alleging that George W. Bush has a coke
conviction in his past not contain a shred of convincing evidence, but it turns
out that the book's author is apparently a convicted felon who did a five-year
stretch for attempted murder. Confronted with the blow up, St. Martin's pulled
the book yesterday. As 
                  Slate
               's 
Jacob Weisberg was the first to point out, the incident reminds that
quality control in the publishing business lacks only two things: quality and
control.

         
      
   
