
   
   
      
         
            The Spread of Goo
            

            Dear Eliza,

            The last time I had 14 drinks in different colors was this one evening in
Vegas ... but that's neither here nor there. Last night I reprised our run over
the bridge, trying several new bars, a different brand of goo, and a couple of
drinks.

            My clearcut taste winner among the new bars was the Grabber Energy Bar in
Wild Mountain Berry. Grabber must have some sort of French affiliation, as it's
labeled "Barre D'Energie" and its ingredients list is bilingual. Leave it to
the frogs to produce a tasty sports snack--Grabber had the taste and
consistency of a thicker Fruit Roll-Up. And it's all-natural real fruit.
Drawback: I don't quite understand why it's an energy bar, since it has barely
any protein or fat. It does have 153 calories and 36 g of carbohydrates.

            I also tried the Clif Bar in Apricot flavor, which basically tasted like
dried apricots, but mushier. Not bad. 250 calories and 2g of fat. I liked it
better than the crunchy Clif Bar we tried yesterday. After this I went to the
HardBody Energy Bar. The Honey-Almond flavor of this was yummy--I'd actually
eat it as a snack even if I weren't exercising. Not surprisingly, it was a 280
calories and a whopping 7g of fat. The Chocolate Truffle flavor HardBody had
the same stats, but was less enjoyable. Chocolate Truffle is way too rich to be
eating before or during exercise.

            During my run I felt good and energetic, and midway through I paused to try
a different goo packet from the PowerGel I tried last night. This one is called
Gu, and it was much more satisfying. Texture was like a nice custard, and
flavor ("banana blitz") was mild and delicious. I actually felt better after
the Gu than before. This may have something to do with its potassium, which
helps maintain fluid balance and stop cramps. The goo packet market is
exploding right now. The latest entry is Clif SHOT, from the Clif Bar people.
Clif SHOT has potassium as well, and cuts out the maltodextrin (sugar) that Gu
loads up on, but it also boasts caffeine, which I'm not sure I want during
exercise. The great thing about the goo packets is portability. They're a real
boost out on a run, and they're easier to carry and keep better than a
banana--you can stick a goo packet in your sock if you need to.

            After the run I tried a couple of Gatorade drinks. Riptide Rush was
delicious. A light grape flavor--not too light to seem watered down, just light
enough to be truly refreshing. Gatorade has potassium, too. The Lemon Ice
flavor I tried next was a disappointment. It had that very weak lemonade
taste--highly disagreeable after a workout.

            Well, Eliza, it's been great fun eating goo with you. I'm not sure we
determined anything conclusive, but I guess we can heartily recommend the
Powerbar Harvest flavor, at least on grounds of taste. And the goo packet
concept is a winner in my book. But if this is the general future of food, I'll
have the lobster. For quick reference, here's a chart of our reactions to the
bars we were both able to sample:



         
      
   
