
   
   
      
         
            Jim Clark, Ubergeek
            

            Nice work with the Rodman-Jordan analogy: Thanks. I think you're right that
the central problem with The New New Thing is the exaggerated claims it
makes for Jim Clark as The Man Who Single-handedly Changed Silicon Valley--and
therefore modern economic life. Clearly, as we've both been saying, Clark
played an astonishing and fascinating (and probably not-yet-finished) role in
what has happened. But my guess, too, would be that the cyber-revolution would
have happened sooner or later anyway, maybe in somewhat different form, with
other players. Your suggestion that the venture capitalist John Doerr may have
done even more to change the Valley than Clark would probably enrage the
latter, since he seems--at least as Lewis tells it--to regard the money guys as
lower forms of life ("the sucker fish of economic growth").

            To make his case, Lewis offers up some big pronouncements. For instance,
summarizing the New Growth Theory devised by Paul Romer in the 1980s, Lewis
says that now "wealth came from the human imagination," and concludes that "the
new theory conferred a stunning new status upon innovation." Am I missing
something? Is this news? What about the old-fangled Eli Whitney, Thomas Edison,
Alexander Graham Bell, and Andrew Carnegie? Lewis goes on:

            

               The Prime Mover of Wealth was no longer a great industrialist who rode herd
on thousands of corporate slaves, or the great politician who rode herd on the
nation's finances, or the great Wall Street tycoon who bankrolled a new
enterprise. He was the geek holed up in his basement all weekend discovering
new things to do with his computer. He was Jim Clark.

            

            There is of course a huge difference between a physical light bulb and an
abstract computer idea, and the revolution in information technology really
has, as Alan Greenspan puts it, "altered the structure of the way the American
economy works." Clark, representing the technogeeks, is now able to dictate
terms to venture capitalists, but as you pointed out this morning, the biggest
change in the way Silicon Valley works seems to have come with the Netscape
IPO, which proved that you don't have to earn profits before taking take a
company public. Later, regarding the Healtheon IPO, Lewis writes, "In this new
world skepticism was not a sign of intelligence. It was a sin." Actually, it
probably just meant missing out on all the money.

            I think there's another big problem here as well, connected to the question
you asked about the motive Lewis ascribes to Clark for the Netscape IPO--that
Clark did it only because he wanted money for his new boat. I don't buy that
either. Lewis says about Clark at the outset that "you didn't interact with him
so much as hitch a ride on the back of his life"--and that "the only way to
spend time with Jim Clark was to leap onto one of his machines." He gets a
great ride, and so do we, but it's impossible not to want to know more about
what is going on under the surface--about why some of these things happen--and
on the subject of "character," this book is odd. Lewis says that the only
creatures Clark really trusts are machines. It would have been interesting to
hear from or about his three wives (one of them current: Her name comes up just
a couple of times, and she never enters the story). Maybe wives were declared
off limits; if so, that would have been useful to know. After the second wife
left him, Clark went through a severe-sounding depression. Trying to explain
how he made the leap from (in Lewis' words) "thirty-eight-year-old unsuccessful
college professor with a warning label on his forehead to a founder of a
multibillion-dollar corporation," Clark says he developed "this maniacal
passion for wanting to achieve something . I guess it was a little bit of
self-imposed psychology." That, like the "reason" for the Netscape IPO, is
it.

            Still, to revert to our basketball analogy, it would be hard to get inside
Dennis Rodman's head. Three times Lewis tries to tell us something quite
surprising about Clark, but we never actually see it: Faced with a new
situation, Clark "wanted badly to do what was expected of him. It was only
after he determined that this was somehow impossible that he went ahead and did
whatever he wanted." "Very deep inside him Clark harbored the desire to be a
good boy." "He really did feel some strong impulse to meet other people's
expectations of him." I'm not sure what we're supposed to make of this. Near
the end, having brought out in a scene you've described that no amount of money
will ever be enough for Clark, Lewis concludes with a poignant but still opaque
image that "the best and most lasting motive for wanting to change the way
things are is to be unhappy with the way things are. ... No matter how well Jim
Clark did for himself, it was always two in the morning in his heart, and he
was lying awake."

            Maybe more tomorrow on the good guys and the bad guys in this story?

         
      
   
