
   
   
      
         
            Shattering Glass-Steagall

            The Washington Post leads with a House Republican plan to cut
Government spending across-the-board by 1.4 percent. The Republicans contend
that cutting $4.5 billion from federal agencies and delaying $1.3 billion in
health spending will fill the hole in their budget. Administration officials
argue that the Republican plan does not add up and that the proposal would
force layoffs and harm military readiness. House Majority Leader Richard Armey
(R-Tex.) explained his vision of how the Defense Department could cut 1.4
percent from its $260 billion budget: "Instead of having two colonels to hold
your paper, you'll have only one major." The NYT and the LAT
carry the story inside.

            The New York Times and the
Los
Angeles Times lead with the product of decades of debate and intensive
lobbying--an agreement to transform American banking laws.

            Democrats and Republicans resolved to repeal the Depression-era
Glass-Steagall law, which restricted the cross-ownership of banks, brokerages,
and insurers. If the accord is enacted, a NYT analysis forecasts that
financial institutions will agglomerate into "universal banks" to provide
one-stop financial shopping. Consumers could benefit from reduced costs. The
LAT notes that the bill will prohibit nonfinancial companies from buying
banks.

            Even though Senate Republicans acceded to a Democratic provision that will
prevent banks with unsatisfactory lending records from moving into other
financial services, advocates for disadvantaged borrowers argue that the
agreement fails to strengthen fair lending laws. Yesterday, the WP was
able to squeeze early news of the 2 a.m. agreement into a late edition. Today,
the story is the Post 's off-lead. All papers report that the stock
market soared over 172.5 points on news of the accord.

            The LAT fronts a United Nations Security Council vote to send 6,000
peacekeepers to Sierra Leone. A NYT story explains that the peacekeepers
will disarm Sierra Leone rebels. The United States will contribute logistical
support to the operation, but no combat troops. On Monday, the Security Council
is expected to approve sending 10,000 U.N. troops to East Timor. The new
commitments will double the number of peacekeepers in the field. The U.N. is
also considering sending as many as 20,000 peacekeepers to the Congo.

            The Post fronts Russia's acceptance and disavowal of
responsibility for the bombing of a Chechen market. The incident cost over 100
lives. Among the dead are women and children. A Russian military spokesman said
that special forces bombed the market because it was actually an arms bazaar.
But Russian Prime Minster Vladimir Putin claimed that the explosion was caused
by warring Chechen rebels. The NYT and LAT carry the story
inside. All papers assert that evidence points towards a Russian bombardment.
According to the New York Times , as violence spreads Chechens are
fleeing into the neighboring republic of Ingushetia, where it is estimated that
185,000 civilians are seeking refuge.

            All the papers bury their coverage of the New Hampshire debate among
contenders for the Republican presidential nomination. The NYT says that
the five candidates "virtually ignored" front-runner George W. Bush and focused
on criticizing Bill Clinton. The WP asserts that after the debate the
five attending politicians blasted Bush by arguing that his absence from the
stage was an affront to voters. "I think he was the big loser here tonight,"
Steve Forbes said of the absent Bush. (
                  Slate
               's 
Jacob Weisberg analyzes the debate and highlights its stranger
moments.)

            A NYT piece reports on a particularly creative Internet start-up.
RonsAngels.com, the brainchild of former Playboy director Ron Harris, auctions
the eggs of fashion models to the highest bidder (presumably infertile
couples.) Even though the site will not premiere until Monday, Ron has already
received a $42,000 bid for one of his angel's eggs. Some ethicists are troubled
by the combination of e-commerce, eugenics and egg pimping.

         
      
   
