
   
   
      
         
            Big Al's Bounce, Big Blue's Plunge

            The Washington
Post leads with President Clinton's decision to hold his nose and sign
a $268 billion spending bill for the Pentagon, a story fronted by the
New York Times
and put atop the Wall
Street Journal 's "Worldwide" box. Clinton compromised with the GOP
because it was unclear whether congressional Democrats could have sustained a
veto and because the president wants to focus on other budget issues, like the
Republicans' push for a 1.4 percent across-the-board spending cut. (For a
budget primer, click 
here.) USA Today
leads with Pat Buchanan's decision to officially leave the GOP for the
Reform Party--a story reefered by the Los Angeles Times and fronted by the Post and
NYT , where it's the top non-local lead. The LAT leads with
the opening of a Gaza-to-West-Bank travel corridor through Israel, a story
fronted by the Post , USAT , and the
NYT (but not the Journal ). Most travel was eastbound, from
the Gaza Strip to the West Bank (where there are more jobs and where it is
easier to sneak into Israel). "The young men aboard [a bus leaving Gaza], with
duffel bags and packed falafel lunches, sang Egyptian pop songs, clapped, and
celebrated," writes the LAT 's correspondent, who notes the
condescension many West Bank Palestinians have for their poorer, more socially
conservative Gazan compatriots.

            Buchanan, a former speechwriter for Barry Goldwater, Richard Nixon, and
Ronald Reagan, urged his supporters to "save our republic before she disappears
into the godless New World Order that the elites are constructing in a betrayal
of everything for which our Founding Fathers lived, fought and died." The
Post and LAT note that George W. Bush criticized Buchanan for the first
time after the announcement. Pat Choate, a former Reform Party vice
presidential nominee and a Buchanan supporter, said he hopes to schedule a
"series of debates" between Buchanan and likely rival Donald Trump. Choate
tells the LAT that Ross Perot has decided not to run, but the
Post still speculates that Perot might jump in. A smart opinion piece
in the Journal argues that Buchanan is not an American populist so
much as a pre-war, European-style Christian Socialist like Karl Lueger,
Vienna's turn-of-the-century mayor. Lueger was a tribune of the lower middle
class and an anti-Marxist--but also an anti-capitalist, an anti-liberal, and a
mild anti-Semite. (For Ballot Box's take on Buchanan's decision, click 
here; to learn how the Reform Party picks its nominee, click 
here.)

            A new USAT -CNN-Gallup poll shows Al
Gore trailing Bush by nine points, 52 to 43--a big improvement over Gore's
16-point deficit earlier this month. Gore also leads Bradley 57 to 32, compared
with 51 to 32 two weeks ago (although Bradley still leads in New Hampshire and
New York). Buchanan lags at 5 percent. A Newsweek poll--cited in a
separate Post story on Bush's first campaign
commercials--also puts the vice president just 9 points in back of Bush, 49 to
40.

            Every paper fronts the death of golfing champion Payne Stewart in a bizarre
corporate jet crash. En route from Florida to Texas, the Learjet apparently
lost cabin pressure, at which point radio contact ceased. Air Force F-16s
tracking the plane could only watch as it flew on autopilot for over 1,000
miles, ran out of fuel, and plunged into a South Dakota swamp. The LAT
says a loss of pressure at 39,000 feet would drop cabin temperature to below
zero (Fahrenheit or Celsius?--the paper doesn't say) and give the pilots 10
seconds to affix oxygen masks before losing consciousness from hypoxia. (The
Post says one to two minutes until loss of consciousness--at
30,000 feet--and the NYT says the loss of cabin pressure could have been gradual and
therefore virtually unnoticeable.) The Journal says the crash may
"throw a spotlight on the widening popularity of corporate jets," but the same
article notes that private plane crashes have actually decreased over
the last five years.

            All the papers front the death of Sen. John Chafee, R-R.I., at 77 from heart
failure. Chafee was a centrist deal-maker, a champion of health care and the
environment ostracized by an increasingly conservative GOP and an increasingly
partisan Senate.

            The Post runs a first-rate analysis of yesterday's 20 percent drop in IBM's
share price. Alan Sloan, Newsweek 's Wall Street correspondent, notes
that yesterday's plunge came after Big Blue announced that its mainframe
computer sales would be soft for the next six months. Sloan argues that stock
analysts could have predicted this sales drop-off with a few phone calls to
mainframe buyers. Yet a database search of 22 IBM stock analysts shows that
only one had downgraded IBM stock prior to the announcement. After the
announcement and stock plunge, four of them downgraded. "This is what rural
types call locking the barn door after the horse has been stolen," he observes.
(For Moneybox's take on the IBM sell-off, click 
here.)

            A front-page LAT piece on the alleged Bank of New York
money-laundering scandal argues that much of the suspicious Russian money is
owned by legitimate Russian businessmen who simply do not trust Russian banks
or wish to avoid paying excessive taxes to a corrupt government. "Safe
investments in Russia are as rare as flamingos in Siberia," the authors write.
"Most [Russian] people think that the only smart thing to do with their money
is to ... try to get it out of the country."

            The NYT examines the gentrification of Freehold, N.J. Once a
tight-knit but downtrodden blue-collar community, the hometown of Bruce
Springsteen has become a wealthy, yuppified commercial district, with lots of
jobs, high taxes, and a fleet of SUVs.

            The Post runs a correction that will make every high-school biology
teacher cluck with disapproval: "An item on yesterday's Science page
incorrectly stated that mitochondrial DNA is found in the nucleus of cells. It
is in every cell's cytoplasm."

         
      
   
