
   
   
      
         
            The Senate Stays Soft

            The Washington Post , New York Times , and Los Angeles
Times lead with yesterday's procedural votes in the Senate that
effectively ended any chance of passing campaign finance reform this year.
USA
Today runs the Senate results on Page 8, leading instead with the FBI's
quiet efforts to warn local police about the possibility that anti-government
militias and hate groups will become increasingly dangerous in the coming year
because of the apocalyptic significance some of them attribute to the new
millennium.

            What happened in the Senate, the papers report, is that in successive votes
to force floor consideration of two campaign reform measures--one simply a ban
of the unregulated campaign use of donations made to the national political
parties ("soft money"), the other a broader bill that also would have tightened
rules about "issue ads" that actually function in support of particular
candidates--the pro forces achieved slim majorities, but fell short of the 60
votes required to cut off a filibuster against the measures. After these votes,
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott quickly tried to move on to other business,
prompting complaints from the pro-reform forces led by Sen. John McCain that
Lott had broken his promise to allow extended floor debate. But the WP
cites sources saying Lott will prevail this morning.

            Everybody quotes President Clinton's reaction: "Once again, a minority in
the Senate has blocked bipartisan campaign finance reform." Clinton called the
Senate impasse "a victory for the politics of cynicism." The LAT claims
that despite these remarks, Clinton has not thrown his full weight behind the
issue, although the paper provides no evidence of this, noting only that
Clinton is a prodigious money raiser within the current rules. The NYT
goes high with the observation that the outcome keeps the special interest
money issue alive for next year's presidential campaign. The LAT and
WP emphasize that the campaign reform cause's outcome was very similar
to what happened last year, but only the NYT claims that actually this
is the fourth straight year that campaign reform has died in the Senate.

            The WP tarnishes McCain's reformer star a bit with a companion piece
(based on a Common Cause investigation) to the Senate vote lead reporting that
earlier this year McCain's Commerce committee backed off tough new regulations
protecting airline passengers in favor of a much weaker bill after airline soft
money flowed into Senate GOP coffers. Although McCain denied knowing about the
rush of money, he admits in the story that "Big people have access to my office
that ordinary Americans don't have. That's one reason we need reform."

            The WP , LAT , and NYT front the latest political news
from Indonesia. And USAT runs it inside. But only the WP seems to
get the emphasis in the story just right. True, President B.J. Habibie has
apparently decided not to run to remain in office, but the bigger news that
affects many people and concerns the U.N. and the countries currently supplying
peacekeeping forces in East Timor is that Indonesia's legislature has formally
relinquished the nation's claim to the region. The WP makes this the big
print headline. The NYT relegates it to smaller type beneath a header
about Habibie. And the LAT and USAT headlines are all about
Habibie and don't mention East Timor at all.

            The LAT slugs a story about corruption in Russia thusly: GREASY PALMS
ARE RAMPANT IN RUSSIA. Even if there were a widespread corruption scandal in
Los Angeles, say, would the paper ever use GREASY PALMS ARE RAMPANT IN L.A.? Of
course not.

            The WP , NYT , and LAT front Tuesday's federal
indictment of McDonnell Douglas, now part of Boeing, and a Chinese airline it
did business with on charges of diverting high-tech manufacturing tools to
China's military. The NYT is alone in emphasizing that the case could
complicate the current effort by the governments of China and the U.S. to
complete a trade agreement that would bring China into the World Trade
Organization.

            Both the WP and NYT go inside about a study--based on redacted U.S. government documents--being
published today in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists that is the
most elaborate accounting yet of the secret deployment by the U.S. during the
Cold War of nuclear weapons in foreign countries, many of which have policies
strictly banning a nuclear presence. The only real remaining mystery, say the
study's authors: What's the blacked-out country alphabetically between Canada
and Cuba that had U.S. nukes foisted on it between 1956 and 1965?

            Both the Wall Street Journal 's "Heard on the Street" column and
USAT 's front page "cover story" report on the whiz-bang first day for
Martha Stewart's IPO, which, USAT informs, made her "America's Newest
Billionaire." Stewart was on hand at the NYSE to ring the opening bell for her
big day, after, says the Journal , serving the money men a breakfast of
scones, croissants and fresh-squeezed orange juice. A question: Who decides who
gets to ring the opening bell? And shouldn't IPOers be excluded from clanging
since the decision is tantamount to pouring millions into their stock?

         
      
   
