
   
   
      
         
            Beyond the Valley of the IPOs
            

            Good guys and bad guys? I hadn't thought about
The New New Thing in those terms, since it seemed
to me that even though Clark had spats with various people--and even though he
looked at money people, in particular, as vermin--all of them, even the vermin,
were his co-conspirators. Everybody involved in this story was in this thing
together, thinking and acting in this new way, trying to reinvent the business
world and perhaps even trying to redefine the nature of capitalism itself. (Can
you really generate a net worth of $2.3 billion without
ever doing any work ? Certainly that has to rank as one of Jim Clark's more
audacious experiments in capitalism!)

            Ultimately, every character in the book is going to
turn out to be a good guy--or they're all going to turn out to be bad guys.
Let's remember, again, why we both thought so highly of The New New Thing : It offers an astonishingly vivid description of
what Silicon Valley is like at this moment in history. From my vantage point on
the East Coast, it seems crazy out there--and Lewis has that craziness nailed.
So let's suppose for a second that this ... this ... anarchy, as Lewis calls
it, turns out to be the future of American business--which of course is what
most people in the Valley firmly believe. If that turns out to be the case,
we're going to look back on this book 20 years from now and say, "Jim Clark and
those guys in The New New Thing , they showed us the
way. They are true heroes." But now let's suppose that Silicon Valley at the
millennium turns out to be what the 1960s were when we were in college: an
intoxicating flash-in-the-pan. That is, all that Jim Clark-style anarchy
ultimately falls by the wayside, much of the wealth evaporates, and one day
people wake up and wonder, "What were we thinking?" In that case, we'll look
back at The New New Thing and say, "What a bunch of
idiots those guys were! Couldn't they see that it was all about to collapse?"
Weirdly--and this is The New New Thing 's real mark of greatness--the
book will hold up no matter how this story plays out.

            There is no dissenter in The
New New Thing , no East Coast sage shaking his head sadly and warning that
it is all going to turn out badly. And that is perfectly appropriate for this
book, because there really is no dissent in the Valley. But reading the book
provoked in me, at least, the lingering thought that it can't last. There is
too much venture capital money chasing increasingly marginal business ideas--as
exemplified by Clark's going in to see John Doerr, uttering one sentence, and
getting funding for MyCFO, an idea that may or may not have merit. (As usual,
it's impossible to know from the scenes in The New New
Thing .) There is an increasing lack of rigor in Internet startups. Catch
phrases such as "business models"--which Lewis knowingly mocks--have replaced
actual business plans. Nobody seems to even care about profits anymore. All of
these things can be found in The New New Thing . You
just have to come to the book predisposed to look for them.

            Which, I admit, is my general bias. Yes, I believe the
Internet will be huge and potentially transformative--and might even make some
companies profitable some day in the distant future. But no, I don't think
what's going on in the Valley right now is sustainable. What was that line you
quoted? "In this new world skepticism was not a sign of intelligence. It was a
sin."

            That's me, a sinner. Care to join me in hell?

         
      
   
