
   
   
      
         
            Do Cellular Phones Cause Brain Cancer?
            

            Recent news reports out of Britain are giving credence to the theory that
cellular phone use increases the risk of brain cancer. What are the facts?

            Think of cellular phones as little radio stations, beaming voice and data to
the telephone network via electromagnetic waves called radiofrequency (RF)
radiation. Cell phones emit RF radiation with a 800-900 MHz frequency, which is
close to the 2,450 MHz frequency used by microwave ovens. The 1,000-watt power
of the average microwave oven, however, is significantly greater than a cell
phone's 0.6-watt output. Exposure to high levels of RF--many times the amount
emitted by cell phones--causes biological damage, but the effects of lower
exposure levels are not well established. Since this radiation penetrates the
human body, critics theorize that cellular phones could cause physical damage
to cells--either through heating or another form of energy release.

            Some scientists dispute this hypothesis, arguing that RF energy from
cellular phones is significantly weaker than the energy occurring naturally in
the body's cells, and would therefore be unable to physically alter them. They
also contend that even after long exposure periods, the phones could only cause
a fraction of a degree increase in cell temperature--well within the body's
normal range. In the absence of another plausible mechanism by which RF
radiation could cause damage, they say that cell phones should be presumed
safe.

            Most RF exposure studies are inconclusive. They either fail to find effects,
or have produced statistically insignificant findings. Selecting subjects for
ongoing cellular phone studies is a challenge, since the highly exposed
population remains relatively small, and many forms of cancer may take years to
develop. But one recent British study found that RF may cause brain cells to
react as if they were being heated (though no temperature increase was
observed), which investigators hypothesized may damage cell function over long
periods of time. Another found that cellular phone use was associated with an
increased frequency of a certain type of brain tumor (although the overall risk
of cancer was not found to increase). Most scientists call for further research
and testing. Some cellular phone users are reducing possible risk by using
earpiece and microphone headsets that plug into the telephone and make it
possible to talk without the phone being held to the head.

            Regulatory agencies like the Food and Drug Administration and Federal
Communications Commission hedge on the issue, neither guaranteeing cellular
phones' safety nor recommending that users stop using them. And the greatest
danger posed by cellular phones yet discovered is an increased likelihood of
car accidents involving inattentive users.

            (Click here to read the FDA's Oct. 20 update on cellular phone
safety, and here to view the FCC's RF safety guidelines. In May,
Radiation Research magazine published a scientific assessment of the research to date into the cell
phone-cancer connection.)

            Next question?

         
      
   
