
   
   
      
         
            The Meaning of the IBM Sell-Off
            

            It's hard to tell if this is still the Era of Stock Market Good Feeling or
if a combination of Y2K concerns, rising interest rates, misreadings of Alan
Greenspan, and conventional "October is a bad month for stocks" has brought it
to a sudden end. What we seem to be living through right now is a strange time
in which the market is simultaneously being excoriated as overvalued and
hysterical and being described as being in a slump that forebodes bad
things ahead. Can't win for losing.

            As evidence of investor hysteria, the financial media often point to things
like the $40 billion market-cap hit that IBM took at the end of last week,
after it announced that it would have two, and perhaps three, disappointing
quarters in a row because its customers were cutting back on spending in order
to take care of potential Y2K problems. Momentum investors pile into a stock,
the narrative goes, and then pile out of it without paying any attention to the
fundamentals, so that good buy-and-hold investors get whipsawed for no good
reason.

            But what happened to IBM on Thursday, far from being evidence of a flighty
stock market, was instead a sign of just how discriminating investors have
become. If stock prices really were being driven solely by inflated margin
balances and the overconfidence bred by years of 20 percent plus returns, you'd
expect investors to be forgiving. In fact, they are more punitive then ever.
Investors are willing to pay high prices for companies that deliver consistent
above-average cash-flow growth. But if there are signs that a company's ability
to deliver that kind of growth may be faltering--and IBM's announcement was a
Vegas-style neon sign to that effect--then the market will pummel a stock
quickly.

            The speed with which a negative earnings report can vaporize a company's
market cap is also sometimes held up as problematic. But here again, it's no
surprise that in a world in which trading costs are minuscule, the diffusion of
information nearly instantaneous, and trading volume immense, prices will
change very fast in the wake of significant news. This just means that markets
are more efficient, not less, in the sense that they establish a new
equilibrium price--or as close to it as they can ever get--in the space of a
day, and not a week. IBM's stock price bumped up a little bit on Friday, but
stayed steady today, which suggests that Thursday's sell-off was not some
massive overreaction.

            The most important thing about the IBM sell-off, though, was what it
wasn't , namely an impetus for a more general sell-off in technology. In
the past (and even the recent past), we've seen announcements like the one that
Big Blue made have a ripple effect on tech stocks across the board, as momentum
and program traders bailed out of anything that might suffer from association
with a big name's blowup. But last week, investors rather quickly recognized
that IBM's problems seemed company-specific, and that companies that had
reported excellent earnings during the week--like AOL--should be bought, not
sold. In other words, investors rewarded the companies that should have been
rewarded and punished those that should have been punished. Capital was
allocated sensibly, rather than hysterically.

            There are, of course, always going to be under- and overreactions, like the
one that victimized Tyco or the
one that sent the stock of Cisco (which I own shares of) plummeting on Friday
after an unsubstantiated rumor that the company would miss estimates hit the
Street. But what last week's action suggested is that five (or 10, or 17,
depending on how you're counting) years of a bull market have not made
investors careless or blinded by success. Eternal vigilance ... Well, something
like that.

         
      
   
