
   
   
      
         
            Bill Bennett and the Cultural-Decline Decline

            What's a conservative Jeremiah to do? Violent crime is down, divorce is
down, the welfare rolls are dwindling, fewer women are having abortions, and
SAT scores and charitable giving are on the rise. This is the dilemma facing
former education secretary and drug czar William Bennett, who this morning held
a press conference in Washington to unveil the second edition of his book
The Index of Leading Cultural Indicators . Bennett is
battling the inconvenient onslaught of good news with three
strategems-- retreat , partisanship , and dishonesty .

            

               
                  1. Retreat. Bennett concedes in the new book that since the
appearance of his first Index in 1994, "there have been many significant
positive developments," and he cites them. He also tells readers, "I have
amended some of my own prior views about the efficacy of politics and public
policy."

               In the 1994 edition, Bennett wrote:

               

                  
                     Today the forces of social decomposition are challenging--and in some
instances, overtaking--the forces of social composition. And when decomposition
takes hold, it exacts an enormous human cost. Unless these exploding social
pathologies are reversed, they will lead to the decline and perhaps even to the
fall of the American republic
                      [italics Bennett's] . ... They seem
impervious to government spending on their alleviation, even very large amounts
of spending.
                  

               

               The new edition is considerably more sanguine (it could hardly be gloomier).
Bennett writes, "It turns out that some social pathologies are less resistant
to legislative action and political leadership than I once thought." This
follows a trend in Bennett's thinking traceable to at least 1997, when he told
a gathering of his fellow conservatives that "these are times in which
conservatives are going to have to face the fact that there is some good news
on the landscape. We're going to have to live with it." (The quote is from
David Whitman's The Optimism Gap .) Earlier this month, Bennett spoke
in a similar vein when he defended an offhand swipe at Robert Bork's sourpuss
tome Slouching Towards Gomorrah that George W. Bush made
in a recent speech on education. Bennett had reviewed that speech before Bush
gave it, though he emphasized at today's press conference that he didn't
insert the Bork swipe, and that when he read it he didn't really think
of it as a Bork swipe so much as a "synecdoche" for the excessive social-issues
pessimism that is common among conservatives. (For a fuller discussion of the
Slouching Towards Gomorrah flap, click 
here.)

               
                  2. Partisanship. Although Bennett now concedes that many social
problems have eased since 1994, he takes care not to give the credit to Bill
Clinton, who has occupied the White House since 1993. How could he? Bennett,
after all, nearly became chairman of the Republican National Committee a few
years back. At today's press conference, Bennett cited as examples of the
"progress on key social indicators" during the 1990s the drop in violent crime
in New York City and the drastically reduced welfare rolls in Wisconsin and
Michigan. It was hard not to notice that the mayor and two governors who
presided over these jurisdictions for the last several years were Republicans.
When Chatterbox asked about any contribution the Democratic White House
may have made, Bennett said "I think most of the action we talk about has been
at the state and local level." He then conceded that the 1996 welfare-reform
bill was significant, and said, "I will give credit to the president for
signing that welfare legislation." But in the next breath he said that Clinton
"didn't want to sign it" and was pushed to do so by the Republican-controlled
Congress.

               
                  3. Dishonesty. There remain, of course, a few social problems that
really have gotten worse in the last few years, and Bennett, of course, eagerly
cites them: a rising percentage of births to unwed mothers, rising marijuana
consumption by high-school seniors, a growing and possibly indiscriminate
tendency for doctors to prescribe Ritalin to children suspected of suffering
from attention deficit disorder. (This last social problem wasn't discussed at
all in the previous edition.) In Chatterbox's book, none of these is nearly so
serious a problem as that of growing income inequality; but inequality isn't
the sort of thing conservatives fret about, and, in his book, Bennett
doesn't.

               Given this paucity of bad-news material to work with, it's understandable
that Bennett would be tempted to find some way to move the goalposts he set
down in 1994. In two instances, Bennett gives in to that temptation.

               The first instance concerns Bennett's discussion of teen-age
pregnancy . Unlike unwed pregnancy, which is rising ,
teen pregnancy is sharply declining . But Bennett leads off his
chapter on "Youth Behavior" with the shocking news, presented in large boldface
type, that "[b]etween 1990 and 1996, the percentage of all teen-age mothers who
are unmarried has increased 12 percent." This is an accurate but not enormously
significant statistic. In effect, it's a way of saying that the venerable
institution of the shotgun marriage is in decline: Teen-age girls who get
pregnant are less likely to get married than were teen-age girls who got
pregnant during the 1980s.

               But the more important question is: How many teen-age girls are getting
pregnant in the first place? The answer, which Bennett mentions only in
passing, is that the teen-age fertility rate is down roughly 13 percent since
1990. The teen-age fertility rate has been dropping for several decades--a
tribute, no doubt, to contraception--though for most of that time the teen-age
out-of-wedlock birth rate was increasing. Thus the 1994 chapter on "Youth:
Pathologies and Behavior" led off with two big charts on teen-age
out-of-wedlock birth rates since 1960, which were shown to be rising
impressively.

               But now the teen-age out-of-wedlock birth rate seems to be leveling
off--reflecting, Chatterbox supposes, some hard-won equilibrium between
teen-agers' greater use of contraceptives, on the one hand, and their greater
disinclination to marry their high school sweethearts, on the other. Since
1990, teen-age out-of-wedlock births have actually decreased very slightly.
This is mentioned in the 1999 edition, but only in passing.

               The second instance of Bennett's dishonesty concerns incarceration .
In the 1994 volume, Bennett defines the incarceration problem as the failure to
imprison criminals. "Nearly three out of every four convicted criminals are not
incarcerated," Bennett writes. "Fewer than 1 in 10 serious crimes results in
imprisonment." The 1994 edition does note, in passing, that the U.S.
incarceration rate, 4.55 people per 100,000, is "ten times higher than that of
Japan, Sweden, Ireland, and the Netherlands." But the overall thrust of the
incarceration section of the 1994 edition is that too many criminals are
avoiding jail sentences. The chapter ends with three tough-on-crime quotes, all
of which harp on this theme. Here's one, from criminologist John DiIulio:
"There is so much crime without punishment in America today because recent
generations of social and political elites, both liberal and conservative, have
liberated themselves from the belief that criminals are free moral agents and
that publicly sanctioned punishments are what they justly deserve."

               Now take a look at the 1999 edition. This time out, Bennett features in
large, boldfaced type the statistic, "Between 1990 and 1997, the rate of
sentenced prisoners in the United States increased 50 percent." This is
followed up with statistics about the number of people in federal and state
prisons and local jails (1.8 million); the states with the fastest-growing
prison populations (Texas, California, Louisiana, and Ohio); the likelihood
(one in 20) that any given person will do prison time; and so on. The chapter
fairly screams, "There are too many people in prison nowadays." Which is odd,
considering that five years ago Bennett was fretting that there were too
few.

            

            The Index seemed a smart bit of ideological entrepreneurship when
Bennett started it in the early 1990s: Using as a baseline the year 1960, when
all conservatives agree the world went to hell in a handbasket, it was able to
document vividly the rise in all sorts of societal ills. By now, however, it
has clearly outlived its usefulness. Chatterbox predicts a third edition will
never see the light of day.

         
      
   
