
   
   
      
         
            Poll to Poll

            For the third straight day the papers lead with stories about the
revitalized U.S. war on terrorism. The New York Times
says that U.S. banks must freeze all of bin Laden's and his associates' assets;
the Washington Post says that all their U.S. assets are
already frozen, but fails to make it clear if any such assets exist. Everyone
reports that President Clinton, in his weekly radio address, warned of a "long
battle" against bin Laden's terrorist network.

            The NYT runs a two-column off-lead on Nigeria's "self-imposed
poverty." Africa's most populous nation has everything it needs: arable land,
quality universities, and oil. Corrupt leadership, however, has left the nation
racked with poverty and unable to correct itself--a predicament blamed largely
on the prevalence of graft among Nigerian politicians. In the words of one
would-be reformer, "They have no love of their country. Only love of their
pockets."

            A WP /ABC News survey agrees with yesterday's NYT /CBS News
poll: folks think Clinton is doing a good job as President, but they don't
trust him. And they don't like Monica Lewinsky. The WP article's
headline reads "American Voters See 2 Distinct Bill Clintons," but the article
reveals that polling was done among two groups of "randomly selected
adults"-selected, that is, from a population in which only 49% of those eligible voted in the 1996 election.

            Crime has dropped but fear hasn't, according to an Los Angeles
Times Sunday Report. The piece says that manipulation of public fear by
politicians, the media, and the crime-prevention industry has created something
akin to Eisenhower's "military-industrial complex." The article particularly
criticizes police departments that take credit for falling crime rates while
padding their budgets by fueling unwarranted paranoia.

            The NYT reports that about 40,000 people, 2% of Utah's total
population, live in polygamous families. A 16-year-old Utah girl, who claims
she escaped from an abusive father and an arranged marriage to her uncle (her
1st, his 15th), has drawn national attention to the issue this summer. A recent
poll finds that, while the Mormon Church has officially banned polygamy for
more than a century, only 54% of Salt Lake City residents support the
prosecution of polygamists.

            William S. Cohen talks tough in a WP Sunday Outlook piece. Mr.
Secretary says that Thursday's missile strike signifies a "long term,
fundamental way in which the United States intends to combat the forces of
terror." Cohen reminds us that the U.S. never "cringed at the feet of communist
or fascist bullies" and warns terrorist-friendly states that they are "not
beyond the reach of America's military might."

            From the Department of Redundancy Department: yesterday's Today's
Papers discussed a WP article about the rapid growth of the Clinton
legal defense fund. Both the NYT and TP had previously covered the
topic back on August 13th.

            Finally, the NYT Week in Review examines how Americans rationalize
their decisions to eat some animals and not others. The article cites perceived
intelligence and fluffiness as big plusses in the "don't eat" column, but fails
to mention what historical role taste buds may have played.

         
      
   
