
   
   
      
         
            Maybe-a-culpa

            Every paper leads with President Clinton's four-minute maybe-a-culpa. But,
because Clinton linguistically bobbed and weaved so much, their headline
descriptions of what exactly took place vary. According to the Los Angeles
Times slug, the president fessed up to an "inappropriate relationship."
The New York Times
says it was the "Lewinsky liaison." The Washington Post sees the "Lewinsky Intimacy." The USA Today
headline probably reflects what most people heard: "Clinton: Affair was
'Wrong'"--but it's not what Clinton said, because, as the NYT 's James
Bennet points out in the second paragraph of his paper's lead story, the
president never used the word "affair."

            Nevertheless, in its lead, USAT pithily sums up what was and was not
said: Clinton said he "misled people" and "gave a false impression," but he
didn't say he lied. And he described his relationship with Monica Lewinsky as
"wrong," but never used the word "sex." The LAT observes that the speech
was not an apology to the American people, and the WP adds that Clinton
never even used the words "sorry" or "apology." USAT notes that Clinton
insisted last night that his sworn deposition in the Paula Jones lawsuit was
"legally correct" even though in that deposition, he testified he couldn't
recall being alone with Lewinsky.

            
               USAT claims that in the session with the grand jury, Kenneth Starr
handled some of the questioning of Clinton, while the WP says he left
that entirely to his lieutenants. The papers report that, according to one of
Clinton's private attorneys, David Kendall, Clinton testified truthfully but
refused to answer some questions he found too personal. This despite, the
NYT reminds us, Clinton's earlier pledge to testify "truthfully and
completely." The Post says some sources have told it that in the grand
jury session, Starr told Clinton he may subpoena him to get all his questions
answered.

            Given the subject matter, a certain amount of waffling was to be expected,
but what, according to the papers, surprised many (including some White House
aides who'd hoped for political reconciliation) was how much of Clinton's
speech was given over to attacking Starr's investigation. Indeed, USAT
describes the speech as contrite words in a defiant tone. And the WP
says Clinton's statement "was flavored with as much anger as remorse," and
quotes Sen. Orrin Hatch as being "personally offended" at this aspect of the
speech. USAT reports that later, on television Hatch called President
Clinton "a jerk."

            The other big story of the day, making all five fronts, is Boris Yeltsin's
decision to devalue the ruble and to default on billions of dollars in debt.
The move was made, says the Wall Street Journal , to forestall the flight of investors
from its emerging markets and to bolster confidence in Russia's abilities to
pay its bills. Devaluation and partial default, explains the Journal ,
means the overall amount of debt is reduced and terms for repaying it become
easier. But the move strikes at Russia's solidest post-Soviet economic
accomplishments: a stable currency and low inflation. And given the increasing
connections between markets, there is the threat posed to the currencies and
interest rates of other emerging economies, such as those in Latin America and
Eastern Europe and even to stronger, more established ones, like Hong Kong.

            Inside, the papers report that authorities have arrested five people for
questioning about last Saturday's bombing in Omagh, Northern Ireland that
killed 28 people. The five have not yet been publicly named, but one is said to
be the son of a prominent Irish nationalist opponent of the recently brokered
peace accord.

            The NYT and USAT run inside stories claiming that the man
recently arrested in Pakistan and transported back to Nairobi to be questioned
further about the Kenya embassy bombing has, according to U.S. authorities,
neither admitted responsibility for the attack nor implicated anybody else.
This directly contradicts yesterday's WP dispatch, which appears to have
relied exclusively on Pakistani authorities' accounts of the man's
statements.

            The WP columnist James Glassman says the Lewinsky matter is mostly
just pseudo-events, and offers the following list of alternative real issues
citizens have a much greater need to know about: 1) How serious is the Asian
economic crisis? 2) Have defense cuts made us vulnerable? 3) How broad is the
current prosperity? 4) Why is crime falling? 5) Why do some schools fail and
others succeed? 6) Why is there a federal surplus? 7) How good and how
widespread is health care? 8) How is welfare reform working?

            Back to the speech: Clinton repeated that he had never asked anyone to lie,
but USAT 's list of the administration's prior but now inoperative
Lewinsky statements includes one made by Mike McCurry. Are we to suppose that
McCurry made that denial without being asked to by his boss? Well no, we can't
because McCurry goes on to say, "[T]he president was quite firm about me making
that statement."

         
      
   
