
   
   
      
         
            Airstrike Hits Northwest

            Local stories lead at the Washington Post and the Los Angeles Times , but the papers' top international
stories are about Russia. The New York
Times also leads with Russia--more analysis of President Clinton's
upcoming trip to Moscow. Expectations for the Clinton-Yeltsin summit are not
high, given the weakened status of both presidents. In paragraph two, the
NYT draws a portentous parallel between the teetering Clinton and
Richard Nixon, who met with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev in 1974 in Moscow.
Five weeks after returning to Washington, Nixon resigned.

            The LAT top international story reports that Russian acting prime
minister Viktor Chernomyrdin's voiced assurances on Saturday that Russia will
pursue market reforms and democracy. The NYT and WP cover
Chernomyrdin's remarks inside; the WP adds that his statement, "there
will be no return to the past," may have been intended to mollify the
International Monetary Fund, which is scheduled to give Russia a $4.3 billion
loan installment in September. However, a WP front-page article
headlined "Russia in Reverse" effectively belies Chernomyrdin's assertions,
saying, "Perhaps more than at any time [since] the Soviet collapse, the
concepts of liberal market reform and democracy are in retreat."

            Also in the front-page Russia roundup: a LAT article profiles a
decidedly "undemocratic" figure in Russian politics, billionaire Boris
Berezovsky, who is believed to have been instrumental in Chernomyrdin's
reappointment. The NYT runs a colorful piece on Russians' survival
strategies during the currency crisis.

            The papers continue coverage of the pilots' strike at Northwest Airlines,
which began at midnight Friday night. All Northwest flights are grounded at
least until midweek. President Clinton has decided not to intervene for the
moment.

            A WP front-page article says that criticism of Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright is mounting. The reason: her tough talk has produced few
results, especially in a time of multiple international crises. However, the
article also quotes analysts who say that President Clinton, scandal-dogged and
an inchworm on foreign affairs, may muffle Albright's activism.

            The WP "Outlook" lands a double-strike against the U.S. cruise
missile attacks. One article decries "vigilante justice," and says that the
United States erred by declaring itself in effect "free to make its own rules"
against an amorphous terrorist network. Another piece questions the wisdom of
the U.S. military strategy. It argues that while cruise missile strikes may be
cheap in terms of American lives (and thus are politically safe), the war
against terrorism requires a "long-term and unwavering commitment." This means
a concentrated campaign using ground troops and special forces as well as
cruise missiles. The NYT "Week In Review," meanwhile, shudders at the
worldwide malaise of weak leadership.

            Good news for the art world: An inside NYT article cheers the
country-music-loving leader of National Endowment for the Arts, who has managed
to twang on Congressional artstrings though he has only been in the job two
months. In his optimistic view, "the federal role in the arts should be equal
to our role in the Department of Defense."

            A lengthy but transfixing WP "Style" article peers into the chambers
of the Church of Satan, a San Francisco-based group whose roster of twisted
rituals includes "satanic baptisms" and the use of nude women as altars. The
church's charismatic and controversial founder recently died (presumably, went
to hell), which may catalyze the institution's demise. But devoted followers
(who can occasionally be found jamming at the Lucifer's Hammer death-rock
scene) vow to carry the satanic torch high.

            A NYT front-page piece reports that surfing the Internet causes
increased depression. A two-year study found that one Internet hour per week
made participants one percent more depressed. In addition, their circle of
friends shrank by an average of 2.7 people. Yikes! Working 35+ hours a week, TP
is on course to wind up at least 35 percent more depressed and lose over 94.5
friends.

         
      
   
