
   
   
      
         
            Tobacco's Lucky Strike

            The New York Times , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles Times all lead with tobacco's latest
triumph: A federal appeals court in Richmond, VA, ruled Friday that the Food
and Drug Administration cannot regulate nicotine as a drug without explicit
Congressional authorization. Nor, by extension, can the FDA regulate
cigarettes. The judges' 2-1 decision deals a crippling blow to the FDA's
efforts to curb the targeting of underage smokers. It effectively overturns an
FDA plan that required anyone under 26 to show identification before buying
cigarettes, banned cigarette vending machines from most public places, and kept
tobacco billboards away from schools. The Clinton Administration has vowed to
appeal the decision, and the current FDA regulations will remain in effect
until the appeal is resolved. The WP notes that "very little" of the FDA
plan had been put into effect anyhow.

            The Lewinsky scandal is relegated to A14 in the LAT , but nabs the
WP off-lead and side-by-side NYT front-pagers. There's no new
news today, only endless speculation. The LAT and the WP are busy
catching up to yesterday's big NYT story about Clinton's contemplated
fudge-the-definition-of-sex defense strategy. The WP assesses Clinton's
options in addressing the nation. While calling a nationally televised address
"the most likely choice," the WP says that some Clinton's lawyers
advocate a written statement instead. A NYT piece paints Clinton as
bleakly alone: With Washington evacuated as usual in August (except for the
press jackals), only Hillary and Chelsea are around to keep his spirits up. The
other NYT front-page Lewinsky story trots out the Ordinary People
refrain--end this scandal soon, please.

            A NYT front page story recounts in depth the extraordinary tale of a
top Iraqi scientist who defected to the U.S. in 1994, after working for decades
on Iraq's efforts to build a nuclear bomb. Khidhir Abdul Abas Hamza, who has
been debriefed by the CIA, paints a chilling picture of Iraq's successful
deceptions against the international community, coupled with U.S. ignorance
about Iraq's swift progress. The research conditions Hamza describes are
appalling: Immense pressure is reinforced by torture, and all operations are
overseen by a controlling but "illiterate" ogre--Saddam Hussein.

            According to another WP front-page story, starting today AT&T
will begin assessing a mandatory $3 minimum fee to new customers. This move,
which will bring AT&T into line with other long distance carriers, will
help staunch the $300 million in annual losses incurred because 10 million of
AT&T's 70 million customers don't even reach this $3 minimum. AT&T will
exempt low-income customers from the regulations.

            Recent terrorist threats have caused the U.S. to partially shut down its
embassy in Albania, say both the NYT and the WP inside. Albania
has become something of a terrorist hotbed in recent months: The three
( NYT ) or four ( WP ) Egyptians arrested there during June and July
have been identified as likely affiliates of Saudi terrorist financier Osama
Bin Ladin, whose name has surfaced repeatedly in connection with the Africa
bombings.

            Yesterday President Clinton turned 52. The celebration, complete with spice
cake and other goodies, is described inside at the LAT and in the
WP "Style: Names & Faces." A very happy birthday it must have
been!

         
      
   
