
   
   
      
         
            Words of Little Interest

            The Los
Angeles Times and New York Times
lead with news that Alan Greenspan may lower interest rates. The Washington Post ignores Greenspan, but leads with a story
no other paper runs on its front: Iran's likely military action against
Afghanistan.

            The NYT and LAT lead with Greenspan's announcement that he may
eventually lower interest rates--an action that would cut the cost of borrowing
and encourage investors world-wide. Inflation looms as the negative result of
such a move. Both leads note that although a rate cut is a mere possibility,
its consideration marks a change in Greenspan's policy: he no longer sees
inflation as a far greater threat to the U.S. economy than the global financial
crisis. The LAT says that the Fed chairman's remarks are the first
attempt U.S. officials have made to restore confidence in foreign markets by
addressing the possibility of lower interest rates.

            The WP reports that Iran has positioned about 35,000 troops along its
Afghani border in response to reports that the Sunni-dominated Taliban regime
has murdered 10 Iranian diplomats and thousands of Shiite civilians in northern
Afghanistan. Although U.S. defense officials "don't have a favorite horse in
this fight," they do criticize the two nations for their hostility towards each
other. One U.S. official notes that while war might divert the countries'
resources away from funding international terrorism, it would also hamper their
monitoring of domestic terrorist groups.

            All three weekend papers run front page stories on President Clinton who,
from Ireland, said he is "very sorry about" his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky
and called his actions "indefensible." The NYT 's headline links
Clinton's latest apology to Senator Joseph Lieberman's recent criticism. The
LAT and WP use the word "affair" in their headlines; the
NYT opts for the less scandalous "relationship."

            The WP continues its coverage of Natalie Liu, the Beijing-based CBS
television producer, who was arrested, locked in a windowless cell for three
days, and interrogated for 16 hours by Chinese authorities. Liu was released
after signing confessions that she broke laws regarding press accreditation and
the interviewing of dissidents. Liu's release was no doubt hastened by the UN
delegation on human rights that arrives in China on Monday.

            Mark McGwire's and Sammy Sosa's race to break Roger Maris' single-season
home run record merits front-page articles at all three papers. The LAT
piece highlights the massive increase in popularity and prestige baseball has
garnered as a result of this year's long ball bonanza. The WP examines
the racism angle, noting that in a USA Today survey 79% of Americans said they
are rooting for McGwire to break the record instead of the Dominican-born Sosa.
The NYT looks at the parallels between Maris and his hometown of Fargo,
ND. Residents have mixed feelings about Maris' record being broken and they
feel both he and Fargo have been slighted by history--Maris by his absence from
the Hall of Fame and the city by its unflattering portrayal in the movie
"Fargo."

         
      
   
