
   
   
      
         
            Geffen Till It Hurts

            
               USA
Today , the New York Times ,
and the Washington Post lead with the revelation that the
ambassador to Kenya, Prudence Bushnell, had been so concerned about her
embassy's vulnerability that months before the Nairobi bombings, she had asked
the State Dept. to build a new one--a request that State denied, citing lack of
funds. The Los Angeles Times , which includes the Bushnell story in its
front-page bombing aftermath story, but puts it deep in the story after the
jump, goes instead with the decision by two Swiss banks to pay $1.25 billion to
Holocaust survivors and relatives to compensate for the Nazi victims' deposits
they held onto after World War II, a story that also gets front space at
USAT and the NYT . The move came just weeks after the Swiss
government had declared it would pay no more than half that sum, but also, the
LAT points out, after several state and local governments, in defiance
of the Clinton administration position, said they would begin leveling
sanctions against the banks.

            According to the papers, Ambassador Bushnell's main concern was that her
post was located on a crowded downtown street. USAT and the WP
report that Bushnell even wrote directly to Secretary of State Madeleine
Albright about the problem, going so far, says USAT , as inviting her to
come see for herself, something Albright never did. The NYT adds that
the U.S. military command covering the region also expressed concern about the
embassy's security. The NYT and WP quote State sources claiming
that even if Bushnell's request had been honored, the completion of a new
embassy would have taken years, and hence the U.S. would have still occupied
the old one at the time of the bombing. None of the reporting mentions it, but
this sort of development is sadly familiar--it was reported after the fact that
the Marines' commanding officer in Beirut in 1983 had expressed grave concern
to his superiors about the vulnerability of his troops to hostile forces
operating in the area.

            The LAT has a front-page story confirming that the woman in the Kenya
rubble known to rescuers only as "Rose" (full name: Rose Wanjiku Mwangi) was
found dead on Wednesday. Her head had been protected from three stories of
rubble by a table. She had been dead for as little as 24 hours when she was
found.

            The WP reports that Tanzanian police are looking for the assistant to
the driver of the water truck believed to have harbored the bomb deployed
against the U.S. embassy in Dar-es-Salaam. The body of the driver, believed to
have been a faithful embassy employee, was found in the wreckage. The
assistant's was not.

            The NYT front reports that the new Clinton legal defense fund, free of some of the legal
restrictions of the old one that was disbanded earlier this year, has already
been much more successful, bringing in more than $2 million in just six months.
The paper says funds have come in from "Main Street, Wall Street and
Hollywood," in response to a direct mail campaign seizing on hostility toward
Kenneth Starr, but makes it seem that Hollywood has been particularly
important, mentioning such donors as David Geffen, Tom Hanks, Steven Spielberg,
Jeffrey Katzenberg, Harvey Weinstein, and Bud Yorkin. Geffen is quoted
explaining his $10,000 donation this way: "There is a well-financed group of
zealots who want to bring down the President. And this guy has no money. He's
broke. This is a terrible situation." The Clintons' legal expenses are now
estimated at $6 million, with the potential, says the Times , to grow at
a clip of $1 million a year.

            A staple newspaper feature is the academic convention piece, which features
elbow-patched and distracted professors virtually unaware that they've plopped
down into a big hotel in a big city because they're so terminally immersed in
their profession, such as it is. Today's WP features a particularly ripe
target for the genre--a philosophers' convention. Imagine--3,000 academics in one
hotel, not one of them sure the others are really there too! But before you
laugh too much at these Platos without a Republic, consider this Post
factoid: the employment rate for philosophy Ph.D.'s is 98.9 percent.

         
      
   
