
   
   
      
         
            Closed Doors (They're Made of Glass)

            The New York
Times
               , 
               Washington Post
               , and Los Angeles Times lead
with the news that, on Monday, Congress will release President Clinton's
videotaped grand jury testimony and 2,800 pages of material gathered by Starr.
The decision was made during a two-day "closed-door" session of the
GOP-controlled House Judiciary Committee. Rep. Henry Hyde (the top Republican)
and Rep. Barney Frank (the top Democrat) announced the decision at a press
conference, after which the two traded partisan jabs. Frank accused Hyde of
"unilateral bipartisanship". Hyde said Frank defines bipartisanship as
Republicans caving in to Democrats.

            The session wasn't "closed-door" in any real sense, of course, since all
three papers describe each and every point the committee discussed. Every
article mentions the remarkable partisanship displayed behind those doors.
Every article also interprets the furious GOP-Democratic sparring as a
depressing harbinger.

            The committee's big dispute--other than whether to release--was over what to
delete from the released materials. The NYT says the proposed deletions
were of "sexually explicit material". The WP adds that some were about a
cigar, while the LAT mentions the cigar and "detailed descriptions by
Lewinsky of her orgasms". (In case you're interested: Republicans kept the
cigar references, while Democrats managed to expurgate Lewinsky's orgasm
musings.) None of the papers catches the irony of Republicans introducing
sexual explicitness into the public sphere whilst Democrats fight to keep it
out.

            The lead international story at the NYT and LAT is that
Japanese political parties have agreed upon a financial recovery plan. Neither
paper has much more to say, since details of the deal are not yet available.
The WP 's internatioal lead says Bosnian elections didn't go the way
Western officials had hoped. Instead, the surprise winner is an
"ultranationalist" named Poplasen.

            All three papers report that the Senate failed, by three votes, to override
the president's veto of a ban on partial birth abortions. Got that? It means
partial birth abortions remain legal. The veto has already been overridden by
the House, the GOP hopes to pick up the required three Senate seats in
November.

            The WP runs a piece on rent control (in Cambridge MA) which reports
that after price ceilings were abolished 1) poorer people moved out; 2)
wealthier people moved in; and 3) wealthier people spend more money on things.
The NYT gives prominent place to the headline "Novice Ranchers Find Fun
and Profit in Breeding Alpacas". Sound familiar? Maybe it's because the
NYT ran an almost identical piece on emus just two months
ago--substitute "emu" for each appearance of "alpaca" and the pieces are the
same (except apparently alpacas are more lucrative). Today's Papers checked
and, astoundingly, the articles are written by different people. Next month:
Bison Are Low Fat (and Lip Smackin').

         
      
   
