
   
   
      
         
            Dissing and Dissonance

            The Los
Angeles Times and New York Times
lead with public and political reaction to The Speech, which is also the
subject of the Wall Street Journal 's main "Politics and Policy" piece. The
Washington Post goes with Kenneth Starr's
re-summoning tomorrow of Monica L. to his grand jury, a story that USA Today
puts together with Hillary's post-speech support of her husband for its lead.
Three of the fronts feature pix of the First Family walking across the White
House lawn to start what would have to count as the worst family vacation in
history. Buddy is there too, on a longer leash than his master will be on for
some time.

            The LAT draws the blinds the morning after and sees some members of
Congress--including Democrats normally Clinton allies--so "infuriated" that "it
was clear the sordid spectacle would not be put to rest quickly." Looming large
in the paper's survey are the reactions of California's senators, both
Democrats. Dianne Feinstein said Clinton's remarks left her trust in his
credibility "deeply shattered." And Barbara Boxer is quoted saying that "he
should have told us the truth seven months ago" and that the Lewinsky
relationship was "wrong--clear, black-and-white, no-room-for-ambiguity wrong."
The paper points out that Boxer's comments were surprisingly negative given
that she is related to Clinton by marriage.

            The Journal and NYT also note the Feinstein reaction, and go
on to note that the ranks of distancing Democrats include such party bigfeet as
Dick Gephardt, Thomas Daschle and Lee Hamilton. The unwavering support
expressed by Al Gore is widely noted. USAT quotes Republican Sen. John
Ashcroft calling for Clinton's resignation. Although the NYT reports
that Tom Delay urged Clinton to resign, the paper describes the general
reaction among Republicans as "unusually tame." The LAT says instant
polls show that the majority of Americans were satisfied with the president's
statement and wanted the matter dropped. Similar observations are given
prominent placement by the WP and WSJ . But the papers don't seem
to notice that this shows there is a serious divergence between what they and
the American people think is news. For instance, the NYT front gives
roughly equal play to two stories: 1) a discussion of whether or not the tie
President Clinton wore on the day Monica Lewinsky first testified to the grand
jury was a gift from her and hence worn as some sort of signal to her, and 2)
the health risks of breast feeding in the undeveloped world, the location of
most of last year's 600,000 new cases of AIDS among babies.

            The NYT off-lead reports that Pakistan has arrested two new suspects in the African embassy
bombings. The men were seized in the Khyber Pass while trying to cross into
Afghanistan. The previously arrested suspect in the case, says the paper, has
said one of the men is a pivotal bomb plot participant. All three men are
apparently devotees of Osama bin Laden, the multimillionaire supporter of
terrorists believed to be living in Afghanistan, and the three left Kenya
together on the same plane. The Times reports that the U.S. is urging
Afghanistan to expel bin Laden. While the Times continues to emphasize
that U.S. officials have apparently not heard with their own ears from the
first suspect about bin Laden's operations, the WP continues to pass
along in increasing detail what he apparently told Pakistani authorities: that
bin Laden runs and finances a terrorist network, which pulled off the embassy
bombings. Today, the Post says the Pakistanis were told that the bin Laden force numbers 4,000 to 5,000 members and that
it has taken part in prior armed actions, including attacks against U.S. forces
in Somalia, resulting in the deaths of 18 American soldiers.

            The USAT front and the insides of the other papers report that on
Tuesday, the "Real IRA," an IRA splinter group opposed to the Northern Ireland
peace accord, issued a telephoned statement admitting that it set off the bomb
in Omagh that killed 28 people, including a number of children. The group
apologized for the deaths, saying that they occurred only because its
evacuation warnings were not properly followed.

            The NYT reports that although the Pope is healthy enough to keep a
busy schedule, American TV networks and those of other countries are rushing to iron out the logistics of covering his funeral. CBS
News, for instance, reportedly just paid $180,000 for the exclusive use of a
terrace overlooking the Vatican for live "stand-ups" by Dan Rather and its
other anchors. And while ABC is said to have just obtained exclusive funeral
rights to the Hilton, CNN is rumored to be negotiating with the Church itself
for sole access to a prime property. The Times quotes the headline of an
Italian newspaper story about the scramble: "The Pope: Heaven Can Wait, the
Networks Cannot."

         
      
   
