
   
   
      
         
            Bombs Are Hell

            The New York Times , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles Times all go with across-the-top leads
and gruesome photos of wreckage from massive Friday bombings at two U.S.
Embassies in Africa. The attacks in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam,
Tanzania, occurred less than five minutes apart, though the worst damage was in
Kenya. At least 80 people died (including 8 Americans) and over 1700 were
injured. Even as the papers went to press, screams were still heard from people
trapped under the wreckage.

            Who is responsible? This is a front-page question for all papers. African
groups are largely discounted; initially at least, experienced terrorists from
the Middle East seem more likely candidates. Though the State Department
refuses to speculate on the attackers' identities, the NYT cites a
senior U.S. intelligence official as saying that "based on early circumstantial
evidence, the investigators were focusing on followers of Osama bin Laden." Bin
Laden is a Saudi multimillionaire who has pledged a holy war against the United
States, and who is widely considered responsible for the 1996 attack in Saudi
Arabia which killed 19 U.S. airmen. Another possibility is the Egyptian group
Islamic Jihad, which earlier this week issued anti-American warnings in the
Egyptian newspaper Al-Hayat . Washington has dispatched top-notch
investigative teams to the scene, and President Clinton stated, "We will use
all the means at our disposal to bring those responsible to justice, no matter
what or how long it takes."

            All papers use separate stories to spotlight the security weaknesses at U.S.
embassies (only the WP 's story runs inside). The NYT 's accusatory
headline says, "Neither Embassy Met Current Security Guidelines." The WP
headline, however, is more realistic-- "Embassies Can Never Be Fully
Protected." The LAT writes that since the Beirut and Kuwait bombings,
more than $1 billion has been spent to upgrade certain embassies to become
"state-of-the-art anti-terrorist fortresses." Kenya and Tanzania were
considered relatively low security risk and thus were not among the upgrade
candidates.

            The terrorist attacks relegated Monicagate to the bottom of the front at all
papers. The latest development is that Kenneth Starr has run afoul of a U.S.
District Court judge. Court papers unsealed Friday showed that judge Norma
Holloway Johnson ordered a probe of Starr's office in June over the Lewinsky
grand jury leaks. She noted the "serious and repetitive nature" of the leaks,
as well as Starr's demonstrated willingness to feed reporters information.
Starr appealed parts of the June ruling, and got a slight break last Monday
when the U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that the President's lawyers could not
question prosecutors or subpoena documents in the investigation. Nonetheless,
as the WP says, the whole matter represents a "stinging rebuke" for
Starr, and the investigation into the grand jury leaks continues.

            The NYT runs an inside story on the Internet as a time-suck (never
knew that, didya?) Specifically, it's loading web pages. The story cites a
report from NetRatings that "the average home Internet user wastes just over
nine minutes per day, or 55 hours per year, waiting for web pages to load."
This otherwise depressing calculation is a persuasive argument for getting TP
emailed to your account--it saves you the bother of loading the page.

         
      
   
