
   
   
      
         
            Yeltsin and Out

            
               USA
Today leads with chat-show declarations by Madeleine Albright and
William Cohen that the administration has opened a new war against terrorism.
The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times go with President Boris Yeltsin's dismissal of his main
government officers, including his prime minister, Sergei Kiriyenko, which is
also the off-lead at the Washington Post and USAT . The WP leads with
Newt Gingrich's first extensive comments about Kenneth Starr's investigation
since The Speech, which include his declaration that impeachment would require
not "a single human mistake" but "a pattern of felonies." Gingrich also tells
the Post that he thinks Starr's report to Congress will probably be made
available to the public, but that the supporting evidence will be kept
secret.

            
               USAT accompanies its lead with a front-section "cover story" about
the newly announced U.S. war, which states that Osama bin Laden has already
trained "tens of thousands of terrorists operating in more than a dozen
countries." Question: if this is so, then how is it that there was virtually no
press mention of bin Laden until the African embassy bombings? The piece
reports that last week's strikes against targets in Sudan and Afghanistan were
code-named Operation Infinite Reach (which could have also been the code-name
for Clinton's Monica speech). The LAT front runs a story filed from
Pakistan that includes an interview with a man who claims to have lived through
the Tomahawk attacks on Afghanistan. "All of us were innocent," the man tells
the paper, explaining that what the U.S. says is a terrorist training complex
is in fact merely a religious education center.

            The papers report that in the midst of his country's economic crisis,
Yeltsin replaced the reform-minded Kiriyenko with Viktor Chernomyrdin. The
NYT says that it appears Yeltsin's thinking is that Chernomyrdin's good
relations with financiers and with the Communists in Parliament may help
deflate the widespread calls for his own departure. Everybody points out that
what makes the move odd is that Chernomyrdin already had the job for five years
until last March, when Yeltsin let him go, in part because in the NYT 's
words, "a new young team was needed." The LAT and USAT say
another reason was that Yeltsin had begun to fear Chernomyrdin as a
presidential competitor. The papers report that despite the upheaval, the
Clinton White House says that President Clinton will still keep to a previously
scheduled two-day summit with Yeltsin in Moscow early next month. Both the
Times and the LAT point out that the shake-up announcement was
made on Russian television after the sports news.

            The WP runs an interview with the Pope. At one point, when it is
mentioned that the major growth in the Catholic Church is now taking place
outside Europe and the United States, the pontiff replies, "It was so at the
beginning."

            Being a celebrity often means you get for free what ordinary people have to
pay for, even though you can afford it and they can't. So for instance, Tom
Cruise makes a movie and besides paying him, the studio throws him a Benz. But
it's not just the studios that are complicit. For years, the main column on the
front page of the LAT 's Sunday real estate section has been "Hot
Property," which chronicles the real estate doings of the glitterati. Now, if
you wanted to advertise your house for sale in the LAT , you'd have to
pay a hundred bucks or so for a tiny little buried ad, but if you're say (as in
last Sunday's paper), Pam Grier, why then at absolutely no cost to you the
paper leads the section with ten paragraphs about your house, including mention
of the neighborhood, the asking price and the names of the realtors to
contact.

            It probably took a presidential sex confession and a transcontinental cruise
missile strike to keep today's Wall Street Journal 's front-page feature by Stephanie Mehta
out of the paper last week. The story? Cell-phones are getting smaller and
lighter.

         
      
   
