
   
   
      
         
            Hyde Crimes or Misdemeanors?

            The big story today is what happens when blue tape meets red tape, with the
House Judiciary wrangle over the release of Starr report evidence--including
the Clinton video--leading at USA Today , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles
Times . The New York Times
puts that story on the top front, but goes instead with Congress' likely
decision to transfer control of satellite exports back to the State Dept. from the
Commerce Dept., a development with its roots in a now-nearly forgotten
Clinton technology-transfer-for-political-donations scandal broken last spring
by the Times , a development nobody else's front page covers. The
provision is part of the defense budget bill, which makes it politically hard,
the Times points out, for President Clinton to veto it.

            Contrary to expectations, yesterday the Judiciary committee did not release
the video of Clinton's grand jury testimony. But, the papers report, the delay
didn't have much to do with the tape itself, but rather with all the other
material involved, much of it Monica Lewinsky's quite graphic descriptions of
Oval Office sex. Committee members debated the material line by line--or "sex
act by sex act," as one committee source tells the LAT . Basically, the
Democrats are trying to screen out as much material as possible, holding it to
be not probative but merely inflammatory, while the Republicans are opting for
maximum disclosure, arguing that the full House has already voted for just
that. It's widely reported that the Republicans are winning all the particular
votes on this matter--with the Clinton grand jury video expected to be made
public by the weekend.

            The WP sees the contentiousness as a harbinger of the difficulties
ahead in the next several months as the committee debates President Clinton's
fate. The LAT notes that the politics aren't all black and white, with
two House Democrats (not on the Judiciary committee) calling for the immediate
release of all the Starr materials. And the WP reports that California
Democrat Sen. Dianne Feinstein is still so angry at Clinton about what she
calls his "betrayal" that she recently turned down an invitation from him to
talk it over.

            The Lewinsky leads all report that the Judiciary Committee will also shortly
receive a videotape of Clinton's deposition in the Paula Jones case. The
WP points out that this sets up the prospect of the TV networks running
contrasts of that deposition with the president's later and often conflicting
grand jury appearance. The Wall Street Journal "Washington Wire" reports that the
video of the latter begins with prosecutors asking Clinton for his
understanding of the meaning of the oath to tell "the whole truth."

            There is much reporting in the papers of the fallout from the revelation
that the Judiciary Committee chairman, Henry Hyde, had an adulterous affair in
the 1960s. (The story was broken in Salon , a fact you could learn
everywhere but in the NYT 's story, which merely cites "an on-line
magazine's disclosure.") The House Republican leadership, the papers report,
has asked the FBI to investigate if the story was part of a White House smear
campaign. And there is plenty of reporting on Capitol Hill fears about who's
next, detailed for instance in a WP front-pager. Apparently now the
concern is that those running for office won't be asked what they've done, but
who they've done. Both the USAT front page "cover story" and an inside
story at the Post refer to the newly poisoned atmosphere as "sexual
McCarthyism."

            According to front-page stories in the NYT and LAT about the
report to be issued today by President Clinton's much-ballyhooed commission on
race, (the WP covered the report yesterday), the commission's principal
recommendation is the creation of a...commission on race. The NYT
charitably calls the 15-months-in-the-making report "modest." The LAT is
harsher, running the headline: "Panel on Race Urges Nothing but More Talk."

            Both the NYT and the WP (which has been hitting such stories
hard lately) report inside that dissidents attempting to register a
democratically oriented political party in various parts of China were detained
by police. This on the heels of a visit to China by the U.N.'s human rights
commissioner that, says the WP , she hailed as "groundbreaking."

            A letter in the Post makes you wonder about the
commitment of schools to excellence in teaching. The writer is a retired Navy
submarine skipper with bachelor's and master's engineering degrees, twenty
graduate credits in education, and college teaching experience. He explains
that earlier this year he applied for a teaching job, sending his resume and
transcripts to every middle school and high school in Fairfax County, Virginia.
He received only one letter back--merely an acknowledgment--and got no
interviews. For God's sake, if a middle or high school principal in the area
reads this item, get in touch with the Post and give this guy a
jingle.

            The WP 's "The Reliable Source" says that Washington, D.C.'s
representative in the upcoming Miss America contest was a White House intern--a
fact she now omits from her contest resume. "I didn't," she tells the paper,
"want anybody to have any preconceptions about who I am."

         
      
   
