
   
   
      
         
            Headline

            After Today's Papers: Summary Judgment wraps up the reviews of the reviews.
The papers continue to show they're much more interested in Mondo Monica than
the American people are--all the majors lead with some aspect of it. USAT and
the LAT go with President Clinton's comments Wednesday at his first post-Report
press conference that he still has the moral authority required to remain in
office. The NYT goes with a story that led elsewhere yesterday--the imminent
release of the Clinton grand jury videotape. The WP combines the two themes in
its lead, running under the headline "Clinton Stresses Duties as House Plans
Disclosure."

            
               USAT says that during his joint news conference with Czech President
Vaclav Havel, Clinton "sidestepped" questions about whether he'd committed
perjury. The LAT reports that most of the questions posed at the
conference were about the Lewinsky scandal--including those from Czech
journalists (the front-page NYT story on the press conference also
observes this). The USAT account depicts a determined, fervent Clinton.
The LAT sees political manipulation instead, calling Clinton's remarks
"part of a determined effort by the White House to change the subject," and
saying it was "stage-managed to put the President in the best possible light,"
and also referring to Monday's speech on the global economy as "a carefully
choreographed appearance." If USAT 's and the NYT 's quoting of
Clinton saying, "I have never stopped leading this country in foreign affairs
in this entire year, and I never will" makes the reader think of jut-jawed
globalism, by the time the LAT gets around to the remark, the reader is
half-way thinking it's actually a coded reference to some as yet undetected
frolicking with exchange students. In noting that "Clinton offered no defense
of his actions and voiced no protest as the House moved further down the track
toward an impeachment inquiry," the WP story limns a third picture: of a
man resigned to a process bigger than he is. The Post notes that when
asked if he might consider resigning, his response--the voters want him to do
his job--was less "steely" than the "Churchillian 'never'" he responded with
last February. The NYT agrees, saying his answer yesterday was less
confrontational.

            The NYT lead stresses the concerns of some Judiciary committee
Republicans that some of the material suggested for imminent release is too
graphic. The paper reports that at a closed-door meeting with members, Newt
Gingrich seemed irritated by such scruples and won "a huge ovation" after
reminding attendees that the House had already voted for full disclosure, and
that pulling back now would only lead to news leaks. Also, both the Post
and USAT report that Judiciary chairman Henry Hyde yesterday
acknowledged a 1960s extramarital affair and that the White House denied
leaking that information.

            A front-page USAT story reports that the Pentagon has ordered a
review of all DOD-maintained Web sites out of a concern that they may make too
much information--including the names of commanders and the locations of their
families--available to terrorists and other potential enemies. The paper
reports, for instance, that one DOD site featured the floor plan and photos of
the inside of the home of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.

            A very good front-page WSJ feature by Douglas Blackmon makes the case that
America is becoming more cultured. True, the piece admits, "Booty Call" made
$20 million and Wonder remains the biggest single selling bread brand, but the
cultural common denominator is on the rise. American book-buying is on a
dizzying upswing, more students are studying abroad, theatrical ticket sales
are up, as is opera attendance, plus pubic radio stations have tripled since
1980--and you can get cappuccino in Arkansas.

            The LAT front runs a piece by veteran tobacco reporter Myron Levin
that may presage a whole new dimension of tobacco scandal. Citing internal
memos from the world's two largest tobacco companies, the piece details their
secret agreement to fix prices in Argentina, Venezuela, and other Latin
American countries. The memos surfaced in a lawsuit brought by Washington state
and provide the first-ever documentation of tobacco companies' anti-competitive
deals. The story reminds that it's not just Bill Clinton who can't give a
simple answer to a simple question--it quotes a Phillip Morris spokeswoman's
response: "Since we must comply with local laws and regulations in every
country in which we do business, we expect that there has been no improper
conduct in the countries that you have referenced." Not exactly "We didn't do
anything wrong."

         
      
   
