
   
   
      
         
            Dousing the Flames

            President Clinton's speech on the global economy leads all around.
Lovey-dovey Bill-and-Hillary pix grace the tops at the Los Angeles
Times and Washington Post . A lovey-dovey shot of Homeric rivals Sosa
and McGwire does the same at USA Today . At the New York Times ,
the spot goes to a shot of a post-speech Clinton at a fund-raiser, amid the
cast of "The Lion King."

            
               USAT , the WP and NYT report that Clinton, in his speech
in New York City to the Council on Foreign Relations, called the current
situation "the biggest financial challenge facing the world in a
half-century." The LAT says that Clinton spoke of trying to "douse
the flames of the international financial crisis." The Post notes that
this is a shift from Clinton's much more minimal assessment of the threat last
fall. And indeed, USAT refers to the leading economies' "months of
silence" about the crisis. The papers note that soon after the speech, the
finance ministers and central bank heads of the G-7 countries issued a joint
statement pledging to spur global growth and restore stability to the financial
markets.

            With characteristic succinctness, USAT does something the others
never quite do--spell out what the problem is: a third of the world is in
recession, and this threatens the U.S. because overseas trade has accounted for
30 percent of U.S. growth since 1993. The remedies Clinton advocated include,
the papers report, Congress' replenishment of the IMF, and allowing the IMF to
tap into an emergency line of credit. All but USAT also mention the
response of lowering interest rates, to stimulate growth. The NYT says
Clinton called for the world's leading economies to abandon their fear of
inflation. The WP says such comments are being widely interpreted as
hinting at the need for the Federal Reserve Board to lower interest rates. But
the WP , NYT and LAT note that Clinton avoided the
appearance of trying to dictate interest rate policy to the Fed.

            The Wall Street Journal and WP report that new Russian
prime minister Yevgeny Primakov has invited an IMF official to Moscow for
talks. This means, say the papers, that perhaps Primakov will not follow the
recent calls from some communists to shut Russia off from western investment.
In the immediate balance is a $4.3 billion IMF emergency loan agreed to in
July, but delayed after Russia devalued its currency and defaulted on its
domestic debt.

            A report highlighted on the front page of last Thursday's WP found
that children in immigrant families tend to be healthier than those of
U.S.-born parents, but that their health deteriorates the longer they live
here. And today's LAT front bears yet another example of a recent skein
of research questioning the time-honored tenet that immigrating to the U.S. is
good for your health. A new University of California study finds that Mexican
immigrants have only half as many psychiatric problems as U.S.-born Mexican
Americans do. Fast food, lack of exercise, and especially drug abuse and the
breakdown of the extended family are implicated.

            A front-page WP piece and one inside at the NYT report that a
new HHS study finds that most of the possible savings to come from the growth
of managed care plans in recent years have already been achieved, with the
result that the nation's health care costs are likely to double over the
next decade. Also contributing to the rise, says the study, is an increase in
the consumption of expensive prescription drugs and new medical technology,
plus greater patient demand for choosing one's doctor. Already, notes the
Post , health insurance rates are starting to go up.

            The front page of USAT 's "Money" section reports that as part of its
antitrust case, the DOJ is investigating accusations made by several former
Microsoft employees that the company destroyed computer files relating to
various previous lawsuits. The files, says the paper, could have served as
antitrust evidence.

            The NYT reports inside that a private New Jersey telephone company
has just signed a deal to build a cellular phone system for the Taliban, the
Islamic sect controlling most of Afghanistan. The White House is said by the
Times to have been unaware of the deal but to look on it favorably as a
means to ease Western access to the country. Under the deal the Taliban will
require the use of software to block "anti-Taliban Web sites."

            Inevitably, some of the reporting on Clinton's economics speech suggests
that it had Lewinsky-driven spin value. The LAT calls the speech
"hastily scheduled," and the WP speaks of presidential aides painting a
picture of an "engaged" president. Well, why not--that's the next step after
dating.

         
      
   
