
   
   
      
         
            Dress Rehearsal

            The expected grand jury testimony today of Monica Lewinsky leads at USA Today and
gets subhead billing in the Washington Post 's lead, which is about the Clinton
administration's revival of the claim of executive privilege in the Lewinsky
matter. The New York Times
plays Monica's imminent testimony below the fold (as does the Los Angeles
Times ), leading instead with the Iraqis' umpteenth snit over U.N.
weapons inspections, which is the LAT 's top national story, and which
also gets top front placement at USAT . (But doesn't make the Post
front.)

            The USAT lead states that Lewinsky is prepared to testify that she
and President Clinton had a sexual relationship and that although she was never
directly told to lie under oath about it, she was given suggestions it should
be kept secret. And "prepared" here, the paper specifies, means that Lewinsky
spent Wednesday going through a "final rehearsal" of her testimony with Ken
Starr's people. USAT somehow refrains from calling it a "dress"
rehearsal. Spending the day this way raises a question not addressed in any of
the coverage to date: How come it's ok for lawyers to do all these dry runs?
Isn't this just coaching the witness? The Nation's Newspaper makes the nifty
observation that yesterday marked the beginning of Starr's fifth year of
investigating Clinton.

            The NYT oversells its Iraq lead in saying that the latest developments mark "the first
time" Saddam Hussein said he was ending all cooperation with U.N. inspectors.
Especially since just a few paragraphs in, the story quotes chief inspector
Richard Butler as saying "...there is a syndrome here--going around the same
track again and again." And a little further below that, it quotes a National
Security Council spokesman saying, "We've heard this bluster before."

            Now that Clinton staff attorney Lanny Breuer is invoking executive privilege
to keep from having a Starr grand jury sit-down, the WP usefully
documents the White House's legal tacking by quoting White House counsel
Charles Ruff's comments from two months ago: "We have no intention of asserting
the privilege, executive privilege, in any situation that I'm aware of."

            The LAT 's "Column One" says that Steven Spielberg's "Saving Private
Ryan" ends years of silence about the horrors experienced by American soldiers
in World War II. Last week, USAT ran a big front-page piece saying the
same thing. But what of Joseph Heller's Catch 22 , Kurt Vonnegut's
Slaughterhouse Five , Paul Fussell's Wartime and Doing
Battle , or Ronald Reagan's (Peggy Noonan's) 1984 "Boys of Pointe du Hoc"
speech? Isn't this just another annoying example of Boomers mistakenly thinking
they discovered, nay, invented, something that's been around for quite a while?
(You know, like having children and working hard.)

            The LAT follows up its front-page scoop that World War II was
horrible with its front-page David Shaw scoop that as internet and cable news
outlets proliferate, the pressure to be first is, in the quoted words of Dan
Rather, "greater and stronger." Other talking heads brought on board include
Bill Kovach, the "Curator of Neiman Fellowships in Journalism at Harvard
University" (point: working fast leads to mistakes) and Marvin Kalb, "executive
director of the Joan Shorenstein Center on the Press, Politics, and Public
Policy" (point: being first is profitable). When was the last time Shaw did a
piece that didn't quote all these media mafiosi? And would it be too much to
ask that their ideas be more substantial than their job titles?

            The Wall Street Journal reports that Golden Books, off of
disastrous first-half results, has hired a media investment banker to explore
"strategic opportunities." It's not just that Toys "R" Us isn't stocking as
many books as it used to--hey, there's also the Shari Lewis death to contend
with.

            One of the bigger challenges faced by contemporary journalism is
convincingly dressing up its desire to dig dirt in the clothes of some
principle or other. Consider the WP 's editorial on Monica's imminent grand jury appearance, which
states that her testimony "offers a welcome opportunity to turn this
investigation away from the fascinating but tangential privilege questions
about Secret Service agents and White House lawyers in which it has so long
been mired. It is a chance to get back to the core issues Mr. Starr was asked
to address." Fascinating privilege questions? Core issues Mr. Starr was asked
to address? Yeah, right.

         
      
   
