
   
   
      
         
            Still No Viktor

            The New York Times ,
Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times lead with the continuing political and economic turmoil in
Russia, signaled by yesterday's second parliamentary defeat of Boris Yeltsin's
candidate for prime minister, Viktor Chernomyrdin. (Ever the world citizen, the
NYT , in an editorial, endorses VC.) The Russia story is but a reefer at
USA
Today , which leads instead with a presidential lawyer's letter to
Kenneth Starr asking for one week to review and rebut Starr's report on the
Monica Lewinsky matter before it is submitted to Congress, a story that also
runs on the NYT top front. Everybody gives lots of top-of-the-front-page
space and big pictures to Mark McGwire's record-tying 61st home run.

            The papers all note that not only did Chernomyrdin get voted down by the
Duma again, but that the chairman of the central bank resigned. The NYT
stresses the ground-level financial chaos, noting that many Moscow stores have
been picked clean of such items as toothpaste, butter, and toilet paper. The
LAT also goes high with this observation, mentioning shortages of
cooking oil and flour. The WP likewise takes note of scarcities, adding
that pharmacies are also affected. And it's not just Moscow. The NYT
says the price of kielbasa has doubled in Siberia. The WP mentions a
nuclear weapons lab in the Urals whose workers haven't been paid for five
months.

            The NYT is particularly strong on capturing the heat of the political debate, noting (along
with the LAT ) that Chernomyrdin warned the parliament that "Indonesia
reached the point where the country went up in flames....Is this what you
want?" The NYT also gets in a pro-communist representative's suggestion
to Chernomyrdin that he find out what people are saying about him and his
reforms by disguising himself and walking out among the people. "But," the
legislator is quoted, "you'd better disguise yourself really well. You'll be in
trouble if they recognize you." A back-bencher charged Chernomyrdin with
wanting to take the country back to pre-perestroika times. "Congratulations,"
she said, "You managed to do it. Look at the empty shop counters."

            The WP sees the second Chernomyrdin turn-down as putting pressure on
Yeltsin to turn to somebody else as prime minister. Everybody notes that under
the Russian constitution, a third defeat would allow Yeltsin to dissolve
parliament and hold new elections, but the LAT alone reports a further
element in the collision course between Yeltsin and the Duma: the Duma is
considering bringing impeachment charges against Yeltsin, for his roles in the
breakup of the USSR, in the attack on the parliament building in 1993, and in
the war against secessionist Chechnya. A Duma vote on the charges could come,
says the LAT , as early as Friday. And, explains the paper, if
impeachment proceedings start, then Yeltsin cannot dissolve the parliament.
Here's the week's biggest stealth news story: come fall, both of the planet's
largest nuclear powers could be considering throwing out their presidents.

            In its last few paragraphs, the USAT lead announces that the
president of the Southern Baptist Convention, President Clinton's church and
the nation's largest Protestant denomination--not to be confused with the
president of the National Baptist Convention, who yesterday, reports the AP,
although married, admitted having an "improper relationship" with a female
senior official of the organization--has called for Clinton to resign, on the
grounds that he is corrupting young people. (Oh, he's the one.) The resignation
call is also carried as an AP dispatch inside the WP .

            The Wall Street Journal reports that the number of black female
architects in the country has doubled in the last ten years. But the raw
numbers are bracing: in 1991 there were 49, and now there are 98. It would have
been useful if the item had also mentioned the raw numbers of whites, white
men, and white females.

            A WP story says that the General Accounting Office has discovered
that welfare reform has generated a $4.7 billion windfall for the states,
because under the reform the states get a fixed amount of federal money no
matter how much they cut their rolls. Some states have, says the paper, used
the money to start new welfare services, but many others are diverting the
money to education or tax relief, or just saving it. The upshot: welfare now
costs the federal government more than it did pre-reform.

            The results of a USAT study of taxi safety are written up on the front of
the paper's "Money" section. From 1990 to 1996, cab accidents were up 48
percent in Phoenix, 41 percent in NYC, 25 percent in Miami, and 20 percent in
Seattle. The story is accompanied by a box of tips, including: always buckle up
(hitting that partition with your head is a leading cause of passenger
injuries) and always request a receipt (most receipts give the cab's number).
Today's Papers would add: immediately upon entry tell the driver that speeding
equals no tip.

            The WP runs an AP story reporting that California congressman Randy
Cunningham has apologized for saying last Saturday during an appearance at a
medical center that a rectal procedure he underwent during his recent treatment
for prostate problems was "just not natural, unless maybe you're Barney
Frank."

         
      
   
