
   
   
      
         
            McGwire Stories

            The New York Times
leads with Janet Reno's decision to launch an inquiry into whether or not
during his 1996 re-election bid, President Clinton coordinated an "issue"
advertising campaign that was in fact an improper attempt to circumvent federal
limits on his own campaign ad budget. The story also gets major play on the
Washington Post front, but is not on the Los Angeles
Times front, and is just barely reefered at USA Today .
The Post goes with President Clinton's attempts to marshal congressional
support for the coming storm. The LAT leads with the Dow's biggest 1-day
point gain ever, which is the off-lead at the WP , and is also fronted at
USAT and the NYT . USAT gives over three-quarters of its
front page to Mark McGwire's record-breaking 62nd home run, a story that also
cops mega column-inchage at the LAT and NYT , but which is missing
altogether--due to deadline constraints, no doubt--from the front of the first
available edition of the WP . McGwire is widely quoted thanking his
family, his son, the Cubs, and Sammy Sosa. The NYT reports that before
the game, he rubbed Roger Maris' record-setting bat on his body.

            The NYT and the WP note that Reno's newest inquiry is the third different DOJ look at a
White House operation initiated in the past two weeks. Although, notes the
NYT , this one's more personal, naming Clinton as the principal subject.
Reno has, explains the paper, reviewed the issue ad issue at least three times
before, but each time stopped after an initial 30-day review. Both papers
report what has been widely suggested in recent days--that a Federal Election
Commission report helped persuade her to look again. And both report a White
House lawyer's comment that the vexed ads were carefully previewed by lawyers.
The WP entices with the tidbit that the Dole '96 campaign ads are also
under review at Justice, but at an earlier stage of review. (Why isn't it as
far along? The paper doesn't say.)

            The WP lead and NYT front report that Kenneth Starr is likely
to deliver his report to Congress as early as the end of this week, probably
sooner than the White House expected. Well-placed lawyers talking to the
Times tell the paper that the report is likely to say that President
Clinton lied under oath in his Jones case deposition and to include
embarrassing descriptions of Clinton's conduct with Monica Lewinsky. The
WP lead and the NYT report that Clinton is scrambling to marshal
Democratic congressional support, with advisors reporting that he is going to
apologize at a meeting with House Democrats today. He may also, says the
Times , apologize later this week at a White House prayer breakfast. The
Post reports that at a Tuesday appearance at an elementary school,
Clinton seemed subdued.

            The LAT off-lead is the confession by long-time Yeltsin advisor,
Anatoly Chubais, that Russia "conned" the international community out of nearly
$20 billion in loans by hiding the severity of the country's fiscal problems.
If the government had told the truth, Chubais is quoted as saying, the Russian
economy would have collapsed last spring and lenders "would have stopped
dealing with us forever."

            For once, have some pity on the Corrections folks at the NYT . Today,
they were somehow forced to run this one: "An article in Arts & Ideas on
Aug. 29 about the changing role of the audience in political theater misstated
the name of a theater institute at Harvard and the title of its leader. It is
the Institute on the Arts and Civic Dialogue (not "for" Arts), and the writer
and actress Anna Deveare Smith is its director, not artistic director."

            According to the Wall Street Journal "Tax Report," just about everybody in
official Washington stood up Tuesday to denounce the idea reported earlier in
the week that the IRS would impose the gift tax on any fan who tried to give a
historic home run ball back to the slugger who launched it. Presidential
spokesman Mike McCurry is quoted saying the idea was "about the dumbest thing
I've ever heard in my life." (And think of all the dumb things he gets to
hear.) Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan dashed off a letter of complaint to the
commissioner of the IRS, and another senator blasted the commissioner over the
phone. The IRS quickly issued a statement making it clear that the fan would
not owe gift tax. The one problem with all this: despite the apparent oddity of
the home run ball case, not one of these horrified public servants has shown
why it isn't a perfectly straightforward application of the gift tax. So
shouldn't they rethink the whole idea? (Look for a WSJ editorial to make
this point any day now.)

         
      
   
