
   
   
      
         
            Kickin' Some Rebuttal

            The White House's response to the Starr report leads at all three Sunday
papers. The New York Times
calls the 42-page counter-attack a "scathing rebuttal," the Washington Post opts for "blistering counterattack," and
the Los
Angeles Times calls it "acid-worded." It's sound bite heaven for
President Clinton's legal team, as all three papers' leads include the White
House's characterization of the Starr investigation as a "hit-and-run smear
campaign." The NYT lead gives the most details about the contents of the
document, or "referral," as it is officially known. The WP and
LAT go lighter on the details, but spend more time stressing the
significance of House Democrats who want the President to accept some form of
punishment.

            All the papers run stories on the rest of the world's reaction to the Starr
report. The NYT reports that the British press blasted Clinton for his
lying and cheating, while French papers expressed their country's predominant
view on the matter--Clinton's affair should remain private. The WP notes
the "almost funereal somberness" of most world leaders who see Clinton's
troubles as yet another setback in an already difficult summer.

            A WP front page piece examines a prickly side-effect of the Starr
report's release: the heightened risk of curious ten-year-olds asking parents
what "oral sex" is. Although "ask your mother" seems like an appealing response
for dads, the paper cites "therapists" who say parents should discuss the
matter with their children and encourage the young'uns to lead the conversation
and tell what they already know.

            The NYT reports that this weekend's elections in Bosnia may be the
most important since the 43-month war ended in 1995. Voters must choose between
hard-line nationalists and moderate, reconciliation-minded politicians. The
rejection of the latter could mean the failure of Western diplomats' peace
efforts in the region.

            An LAT front page piece claims that despite promises to break up
incestuous business-government relationships, South Korea still has not carried
out reforms it agreed to as part of last years' international bail out.
Apparently, big-business has actually gained power by profiting from
high-interest loans that are driving medium to small-size companies into
bankruptcy. Meanwhile, the nation's economy continues to suffer, with the lower
and middle economic classes taking the hardest hit.

            The last words of Swissair Flight 111's pilots--captured by the cockpit
voice recorder--will not be released to the public, according to an inside
article at the WP . Like most countries aside from the U.S., Canadian law
precludes the public disclosure of any dialogue from the cockpit
recordings.

            A NYT op-ed asks several public figures, including Mario Cuomo and
William F. Buckley Jr., to recommend comeback strategies for the down-and-out
President. The show is stolen, however, by Donald Trump, recent author of
Trump: The Art of the Comeback. No stranger to scandal and hard times,
Trump advises the President to rid his mind of troublesome women by dumping his
lawyers, wife, and job--so that he can finally have some fun.

         
      
   
