
   
   
      
         
            Aye, There's the Ruble

            The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times lead with Russia's deepening economic crisis, marked
yesterday by a nearly ten percent drop in the ruble. USA Today and
the Washington Post each put the ruble inside and go
instead with the likely coming ashore today in the Carolinas of Hurricane
Bonnie, packing 115 mph winds across an extremely broad front. The storm has
forced the evacuation, say the papers, of nearly half a million people. The
LAT fronts the storm, while the NYT runs a reefer to its story
running deep inside.

            The NYT says a "fresh wave of panic" is hitting Russia's financial markets, with,
both Times explain, the government trying to delay the scheduled
repayment of its debt, and the banks furiously dumping rubles for dollars. The
upshot is, according to one former Boris Yeltsin advisor quoted in the
LAT , that "not a single foreign investor in his sound mind will come to
Russia...." The ruble's slide has, says the NYT , awakened new fears of
hyperinflation like that seen in the early 90's. According to the NYT ,
Yeltsin is increasingly acting like a lame duck as attention turns to Prime
Minister-designate Viktor Chernomyrdin's likely alliance with Communists and
the financial elite. Chernomyrdin's initial public comments, says the paper,
harks back to Soviet times, with his suggestion of more government support for
ailing industries. One NYT example of the spreading cash crunch:
yesterday's press run of the newspaper Izvestia was halted when its
printing plant ran out of money.

            The NYT off-lead reports that in preparation for their upcoming
antitrust case against Microsoft, federal and state investigators are looking
into whether MS ever forced Intel to shelve new Internet technology efforts
because they posed a competitive threat. The Times notes that the
Internet-related conflict between the two companies has been well-covered in
the trade press, and was even the subject of a 1996 dialogue between Gates and
Grove in Fortune . The paper says investigators appear particularly
interested in an August 1995 meeting between Intel and MS execs including Intel
CEO Andrew Grove and Bill Gates, at which, according to one internal Intel memo
cited by the Times , Gates, concerned about various Intel Internet
projects, made "vague threats" about supporting Intel's competitors. The story
also includes Microsoft's response to the allegation: that the government is
trying to depict as evidence of an anti-competitive conspiracy what are in fact
just minor disputes arising in routine business meetings. The Times
notes that Intel is also the subject of a federal antitrust suit.

            An inside NYT piece reports that seven men, including a member of the
board of the principal U.S. Cuban exile organization, were indicted in Puerto
Rico on charges of conspiring to kill Fidel Castro while he was on an official
visit to Venezuela last year. The story also runs inside at the Post . A
lawyer for one of the accused tells the Times that he will demand access
to every CIA and FBI document on nearly 40 years of Castro death plots.

            Monday's Wall Street Journal broke the story that Osama bin Laden
was charged in a sealed indictment with various terrorist activities. (That
story, by Thomas Ricks and Robert Greenberger, was also the first report of the
detail in yesterday's NYT about the U.S. dispatching a general to
Pakistan to reassure that U.S. cruise missiles were not an attack by India.)
Today's USAT front elaborates on that indictment a bit. Citing a Tuesday
Newsday story, the paper says that one of those activities attributed to
bin Laden in the indictment is ordering and helping to finance a 1994 plot to
assassinate President Clinton. The NYT runs a vaguer story inside about
the indictment that doesn't mention any Clinton plots, but under a piquant
headline: "A Formality In a World of Missiles."

            No matter the so-what attitude of most people in most parts of the country,
the WP off-lead indicates that in official Washington, President
Clinton's fate still hangs very much in the balance. The headline: "Gephardt Says Clinton Could Be Impeached." The story is
that House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt--never, as the paper notes, close to
Bill Clinton--yesterday repeated his criticism of Clinton's behavior in the
Monica Lewinsky matter and is quoted saying that if Clinton were to leave
office, "we'll get through this." Gephardt describes himself in the story as "a
prospective grand juror." The Post adduces further evidence of the
inside-the-Beltway bandwagon, with media reporter Howard Kurtz citing the
(mostly Washington-based) columnists who thus far have said in print they want
Clinton out, a list that includes Clarence Page, Garry Wills, and Lars-Erik
Nelson. And Walter Shapiro, in his USAT column, notes that last Sunday,
the Post ran a resignation op-ed by former Sen. Sam Nunn. Today the
paper runs a Michael Kelly op-ed in which Kelly writes, "If he is not doomed,
he is awfully close."

         
      
   
