
   
   
      
         
            Starr Gazing

            Everybody leads with the expected near-simultaneous release today to the
Congress and the American people of the Starr report. You can't tell from the
USA
Today and Los Angeles Times headlines what the report says Clinton
did. And indeed, the LAT lead never says. For that you have to turn to
the Washington Post and New York Times
headlines, which make it plain: lied (both papers), obstructed justice (the
Post ) and abused power (the NYT ).

            The LAT lead emphasizes the struggle yesterday between get-it-out-now
House Republicans and pro-delay Democrats over the timing of the report's
release, a battle, say the papers, the Republicans have won. The LAT
cites one argument Democrats wielded, but to no avail: when the House Ethics
committee reprimanded Newt Gingrich last year, he was given an advance copy of
the report. Only the WP notices that in describing the Starr report as
one-sided, White House lawyer David Kendall was analyzing a report he hadn't
read.

            
               USAT also tells of the pre-release battle and repeats its account of
the report's charges from yesterday's edition: that Clinton obstructed justice
in trying to find Monica Lewinsky a job and lied twice under oath about his
relationship with her. These charges are expounded at much greater length in
the NYT and WP . Oddly, USAT buries until the
third-from-the-bottom paragraph the news that a source says Starr concludes
Clinton committed eleven offenses that could warrant impeachment, a detail the
WP rightly puts in its lead's first sentence.

            
               USAT says the report includes "graphic details about sexual
encounters" between Clinton and Lewinsky but leaves it at that. The LAT
goes a little farther with such titillating non-titillation, quoting a source
telling the reporter, "I don't know how a newspaper like yours will be able to
handle some of this material." But the NYT and especially the WP wade into the details, and even though Bill
Clinton told Senate Democrats yesterday at a White House meeting that Starr's
report would contain "no surprises," some of the details are new: Lewinsky
testified that on two occasions she engaged in a sex act with Clinton while he
talked on the phone with members of Congress (say both papers) and the
WP prints the Dutch Master-bator tale of Drudge Report fame that
according to her, the two once used a cigar as a prop in a sex act.

            All the papers have comments from Cabinet members and Democratic senators
who met yesterday with Clinton behind closed doors. Most describe a repentant
Bill Clinton. (In a sort of Atonement Watch, the NYT runs a chronology with excerpts of
the six Clinton apologies to date.) But the WP reports that at the
Cabinet meeting, when HHS Secretary Donna Shalala asked Clinton if he didn't
think he had an obligation to provide moral leadership, Clinton "let her have it," saying that if her logic had
prevailed in 1960, Richard Nixon would have been elected instead of John
Kennedy. After that exchange, says the Post 's source, no other Cabinet
member had anything critical to say.

            The off-lead at the LAT , the WP and NYT , which
USAT plays on the front below the fold, is Boris Yeltsin's decision to
name Yevgeny Primakov, his current foreign minister, as his new prime
minister. The papers all note that the choice met with the communists' approval
and hence is likely to be approved by the parliament, possibly resolving the
country's leadership crisis. Also widely noted is that Primakov, an experienced
diplomat, has no expertise in the area of the country's burning problem,
economics. The WP seems particularly down on the move though--an
editorial describes him as a "KGB veteran and friend of
dictators everywhere."

            Inside pieces at both the WP and the NYT report that the
Senate yesterday killed an attempt at campaign finance reform, probably tabling
such efforts for the rest of the year. The arguments of the corruptions of
money vs. the freedom to contribute and raise it were the same-old same-old,
but this time, notes the Times , there was also the deepening distraction
of possible impeachment proceedings. Similarly, the Wall Street Journal "Washington Wire" says the Starr report
means the chances of a managed care overhaul coming out of Congress this year
are zero.

            The USAT front features a poll that says two-thirds of Americans
think Bill Clinton should stay in office. But Martha Stewart may not be one of
them. The WP says today's broadcast of "Martha Stewart Living" was
supposed to be a lunch get-together with Bill Clinton the hostess had taped
back in June. But instead, viewers will see a rerun.

         
      
   
