
   
   
      
         
            Creatine Trouble

            The crisis in Russia leads at all papers--the New York
Times , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles Times --though the WP tucks the
story under a banner headline on market dives and global turmoil. Each
front-page features a photo of Boris Yeltsin, his hands raised, defiantly
refuting rumors of his resignation. In Yeltsin's words: "I'm not going to
resign . . . In 2000, there will be an election for president, and I will not
run." But Yeltsin's determined words belie his weak physical appearance and
waning power. The papers note that an agreement reached Friday to shift
substantial power away from the presidency and over to the parliament (the
State Duma) constitutes a likely setback for reform. The LAT is the only
paper with high-up mention of Yeltsin's latest sackings: Anatoly Chubias
(Russia's envoy to international financial institutions) and deputy prime
minister Boris Nemtsov.

            All papers run above-the-fold stories recapping Wall Street's worst week
this year (and the worst week since October '89). The Dow dropped 114 points
Friday, extending Thursday's 357-point dive. Asia's markets also dropped
sharply on Friday, with Tokyo dipping to a 12-year low. In Russia the economy
remained virtually frozen--stocks were traded at very low volume Friday, and
Moscow's main currency exchange stayed shut.

            Next week's Yeltsin-Clinton summit in Moscow gets front-page play at the
LAT and gets inside features elsewhere. The WP predicts the
summit will yield "psychic solace but little tangible assistance." Newt
Gingrich for one foresees no psychic solace: he tells the NYT that
Clinton's trip is "imprudent" considering Russia's current state. The chaos
certainly makes trip logistics a nightmare, as all papers note. Interesting
angle not mentioned in the papers: What is the status of security
preparations?

            All papers report (the NYT inside) that a second suspect in the
African bombings, arraigned in a court in New York, has admitted ties to
terrorist financier Osama bin Laden. A related WP front-pager says that
bin Laden was in the Afghanistan camps the day of the attack, but moved before
the missiles struck. The story also says that the U.S. began formulating
retaliation plans against bin Laden's Afghan stronghold in June.

            A NYT front-page story keeps up the heat on U.S. officials who
maintain that the Sudanese pharmaceutical plant was a legitimate target. The
article chronicles numerous U.S. changes-of-story. It also says that President
Clinton "personally chose the bombing site [in Sudan] . . . declining to strike
any other among a larger set of targets presented to him by military planners."
The article adds that Clinton may not have known that the plant was a
U.N.-affiliated medicine factory.

            President Clinton's speech at a Martha's Vineyard church makes the front
page at the NYT and the WP . While not alluding directly to the
Lewinsky scandal, Clinton emphasizes forgiveness. (He also compares himself to
Nelson Mandela in needing to forgive tormentors.) Clinton's audience is largely
sympathetic.

            A WP "Style" section piece says that British newspapers still carry
on in "all-out wretched-excess mode" about Princess Diana, almost a year after
her death. However, some editors dare to predict that this may be the
Princess's last media hurrah. Supporting evidence: 300 people showed up to a
commemorative march last weekend when 15,000 were expected. Counter-evidence:
London's Daily Mail netted 20% more readers when it serialized Diana,
the Untold Story .

            A mock-epic on the NYT op-ed page replays the Trojan War as a
steroid-aided battle, a la the controversy over Mark McGwire's use of
over-the-counter muscle-builders. The wily Odysseus slips Achilles some
androstenedione, while Apollo stokes the Trojan defenders on creatine. All
contenders show the requisite deference toward Anabolis, the goddess of
steroids.

         
      
   
