
   
   
      
         
            Oral Arguments

            Lewinsky's loose lips lead. Everybody has their sources for her supposedly
secret grand jury testimony and the general word from them is: sex with
President Clinton in the White House. USA Today
says the kiss-then-tell included descriptions of oral sex with him. The
New York Times
says Lewinsky said the sex happened in the small, private study down a short
hallway from the Oval Office. The Los Angeles
Times says Lewinsky said there were a dozen sexual encounters over
eighteen months. The Washington Post reports that the Clinton camp has private
investigators collecting information on Lewinsky that would undermine her
credibility, to be used if her testimony proves damaging.

            There is other news out of Washington. The WP 's off-lead is the
House's passage of campaign finance reform legislation that
would stop the flow of unacounted-for soft money and crack down on special
interest group attack ads. The paper says that the vote puts new pressure on
hostile Senate Republicans to approve the bill. A Post editorial calls
the House move impressive because it occurred over the opposition of the House
Republican leadership, and challenges the "do-nothing" Senate to pass the bill.
The Times editorial says and does pretty much the same. And the
NYT , WP , and LAT fronts all report that the House
committee investigating 1996 Clinton campaign finance practices voted yesterday
to hold Janet Reno in contempt of Congress. Why? For refusing to honor a
subpoena it issued for internal DOJ memos to her that called for the
appointment of an independent counsel in the finance matter.

            The NYT 's off-lead reports that the Clinton administration plan for stockpiling anti-germ-warfare
vaccines at various strategic sites, developed in record time, is now in
jeopardy. The problems include a dispute among experts concerning the merits of
such vaccines compared to antibiotics. The stockpile plan was developed, says
the paper, without consulting drug industry leaders about feasibility, and by a
group including two men standing to gain financially from the set-up.

            Both the Wall Street Journal and WP report that the FTC has
opened up an investigation of alcohol advertising and has reached a settlement
with Beck's beer and Kahlua that forced ads off television. The big issue is
how are booze companies handling marketing to young people.

            The WSJ "Washington Wire" reveals that the CIA hires hair-care biggie
John Paul DeJoria (of those John Paul Mitchell TV ads) to lecture
employees--no, not on the best kind of hairdo to hide a camera or a gun in, but
on time management and leadership.

            The WP business section runs a story about how, with fears about
newborn switching and snatching on the rise, high-tech infant monitoring systems are being put in place
in hospitals nationwide. The market for these has increased two to threefold
just in the past three years. In light of that scary story of undetected baby
switching at the University of Virginia hospital, it's interesting to note
that, according to the paper, the devices really don't do anything to prevent
switching.

            For those of you who are sticklers when it comes to showbiz bureaucracy, the
NYT has just the correction for you: "Because of an editing error, an
article on July 27 about the apartment of Jen Graffam-Wink and Chris Wink, a
founder of the Blue Man Group, referred incorrectly to the group's structure.
There is no head Blue Man."

         
      
   
