
   
   
      
         
            Reign of Terror

            The front-page spotlight remains on Kenya and Tanzania in the aftermath of
Friday bombings at two U.S. embassies. Even as the search through the rubble
continues, the still-rising death toll is at 149 (including 12 Americans),
according to the Washington Post , which gives the highest figure.

            The lead at the New York Times details the launching of an organized
international rescue operation, replacing the heroic but chaotic efforts to
date. A contingent of 170 Israeli troops--whom the NYT peculiarly characterizes
as "specialists in rescuing people from destroyed buildings"--arrived in
Nairobi and quickly took charge. Among their first moves: pulling a Kenyan
businessman out alive from the rubble. The Los Angeles Times and the WP also cover the
Israeli rescue effort, but further down.

            All papers report that the Nairobi hospitals have been overwhelmed by
treating the 4000-plus wounded; the NYT devotes a separate inside
article to the story. The biggest problems are blood shortages and dwindling
equipment and supplies. There was little reported progress in the search for
the bombers, though a Kenyan daily newspaper quoted witnesses who recalled
seeing a man waiting in a pickup truck Friday morning in the alley behind the
embassy, where the bomb exploded.

            The front-page LAT "Sunday Report" looks into a prophetic 1993
Pentagon study dubbed "Terror 2000," which outlined potential terrorist
scenarios--including the targeting of a major U.S. financial center, which
happened months later when the World Trade Center was bombed. Dubbed too
alarmist for their time, the papers were "quietly buried," says the
LAT .

            In other front-page news--rather, news of the front page--the Monica story
retreated inside for the first time in weeks. Savor it: she won't stay there
long.

            A mammoth article inside the WP "Outlook" offers cautionary words for
America's Social Security reformers: Britain's model of partial privatization
ain't as great as it sounds. The system, instituted under Margaret Thatcher in
the mid-80s, incurred higher than expected administrative costs, and triggered
a breakdown in consumer protection as people invested in a smorgasbord of
incompetent companies. ("Investors could even buy a pension from the big
supermarket chains.") Though an insightful glimpse into Britain's struggles
with Social Security, the article makes few links to the challenges facing
America.

            How's this for a catchy lead--"Victoria's Secret sells 20 times more size 32
bras in New York than it averages in other cities" (from the WP , p.
A18). Having been hooked by this line--and by a follow-up report that Miami
customers prefer ivory-colored undergarments to black ones by 10:1--TP was
deeply disappointed to discover that the article was really about a
Virginia-based company called Microstrategy, whose products help companies sort
through their databases. How dreadfully mis lead ing!

         
      
   
