
   
   
      
         
            Bloody Saturday

            The New York Times and the Los Angeles Times lead with new terror in Northern
Ireland: a car bomb exploded Saturday in a crowded shopping area in Omagh, a
town west of Belfast, killing at least 28 people and injuring hundreds more.
The Washington Post , which runs the story at the fold,
calls it "the single worst terrorist incident in the 30-year history of
sectarian warfare" in the province. For its lead the Post turns to a
three-story spread on President Clinton's upcoming grand jury testimony. The
banner lead reports that Clinton's lawyers think he will revise his story for
Monday's testimony--i.e. he will admit to sexual relations with Monica
Lewinsky, but will not admit to perjury.

            The terrible toll in the Northern Ireland bombing was partly due to a
misleading warning about the bomb's location. A caller warned of a bomb near
the Omagh courthouse, but the bomb actually exploded in an area where the
crowds had retreated to get away from the courthouse. Prominent among the early
suspects is a radical Irish Republican Army "splinter group" which opposes the
peace agreement between Catholics and Protestants that was ratified last May.
The LAT and the NYT state early on that the explosion may
jeopardize the peace agreement, but the WP notes in its second paragraph
that "local Protestant and Catholic leaders insisted that the tragedy . . .
would not block implementation" of the agreement.

            Back in Scandalworld: The WP lead, while suggesting that Clinton may
testify to a sexual relationship, also notes that he is prone to last-minute
changes of mind and could go against his advisors' recommendations. Another
piece in the WP front-page package describes the intense legal
preparation on both sides. Strategizing aside, though, Clinton's testimony
hinges on his "own lonely struggle over whether to admit a relationship with
Lewinsky despite his past denials." The third WP piece chronicles
Clinton's ability to cope with adversity. In related news, the NYT
off-lead explains how the scandal could shift election-year politics: if
Americans' disgust translates into low voter turnout, the Democrats will
probably suffer. A LAT front-pager recaps the long list of legal
precedents set in the case.

            Trouble in Congo gets front-page play at the LAT , and runs inside
elsewhere. The U.S. embassy there was closed yesterday, and the last American
diplomats were evacuated as the teetering Congoese government prepares to
counter advances from Rwanda-backed rebels. The WP adds this to the
story: Western troops (including some 1,200 U.S. Marines) are taking up
positions near Congo's coast in order to rescue foreigners if necessary. The
Congoese take an understandably dim view of this move--very few foreigners
remain in Congo.

            Front page pieces at the NYT and WP report new developments in
the search for suspects in the African bombings. An NYT front-page
article, citing federal law-enforcement officials, says that an associate of
wealthy Saudi exile and terrorist financier Osama Bin Laden has been
"tentatively linked" to the bombings in Kenya and Tanzania. The WP 's
front-page story pursues another angle: A bombing suspect was arrested on the
Pakistan-Afghanistan border while travelling under a false passport, and is
being flown to Kenya for questioning.

            A NYT "Week in Review" article urges the U.S. to develop a
consistent, long-term policy to combat terrorism. The writer, a long-time
intelligence officer, observes that, "Most of our counter-terrorism successes
are against loners." He decries quick fixes such as assassination because they
either backfire by perpetuating the cycle of violence or aren't comprehensive
enough. A better strategy, he argues, would involve gradually undermining and
weakening terrorists' bases.

            According to a below-the-fold NYT front-page article, some
heavyweight web sites like Geocities, Lycos-Tripod, and Ticketmaster have
agreed to feed subscriber information to a tracking system. This information
will then be sold to advertisers, who can tailor their marketing strategies
accordingly. While this does not violate individual anonymity per se, the
prospect irks privacy-rights activists. Their battle may be tough, however,
since privacy regulations on the Internet remain notoriously nebulous.

         
      
   
