
   
   
      
         
            Afghan Hounding

            Everybody leads with the U.S. cruise missile strikes (generally thought to
involve 75 missiles, although the Los Angeles
Times says it could have been up to 100) against terrorist targets in
Sudan and Afghanistan. There was other news today, but not much: Monica
returned to the grand jury. The Unabrother got a $1 million reward, which he
says he'll distribute to the victims' families. A study shows that sons of
absentee fathers are twice as likely to do jail time as those raised in
two-parent homes. The Prom Mom, who confessed to knowingly killing her child,
pleaded guilty to aggravated manslaughter and as a result, could be out
partying again in three years.

            The Washington Post , LAT and USA Today run
banner headlines across their tops, while the New York Times
holds itself to a four-column header, leaving room for two columns for its
off-lead about Monica's second grand jury shot. But there is no Lewinsky story
on the USAT front and she's driven below the fold at the WP and
LAT . The USAT headline boils things down the most: "U.S. Strikes
Back." The WP and NYT opt for straight, analytical headlines,
although neither mentions the African embassy bombings. The LAT does
mention them, although at the cost of omitting the location of the strike
targets. But with its top line, the paper does best communicate the
government's sense of urgency: "U.S. Targets Heart of Terror."

            The NYT says the operation was the most formidable ever undertaken by
the U.S. against a private sponsor of terrorism. Both targets--terrorist
training camps in Afghanistan and a chemical weapons factory in Sudan--are
associated with Osama bin Laden. USAT , the Wall Street Journal and NYT report that an arrested
Palestinian suspect in the bombings provided irrefutable evidence of bin
Laden's involvement in the African embassy bombings, a story that from the day
of his arrest, the WP pushed harder than the other big dailies. The
NYT reports that there were multiple sources for the bin Laden ID. The
Post states that in a briefing on August 12th, the director of the CIA
told Clinton that bin Laden was behind the embassy bombings. The NYT
reports that Clinton tentatively approved the mission on August 14th, with the
final go-ahead coming in a 3 AM phone call yesterday morning.

            The WP quotes a spokesman for the Taliban, the Afghan ruling group,
saying that bin Laden had not been hurt in the strikes. Everybody reports that
U.S. officials insist that bin Laden wasn't personally targeted in the raids.
But why this fuss? True, the U.S. government has adopted a policy against
assassinating heads of state, but bin Laden is not one. So why not try to kill
him? Also, this space noted yesterday that in its story emphasizing U.S.
diplomatic efforts, the NYT reported that there was no evidence that the
U.S. was considering military action against the bin Laden compound. Today's
Papers doesn't care whether the NYT just missed the story, or was misled
by its government sources as part of a cover and deception plan, or like a
congressional leader, was let in on the deal with the promise to keep quiet
until afterwards. It's all good--scumbags don't have the right to a
heads-up.

            Everybody notes that in his address to the nation from Washington, President
Clinton cited evidence suggesting that bin Laden was planning further attacks
against American facilities overseas. The WSJ says the evidence included
electronic intercepts of communications relating to a planned truck-bomb attack
on an undisclosed facility as well as to U.S. targets in Pakistan. Everybody
reports that yesterday was chosen for the action because intelligence indicated
a major gathering of terrorist leaders was to take place at the Afghan site.
The LAT says the group numbered "several hundred."

            But USAT quotes Sen. Arlen Specter saying the reason was that Clinton
wanted to "focus attention away from his own personal problems." And the
NYT has Sen. Dan Coats saying Clinton's record "raises into doubt
everything he does and everything he says." The WP describes such
comments as "unusually swift criticisms" and reports that Secretary of Defense
William Cohen "responded stonily" when asked about the comparison to "Wag the
Dog." Everybody runs "Wag the Dog" stories. Their basic form: there is no
evidence for the "Wag the Dog" comparison of course, but here's the comparison.
A more apt commentary appears on the LAT op-ed page in the form of a
cartoon depicting a reporter asking President Clinton at a press conference,
"How do we know these attacks aren't meant to distract us from distracting the
country?"

            The LAT op-ed page features a column today arguing via learned
appeals to Catholic doctrine and English royal history that what was really
wrong with President Clinton's speech the other night is that he didn't humbly
ask forgiveness for his bad behavior. The author? Gerald Uelmen. Funny, don't
recall much of that from his client, O.J. Simpson.

         
      
   
