
   
   
      
         
            Shuttered to Think

            
               USA
Today and the New York
Times lead with the U.S. decision, in the wake of the African embassy
bombings, to shut some embassies in order to update their security. The
Washington Post goes with word that Kenneth Starr's
upcoming report to Congress will focus on evidence of possible impeachable acts
relating to President Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky and will not
even include the Arkansas financial dealings that Starr has been investigating
for four years. The WP front ignores embassy security, and the
USAT and Times fronts ignore Starr.

            
               USAT and the NYT report that the State Dept. says it has received more than a dozen threats to
embassies since the African bombings, but that State is emphasizing
embassies are not being closed permanently. Indeed, the NYT suggests the
downtime might be just a matter of days. USAT quotes the AP's
identification of three of the affected sites: the embassies in Uganda,
Malaysia and Swaziland. The Times also names Uganda and Malaysia, but
refers only to a several-hours evacuation at the Swaziland embassy in response
to a bomb threat. The paper adds that the embassy in the Ivory Coast is cutting
back its business hours while security is improved, and that the Cairo offices
of the U.S. Agency for International Development were closed and its employees
moved into the city's U.S. embassy.

            This space often notes how USAT headlines cut to the chase, but its
headline over this story--"U.S. To Shut Embassies To Fix Security"--cuts too
much, with its suggestion that all embassies are being affected. Better is the
NYT header: "U.S. Closes Down Some Operations in Foreign Posts."

            The WP 's account of the Starr report to Congress notes that he will eventually
produce a separate and more inclusive document for the judicial panel that
appointed him. In the meantime though, the paper explains, the pared-down
Lewinsky report will get to Congress quickly (probably shortly after President
Clinton testifies to the Starr grand jury)--in plenty of time to leak out and
produce much partisan acrimony during the fall elections.

            The NYT and USAT top fronts feature stories about yesterday's
court proceeding in Arkansas in which a twelve-year-old and a fourteen-year-old
were given the strictest sentence available to juveniles, for shooting to death
four students and a teacher: confinement in a juvenile detention center until
age 18. One of the boys made no formal statement in court, while the other
apologized but also said he meant to shoot over everybody's head.

            The Times notes that in Arkansas, juvenile proceedings are usually
closed to the public and press, but that the judge in this case had allowed a
more open hearing. And the nation's newspaper editors seem to have likewise
loosened up on juvenile coverage in this case--the papers run the boys' names,
and indeed, the fronts of the NYT , WP , and USAT all
feature pictures of them. Just what are the papers' policies in this area? It's
hard to figure out from what they publish--just yesterday the papers told the
tale of two boys, age 7 and 8, arrested for murdering an 11-year-old girl,
without publishing their pictures or their names.

            The WP reports that the three-year old Korean War Memorial, built in
Washington, D.C. by the Army Corps of Engineers, needs $2 million to fix
buckled paving stones, 40 dead shade trees, and a leaking Pool of Remembrance.
Shouldn't a war memorial be built to last longer than the war it's a memorial
to?

            The Wall Street Journal runs a front-page feature describing
a new type of medical consultant service: for about $800 a
year, you get access to a doctor who, when you get sick, advises you how to
best navigate the health care bureaucracy. The paper says such a development
points the way to a multitiered medical system where the quality of medical
care might depend even more than it does today on a patient's wealth.

            The WP reports that last week's signing into law by President Clinton
of a comprehensive job training bill "got lost in the backdraft of the Monica
Lewinsky investigation." The paper adds that "little seems to be getting done
in the capital these days and when it does it barely causes a ripple." The
story runs on page six.

         
      
   
