
   
   
      
         
            Let's Go to the Videotape

            The New York Times leads with a sneak preview of the videotaped
testimony that Congress will make public on Monday morning. The Los Angeles
Times ' lead national story says Kenneth Starr plans to continue his
investigation and press for impeachment. The Washington Post leads with somewhat odd comments from the
Japanese prime minister.

            The NYT lead describes what America will see on Monday morning when
President Clinton's taped testimony is released. The article claims that
Clinton "painted a picture of himself as a concerned and even tender friend to
Monica Lewinsky." While Clinton "expressed embarrassment and regret about the
affair," he also showed "flashes of fury" directed at Kenneth Starr and his
prosecutors. Clinton refused to answer specific questions about sex acts,
instead reading a prepared speech, the text of which the Times prints.
In the speech, Clinton admits to having "inappropriate intimate contact" with
Lewinsky and engaging in phone conversations that featured "inappropriate
sexual banter." (Will 900-lines now advertise "phone banter" at $4.99 per
minute?) The source for these leaks? "Lawyers with detailed knowledge of the
proceedings." The NYT helpfully adds that the only lawyers at the
proceedings were Clinton's attorneys and Starr's prosecutors. Hmmm.... A second
front-page NYT story argues that the hateful rivalry between Clinton and
Starr has led each to overstep and use poor judgment.

            The WP runs a front-page story on Hillary Clinton's lack of
discernible reaction to the mess. Hillary has kept her schedule of appearances,
and offered no statements and no sign of her inner feelings. A front-page
LAT piece quotes several women complaining about Hillary's inaction. One
says, "I have no problem with Mr. Clinton. I have a problem with Hillary
Clinton not taking a stand on it." In a separate story, the LAT claims
that Starr will continue his investigation in an effort to find further
impeachable offenses. Starr hopes to find a pattern of cover-ups, stemming back
to Whitewater, Filegate, and Travelgate.

            The WP lead recounts comments from an interview with Japanese Prime
Minister Keizo Obuchi. Obuchi emphasized that Japan is doing all it can to end
its recession: lowering interest rates, slashing taxes, and throwing government
money into the economy. Obuchi then commented that the only real solution might
be massive military spending, akin to what World War II did to pull the U.S.
out of the Great Depression. Obuchi was careful to add that Japan's
constitution would not allow weapons exports and that he would "never consider"
defense spending as a solution, but the WP notes that Obuchi raised the
idea himself before pooh-poohing it. Doth Obuchi protest too much?

            Two articles in the NYT 's Sunday Styles section offer snapshots of
the go-go '90s. One story says hotel and wait staffs are now uniformed in
designer clothes. Isaac Mizrahi, Calvin Klein, and Donna Karan are designing
uniforms for bellboys, waiters, and room maids. Mizrahi put doormen in
"understated" four-button suits, bellboys in Nehru jackets, and receptionists
in "baby-blue twin sets." The second article describes a "reservationist to the
stars" who acts as a travel agent for super-celebs. He can get you rooms in
booked hotels and tables at ultrachic bistros, but you'll have to pay a $10,000
nonrefundable fee just to talk to him (this fee is not applied to charges for
actual services), and you may have to offer character references. "If potential
clients balk at the fee...[the agent] decides right away not to take them
on."

         
      
   
