
   
   
      
         
            Tape Measure

            Everyone leads with the presidential tape, although true to its Rashomon
spirit, no two papers see in it quite the same thing. The Washington Post flags it as "Clinton Decries Attempt to
'Set Me Up." The New York Times
says, "Tape Shows Nation a Clinton Irate and Sad." The Los Angeles
Times and USA Today play it somewhat straighter, with their top
headlines merely stating that the tape was nationally aired, although the
papers use their sub-headlines to interpret the event. The LAT sees a
"composed" chief executive offering "new insights" into his version of events,
while USAT stresses that the initial reaction of the public and Congress
prompted by the tape suggested that Clinton's risk of impeachment was not
thereby increased. Indeed, USAT cites a post-tape poll finding that
two-thirds of Americans don't want President Clinton impeached, up from 60
percent the day before the tape's airing.

            To varying degrees, the papers all note that the taped testimony did not
feature the politically explosive emotions or over-the-top sex talk that had
been rumored last week. USAT notes that contrary to leaks, the tape
contained no angry eruptions. And the NYT 's R.W. Apple makes the point
that the grand jury appearance was marked by Clinton's fuller and more
convincing expressions of personal regret, plus more fondness for Monica
Lewinsky than the nationally televised speech he gave a few hours later. Apple
writes that if the speech had been more like the testimony in this regard,
Clinton might well have put the whole matter to rest.

            A key to the relative success Clinton achieved in his grand jury appearance
is noted by the LAT : unlike ordinary witnesses, Clinton was frequently
allowed by the prosecutors to go on at great length without directly responding
to questions. (Which, given that Clinton had agreed to appear for only four
hours, also meant he was able to avoid some lines of questioning altogether by
"eating the clock.") Or just as unusually, note all the papers, Clinton simply
didn't answer some questions at all. For instance, the NYT reports that
when Clinton suggested that the grand jurors themselves wielded a definition of
sex, that like his, required sexual intercourse, some of the jurors sent back
word that no, they wanted him to address more specifically what he and Lewinsky
did, but Clinton politely refused.

            Everybody suggests that the among the most implausible moments in Clinton's
testimony came when he tried to save his testimony from perjury by advocating
arcane definitions of such words as "is" and "alone." In conjunction with
Clinton's attempt to fine-tune the notion of sexual relations so that it
required intercourse, the WP helpfully notes that in a recent Time-CNN
poll, 87 percent of the respondents said they consider oral sex sex. Clinton's
answers included the enunciation of his own philosophy of such testimony: be
truthful but not helpful; say what's true, but if possible make it misleading.
But Clinton came out of such logic-chopping to a peroration pitched primarily
to the grand jurors that was, notes the NYT , worthy of a campaign
speech.

            A WP editorial says that the videotape does not change the
"unfortunate fundamentals of the case." And so the paper maintains that the
only thing to do is for Congress to open a formal impeachment inquiry. The
NYT editorial on the subject says the performance might have done
Clinton some good, but is still "one of the most low-rent moments in White
House history." The editorial concludes that any short-of-impeachment
resolution requires that Clinton stop demanding that the American people
"endorse his lying." We can afford, says the editorial, to be a nation of
forgivers, but not of enablers.

            Everybody picks over the new Lewinsky material released yesterday. The
biggest new news everybody has is that keeping the dress unwashed was Linda
Tripp's idea, one which she implemented by convincing Lewinsky she'd gotten too
heavy to wear the dress and hence didn't need to wash it. There's also the word
that Lewinsky's notes of her Clinton visits and calls are so extensive that
they even included a spread (so to speak) sheet. USAT 's account says her
memory for details was so good that she rattled off for prosecutors what she
and Vernon Jordan had to eat at their breakfast meeting some months prior.

            World record-holder and 1988 Olympic champion Florence Griffith-Joyner died
in her sleep yesterday. The story makes the LAT , USAT , and
WP fronts and runs inside at the NYT . The widespread rumors about
her use of steroids during her career, made relevant by her death of heart
failure at age 38, are mentioned prominently by USAT and the NYT ,
not at all by the WP .

            The Wall Street Journal "Work Week" column says that the
Clinton testimony tapes were a big distraction in the American workplace
yesterday. Trouble is, the column cites just a single workplace--that of
something called Amcat Corp. in New Britain Conn. Why this outfit and no other?
But the item does go on to mention that about half of the 300,000 people who
used the Internet on Monday to view CNN's testimony download were at the office
at the time.

         
      
   
