
   
   
      
         
            Scraping Off The Barnicles

            The Washington Post leads with today's second grand jury
appearance by Monica Lewinsky. USA Today 's lead is that Lewinsky initially kept
quiet because she believed her relationship with President Clinton might last
beyond his second term. The New York Times
national edition leads with Kenneth Starr's demand that President Clinton
provide a DNA specimen, a move the paper says strongly suggests that the FBI
lab has determined that the infamous blue dress contains DNA evidence of a
sexual encounter. The WP lead says Starr was seeking the sample from
Bethesda Naval Hospital and that Clinton's lawyer didn't oppose the request.
(Last night, NBC News was reporting that Clinton had indeed provided a DNA
sample.) The later metro edition of the NYT instead leads with the U.S.'
strategizing about how to capture suspected terrorist mastermind Osama bin
Laden, currently in Afghanistan. The Los Angeles
Times goes with new evidence that Los Angeles County is moving
impressive numbers of people off its welfare rolls and into jobs. The findings
are likely to be cited, says the LAT , as a model for welfare overhaul in
other large urban areas. The WP front also carries the story.

            The Post reports that Lewinsky is set to testify to the grand jury
that Betty Currie sought her out to get back the gifts that Clinton had given
the intern. The paper says that when asked by Starr on Monday whether he had
asked Currie to get the gifts back, President Clinton didn't really answer the
question.

            The NYT reports that in a telephone interview, a high-ranking
official of the Taliban, the fundamentalist Moslem group controlling
Afghanistan, said that if the U.S. provided hard evidence of bin Laden's
involvement in the African embassy bombings, the Taliban would be willing to
discuss with American officials what to do about him. The paper notes that any
negotiations might be complicated by prior U.S. complaints about the Taliban's
harsh treatment of women and its involvement in drug trafficking, but goes on
to note that the timing may be right, since Afghanistan's rulers are desperate
for international recognition and aid. There is no evidence, says the
Times , that the U.S. is instead considering military action against bin
Laden's Afghan compound.

            The WP off-lead reports that President Clinton has approved an
average 3.6 percent pay raise for federal workers next year and proposed a 4.4
percent raise on top of that for the following year. The story makes two
mistakes typical of federal pay raise reporting: 1) it suggests that federal
employees earn much less than their counterparts in the private sector even
though there is much evidence to the contrary. Thus the piece mentions that the
typical white-collar federal workers who will receive the bulk of the raises
earn over $44,000 but doesn't note that the average salary in this country is
far, far less; 2) it doesn't mention the real cost of federal raises. Thus, the
story says the 1999 pay raise will cost $2.9 billion, when in fact it will end
up costing much more because it increases federal pension payouts, which are
based on a worker's last few years of salary.

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature gives a tour
of the wacky world of INS "national interest" visas--granted upon the
ruminations of a few hundred clerks who make their decisions without much in
the way of guidelines. The results therefore, are pretty random. A Russian
acrobat gets in, as does a Chinese physicist specializing in detecting
radioactive leaks. And so does a 27-year-old Montrealer out to fill a "huge
void in the telesphere" by launching a youth-oriented global news network. But
an Indian engineer skilled at protecting bridges from earthquakes does not. Nor
does a British teacher at a Bronx homeless shelter. "Being a qualified, caring,
competent and committed individual," reads the woman's INS rejection letter,
doesn't show "that her contributions are significantly above any other member
of the education profession" or that they would "provide a prospective benefit
to the U.S."

            A NYT front-pager brings word that just eight days after salvaging
his career from a controversy over his lifting material from a book, longtime
Boston Globe columnist Mike Barnicle resigned yesterday after it was
revealed that there was no evidence two people he wrote about in a 1995 column
had ever existed. The WP and USAT carry the story inside--both
reporting that there was cheering in the Globe newsroom when the
announcement was made. (The NYT may have felt the need to front the
story because it owns the Globe .)

            In the days since The Speech, the papers have been fairly spattered with
editorial complaints that Bill Clinton should have come clean seven months
ago--he shouldn't have had to be cornered first. Well, the same goes for the
papers themselves. Many of them know that they are harboring on their staffs
fiction artists and plagiarists. Today's Papers knows about a few of them,
still drawing fat salaries, still writing with undeserved reputations--and will
print their names here if it comes to that. So Today's Papers issues this
challenge to America's press: Come clean about the Mike Barnicles still in your
midst before you have to.

         
      
   
