
   
   
      
         
            Un-Free Willy

            Everybody leads with Kenneth Starr's sudden delivery to Congress yesterday afternoon of his
report claiming there is substantial evidence that President Clinton, in
his behavior relating to his relationship with Monica Lewinsky, committed
crimes that may be impeachable offenses. "The fate of the Clinton presidency,"
says the Wall Street Journal , is now in Congress' hands. The
headlines at the Los Angeles Times , USA Today ,
and the New York Times
all include the word "impeachment." The Washington Post front gives itself over most completely to
the development, but its headlines omit the I-word. Perhaps quite by accident
or perhaps with full subversive intent, a headline over another WP
front-page story--about the return of a certain movie killer whale to the high
seas--sends an ominous message, though: "A Whale of an Ending for 'Willy'".

            The WP and NYT speak somewhat vaguely of the report's
allegations of perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse of power. USAT
is more concrete, saying that according to a "lawyer with knowledge of the
report," Starr's 445-page effort--shipped over with supporting documents in
duplicate in 36 sealed boxes--flatly concludes that Clinton perjured himself
twice, once in his Jones case deposition and once in his videotaped grand jury
testimony. In addition, the paper says the report finds that Clinton's efforts
to find Lewinsky a job were obstruction of justice. The LAT is also
somewhat detailed, quoting "one legal source" (hmmm...wonder if he's A Lawyer
With Knowledge Of The Report?) as agreeing that perjury is charged, and
elaborating that the charge arises from Clinton's denial of sex with Lewinsky
and for claiming he could not remember being alone with her except when she was
delivering papers to him.

            The WSJ says the report also alleges that attempts by Vernon Jordan
to find Lewinsky a job were aimed at keeping her silent. USAT says the
Starr report sees no wrongdoing in Jordan's efforts. The Journal quotes
"allies of Mr. Starr" as saying that the report includes many heretofore
unreleased details that will "surprise the public." Everybody notes the report
is sitting in a locked House storage room while the congressional leadership
decides how to proceed. The NYT and USAT say the report could be
made public Friday. USAT says this might include Internet access.

            The WP detects "a rising sense of helplessness" at the White House.
The WSJ and LAT report that on the heels of yesterday's apology
session with House leaders, President Clinton will today offer more of the same
to Senate Democrats and his Cabinet. The NYT says Clinton was "sad,
somber and choked up" at the Wednesday session. The Journal says that
ill feeling towards the president among pols is "pervasive." Everybody reports
another Clinton apology Wednesday, delivered at a public appearance in Florida.
The LAT says he was "husky-voiced and somber" for that one. (It turns
out that sex means always having to say you're sorry.)

            There's other news today: The NYT reports that the Communists are threatening Boris Yeltsin with impeachment
if he renominates Viktor Chernomyrdin to be his prime minister (a story first
broached earlier in the week by the LAT ); the WP and NYT
report that government security guards in Beijing brutally hauled away the wife of a jailed dissident to keep
her from delivering a letter of protest to the visiting U.N. commissioner on
human rights. (She was released several hours later.) The WP reports
that U.S. investigators have focused in on a rural truck repair facility as the likely staging area for
the Tanzania embassy bombing.

            And then there's intrepid WP reporter Libby Ingrid Copeland's
tireless 575-word effort to discover things that have the same circumference as
Mark McGwire's arms. Such as: D.C. parking meters, personal pan pizzas, a
two-year-old's head, a twenty-three-old woman's thigh. Things that fall short:
Several male-in-the-street biceps, including those of an unnamed reporter, a
coffee cup. All this and a quote from Louis Farrakhan too. Note to Post
management: check the ventilation in the "Style" section offices.

         
      
   
