
   
   
      
         
            Blacklist and Backstory

            A couple of weeks ago, the
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences announced that it would award an
honorary Oscar to the director Elia Kazan. What was surprising about this news
was the amount of controversy it generated: virtually none. For decades, Kazan
has been reviled as the most notorious of those who "named names"--identified
Communists working in Hollywood--before the House Committee on Un-American
Activities. In recent years, both the American Film Institute and the Los
Angeles Film Critics Association have turned Kazan down for honors that no one
disputes are merited by his films, which include East of Eden and A
Streetcar Named Desire . But this time the vote in Kazan's favor was
unanimous. Reporters looking to reprise the old conflict had a hard time
finding anyone who still bears him a grudge.

            Why have Kazan's enemies
suddenly dropped their complaint? Several articles on the subject have ritually
invoked "the end of the Cold War" as an explanation. But it's not clear why the
collapse of Communism should smooth matters over. Many wars end in a reckoning
rather than in forgiveness and forgetting. A more plausible explanation is
probably that Kazan, now 89, has outlived most of his antagonists and that the
fury of the rest has lost its edge. It may indeed be time to excuse Kazan for
what he did in 1952. But if so, it shouldn't happen because no one can be
troubled to remember or sort out the morality of his actions.

            A synopsis: In the 1930s, Kazan got his start in the Group
Theater, a left-wing theater troupe that was home to the legendary directors
Lee Strasberg and Harold Clurman, as well as the radical playwright Clifford
Odets. For a year and a half, Kazan was a member of a Communist "cell" inside
the Group. He quit after members of the cell received orders to take over the
theater and turn it into an "actors collective." Despite his
resignation/expulsion, Kazan remained sympathetic to the Soviet Union into the
1940s, when he began directing Hollywood films. But that sympathy was long gone
by 1952, when he was called before HUAC.

            The first time he
testified, in January, Kazan took a principled position: He would discuss his
own involvement in the party but not the others who had been in it with him. So
the committee called him back to Washington and put him under oath. Under
pressure from the FBI and the movie studios, he reversed himself. Since the
committee already knew the names it wanted, "naming names" was a loyalty test
and humiliation ritual, not part of a real investigation. There is a chilling,
Darkness at Noon quality to Kazan's questioning by Frank Tavenner Jr., a
lawyer for the committee:

            
Tavenner: I understand that you have voluntarily requested the committee to
reopen your hearing, and give you an opportunity to explain fully the
participation of others known to you at the time to have been members of the
Communist Party.

            Kazan:
That is correct. I want to make a full and complete statement. I want to tell
you everything I know about it.

            Kazan's prepared statement offered up the names of the
eight others who were members of his Group Theater cell. The names included
Odets, who subsequently named names himself, and several actors since
forgotten, in part, perhaps, because they were blacklisted.

            It was not just his
testimony that made Kazan into a Linda Tripp figure of his time. After all,
Odets gave HUAC the same names, as did Lewis Leverett, another Group Theater
alumnus whom Kazan named. But many others who named names did so under
ostensible protest, or later castigated themselves publicly for crawling before
the committee. Kazan embraced his inquisitors. Soon after he testified, he took
out an ad in the New York Times to defend himself. "I believe that any
American who is in possession of such facts has the obligation to make them
known, either to the public or to the appropriate Government agency," he wrote.
"Whatever hysteria exists--and there is some, particularly in Hollywood--is
inflamed by mystery, suspicion and secrecy. Hard and exact facts will cool it."
Kazan made his case more memorably in the 1954 film On the Waterfront ,
in which Marlon Brando plays a longshoreman faced with a choice about whether
to "rat" on the murderous and corrupt leadership of his union. His decision to
testify is portrayed as an act of courageous whistle-blowing, not betrayal or
cowardice.

            For years afterward, Kazan kept his silence about the
episode. "I don't think there's anything in my life toward which I have more
ambivalence, because, obviously, there's something disgusting about giving
other people's names," he acknowledged in a 1971 interview. But he also refused
to apologize and defended his choice. In his fascinating autobiography,
published in 1988, Kazan expresses a range of justifications. He wasn't telling
the committee any names it didn't know; as an immigrant, he was eager to
demonstrate his patriotism; he was faced with a choice of two evils.

            Did he do wrong? The
first question to ask is what the right thing would have been. Kazan might have
stood by his original policy, asserting that while he hated Communism, he would
not assist in a violation of civil liberties. Kazan's soon to be ex-friend
Arthur Miller did something like this four years later when he refused to
answer questions. Miller claimed the First Amendment (right to freedom of
speech and association) rather than taking the Fifth (right against
self-incrimination). This was the more principled stand, since taking the Fifth
implied agreeing that simply being a Communist was a crime. Also, there is no
Fifth Amendment right against incriminating others. Unfortunately, the Supreme
Court had never ruled that the First Amendment could be used in this way.

            With McCarthyism much weaker by 1956, Miller avoided prison
and continued to have his plays produced. But for Kazan to take Miller's stance
before HUAC in 1952 would almost certainly have meant a contempt citation and
time in jail. Kazan would not have made films for many years, if ever again.
For a great artist like Kazan to immolate himself to protect the rights of
lesser artists, or more precisely in a quixotic attempt to protect those
rights, would have been heroic. But failing to be a hero did not make him a
villain. The villains were the blacklisters. Kazan was one of their
victims.

            But failing to be a
villain doesn't make him a hero, either. Where Kazan did go wrong was in
casting an evil he couldn't avoid as a good. His statement that the "facts"
about Communism were the cure for anti-Communist hysteria was disingenuous. The
real cure for anti-Communist hysteria was a courage that Kazan, like most
people, did not possess. But this bit of gratuitous groveling pales next to the
sins of others--both those who remained Stalinists into the 1950s and those who
did not just acquiesce in, but advocated, McCarthyism. For the Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which actually enforced the blacklist, to
reject Kazan for his comparatively minor offenses would have been the sheerest
hypocrisy.

            Some historians have argued recently that new information
makes all forms of American anti-Communism, including even McCarthyism, look
better in hindsight. They contend that the so-called Venona intercepts, a few
of which have been released, show definitively not only that Alger Hiss and the
Rosenbergs were spies but also that there was far more Soviet string-pulling
behind American Communism than anyone ever knew. But none of these revelations
improves the case that Hollywood Communism was a significant threat to
democracy. Murray Kempton got this story right in 1955, in his book Part of
Our Time . The Hollywood Communists, most of them screenwriters, were
overpaid hacks, not dangerous revolutionaries. The examples of "propaganda"
they slipped into scripts are few and laughable. The high point of Kempton's
essay on the Hollywood 10 is a list of the folderol the blacklisted
screenwriters actually produced--with excerpts from the glowing reviews they
received from the Daughters of the American Revolution.

            Elia Kazan wasn't a hack, and he didn't try to be a
hero. He deserves an Oscar as much as anyone living--for best director, not for
best human being. Who in the movie industry qualifies for that second one
anyway?

         
      
   
