
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
                
               , Jan. 30
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Jan.
30, 1999)
            

            The cover editorial predicts the imminent collapse
of--guess what?--massively overvalued Internet stocks. That crash, if it
doesn't drag the whole stock market down, could be useful for the economy
because it will "restore sanity" to the venture capital industry. Some of the
big Internet pioneers such as Yahoo! and America Online may survive, but the
Dollar.coms and Buy.coms of the world are surely doomed. ... An article
identifies four reasons that company managers are rich yet miserable: 1)
They're working longer hours. 2) Flatter management structures diminish the
sweet sense of victory that used to come from reaching the top. 3) Job
paranoia: Execs get fired more often these days. 4) Outside contractors are
increasingly siphoning power from managers' "fiefdoms." ... An article
finds "feminism" in an unexpected place: primitive, forest-dwelling tribes. The
women are deliberately promiscuous in order to win more male protectors for
their child. Men, not knowing if they're the biological father or not, assume
that they are.

            
               
                  New
Republic
                
               , Feb. 15
            

            ( posted Friday, Jan.
29, 1999 )

            The cover story argues
that feminists and evangelicals are to blame for the increasingly blurry line
between private morality and public life. Both these newly enfranchised groups
emphasize conversion and consciousness-raising, and insist that the personal is
political. ... The editorial deplores the resignation of a white
Washington, D.C., mayoral aide for uttering the word "niggardly" in a financial
management meeting. The word has no etymological connection to the racial slur,
but new Mayor Anthony Williams yielded to the mere appearance of bias instead
of defending his staffer. ... A piece accuses House Majority Whip Tom
DeLay of tap-dancing around the truth in a now-settled 1994 lawsuit. Accused of
using a private company to carry his campaign loans, DeLay had trouble
affirming or denying his connection to the business, answering with
Clintonesque equivocations.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , Jan. 31
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Jan.
28, 1999)
            

            The cover story examines
the decline and fall of the Italian Mafia, and the Gambino family in
particular. The wiser of the wise guys have gone legit; the dumber ones (such
as John Gotti Jr.) preside over sagging profits and faltering allegiances.
Gotti has even tarnished the mob's Coppolaesque grandeur. The piece mocks his
car (a minivan), his attire (mock turtlenecks), and choice of repast
(country-fried steak). ... A writer finds great disparities among the
different bilingual education classrooms of a New York City public school. The
Chinese and Russian programs provide a fluid, supportive transition to English.
But Hispanic students, for whom bilingual education was originally designed,
languish in a "well-upholstered trap."... A newbie foreign correspondent
describes his training at "hostile environment school," where journalists learn
to dodge bullets and placate their kidnappers. ... The magazine gives
Bill Murray its now-standard Hollywood profile treatment: He's not just a funny
guy who makes funny movies. No, he's a fiercely independent artiste with a
secret cerebral side who takes long road trips in beat-up vehicles. Just like
Sean Penn.

            
               
                  Time and
Newsweek
               
               , Feb. 1
            

            
               (posted Monday, Jan.
25, 1999)
            

            The magazines do the
math on the State of the Union address. Time 's cover story details the president's soaring poll numbers and
the various boosts they've given to his lawyers' confidence, his relationships
with Congress, and even to donations to the Democratic Party. Newsweek
calculates the bottom line on the president's plan to save Social Security: It
promises away a full 151 percent of the projected budget surplus, and would
create a shortfall of $2.3 trillion. ... 
               Time calls Bill
Bradley's nascent presidential campaign strategy "charming" and "insane." In
contrast to the well-oiled Gore machine, Bradley has no staff, message, money,
or following. The piece features what is sure to be a major element of any
Bradley run: a surfeit of tired sports metaphors. ... 
               Newsweek 's
cover story says the labor shortage is emboldening and transforming the
American work force. The Company Man has been replaced by a fiercely
independent gang of "free agents," "new nomads," and "globalists," who write
their own job descriptions, schedules, and rules. But Time 
               suggests that even these bold quasientrepreneurs need to
commiserate around the water cooler. It profiles a new kind of office
superstore-cum-hotel that sells generic office space to lonely telecommuters.
... A Newsweek piece describes (and amply illustrates) how the
men's magazine Maxim is stimulating the Playboy ization of the
genre. Competitors disdain its lowbrow tone but nurse a bad case of circulation
envy.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               
                  , Feb. 1
            

            
               (posted Monday, Jan.
25, 1999)
            

            The annual Mutual
Funds issue congratulates the aggressive and chastises those cowed by
short-term fluctuations. Index funds top the lists, while money market accounts
lag behind. ... A piece argues that governors' offices are replacing the
federal government as the primary engine of domestic policy. In contrast to
trial-blinded Washington, states are using their newly bulging coffers to
reform education, health care, and Social Security. ... The magazine
recounts Fidel Castro's epistolary romance with a Havana socialite: Imprisoned
after his failed 1953 coup, he sent her fervent letters that mixed political
invective with sweet nothings ("there is a type of honey that never
satiates").

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , Feb. 1
            

            
               (posted Monday, Jan.
25, 1999)
            

            An article says that
Mongolia is clogged with a "glut of raw cashmere": Fresh-off-the-goat cashmere
fetches a rock-bottom price worldwide, as supply has skyrocketed (thanks to
capitalism, the number of goats in Mongolia has doubled since 1992). Since raw
cashmere is sold by weight, some suppliers turn to dirty tricks, like plugging
factory-bound cashmere tufts with heavy dirt. So choose carefully among those
thousand dollar sweaters dangling in upscale SoHo stores. ... A gripping
article describes why the potential for surgical error is so high. Surgeons are
human, forced to make split-second choices about conditions they may never have
seen before, and operating on the human body is not a machine-reliant science
such as flying an airplane. Demonizing errors, the author argues, dangerously
hinders constructive discussion about those errors.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , Feb. 1
            

            
               (posted Monday, Jan.
25, 1999)
            

            The editors offer their
own diagnosis of the state of the union. It must be awful, they
argue, if the president's lawyers have succeeded in feeding a dubious and
duplicitous defense to the Senate, the public, and the press. ... Two
other stories, however, are premised on the nation's general success and
contentedness. The cover story explains that morality is no longer about a
pre-formed set of abstract values. Instead, moral standards fluctuate like
stocks, rising and falling according to the practical results they yield.
Examples: Americans value chastity because it prevents AIDS, temperance because
it's healthy, and marriage because it produces well-adjusted children.
... A piece gleefully imagines what will happen to President Clinton's
popularity in a future economic downturn. A slump will expose his "disgusting
betrayal of Democratic principles" and finally cause his supporters to jump
ship.

         
      
   
