
   
   
      
         
            No. 187: &quot;Photo Fun&quot;

            

               I give the caption, you briefly describe the Associated Press photo:
"Protesting the export of trash by New York to Pennsylvania, demonstrators
gathered outside a hotel in Harrisburg, Pa., yesterday to assail Mayor Rudolph
W. Giuliani, who was inside at a Republican dinner."
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thursday's question (No. 186)--" 's Cool":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        Joining a national trend, the superintendent of
schools in West Greenwich, R.I., ordered these turned off during the day.
What?
                     
                  
               
            

            "Moral
compasses."--Jennifer Miller
            

            "Those
lunchroom slot machines that the gambling industry had such high hopes
for."-- Jay Majors
            

            "Really
big pagers, set on 'vibrate.' "-- Dianne Carter
            

            "The
students' libidos, as per the instructions of Wendy Shalit."-- Greg
Narver ( Darren Thorneycroft , Carrie Rickey , Colleen
Werthmann , Charlie Glassenberg , Aaron Schatz , Brad
Spencer , and Chris Thomas had similar answers.)

            "The
natural spark of joy within young people."-- Daniel Radosh (similarly,
David Finkle, Gabriel Nelson [grade 6], Charles Star , David
Ballard , Judith Spencer , Andrew Milner , Daniel Krause ,
and Marshall Efron [Sponsored today by Pedigree Dog Food. "Recommended
by top breeders."])

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            The atmosphere is
soul-deadening, the young are armed and bored, their elders are armed and
feeble, and everyone is in a constant state of sexual arousal. Life aboard ship
is tough; no wonder Navy recruiters have trouble meeting their staffing goals.
Coincidentally, this is also the state of our schools, according to News Quiz
participants. Although a few of you target drug-dealing students, by far the
predominant attack is directed at unimaginative teachers, stuffy
administrators, and private companies exploiting a captive audience of
children. I've never felt prouder to be associated with a group of strangers
identifiable only by their (no doubt spurious) e-mail addresses.

            
               Effervescent
Answer
            

            Soda machines are turned off during school
hours.

            "In health classes, we're teaching students one
thing about nutrition," says Superintendent Robert Hicks, "and they leave those
classes and go to the lunchroom, and we're promoting candy and soda sales. We
should live our words better."

            The kids can still buy cookies, chips, and ice cream
at the school snack bar; federal law does not ban their lunch hour sale at
schools receiving food aid.

            Many school districts,
short of revenue, have made deals with soft drink companies. Average
consumption is 868 cans a year for teen-age boys, 600 cans for girls. Both
Florida and Oregon have begun restricting soda machines.

            
               Last Week's
Shooting Percentages Extra
            

            Friday, New York Knicks vs. Orlando Magic

            (season opener)

            Shots taken: 74. Shots made: 35. Percentage: 47.

            Thursday, New York Police Department vs. Amadou
Diallo (unarmed 22-year-old West African with no police record)

            Shots taken: 41. Shots
made: 19. Percentage: 46.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target:
Spirit-crushing pedagogy.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
