
   
   
      
         
             Kenneth Starr for the Defense

            There he goes again.
According to "associates" interviewed last week by the New York Times ,
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr has been "actively considering" an indictment
of President Clinton while Clinton is still in office. The story, published
Sunday, surfaces at a typically inopportune moment. The Senate is preparing to
vote by Feb. 12 on whether to remove Clinton from office. Assuming that vote
fails, senators will evidently consider whether to censure Clinton or to
approve "findings of fact" that he lied under oath and interfered with the
judicial system. Starr's reappearance is just what Clinton needed to escape
punishment entirely.

            The leak is clearly an
inside job. According to the Times , Starr's "associates," with whom he
"speaks frequently" and "has discussed" the issue directly, have been
researching the issue and discussing it with Starr during the Senate trial.
Starr and his spokesman deny leaking the story. The most charitable theory is
that it came from the "group of prosecutors" inside Starr's office who,
according to the Times , believe Starr should seek the indictments. But
by signaling that Starr might prosecute Clinton in the courts, the disclosure
from Starr's office protects Clinton in the Senate.

            1. It supplies an alternative villain. Ever since
James Carville declared "war" a year ago, the White House strategy has been to
divert scrutiny to Starr, Newt Gingrich, and other enemies of Clinton. In the
past six months, the media and key congressional Democrats have turned on
Clinton twice, first when Starr disappeared from the scene in September, and
again when Gingrich disappeared in November. By leaving Clinton alone onstage,
his enemies forced Congress and the press to confront his shameful conduct.

            Now, just as the Senate
approaches its verdict on Clinton's misdeeds, Starr's "associates" have shoved
Starr back onstage, and Democrats are turning the spotlight on him. Clinton's
lawyer David Kendall is calling for an investigation, claiming that Starr "has
once again engaged in illegal and partisan leaking." Hours after the
Times story was released, Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., declared on
Meet the Press , "Ken Starr is once again running amok." On This
Week , Sen. Richard Durbin, D-Ill., likened Starr to the obsessed,
wrongheaded investigator in The Fugitive . Republican senators groaned at
Starr's gaffe, citing it as further evidence that the independent counsel law
should be scrapped. The discussion of Starr's indiscretion supplanted the
discussion of Clinton's.

            2. It antagonizes the Senate. Democratic
senators were already angry at Starr for going to court to force Monica
Lewinsky to submit to yet another deposition, which she did for House
prosecutors Monday. These senators complained that Starr was interfering with
the Senate's management of the trial. White House aides lost no time turning
the Times report into another cause for Senate outrage. "Starr is
tampering with the Senate trial," White House spokesman Jim Kennedy told the
Los Angeles Times Saturday night. "Somebody ought to tell [Starr] he's
not the 101 st senator." Democratic senators agreed. Sunday morning
on Face the Nation , Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich, grumbled that Starr "or
people in his office are trying to impact this trial. They've tried to impact
it before in a number of ways, wrongfully, irresponsibly." The suspicion that
Starr is scheming to make the Senate punish Clinton provides a convenient
rationalization for doing the opposite.

            
               3. It relieves
pressure to punish Clinton in the Senate. Clinton's defenders have
argued for months that the Senate need not punish him because he can be
punished instead by an ordinary prosecutor and jury after he leaves office.
Starr's gaffe confirms this argument, freeing senators to vote not only against
Clinton's removal but against censure as well. On Sunday's television shows,
several moderate Republican and Democratic senators cited the Times
story as evidence that, as Sen. Joseph Lieberman, D-Conn., put it, Clinton "can
be subject to the rule of law, regardless of what the Senate does. ... A
prosecutor is still free to subject him to the normal criminal law, and it
sounds like Mr. Starr is getting closer to doing just that." On Face the
Nation , House prosecutor Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark., observed with disgust
that the disclosure from Starr's office played into the hands of senators who
say "there's no sense impeaching [Clinton] because he can be held accountable
when he leaves office."

            4. It gives Democrats a reason to oppose findings of
fact. Republicans have been floating a proposal under which the
Senate, rather than voting to remove Clinton from office, would approve a
resolution affirming that Clinton lied under oath and tampered improperly with
the judicial system. Some Democrats have indicated they might support such a
resolution, depending on its language. But the specter of a criminal indictment
by Starr stirs up suspicion among Democrats that these findings of fact might
help Starr prosecute Clinton on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice.
This suspicion may be a delusion or a self-delusion, but it nevertheless
provides an excuse to vote against the resolution.

            
               5. It pits Starr
against Lewinsky. House prosecutors spent weeks portraying Clinton as
Lewinsky's treacherous abuser. They scheduled her deposition for Monday, hoping
she would contradict Clinton's testimony and convince senators that he had
committed perjury and obstructed justice. Instead, the Sunday Times
story resurrected the notion that Starr, not Clinton, posed the chief threat to
Lewinsky. Starr had already forced her to testify for the House prosecutors by
invoking her immunity agreement, thereby implicitly threatening her with
prosecution. Now he seemed to be threatening Clinton with prosecution as well.
Where would he stop?

            The resulting deposition seems legally and politically
counterproductive. According to leaks that appear to have come from Clinton's
sympathizers, 1) House prosecutor Rep. Ed Bryant, R-Tenn., tried to interrogate
Lewinsky about "details of her sexual encounters" with Clinton but was ruled
out of order; 2) another prosecutor, Rep. James Rogan, R-Calif., told Lewinsky
she could be compelled to testify again; and 3) Clinton's lawyers asked her no
questions and instead apologized on Clinton's behalf. Reports indicate that
Lewinsky thanked Clinton's lawyers for the apology and that she responded
carefully and unhelpfully to Bryant's questions, lest she contradict her
previous testimony and get herself into more trouble with Starr.

            For more than a year, Clinton's surrogates have
been calling Starr an "out-of-control" prosecutor. To their good fortune, he's
proving them right.

         
      
   
