
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Even Sewers Need
Cleaning
            

            In his article "," Michael Kinsley attempts to show
why Clinton should not be removed from office. Unwittingly, Kinsley has
provided the most compelling argument why Clinton must be removed.

            Let us concede for the moment Kinsley's point that
Reagan and Bush were at least as corrupt as Clinton. (I think sincere people
can differ, but let's make the assumption for the sake of argument.) According
to Kinsley, the United States has had an unbroken chain of corrupt presidents
for the past 18 years. That being the case, Kinsley should give some thought to
how we might end this plague of corruption. Kinsley's solution is to look the
other way one more time !

            Perhaps the corruption
persists because it is so consistently condoned?

            

               --Everett G. Farr Albuquerque, N.M.

            
               It's Not the
Cover-Up. It's the Sex!
            

            Herbert Stein's article "" is elegant in its
explanation of why he wants Bill Clinton impeached. Mainly, it's because he is
disgusted by the idea of Clinton representing America. Some months ago, in the
article "," he wrote about how much he respected Richard Nixon. Nixon was a
"civil, serious, dedicated, judicious, and highly intelligent man," Stein said.
Stein also did "not feel I have the wisdom and moral elevation to [judge
him]."

            Stein's different
reactions make it clear why Clinton is so hated--it was not the perjury or the
laws of the country. It was the sex and Clinton's refusal to admit his
indiscretions in front of everyone. Such self-righteousness--and the
willingness to cover it up in statements about the rule of law and the
Constitution--appalls me as much as Clinton's lust.

            

               --Viswanath Subramanian Cupertino, Calif.

            
               Save It for the
Ballot Box, Buddy
            

            Herbert Stein's article
"He Has To Go" asks, "Is this the man I want to represent ..." I couldn't help
but wonder whether he had ever wanted Clinton to represent the United
States. I actually did and do want this man to represent the United
States--that's why I voted for him twice. I suspect this is just the sort of
question the technique of electing presidents was designed to answer.

            

               --Kathy Augenblick Cambridge, Mass.

            
               The Presidency
Isn't a Popularity Contest
            

            Herbert Stein's article "He Has To Go" illustrates
the fuzzy thinking surrounding the impeachment proceedings. I'm sorry that
Stein cannot decide whether the president's bombing of Iraq was generated by a
wish to divert the nation. I am sorry that Stein is distressed by the sight of
the president visiting Israel and Palestine. Stein's distress is not, however,
an impeachable offense nor is his perception, even if accurate, that Clinton is
unable to lead the nation and the world. Leadership ability is an issue for the
electorate, which has spoken on two occasions regarding Clinton and which will
speak again in two years (through votes, not polls).

            The Senate must keep its
focus on the Constitution and not on such amorphous standards as
"embarrassment," "reckless personal behavior," or "inability to lead." Thank
goodness Stein didn't include "setting a bad example for our children" among
the high crimes and misdemeanors that would warrant the removal of an elected
president from office.

            

               --Charles A. Trainum Jr. Fredericksburg, Va.

            
               Cut the Forest,
Not the Trees
            

            "Today's Papers" has a very selective interest in
spending of taxpayers' money. The Dec. 31, 1998, column frets that the Coast Guard wasted money rescuing some
rich guys who were ballooning around the world. Not fretting because they were
rescued, but fretting because they are rich. Also, those who tilt a bit to the
left have worried a lot about Ken Starr spending $40 million over five years on
the Slick Willie investigation.

            Put it all in
perspective. The federal government spends more than $3 million every minute of
every day of the year. Why not concern yourself with that startling number
rather than worry about three guys in a hot air balloon or one guy full of hot
air such as Clinton? You should tame the "class warrior" tendencies that color
your commentary, Scott.

            

               --W.R. Lewis Mandeville, La.

            
               Get a U.S. Bookie,
Perhaps?
            

            The Dec. 29, 1998, ""
column says:

            
               In Britain, where betting is legal, the
Sunday Times lists some of the "unusual bets for the next year" accepted
by a leading bookmaker. William Hill has offered odds of 10-to-1 that Bill and
Hillary Clinton would announce divorce proceedings during 1999, 20-to-1 that
the controversial "Millennium Dome" would be scrapped, 100-to-1 that Prince
Charles would marry his sons' former nanny Tiggy Legge-Bourke, and 1
million-to-1 that the world would end in August.
            

            Exactly how would an
individual betting on the end of the world go about collecting their
winnings?

            
               --Justin
Gould Kokomo, Ind.

         
      
   
