
   
   
      
         
            No. 169: &quot;Eats/Wets&quot;

            
               You chew household
objects and drool copiously, and perhaps you defecate or urinate on the
floor.
            

            

               Who are you, and what should you do next?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Tuesday's question (No. 168)--"East/East":
            

            

               
                  "We've been made the butt of a joke in New York--on television,
in the newspapers. We take it not as funny but as something very serious." Who
said this about what?
               
            

            
"Rudolph Giuliani, on his administration. Which is why he's outlawed television
and radio, starting today. Also, he's dissolved the Reichstag. And Newark,
N.J., is looking like an awfully convenient 'corridor to the sea.' "-- Tim
Carvell ( Arlene Hellerman and Bill Cavanaugh had similar
answers.)

            "The
ghost of Andrew Johnson speaks out, in the first person plural, against his
recent bad press. 'Although we may have fired a Cabinet minister without
congressional approval, we never had sexual relations with that woman, Ms.
Lewinsky.' "-- Andrew Staples
            

            
"Blue-collar residents of the outer boroughs, about TV shows such as The
King of Queens and comic strips such as Dumb Bastards From
Brooklyn ."-- Alex Balk
            

            "Sante
Kimes, about her odd child-rearing techniques."-- Larry Amaros
            

            "A
Dunkin' Donuts spokesman, on the termination of the Rugrats product
tie-in negotiations."-- Matthew Cole
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Once, when you were made
the butt of a joke, a recurring punch line on Johnny, it really was serious:
You were finished as a public figure. (See Dan Quayle.) More recently, when you
become a running gag on Dave or Jay, you're merely humanized. (See Dan Quayle.)
Perhaps that's as it should be. Mockability is an evanescent quality; it's the
slip-up, the gaffe, the anomalous pratfall. To joke about such things is the
comic equivalent of scandal journalism, focusing on crime rather than policy.
But it's not their missteps that are the problem, it's their steps. Or as a
former editor of Harper's once said, it's not what's illegal that's the
crime; it's what's legal.

            
               Deep-Fried,
Cream-Filled Answer
            

            As everyone knew, Jack Laudermilk, a lawyer for
Dunkin' Donuts, said it about a photograph in the New York Post of a
mouse nibbling a doughnut in the window of one of the franchise's midtown
Manhattan outlets.

            "Anytime someone laughs at your trademark and what's
going on in your shops, you've been damaged," said Laudermilk.

            On Monday, Dunkin' Donuts
filed suit against the Riese Organization, the owner of that Manhattan
store.

            
               Three Pairs
Extra
            

            Each duo has something in common. What?

            1. Bill Paxon and Vernon Jordan

            2. Princess Diana and Delaware

            3. Japanese Justice
Minister Shozaburo Nakamura and Yankees owner George Steinbrenner

            

               Answers
            

            1. Work mates: The former New York congressman has
joined Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld, the law and lobbying firm where
Jordan works, along with founding partner and former Democratic National
Committee head Robert Strauss. It's bipartisanship at its finest--rich and
powerful Democrats joining rich and powerful Republicans to help rich and
powerful clients.

            2. Money mates: Each is honored by a new minting,
Diana on a 5 pound coin, and Delaware on the first of a series of 50
commemorative quarters. One of them shows somebody on a horse.

            3. Remorse mates: Each
made a public apology--Nakamura for calling the United States a bully, and
Steinbrenner for the way he fired Yogi Berra.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Today's most frequent
target: Rudolph Giuliani.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
