
   
   
      
         
            No. 177: &quot;Them!&quot;

            

               In his inaugural address Tuesday, Texas Gov. George W. Bush said, "We
should celebrate them in festivals, we should enjoy their traditions in our
homes, we should share them with friends." What?
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Tuesday's question (No. 176)--"Wrecking Ball":
            

            

               
                  "It did the Vice President and me a lot of good to pick up
those hammers and crowbars and tear something down," President Clinton said
Monday. Tear what down?
               
            

            "That
twirler's frilly little underth ...--oh, I meant the chains of racism and
homophobia."-- Meg Wolitzer
            

            "The
chains that bind the workers of the world. The president was speaking
metaphorically, of course, about his achievements in estate tax
relief."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            "A
Habitat for Humanity house. 'Sometimes he just doesn't listen,' apologized
Jimmy Carter to the bewildered family."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Lani
Guinier."-- Susan Vance
            

            "All
ideological differences between Democrats and Republicans."-- Daniel
Radosh ( Tom Banker had a similar answer.)

             

             

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            I believe Jimmy Carter
was the only Democratic president of the 20 th century to
convincingly wield hand tools. Republicans tend to be better at this sort of
thing. Ronald Reagan looked at home with a chain saw, although he badly gashed
his leg attempting to read a book for some photographers. Of course, George
Bush was befuddled by a supermarket scanner, which isn't even a real hand tool,
and besides, no one expected him to operate it, just carry the bags of
groceries out to the car. Teddy Roosevelt liked to take a 9 pound sledge hammer
out to the woods and pound a moose into the ground up to its antlers. He said
it impressed the Spaniards. The real purpose of these sweaty efforts is a
display of manliness and blue-collar virtue. For Roosevelt and Reagan, this
meant the conquest of nature. Carter's was a more modest Christian carpentry.
Maybe someday we'll have a true liberal Democrat in the White House, secure
enough in her ideology to put down the tools, pick up the phone, and call a
repair crew.

            
               Hard Hat Area
Answer
            

            At a Washington
retirement home, the president helped demolish a wall to make room for a health
clinic, an activity meant, in some weirdly elliptical way, to commemorate the
life of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.

            
               Republican Response
Extra
            

            Because so many people
turned off the set right after the president's speech, then stumbled toward the
liquor cabinet, clutching their head and moaning, they missed these highlights
from the opposition. If you read between the lines, you can infer what new
measures are being proposed.

            
               From Rep. Jennifer
Dunn, R-Wash.
            

            

               "I know how that knot in the pit of your stomach feels; I've been
there."--Some say the president's wire-tapping measures are grotesquely
intrusive, but apparently the Republicans want to deploy some sort of shrinking
machine that can inject a tiny congresswoman right into your digestive
system.

               "Our country is not in crisis. There are no tanks in the streets."--She
seemed so disappointed. I think what she's getting at is a crime-fighting plan
involving larger, more heavily armed Jeep Cherokees.

            

            
               From Rep. Steve
Largent, R-Okla.
            

            

               "I got to live every boy's dream: playing in the National Football
League."--Actually, my dream involves a time machine, Carol Lombard, and a
thermos of Manhattans, but that's not an actual government policy. Not
yet.

               "It wasn't until after I was elected that I attended a Republican function
where a banner hung that read 'GOP.' I had to ask someone what those letters
stood for."--You'd think at that point, mortified by his own ignorance, Largent
would have resigned. Maybe this signals an interest in on-the-job
training?

               "True liberty and freedom come from
God."--Largent may have mixed up GOP and GOD; he did get hit in the head a lot
living out his dream (whereas in my dream, Ms. Lombard and I say amusing things
to each other in the bathtub and then slip into attractive robes and then the
camera slowly zooms in on the fireplace). I'm not sure how Largent's idea
translates into policy, but I'd look for these words in any bill he introduces:
human sacrifice.

            

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: Betrayal of
FDR's legacy.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
