
   
   
      
         
            No. 188: &quot;Two Bad&quot;

            

               Starbucks and Time Inc. are teaming up. To do what?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Monday's question (No. 187)--"Photo Fun":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           I give the caption, you briefly
describe the Associated Press photo: "Protesting the export of trash by New
York to Pennsylvania, demonstrators gathered outside a hotel in Harrisburg,
Pa., yesterday to assail Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who was inside at a
Republican dinner."
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Self-immolation of Oscar the Grouch, torched by a burning 'I Love NY' coffee
cup. A stunned crowd turns away in horror."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Photo
of screaming, riotous Denver Bronco fans, to be followed by a correction in
tomorrow's paper."-- Bill Franzen ( Jon Delfin had a similar
answer.)

            "In the
foreground, the usual do-gooders, blissfully unaware that just behind them a
phalanx of officers from NYPD's Special Forces division are aiming their
automatic weapons at what they assume are gun-wielding rapists."-- Peter
Carlin
            

            
"Against a black background, an amber-lighted Matt Damon laughs congenially,
wearing an olive-green Prada sweater. Wait a minute--Sorry! Thought it said
'associative' press. My bad!"-- Colleen Werthmann
            

            "This
question is too hard. Send back something that lets me take a cheap shot at the
WB."-- Dennis Cass
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Demonstrations on
television never look right. All the signs are painted the same color, as if
they were done the night before, presumably by that kid who did the prom
decorations for Sabrina, the Teenage Witch . If the marchers are white
college kids, they look like an issue of Archie comics; if they're
African-American college kids, they look like they've been costumed by whoever
did the first few Jackson Five albums. TV demos capture neither the
exhilaration nor the fear, conveying instead the smug fatuity of some
second-unit director who believes social change is for saps; DGA cards are for
winners. And by the way, The Man can't bust our music, but it turns out that he
can repackage it as an NBC mini-series, The '60s . At last, someone has
collected all the turbulent decade clichés in one convenient 37 hour package. I
guess I can finally throw out my Moby Grape albums.

            
               Vividly Descriptive
Answer
            

            A woman dressed as the Statue of Liberty holds a
sign reading "Rudy: Keep your wretched millions of tons of garbage." A man
dressed like Ben Franklin holds a clear plastic bag (of garbage?) bearing an "I
Heart NY" sign. A woman in a ball cap clutches a bundle (garbage? baby?) and
holds a Sierra Club placard: "Protect our Kids' Health and Heritage."

            Friday, officials from
Virginia, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, and West Virginia urged Mayor
Giuliani to reconsider his waste policies. The mayor has not yet called them
idiots. But perhaps he's too busy acting surprised that the NYPD shot another
unarmed black man.

            
               Toying With Your
Affections Extra
            

            The 96 th Annual American International
Toy Fair opened in New York Monday, featuring 1,700 exhibitors from 25
countries. Below, some highlights as described by the Toy Manufacturers of
America press release, and me.

            

               Play Catch Puppy (TM)--Fun or cruel? It depends where you put the
hyphen.

               The Sea-Monkey Aquarium Watch is a tidal wave of fun with real live
sea-creatures that live two years with only minimal care!--We told the nursing
home much the same thing about my Aunt Helen.

               Wishbone (TM) plush, inspired by TV's popular, literature-loving Jack
Russell terrier.--For $10,000 the dog will love your book even more; he's got a
deal with Amazon.com.

               Play the Mutual Mania board game and make the most money by balancing the
risk and reward of buying and selling the nine mutual funds offered, and learn
all about investing the fun way.--Hey, kids, fun investing! Kids? Kids?

               He's cool, he's blue ... and he's better than a rooster! Wake Me Willy
vibrates when he speaks, and has a bright yellow squishy nose that tells you
the time when squeezed.--Wait a minute: That's not his nose!

               RINGO is the ring game for ages 5 to 105 that challenges players to use a
swinging motion to catch the hook on the ring.--There hasn't been a sadder
endorsement deal since David Crosby did that Depends commercial. The '60s are
over, man.

               Christian Soldiers Inc. "Baby Jesus" is the Nativity set that children can
play with--Yes, but does he vibrate when he speaks?

               Mattel: When kids "read" to Goodnight Blue from her favorite storybook, she
closes her eyes, lowers her ears and gradually fades off to sleep and starts to
snore.--Part of its Literacy Is for Losers campaign, "Books: They're boring and
stupid!"

               Doubles Wild (TM) is a new luck and strategy game in which players try to
get three markers in a row in as many places as possible.--And then describe it
to Larry Flynt for a million bucks.

               McDonald's to launch Furby Happy Meals in March (Reuters)--Don't get your
hopes up; the patties are still made of "beef."

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Top target: Gun-happy New
York police.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
