
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Drawing upon her rich experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her
friends) responds to questions about manners, personal relations, politics, and
other subjects. Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries
should not exceed 200 words in length. Please indicate how you wish your letter
to be signed, preferably including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               As 1998 has drawn to a close, I have found
myself in evaluation mode and have felt ever increasingly blue and
bluer.
            

            
               Though I do long for a permanent relationship,
I also have not been gathering moss till the right one comes along. The result
is I have several ongoing, fairly long-term relationships that are basically
sex and nothing more. All these gents are unavailable for reasons of geography,
marital status, and/or neuroses. The problem is, even though there is no
pressure for me to make any of these relationships permanent, none of these
guys treats me very well. I'm not talking trinkets here, either. I just don't
feel warm and fuzzy--more like cheap and tawdry!
            

            
               Is a big
housecleaning the answer?
            

            

               --Confused in the Big City
            

            Dear Con,

            YES!! A big housecleaning is the answer. And Prudie
knows you will succeed because you are so cleareyed about what's wrong. It is
not everyone who can be her own Greek chorus.

            Turn your blue to white: Become a born-again
virgin. Get your self-respect back. Only truck with men you decide are
worthwhile. It will be a new beginning. How insightful you are to use the word
"unavailable." And how wise to want to bag relationships in which the other
person is far away, married, or a filbert. The time has definitely come to say
to all these chaps: Adios, yo-yo. (Translation: Farewell ... you're on your
own.)

            Do begin again, and
Prudie predicts 1999 will be your year. Let us all know how things develop.

            
--Prudie, resolutely

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Growing up, I was taught that a gentleman
precedes a lady when entering a public place (e.g., a restaurant), as a sort of
vanguard, and follows her upon exiting. Is this behavior still appropriate
and/or useful?
            

            
               Please reply
to
            

            

               --Anonymous, via Internet. Thank you.
            

            Dear Anon,

            Your training is still
appropriate. Good manners never go out of style. If Prudie could channel Emily
Post, however, she might suggest that you also precede the lady upon leaving an
establishment, if only to push or hold the door open.

            
--Prudie, precedently

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               What is with all these people who take offense
at social pleasantries? And why are you encouraging them? Salutations such as
"How are you?" and "Have a nice day" are obviously free of malicious intent and
have virtually no semantic content, thus providing no basis for umbrage. Such
pleasantries are clearly intended to be both polite and friendly, and
responding to proffered congeniality with disdain, reproof, or sarcasm is
nothing short of boorish. Rudeness needs dissuasion rather than promotion, as
there is already rather enough to go around.
            

            
               Have a nice day (a
sincere wish, expressing my hope that the reproving tone of my missive will not
tarnish your humor).
            

            

               --John Douceur, Bellevue, Wash.
            

            Dear John,

            Prudie is not
anti-semantic. Au contraire , she is so devoted to language, as it
appears are you, that it pains her to hear empty phrases bruited about.
However, your point is taken that well-meaning pleasantries should be accepted
for what they are, and Prudie's New Year's resolution is to chill when it comes
to banalities. How's that?

            
--Prudie, resolutely

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               As for "Have a nice day," it has the same ring
of sincerity as the robot-voiced "Your call is important to us, please continue
to hold."
            

            
               Approaching an
acquaintance I haven't seen in a while I often say, "Nice to see you" (which is
true). The reply, "Nice to see you, too," can be completed quickly, sparing
each of us the awkward head-swiveling to which "How are you?" "Fine ... how are
you?" often leads.
            

            
               Yours,
            

            

               --Calculating in California
            

            Dear Cal,

            Do you know what Prudie
is thinking? Prudie is thinking your idea is stellar. Let's both make an effort
to say this in '99 and see if we can make any headway with the
"Have-a-nice-day" and "How-are-you?" crowd.

            --Prudie, hopefully

         
      
   
