
   
   
      
         
            Lies, Damned Lies, and Impeachment

            OK, so it's not about sex.
It's about lying under oath, obstruction of justice, and abuse of power. If the
standards used to impeach President Clinton for those offenses were applied to
his two Republican predecessors, Reagan and Bush, they would have been
impeached too. The fact that they weren't owes less to any lack of evidence
than to a sense of proportion and respect for the popular will--or call it
cowardice, perhaps--in the opposition party (the Democrats), which then
controlled Congress.

            The only time Ronald
Reagan ever talked about Iran-Contra under oath was in a deposition for the
criminal trial of his former National Security Adviser John Poindexter. The
deposition was in 1990, after Reagan had left office. He claimed that there was
not "one iota" of evidence that profits from the sale of arms to Iran had been
diverted to the Nicaraguan Contras, that his aides hadn't lied to Congress
about the affair, and so on. All this was demonstrably false. The only reason
he might not be guilty of perjury is that his mind pretty clearly was
going.

            But the very fact that Reagan was never forced to testify
under oath as president illustrates the double standard that has trapped Bill
Clinton. If Special Prosecutor Lawrence Walsh had operated like Kenneth Starr,
he would have forced Reagan, while president, to repeat or renounce under oath
his public lies about Iran-Contra, such as those in his first TV address on the
subject, when he declared it "utterly false" that arms had been shipped to Iran
in exchange for the release of American hostages. This was as vivid as
Clinton's televised finger-wagging "that woman" sound bite, and just as flatly
untrue. Reagan had been at several meetings where the arms-for-hostages deal
was discussed--and, indeed, where Cabinet members had warned him it was illegal
and he'd said he didn't care. If Walsh had been Starr, Reagan would have faced
the same excruciating dilemma as Clinton: admit to a spectacular public lie or
lie again under oath.

            Possibly Reagan was
already gaga in 1986, while still president, though this is not an argument the
Republicans now pursuing Clinton are likely to want to make (or were heard to
make back in 1986). But even before he was officially declared to be losing it,
Reagan benefited from a more general double standard about truth telling.
Reagan and Clinton both are among the great bullshitters of American history,
but somehow Reagan was always regarded as floating above the truth while
Clinton is regarded as wallowing beneath it.

            Walsh's final report concluded that Reagan "knowingly
participated or at least acquiesced in" the Iran-Contra cover-up, which
involved, among other things, Oliver North shredding thousands of documents
that may well have implicated Reagan more deeply. Any Flytrap cover-up pales in
comparison. (The nearest equivalent involves the mysterious
appearance --not disappearance--of documents, none of which has turned
out to be vital, in a White House closet.) Yet Walsh didn't bring charges
against Reagan, or even depose him to squeeze out information or set him up for
a perjury rap.

            The case against George
Bush--by the standards being applied to Bill Clinton--is even stronger. Bush
claimed in the 1992 campaign that he'd given sworn testimony hundreds of times
conceding that he knew all about the arms-for-hostages deal. In fact, when the
story broke in 1986, Bush repeatedly claimed to have been "out of the loop." He
knew we were selling arms to Iran--itself flatly illegal and spectacularly in
conflict with the administration's public pronouncements--but, he claimed, he
had no idea the deal involved paying ransom for hostages.

            Specifically, Bush claimed not to have attended a January
1986 meeting at which Secretary of State George Schultz and Secretary of
Defense Caspar Weinberger vehemently opposed trading for hostages. When White
House logs indicated that Bush was at the meeting, he emended his story to say
he hadn't caught the drift of Schultz's and Weinberger's objections. If only
he'd known George and Cap were as bothered as he was, Bush said, he would have
tried to stop the policy. This was his story until 1992, when Walsh released
notes taken by Weinberger at the meeting, recording that "VP approves" of the
policy Bush claimed to be both ignorant of and disturbed by.

            As president in 1989-93,
Bush did his best to thwart Walsh's investigation. He tightened up on the
release of classified information. A diary he started keeping in 1986 somehow
never materialized until after the 1992 election. And his last-minute pardon of
Weinberger, Poindexter, and others, after he'd lost re-election, effectively
thwarted Walsh's pursuit of Bush himself, among others. No "obstruction of
justice" or "abuse of presidential power" in Flytrap comes close.

            So why is Bill Clinton's presidency stamped forever with
the shame of impeachment, and why does he face premature removal from office,
when impeachment was never seriously considered for Bush and Reagan? Perhaps at
this point Clinton's critics would like to revisit their insistence that it's
not about sex. The only sensible distinction is that lies about some things
matter more than others. Henry Hyde, for example, was quite eloquent back in
the Iran-Contra era about how statesmanship and higher principles sometimes
require presidents to lie and break the law.

            Hyde and others would be
tempted to say that lying to free American hostages and breaking the law to
protect Latin America from communism are more justified than lies to hide a
tawdry affair. I would be tempted to reply that lies and cover-ups intended to
thwart the workings of democracy on an important public policy issue seem to me
to be a lot worse than lies about an embarrassing personal mess. But perhaps we
could agree that David Schippers, the House Judiciary Committee Counsel, was
wrong in his self-righteous pronouncement "Lies are lies are lies."

            Schippers himself told a quick series of obvious whoppers
during that same impeachment hearing opening statement. "When I appeared in
this committee room a little over two months ago," he said (mournful as the
Walrus in Through the Looking Glass ), "it was merely to analyze the
[Starr report] referral and to report to you. Today, after our investigation, I
come to a point that frankly I prayed I would never reach. It is my sorrowful
duty now to accuse President William Jefferson Clinton," etc., etc. Raise your
hand if you believe Schippers a) was feeling sorrowful; b) had prayed that his
months of effort to nail the president would be in vain; c) was being frank; d)
had no settled view on the whole matter even after analyzing the Starr
report, until "our investigation" (whatever that consisted of). And while your
hand is up, would you care to swear an oath that you believe these unbelievable
things?

            "Every time a witness
lies, that witness chips a stone from the foundation of our entire legal
system," Schippers intoned. Or does he make an exception when the witness is
himself?

            Trent Lott, as Senate majority leader, is overseer of the
forthcoming Clinton trial. He was pictured in last Friday's New York
Times actually wagging his finger, Clinton-"that woman"-style, as he
publicly lied to get himself out of a fix. On Wednesday he had said about the
Baghdad bombing: "While I have been assured by administration officials that
there is no connection with the impeachment process ... I cannot support this
military action in the Persian Gulf at this time. Both the timing and the
policy are subject to question." It was immediately clear that Lott should not
have said this. So on Thursday, Lott declared that he did support the action,
did not suspect any connection with the impeachment process, and had not meant
to imply otherwise merely by uttering words whose plain meaning and universal
interpretation was the exact opposite. Lott's sushi-master carve-up of the
phrase "at this time" was positively Clintonian in its boldness and artistry.
Of course he wasn't under oath, so that's OK.

            What made the Lott incident especially enjoyable is
that Republicans all rallied round the obvious meaning of his original
statement even as Lott himself was denying it. Paul Gigot, for example, got
trapped midspin-cycle. In his Friday column on the Wall Street Journal
editorial page, he praised Lott's remark as "an honest, considered judgment."
But how could a conservative Republican senator and major flag waver for the
original Gulf War honestly oppose punishing Saddam for violating his surrender
terms? Easy: "This is the surreal politics Bill Clinton has created. Hawks are
now doves and vice versa." But surely, Paul, you don't really believe Clinton
bombed Baghdad to affect the impeachment vote? Well, no, but, "The tragedy for
American interests is that Mr. Clinton is doubted even when he might be
right."

            Neato. Clinton is thus responsible not only for his
own lies and hypocrisies but also for those of his enemies. No doubt he is
somehow to blame for Iran-Contra too.

         
      
   
