
   
   
      
         
            No. 182: &quot;Reign Delay&quot;

            

               Out of deference to the pope, the state of Missouri postponed something
until after he left St. Louis and returned to Rome. What?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 181)--"Sit Up and Cheer":
            

            

               
                  "This is great news for the millions of Americans who are not
getting enough physical activity," says Dr. Claude Lenfant. What
is?
               
            

            
"Self-loathing burns as many calories as running."-- Beth Sherman
            

            
"Hammocks on sale at IKEA."-- Ellen Macleay
            

            "Meals
on Wheels now delivering not just to the elderly and infirm but also to the
merely indolent."-- Tim Carvell
            

            
"Advance word from the pope's St. Louis speech: Heaven's dropped the chin-up
entrance requirement!"-- Andrew Milner
            

            "Global
warming. 'It's like a giant sauna.' "-- Kate Wing
            

            
"President Clinton is rehiring Joycelyn Elders ."--Greg Diamond
( Jay D. Majors and Peter Carlin had similar answers.)

            "New
Hostess cupcakes come when you call them."-- Susan Vance
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            While many of you made fat jokes, sedentary is not
synonymous with portly. It can also mean frail, although it is tougher to mock
the weak and physically ineffectual, unless you're Leni Riefenstahl or an
old-school gym teacher. In 1968, all sports were square and right-wing, unless
you considered Frisbee a sport instead of its traditional designation,
"nuisance." There were exceptions: Dr. Harry Edwards inspired U.S. track stars
to raise the black power fist at the Mexico City Olympics. But the contemporary
meaning of athletics was reiterated on every Bob Hope TV special, when he
trotted out a herd of college football stars to boost the war in Vietnam.

            Now there are hip athletes--snowboarders, sullen
teen skateboarders, Rollerbladers, dirt bikers--fighting for public space
across barriers of age, class, and hairstyle. This is not merely the triumph of
individual over team sports. Figure skating and gymnastics remain square; just
listen to the music, if you dare.

            It's easy to overstate the new athletics as a force
for social change, but don't count on surfers opposing the president's
ludicrous, Reagan-revival anti-missile plan. And while mountain bikes and rock
climbing are terrific, they've already been appropriated by MTV as mass market
rather than mass movement.

            If sports hasn't turned
into progressive politics, at least it has been demilitarized, rejecting the
boot camp model of recreation, and that means more fun for more people. Not so
bad. So if you want me, I'll be on my bike, pedaling past Leni Riefenstahl's
house, tossing rocks. See if Clinton's Star Wars system can block that.

            
               Take It Easy
Answer
            

            Lenfant, director of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, was enjoying Wednesday's issue of the
Journal of the American Medical Association . Two newly published studies
suggest that performing "lifestyle" exercise--raking leaves, climbing
stairs--can improve heart and lung fitness as much as a vigorous workout. The
studies (noncontroversial, nonpolitical, and in no way intended to affect the
impeachment process) found that while moderate exercise does not burn many
calories, it is beneficial to the one in four Americans who spend most of their
time sitting.

            
               What Is "It"
Extra
            

            Fun with pronouns. Match
each ambiguous "it" with its antecedent.

            1. "If Ford buys it, so
what, and if Ford doesn't buy it, so what?"-- Maryann Keller, easygoing
analyst at ING Baring
            

            A. The farm

            B. ING Baring, the Prozac and bourbon brokerage

            C. Volvo

            2. "If it can prevent
children or other New Yorkers from being maimed, disfigured, or killed, it will
serve its purpose."-- Colleen Roche, press secretary for Rudolph
Giuliani
            

            A. Hiring more police

            B. Hiring even more police

            C. A proposed "dangerous
dog" law

            3. "It's perky, it's
active, it's eating."-- Dr. Dan Wharton
            

            A. Maryann Keller

            B. Insert your own sex joke here

            C. A female, thick-billed
parrot, the only animal ever stolen (and just recovered) from the Central Park
Zoo

            

               Answers
            

            
               1-C,
2-C, 3-C.
            

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: Remote
control.

            
               For Your Dancing
Pleasure
            

            On Monday, Feb. 1, Randy Cohen Week begins at the
online site of the humor magazine McSweeney's , featuring pieces from the out of print
Diary of a Flying Man .

            Open fires prohibited
without proper permit.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
