
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Today's Clintometer:
            

            

               
                  2/8/99
                The prosecution and defense deliver
closing arguments, but everyone agrees that neither impeachment article will
get the requisite 67 votes, and some senators think the perjury article won't
get even a majority. Speculation turns to whether: 1) conservative senators
will be able to filibuster a post-trial censure resolution to death; and 2)
Clinton aide Sidney Blumenthal committed perjury when he denied peddling nasty
stories about Monica Lewinsky to the press. The naive scenario: Rather than let
Clinton escape unpunished, the Senate will prolong the trial to subpoena more
testimony about Blumenthal. The sophisticated scenario: Clinton will escape
unpunished and, in his stead, Blumenthal will be prosecuted afterward.
Chance of removal from office: Zero.
            

            

               For the complete Clintometer and links to all Slate 's Flytrap
coverage, click .
            

            
Jordan's King
Hussein has gone home to die . He left the Mayo Clinic after his body
rejected a bone marrow transplant (to stave off cancer) and his organs began to
fail. Now that everyone realizes how ill the king was when he recently dumped
his brother as heir and replaced him with his son, Abdullah, analysts are
marveling in retrospect at the king's decisiveness, resolve, and composure.
Meanwhile, the media are rushing to suck up to Abdullah. The old spin: Is he
competent to run the country, and will he maintain Jordan's role as Middle East
peace broker? The new spin: Of course. (2/5/99)
            

            
 Washington,
D.C., Mayor Anthony Williams decided to rehire a white aide who had
resigned for using the word "niggardly." The word means "stingy" and is
unrelated to the "N word," but some people had misunderstood it. The aide,
David Howard, had then resigned, saying his use of the word was insensitive;
and Williams had accepted his resignation. Williams now says he "acted too
hastily." The spins: 1) Bravo to Williams for admitting his error and refusing
to bow to ignorance. 2) Howard should take a less visible job because his
rapport with black city residents is crippled. 3) Howard says the episode was
"really not about me or the use of the word niggardly. ... It was about
feelings underneath the surface. ... I used to think it would be great if we
could all be colorblind. That's naive, especially for a white person." 4) Shut
up and take the job. (2/5/99)
            

            
The White
House rebuked People magazine for running a cover story on Chelsea
Clinton. The profile, while essentially positive, dwells on a negative context:
how the Lewinsky scandal is stressing out Chelsea and affecting her personal
life (e.g., the headline is "Grace Under Fire: An intimate look at the deep
bond of love that sustains the Clinton women through their painful family
ordeal"). The White House reportedly tried to spike the story on security
grounds, then condemned it as an invasion of Chelsea's privacy. The spins: 1)
The Clintons are good parents who are trying to protect their daughter. 2)
They're hypocrites, since they've used People and other popular
magazines for publicity about their family when it suits them. 3) Chelsea is
fair game because she's an adult and a public figure. 4) The article was nice
to her. 5) Well, at any rate, it could have been a lot meaner.
(2/5/99)
            

            
President
Clinton presented his 2000 budget . Highlights: a 2.3 percent spending
hike, offset by an even greater revenue hike (thanks to economic growth),
leaving a $117 billion surplus. Clinton proposes to set aside 62 percent of
surpluses over the next 15 years for Social Security. The GOP wants an across
the board tax cut, but Clinton proposes smaller targeted tax breaks (e.g., for
long-term health care) instead. Clinton calls his budget "progressive but
prudent." The GOP calls it more big government. Editorial spins: 1) Clinton
should be applauded for spending less and saving more than the "big government"
critique admits. 2) Republicans are right that he's using the surplus to avoid
adjusting Social Security taxes and benefits so the program will remain
solvent. 3) But their tax cut would only make things worse. (2/3/99)
            

            
An Oregon jury
ordered anti-abortion activists to pay $107 million in damages for
running a Web site that tracks the murders of abortion providers. The site,
called "The Nuremberg Files," identifies the doctors ("baby butchers") in the
format of a "most wanted" list, along with their home addresses, license plate
numbers, and the names of their spouses and children. The doctors' names are
crossed out as they are murdered. The plaintiffs' spin: The site is "a hit list
for terrorists" and is also intended to scare doctors out of the business. The
defendants' spin: The site doesn't explicitly advocate violence against
doctors, and the damage award violates the First Amendment. Legal analysts look
forward to an ultimate resolution in the Supreme Court. (2/3/99)
            

            
 House Minority
Leader Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., decided not to run for president in 2000.
Instead, he will campaign for Democratic House candidates in the hope that
Democrats will recapture the House and he will become speaker. This leaves
ex-Sen. Bill Bradley, D-N.J., alone against Vice President Al Gore. The
official spin: Gephardt is sacrificing his ambition for the good of the party.
The unofficial spin: He smells blood on House Republicans who have antagonized
their districts by crusading for President Clinton's impeachment. The unspoken
spin: He's getting whipped by Gore in the polls. (2/3/99)
            

            
The Rev.
Jerry Falwell apologized for saying the Antichrist must be Jewish . At a
prayer breakfast, he said, "I apologize to my Jewish friends here and around
the world and I apologize to the Christians here for having created any kind of
rift. ... I apologize not for what I believe, but for my lack of tact and
judgment in making a statement that served no purpose whatsoever." The spins:
1) Falwell is an anti-Semite. 2) No, the only reason he had said the Antichrist
must be Jewish is that Jesus was Jewish, and the Antichrist is supposed to
resemble Jesus. 3) So Falwell had nothing to apologize for other than
insensitivity--another triumph of political correctness. 4) If resemblance to
Jesus were the only issue, why didn't Falwell say the Antichrist must be a
carpenter? (For more on the Falwell Antichrist flap, see in

                  Slate
               .) ( 2/3/99)
            

            
Scientists say
they have found the source of HIV . They traced HIV-1, the virus that has
caused most of the AIDS epidemic, to a related virus carried by an African
chimpanzee subspecies. They theorize that humans contracted the virus by
hunting these chimps and handling their meat. The spins: 1) By studying how the
chimps' genes or immune system defeat the related virus, we can learn how to
defeat HIV in humans. 2) By tracing the virus's journey from chimps to humans,
we can learn how to recognize dangerous viruses earlier and prevent another
HIV-type epidemic. 3) We'd better move fast before African hunters and meat
merchants finish slaughtering the chimps in question. (2/1/99) 
            

            
The Denver
Broncos won their second straight Super Bowl, beating the Atlanta Falcons
34-19. The hero was 38-year-old Broncos quarterback John Elway, who passed for
336 yards and ran for a touchdown to put the game away. The goat was Falcons
safety Eugene Robinson, who was arrested the night before the game for
allegedly trying to buy oral sex from a prostitute. Sports writers mercilessly
scrutinized Robinson's errors in the game (notably, getting burned on an 80
yard touchdown pass) and partly blamed the Falcons' sloppy performance (several
muffed touchdown opportunities and four second-half turnovers) on the attendant
dismay and distraction. The runner-up goat was Falcons Coach Dan Reeves, whose
defeat at the hands of his former quarterback (Elway) and an assistant coach he
fired seven years ago (Broncos Coach Mike Shanahan), made Reeves 0-4 in the
Super Bowl. The postgame hype revolves around whether Elway will attempt a
"threepeat" next year or will retire on top as Michael Jordan did.
(2/1/99)
            

            
Family-values
activist Gary Bauer announced he would form an exploratory committee to
run for president. The political spin is that Bauer will be the Pat Buchanan of
2000: He lacks experience in elected office and is too conservative for most
voters (he plans to make anti-abortion legislation a cornerstone of his
campaign), but he will have plenty of diehard donors, volunteers, and
caucus-goers from the religious right. The media spin is that his announcement
illustrates how long-shot candidates milk attention by dragging out their
announcements. (Bauer hinted at his candidacy in speeches, then announced he
was taking a leave of absence from his job, then set up an "announcement"
interview on Meet the Press , then persuaded newspapers to write preview
stories about the TV announcement--all before he had even filed the papers to
set up the committee that would set up his eventual campaign.) The New York
Times punished Bauer's milking of the media by publishing a follow-up story
about how he milked the media. (2/1/99)
            

            

               Saddam 
               Hussein has offered a huge
bounty to any Iraqi citizen who shoots down a U.S. or British war plane,
according to an Iraqi newspaper. The reward for downing a plane is 25 million
dinars, with a bonus of 5 million dinars for capturing the pilot. This is only
$16,000, but in Iraqi terms it is a fortune. (2/1/99)
            

         
      
   
