
   
   
      
         
            No. 181: &quot;Sit Up and Cheer&quot;

            

               "This is great news for the millions of Americans who are not getting
enough physical activity," says Dr. Claude Lenfant. What is?
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 180)--"Three for All":
            

            

               Safer, cleaner, more fun--these are the attributes touted by an
organization's new chairman. What organization?
            

            "The
Shining Path. Now even shinier."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            
"Heritage USA. First step toward more fun: All-nude water slide!"-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "The
organization is Western civilization. The new chairman is Wendy
Shalit."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Union
Carbide, announcing their triumphant return to Bhopal."-- Joel
Silverman
            

            "North
American Man Boy Like Association."-- Brian Danenberg ( Larry
Amaros , Tim Rogers , Beth Sherman , Larry Schnur , Ken
Tucker , Deb Stavin , Molly Shearer Gabel , Aaron Schatz ,
and Charles Star had similar answers.)

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            The big thing is not so
much having lots of good points, as knowing which are your good points and
which are your bad. It's not always obvious. Consider safe and clean. Do people
really want that? Put that pair in your personal ad, and you'll be dating my
aunt Helen (if you're a man) or my uncle Morty (if you're a neat and prudent
gay man) or my uncle Herb (if you're a straight woman and his mother, my
great-aunt Selma, says it's OK). You don't want that; you want to be the sort
of person who attracts the sort of person who wants dangerous and dirty. (But
let's not bring up my cousins.) When enlistment rates are down, Army recruiters
panic and misconstrue their points. You don't attract ferocious soldiers by
promising above average pay and, some day, a fine pension. Warriors want
challenge--terrible pay, miserable conditions. Henry V would have inspired no
one on St. Crispin's day by declaiming:

            

               We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;

               For he today, so safe and clean with me

               Shall be my brother.

            

            Today, most historians believe that the Battle of
Agincourt was more fun than Aunt Selma.

            And that's the act I
would have done at the Concord Hotel if they just could have hung on one more
season, and if Buddy Hackett's lawyers had stayed off my back. Safe, clean,
fun.

            
               Conventional
Answer
            

            The New York City Convention and Visitors
Bureau.

            New chairman, Tim Zagat,
announced that his first act will be to change the name of the organization to
"NY & Company," presumably to make it clear whose interests the city will
continue to serve.

            
               Kids Corner
Extra
            

            Who Am I? Can you identify someone from very little
hard evidence, just like a real policeman?

            
               Clues
            

            1. I like to stay in a safe-deposit box, a freezer,
or between the pages of a Bible.

            2. I have extraordinary strength, use an unknown
language, and have an aversion to God.

            3. I'm doing something "more intimate, more
personal"; I've "stripped away the theater"; and "if the public could see it,
they would demand that we do it more, not less."

            

               Solutions
            

            1. I'm an infant DNA sample.

            Nine Florida hospitals now offer to take blood
samples from newborns, to help with prompt identification if the child is
eventually murdered. The hospitals recommend that the blood sample, dripped
onto a special card, be stored by the parents in the above-mentioned
places.

            2. I am a Swedish gym teacher.

            Or I am possessed by the devil. The Vatican's new,
revised guide to exorcism, "De Exorcismis et Supplicantionibus Quibusdam,"
lists these three warning signs but cautions that exorcists "must not consider
people to be vexed by demons who are suffering from some psychic illness."

            3. I'm a senator meeting in closed session, dancing
around in my underwear.

            Comments, in order, came
from Sen. John Kerry, Sen. Chuck Hagel, Sen. Gordon Smith. The part about the
underwear probably isn't true, but how can we be sure?

            
               Race
Results
            

            Win: NAMBLA.

            Place: IOC.

            (Time to merge? And of
course by "merge" I mean form a single organization able to more efficiently
serve the needs of all its constituents.)

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
