
   
   
      
         
            Cold Comforts

            Years ago, when he was
still a film critic, Paul Schrader wrote an evocative study of the directors
Ozu, Bresson, and Dreyer that he called Transcendental Style in Cinema .
How odd that the style of Schrader's new movie, Affliction , is as
torturously untranscendent as a work of cinema can get. Maybe that's the point:
The tragedy is the protagonist's inability to transcend his terrible
upbringing. Based on a grim novel by the Baron of Bleak, Russell Banks, and set
in a frigid town in northern New Hampshire, Affliction tells the story
of Wade Whitehouse (Nick Nolte), a part-time police officer and full-time
flunky, who's constitutionally unequipped to survive a succession of personal
and professional crises. Wade can't get on his preadolescent daughter's
wavelength and compensates by suing his ex-wife (Mary Beth Hurt) for custody.
Then his mother dies (he finds her in bed, semi-frozen), and he ends up caring
for his elderly father (James Coburn), a stuporous and abusive drunk. Grainy,
home-movielike flashbacks show Coburn taunting the boy for being a sissy and
then beating him senseless when he tries to fight back.

            When a wealthy Boston
union leader is killed in an apparent hunting accident, Wade has a hunch that
the man was murdered. Who done it? Either the only witness, Wade's buddy Jack
(Jim True), or a third party--perhaps at the behest of the town's capitalist
overlord (Holmes Osborne). Late at night, Wade drinks and holds forth on his
suspicions in a low rasp over the phone to his younger brother, Rolfe (Willem
Dafoe), a Boston academic who subtly feeds the flames of Wade's alienation. "I
get to feeling like a whipped dog," says Wade. "Someday I'm gonna bite
back."

            A ffliction is an affectless piece of moviemaking. It
features frozen landscapes, gray skies, mud-spattered cars, and long,
protracted shots of people walking in and out of buildings that seem to have
turned themselves inward to escape the cold. Nothing expresses anything. For
much of the film, you can't decide whether the murder plot is a product of
Wade's escalating paranoia or if Schrader is just inept at shaping a whodunit.
As it turns out, the vagueness and even the infelicities are part of Schrader's
design. The film is uncompromising, all of a piece, its desolateness unleavened
by incidental pleasures. Not a whodunnit at all, it's more like a postmodern
western, the parable of an unruly patriarch driven to madness by a long line of
unruly patriarchs before him; an impotent vigilante in search of
something--anything--to shoot.

            Wade lives on the edge of
his emotions--he has no perspective to retreat to even in a crisis. OK, I can't
take credit for that line. It's from Rolfe's literary narration, which is
helpful in clarifying people's motives but ultimately annoying, since only an
inexpert storyteller needs that much pompous clarification. It doesn't help
that the waxen, bug-eyed Dafoe inhabits a different universe from the other
actors, an effect that Schrader intended but that would have worked better with
someone else--Dafoe always acts as if he has beamed down from a Martian theater
troupe. He ends up embodying only the movie's numbing obviousness.

            Nolte embodies its volcanic undercurrents, and he keeps
Affliction off life support. Like Wade, he's a heavyweight too big and
too unstable for the room. The sagging flesh on that square head encases small,
babyish features, and the belching sounds that come out of that barrel chest
are like an infant's squalls after a thousand shots of bourbon and 10 times
that many cigarettes. Nolte's eyes are slits in dough, and his huge gestures
might be an attempt to compensate for their tininess. Part of what Nolte
conveys is the struggle of a clay man to convey a lot of elusive thoughts--a
hopeless prospect that only leads to rage and despair. At one point, he grabs
and twists his face into a Munchian scream. Wade, it turns out, has a
horrendous toothache, but Nolte isn't playing the physical pain. He's playing
the metaphor--the toothache as existential agony.

            Not too many actors could have embodied this
titan's dominating father, but Coburn is Saturn-like in his awfulness. At once
lethargic and vicious, he is roused from his decrepitude only by the prospect
of inflicting discomfort or pain. When Wade's girlfriend Margie (Sissy Spacek)
confronts him about a crude remark, he fixes her with a leer while licking salt
off the back of his hand--a gesture more wolfishly obscene than anything he
could say. We know why she packs her bags after that and could have done
without Dafoe's concluding lines about the lives of boys and men beaten by
their fathers whose capacity for love and hope has been destroyed at birth.

            Perhaps I'd have
responded more fully to Affliction if it had been in Swedish. In movies
such as Winter Light (1963), we give Ingmar Bergman the benefit of the
doubt because he grew up with 20 hour nights, herring, and Strindberg.
Dyspeptic storytelling is in his blood. The first time I saw Affliction ,
it struck me as both arid and pretentious; the second, arriving with no
narrative expectations, I found myself more tolerant of the pacing and more
drawn in by the performances. If you don't have the luxury of seeing the movie
twice, you'd do well to leave your hopes for a good thriller at the
door--unless the thrill you seek is that of a great, gutsy actor on the high
wire.

            Sam Peckinpah might have been fortunate in croaking before
he could realize his dream of bringing Max Evans' post-World War II western
novel The Hi-Lo Country to the screen. This is another of those Last of
the Cowboys sagas, with the young rancher-narrator, Pete, falling under the
spell of an embodiment of the Old West, here a character called Big Boy. He
also falls in love with a married woman, Mona, the embodiment of Sex--the kind
of woman who sends men into spasms of uncontrollable lust, such that they'd
kill their good buddies or drink themselves into an early grave. When Big Boy
and Mona start doing the wild thing, Pete finds himself pulled in two different
directions, neither especially interesting. Mixed in with this is a lot of
elegiac folderol about herding the old-fashioned way, on horseback, rather than
in trucks or boxcars.

            If Peckinpah had made this movie it might have had
some of the ingratiating rowdiness of his The Ballad of Cable Hogue
(1970) or Junior Bonner (1972). But Brit Stephen Frears directs in a
distanced and self-consciously classical style. He keeps the horizon line at
the center of the frame, so that the movie's point of view seems static even
when the images are gorgeously evocative. It's pretty, but it's all at arm's
length, with an aura of doom that palls our enjoyment of even the picture's
well-staged fisticuffs and bronco busting.

            As Big Boy, Woody
Harrelson is a pop-eyed cartoon, but I admit to finding his hamminess--and his
pronunciation of such phrases as "You scum-suckin' dawgs"--hugely entertaining.
Less companionable is Billy Crudup's Pete, whose high-arched cheekbones are
emblems of the movie's frozen classicism. But what sinks The Hi-Lo
Country is Patricia Arquette's Mona, who's supposed to convey sleepy
sensuality but seems merely to be on Quaaludes. Whatever surprises Arquette
might once have had are long gone; the only thing mysterious about her is those
long, distracting fangs.

            Annette Bening, on the verge of becoming a major actress
before she got sucked into Warren Beatty's orbit, burned up on entry. But she's
astonishingly vivid in her new film, In Dreams . It's a poetic but
ultimately disappointing stab at expressionistic horror, courtesy of Neil
Jordan ( The Crying Game , 1992). Bening plays a children's book author
plagued by dreams of little girls being lured away by a big, bad wolf in human
form. No student of the genre will be surprised to learn that she's established
some kind of psychic link to a serial killer (Robert Downey Jr.). Besides
Bening, the film's chief interest is the unmatched intensity that Jordan brings
to her visions, which are both lyrical and ghastly, and so frightening that
it's hard to imagine how the movie can deliver a demon worthy of them. It
can't, of course, which is the problem with mainstream horror pictures: The
more deliriously abstract and unhinged their imagery, the more of a clunk there
is when the evil actually materializes and the genre conventions kick in.

            Bening has one amazing
scene. In despair, she slashes her wrists and ends up in a hospital, where she
attempts to explain her bond with the killer to a psychiatrist (Stephen Rea,
with an incongruous New York accent). Both haggard and elfin, she moves in and
out of sanity, now distraught with grief, now giddy with superior insight.
Someone else made her trash her house and scrawl imprecations on the walls, but
cutting her wrists, she says, giggling, was all her own work. Bening plays the
scene on a cascade of emotion, so that she really seems to be speaking from a
different world. In Dreams betrays her supernatural brilliance. The last
half-hour is like a séance after the ghost has left. Everyone's at the table
still trying to get worked up, but the spell has been irreparably broken.

            I want to thank critic Michael Sragow for encouraging me to
catch the commercial flop Babe: Pig in the City before the movie ended
its nightmarishly brief run in theaters. (Sragow unfashionably named it the
best film of the year in SF Weekly .) You could wait for video, but if
you can find Pig in the City playing anywhere on a big screen--an hour
away, in a strip mall, only at 2 p.m., in the middle of a blizzard--see it,
because you'd have to go back to the silents to find its like visually, and no
silent picture could have had this kind of soundtrack. Directed by George
Miller, the movie is in a different league from its unassuming predecessor. The
talking animals and discombobulated cityscapes are so exquisite that I started
to snivel about 10 minutes in and more or less kept it up for the next hour and
a half. This is my candidate for the most overlooked big budget film of the
decade, maybe of the century. Pearls before swine, indeed.

         
      
   
