
   
   
      
         
            No. 184: &quot;Post-Game Blame&quot;

            
               Fill in the blank
on one Atlanta Falcon's analysis of his team's Super Bowl loss. "Instead of
getting mentally ready for the Broncos, we were ___________."
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Tuesday's question (No. 183)--"Three Times To":
            

            
               The answer, from
Richard Clarke, the president's counterterrorism coordinator, is: "To extort
us, to intimidate us, to get us to abandon our foreign policy."
            

            

               What's the question?
            

            "Why do
black college students play their big, expensive stereos so loud around

                  Slate
                staffers?"-- Katha Pollitt
            

            "Why
are so many of the Iraqi people starving to death?"-- Matt Sullivan
            

            "Can
you give examples of a direct object in an infinitive phrase?"-- Brooke
Saucier
            

            
"There's no question. This is an excerpt from the voice-over credo read in the
opening credits for the new UPN series Star Trek: Pitiful Helpless
Giant , starring former Secretary of State George Shultz."-- Greg
Diamond
            

            "Why
would Michael Flatley threaten to perform an all-nude version of
Riverdance ?"-- Steven Davis
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Which aspect of our
foreign policy does Richard Clarke most fear will be abandoned--standing around
while civilians are slaughtered in Rwanda or standing around while civilians
are slaughtered in Kosovo? Or does Clarke burn to preserve our more activist
policy, promoting the suffering of Iraqi civilians? Perhaps when the unworkable
but stylishly nostalgic Star Wars anti-missile system is deployed, a part of
President Clinton's request for the biggest increase in the military spending
in decades, Clarke will lose his fear of abandonment. Or maybe he should switch
to chamomile tea.

            
               All Too Hackable
Answer
            

            Why would cyberterrorists want to assault America's
911 system, inquired New York Times reporter Tim Weiner.

            "It's as bad as being attacked by bombs," says
Clarke, with the characteristic enthusiasm that once fueled his psychological
war efforts against Libya. Clarke's 1986 plan included setting off scary sonic
booms near Muammar Qaddafi to ... well, scare him. The plot collapsed when
Clarke's sponsors in the Reagan White House got caught planting lies in the
Wall Street Journal about Libyan support of terrorism.

            Currently working out of
Oliver North's old office, Clarke maintains a lighthearted attitude toward the
law that has not discouraged President Clinton from expanding counterterror
activities into an $11 billion a year endeavor.

            
               Civil Disobedience
Extra
            

            Match the police response
to the demonstration.

            
               Riot
Police
            

            A. Police fire tear gas.

            B. Soldiers fire tear gas.

            C. Police throw tear gas grenades, pound nightsticks
on shields.

            D. Police use tear gas, batons, water canon.

            E. Police fire rubber-coated steel pellets.

            F. Troops brandish Galil assault rifles; vigilantes
use rifles, pistols, machetes to kill 45 suspected looters.

            G. Police use attack
dogs, pepper spray, fire hoses.

            

               Demonstrators
            

            1. In Romania, stone throwing coal miners march
toward Bucharest.

            2. In Kenya, students protesting unrestrained
development plant trees in the Kauru forest.

            3. In Palestine, after a funeral for a youth killed
by a rubber-coated steel pellet, rioters hurl stones and firebombs at Israeli
police.

            4. In Armenia, Columbia, rioters fight for relief
supplies.

            5. In the United States, fans in Grand Junction,
Colo., celebrate the Broncos' victory.

            6. In the United States, Broncos fans in Greeley,
Colo., pelt cops with rocks and bottles.

            7. In the United States,
Denver fans celebrate a Super Bowl win by overturning cars, breaking windows,
setting fires.

            

               Answers
            

            
               A-6,
B-1, C-7, D-2, E-3, F-4, G-5.
            

            
               Race
Results
            

            Replies referring to actual events in the world:
23.

            Replies referring to movies, television, etc.:
14.

            Ambiguous replies: 3.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
