
   
   
      
         
            Picasso.com

            The business press played
the birth announcement of sothebys.com last month as another story about the
frenzy for e-commerce. The snooty British auction house, founded in 1744, was
going to remodel itself after eBay, the 24 hour electronic garage sale! Out the
window went centuries of snobbery, mystique, and pretension. Up, up went
Sotheby's stock, on the basis of a Web site that didn't yet exist and that
wouldn't be selling anything for six months.

            But the dotcomming of
Sotheby's is about more than a fusty old company chasing fresh loot. It's a
harbinger of the dramatic transformation that's about to sweep the entire
business of buying and selling rare and precious things. The market for art,
which has long behaved very differently from markets for other kinds of goods,
is about to be transformed by the irresistible force of the Internet. The
upscaling of the online auction fad is one aspect of this change, but perhaps
only a small part of it.

            The trade in art has always been anomalous in economic
terms. What's unusual about the business is its secretiveness. Vendors of most
other kinds of goods--household appliances, cut-up chicken parts, and
condominiums--generally advertise what they have for sale and how much it
costs. Transparency benefits consumers, who can compare prices, features, and
quality. If you want to buy a 19 inch color television set, you start by
checking the newspaper for advertised prices. In markets where price
comparisons aren't easily available--Oriental rugs or new cars--buyers are at a
conspicuous disadvantage. The buying experience is unpleasant because consumers
suspect they're being fleeced. Market secrecy tends to break down, because
sellers have to reveal their prices if their competitors do. In recent years,
this has happened with cars and even Persian carpets.

            In the art world,
however, secrecy has survived. Art dealers seldom advertise prices and
sometimes won't even quote them if they're not convinced a buyer is on the
hook. There was an outcry among gallery owners a few years ago, when New York
passed a law requiring them to post prices for works that are actually on
display. Most follow it, but grudgingly. "We're sheepish about posting prices,"
says a dealer I know at a high-end SoHo gallery. "Why give out free
information?" And don't even bother asking what they have for sale. At
Wildenstein & Co., which has the world's largest private collection of Old
Master and Impressionist paintings, not even employees are allowed to know
what's inside the vaults.

            There are a variety of reasons for these
practices--historical, cultural, and economic. Art dealing as a profession
originated mainly in France, where it began its long association with social
snobbery. The art dealer cultivates his aura (and the more mystical aura of the
art object) by casting himself as a connoisseur rather than as a merchant. He
flatters his buyer as a person of taste and distinction rather than a mere
customer. As a consequence, buyers tend not to behave the way consumers do in
other fields. But the most potent factor is the economic logic of selling rare
or unique goods. Comparison shopping is hard. Even in the case of
multiple-edition prints, where a sizable number of identical lithographs may
exist, you're not likely to find them competitively priced in adjoining
storefronts. And virtually everything else is subjective. Which is better: a
green Warhol Marilyn or a red Warhol Marilyn? A 1964 Warhol or a 1964
Rauschenberg? By making intrinsically difficult comparisons nearly impossible,
dealers augment their power over the market. In other words, they can get
prices higher than what they would get if everything were laid on the table
with a price tag attached.

            The one check on the
power of dealers has always been auctions, where individuals can buy and sell,
bidding is public, and prices are published. Selling more art at auctions and
expanding the number of people who can participate in auctions, which is what
Sotheby's is trying to do by holding them online, will bring more efficiency
(if less drama) to the art market. But the real way the Internet stands to
revolutionize the economics of the art business is simply by breaking down the
secrecy that prevails in the nonauction sector of the market. If some dealers
are willing to sell art to buyers via the Internet--and almost all of them are
now fanatically eager to do so--those who remain coy about what they have and
how much they want for it will put themselves at a competitive disadvantage.
They'll be denying themselves access to the fastest expanding sector of the
international art market.

            The chief vehicle for this transformation isn't Sotheby's.
It's ArtNet , on online service which now provides access to the
wares of 700 dealers around the world, and which is adding new galleries at the
rate of 70 a month. ArtNet is the brainchild of Hans Neuendorf, a German dealer
who started the first international art fair, in Cologne in 1967--the first
actual art market. A few years ago, Neuendorf founded ArtNet as a database for
auction results. Now he has turned it into a consortium of galleries offering
wares directly over the Internet. The company is headed for--you guessed it--an
IPO. Neuendorf says he wants to challenge the way the art business works
directly. "This tendency to keep everything secret, to take little advantages
of information, has resulted in a suffocation of the market," he says. "If you
wanted to set up a system to keep people away from buying art, it would be very
close to what we have now."

            The theory behind
Neuendorf's business is that the Web will expand the market not only by
spreading information but also by making art into a more liquid asset. Web
auctions like Sotheby's and the competitor Neuendorf plans to launch in March
should significantly reduce the transaction costs associated with selling
art--for dealers and private individuals. The seller doesn't have to pay a
commission, as in an off-line auction. Gone will be the need for expensive
catalogs, transparencies FedExed around the world, and multiple packing,
shipping, and insurance costs as the work goes from gallery to auction house to
purchaser. Today the sale of a work of art can add 25 percent to the purchase
price and take six months; an efficient online sale might add only 10 percent
and take but a few days.

            There are a variety of smaller dealer consortiums, similar
in principle to ArtNet, which allow buyers to browse gallery stock and view
whole exhibitions online. They encourage the kind of comparison shopping that
was previously impossible in the art world. Not all galleries give prices, but
enough do to allow the buyer the upper hand occasionally. For example, looking
up the artist Chuck Close, I found nine different lithographs for sale online,
including three copies from the same edition of 50 prints titled "Lucas
Woodcut." The galleries offering this print advertised it at shockingly
different prices. The Pace Gallery on 57 th Street in New York City had it
for $5,000. Jim
Kempner Fine Arts, a gallery in Chelsea specializing in 20th century
prints, had it for $12,500. A third gallery, Kunsthaus Schaller
in Stuttgart, Germany, had it for 38,000 deutsche marks, which is just over
$22,000.

            In the art business, old ways die hard. I e-mailed
all three galleries, asking them to explain the disparity in their prices. Pace
responded that they had made a mistake. Their price was $18,000. Jim Kempner
also claimed a misunderstanding, saying that his price, curiously enough, was
really the same as Pace's--$18,000. He subsequently offered to sell it to me
for $16,000. (I never heard back from the gallery in Germany). I'm not sure how
with a pair of e-mail messages I managed to effectively double the price of
Chuck Close lithographs. But you can see why dealers are reluctant to give out
prices: It makes it harder for them to raise them at a moment's notice when an
artist's stock rises, as Close's did when he had a big retrospective at the
Museum of Modern Art a few months ago. In any case, if I had actually been
interested in buying the print, with the help of the Web, I would have been in
a far better position to negotiate a favorable price.

            What, you might ask, do dealers stand to gain from
making information available online if it merely gives leverage to their
customers? The answer is that the Internet stands to expand the market as a
whole more than enough to compensate them for having to compete with each
other. A gallery in Geneva or Berlin can now sell artwork to someone who never
leaves Iowa City. Some even think that while Internet competition may drive
prices down initially, prices will rise as sellers are matched with buyers and
the market clears. Neuendorf, for one, says he expects the Web to drive art
prices through the roof. Judging from what Pez dispensers are fetching on eBay,
he might just be right.

         
      
   
