
   
   
      
         
            How Lying Pays

            According to the Israeli
daily Ha'aretz , there is one politician who rises in the polls for
no apparent reason. Exposing his lies on television has no effect on his
potential supporters, nor even, it appears, on many of his nonsupporters,
Ha'aretz commentator Gideon Samet wrote. The
politician in question is Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, the
"odds-on favorite to win the next general election." A Gallup poll in Israel
last weekend gave Netanyahu a 56 percent chance of victory. "The legendary
phoenix that rises from the ashes is nothing compared to Netanyahu," Samet
said.

            Both Ha'aretz and
Yediot Aharanot reported Monday that Yasser Arafat will now delay the
declaration of a Palestinian state, which had been planned for May 4, until the
end of the year. Ha'aretz attributed this report to
"sources close to the Palestinian leader," while Yediot Aharanot gave it
as the opinion of U.S. Special Middle East Coordinator Dennis Ross, as
contained in a "secret report" from the Israeli Embassy in Washington to the
foreign ministry in Jerusalem. Ha'aretz said Arafat is ready to
negotiate a new date with the United States, with the most likely one being
Dec. 31, the eve of the new millennium. It said Arafat was willing to negotiate
this postponement because he fears that a Palestinian independence declaration
on the eve of an Israeli election would give Netanyahu a boost.

            In Russia, Nezavisimaya Gazeta said Monday that the idea of a
Russo-American partnership is now a dead duck. Washington is angry about
Russia's criticisms of Operation Desert Fox, while Moscow is angry with the
United States for boycotting Russian research centers as a punishment for them
allegedly having supplied nuclear missile technology to Iran. America is
pragmatic and dedicated exclusively to the promotion of its own interests, the
paper said, and it is time that Moscow realized this. "Why beat on a closed
door?" it asked. "Why do it now when the U.S. so frequently demonstrates its
dissatisfaction with the Russian stand on many issues, and is even prepared to
punish us for it?"

            Meanwhile, Segodnya reported that there is no
sign of the documents cited by National Security Adviser Sandy Berger as proof
of Russia's nuclear cooperation with Iran. "The US Administration stated on
January 12 that all documents on 'the Iranian case' have been transferred to
the competent Russian agencies through diplomatic channels," Segodnya
said. "This newspaper tried to trace these documents in Moscow, but failed to
find them in the government, the Security Council, the Federal Security
Service, or the Foreign Ministry. Neither could the State Department and the US
Embassy in Moscow say to which address these documents had been dispatched."
The paper added that Moscow is now preparing to publicly accuse Washington of
defamation. Denying all the American allegations, an unnamed Russian
intelligence official interviewed by the newspaper blamed them on "the current
political situation in the US." The official added, "Some faction probably used
'the Iranian factor' artificially to complicate relations with Russia."

            On the new illness of
Russian President Boris Yeltsin, the newspaper Vremya said his "acute
hemorrhaging ulcer of the stomach" was bad news for several reasons. "First, a
hemorrhaging ulcer is a serious and painful disease, which even younger
patients find it difficult to combat. Second, this reveals the full extent of
the incompetence of the president's doctors," the paper said. "Too many cooks
spoil the broth, as the saying goes. The best doctors in the country either
didn't notice the development of ulcer in the case of their important patient,
or they themselves produced it by filling the president up with pills before
the New Year." Vremya also pointed out that to this day President
Yeltsin remains the only guarantee "against which international financial
organizations would agree to give further credits to Moscow or to postpone the
repayment of its debts, provided Yeltsin promised to make the Primakov
government pursue a reasonable economic policy."

            The main story across Europe Monday was the massacre at
Racak in Kosovo in which 45 Albanians were killed, with many newspapers
demanding steps by the West to bring the perpetrators to justice. In Paris,
Tuesday's edition of Le
Monde carried an editorial, headlined "There Will Be Other Racaks,"
saying that the massacre had been wholly predictable because the West "didn't
even give itself the means to be taken seriously by Milosevic. ... Once again,
the day after Racak, they multiply their warnings and threats, and send NATO
generals to Belgrade, when they should be putting on a show of force on the
ground."

            In London, the liberal
Guardian said
that war over Kosovo will be inevitable if Americans and western Europeans
don't send in troops. "This will almost certainly have to be a NATO rather than
a United Nations operation, as in Bosnia," the Guardian said. "It will
especially be a test for the British and French governments, and of their new
understanding on security matters, since the United States is unlikely to be
willing to contribute more than a token number of ground troops."

            The conservative Daily Telegraph
also argued for a tough line, saying that "the atrocity cannot
be allowed to go unpunished" and that if the culpability of the Serb police was
established, "Milosevic should face indictment as the commander-in-chief of the
Yugoslav security forces, with ultimate responsibility for their actions. ...
As for stopping the killing, only drastic measures are likely to work, such as
deployment of a fully armed NATO deterrent force, as is being proposed in some
quarters of Congress."

            In an editorial Monday
devoted to the Clinton impeachment, the Times of London said
that only a confession by the president that he had lied under
cross-examination could bring the trial to a swift end. But instead he will
continue to rely on public opinion to keep his jurors from convicting him, and
in his State of the Union message will "propose scores of popular
measures designed to secure poll ratings, even if they have no chance of
entering law." The editorial continued, "He is rightly confident that that by
such means he can maintain himself in power. But he should also be concerned
about his reputation. Martin Luther King, whose memory Americans celebrate
today, once asserted: 'On truth there can be no ambiguity, on justice no
compromise.' "

             

         
      
   
