
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Today's Clintometer:
            

            

               
                  1/29/99
                Along party lines, the Senate kills a
Democratic plan for the rest of the trial (skip the witnesses and forbid
videotaping of their testimony) and passes a Republican plan (witnesses,
videotaping, and likely completion of the trial by Feb. 12, with the option of
a majority vote to find Clinton guilty on the facts but not remove him from
office). Democrats say the guilty-without-removal verdict is unconstitutional.
The conventional media spin: It's a partisan meltdown. The conspiratorial spin:
Both sides are faking a partisan meltdown so they can each look good to their
respective constituencies.. Chance of removal from office:
Zero.
            

            

               For the complete Clintometer and links to all Slate 's Flytrap
coverage, click .
            

            
The United
States is worrying about the future of Jordan. King Hussein , who has
brokered key peace efforts between Israel and Arab nations for decades, has
suffered a relapse of lymphatic cancer. Everyone expects him to die soon. A few
days ago, he flew home, dismissed his brother, Prince Hassan, as his successor
and replaced him with the king's son, Prince Abdullah. The king accused Hassan
and his followers of political intrigue. Supporters of the move say Abdullah
will make a more stable leader because, unlike Hassan, he has solid ties to the
military and to Jordan's Palestinian majority. Critics say Hassan is older and
wiser and an established economic reformer, whereas Abdullah lacks political
and economic experience. Some think Hussein has lost his mind. Everyone hopes
Abdullah lives up to his father's legacy. (1/29/99)
            

            
Mayor Anthony
Williams of Washington, D.C., accepted the resignation of an aide for using the
word "niggardly ." Williams is black; the aide, David Howard, is white.
Full context: 1) "Niggardly" means stingy. It is totally unrelated to the "N
word." 2) In a meeting with two colleagues, Howard said, "I will have to be
niggardly with this fund because it's not going to be a lot of money." 3) One
of the colleagues, who was black, stormed out, and rumors spread that Howard
had uttered a racist remark. 4) Howard resigned because although his remark
bore no racist intent, he had failed to consider how it would be perceived. 5)
Williams accepted his resignation on the same grounds. Conservative talk radio
is having a field day with the story. NAACP Chairman Julian Bond says people
shouldn't have to censor their own speech to accommodate their listeners'
ignorance. The spins: 1) This is political correctness run amok. 2) It's about
sensitivity, not intent. 3) It's about black paranoia. (A leading black lawyer
asked, "Do we really know where the Norwegians got the word?") 4) It's
political correctness gridlock, because Howard is gay, and gay activists are
now pressuring Williams to rehire him. 5) Williams shamefully caved. 6)
Williams had to cave because he lacks credibility with blacks, because he's
"not black enough." (1/29/99)
            

            
Gov. Mel
Carnahan, D-Mo., spared a murderer's life at the pope's request. The
murderer, Darrell Mease, was scheduled to die Feb. 10. While visiting St. Louis
this week, the pope asked Carnahan to spare him. Carnahan commuted Mease's
sentence to life in prison but said he still supports the death penalty and
made an exception for Mease only because of "the coincidence of the pope being
there" and "making a personal request that I chose to respond to." Analysts
pondered why the pope's request worked this time, whereas similar pontifical
pleas for mercy have failed in the past. The spins: 1) The pope is teaching
U.S. politicians that capital punishment is wrong. 2) U.S. politicians are
teaching the pope that face-to-face visits and requests for personal favors are
more effective than appeals to principle. 3) According to Mease's mother, "God
was on Darrell's side and God is the best lawyer you can get. He's never lost a
case." (1/29/99)
            

            
Pope
John Paul II made his fifth visit to the U.S. mainland. His
official message was that America must turn away from a "culture of death" that
includes abortion, assisted suicide, and capital punishment. The latter issue
stirred the most controversy, since Missouri had executed a murderer shortly
before the pope arrived in St. Louis. Oddest moment: The pope's comparison of
Christian evangelism to the home run exploits of Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa.
President Clinton joined the pope in St. Louis, escorted him, and pledged that
the United States would pursue "justice," virtues," and "goodness." The pope
clasped Clinton's hands, smiled at him, said nothing about the Lewinsky
scandal, and focused on policy instead. Reporters marveled anew at Clinton's
ability to change the subject, milk world icons for their moral stature, and
repeatedly seduce the country. (1/27/99)
            

            
The Supreme
Court ruled that the Census Bureau could not use statistical
sampling to adjust the population count for congressional
reapportionment. Critics of the traditional method (counting each household)
argue that this method misses isolated and hard-to-track populations, which are
disproportionately black and Hispanic. Since these groups tend to vote
Democratic, Democrats want to use sampling, i.e., mathematical projection, to
theorize as to how many people the head count missed in various locations.
Republicans vehemently oppose this idea. The superficial analysis is that the
court struck down sampling and hurt the Democrats. The sophisticated analysis
is that the court nixed sampling only for the apportionment of congressional
votes among states, not for drawing district lines. Therefore, within states,
Democrats will try to use sampling to give black and Hispanic areas more
representation at Republican expense. The Democratic spin is that "every
individual ought to be counted." The GOP spin is that taxpayers shouldn't have
to pay for two census methods. (1/27/99)
            

            

               Colombia
suffered its worst earthquake since 1875. The quake killed at least
700 people and left at least 180,000 without homes. U.S. coverage of the story
rapidly descended from humanitarian anguish to material cynicism to petty
curiosity. Tuesday evening's AP headline: "Colombia Quake Toll Passes 700."
Wednesday morning's headline: "Quake Survivors Guard Belongings." Wednesday
afternoon's headline: "Quake Won't Hurt Coffee Production." The afternoon story
says the chief remaining worry is not that Colombian coffee will be unavailable
but that it won't be up to its usual quality. (1/27/99)
            

            
The
International Olympic Committee expelled six of its delegates for
accepting cash and other gifts as part of Salt Lake City's successful lobbying
for the 2002 Winter Olympics. Other IOC members have resigned or are still
being investigated. Meanwhile, an Australian official said he gave $70,000 to
two IOC delegates just before the IOC awarded Sydney, Australia, the 2000
Summer Olympics by a two-vote margin. Cynics, noting that officials in Nagano,
Japan, (which hosted the 1998 Winter games) have already burned their
documents, predict the expanding investigation will show that corruption has
permeated Olympics site selection for years. The IOC promises to stop this
corruption by taking away delegates' voting rights and halting their visits to
prospective host cities. Critics' spins: 1) The IOC is corrupt throughout, and
the expulsions are a cover-up. 2) The IOC won't really be cleaned up until
embarrassed corporate sponsors threaten to pull out. (1/25/99)
            

            
The first
hand transplant in the United States was performed. This follows a hand
transplant performed in France last September. Prior to that, an attempt in the
1960s had failed because the patient's body rejected the new hand as foreign
tissue. The rosy spin: Potent anti-rejection drugs now make it possible to
prevent the body from rejecting a new hand. The grim spin: The anti-rejection
drugs can cause infection and cancer, and since a hand isn't an essential
organ, it isn't worth that risk. (1/25/99)
            

         
      
   
