
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Blacks in
Cadillacs
            

            Hey, that was real funny when that computer use at
historically black colleges may be about half of that at elite colleges because
the black students prefer to spend their money on "hot cars and loud stereos."
Too bad the remark is also racist.

            When I say that I don't mean that Shuger is a white
supremacist. But I do mean he shows some symptoms that are still common among
well-educated whites. He feels entitled to interpret a politically charged
question of racialized disparity through one experience he had with blacks. He
doesn't seem to have enough experience with black folks in or out of college to
know that he can't extrapolate black college student behavior from the black
spring break celebration "Freaknik." He fails to grant black college students
the same assumption he might grant whites--that affluent Freaknik partiers are
a small subset of college students. He doesn't assume that serious students can
party at Freaknik for a few days without damaging their academic achievements,
or that Freaknik says nothing at all about those achievements. He doesn't
assume that, as with whites, black students with enough money for expensive
stereos usually also have computers, and that black students without money for
computers usually don't have expensive car stereos or even cars. In short, he
overlooks systematic, statistically verifiable inequalities between black and
white, poor and affluent, non-elite and elite college students in favor of a
favorite "culture of poverty" anecdote. It's not so different from the old way
of discrediting evidence of black poverty or segregation by saying, "look,
blacks in Cadillacs."

            Is there any truth in
the Freaknik anecdote? A recent study headed by Richard Flacks, a sociologist
at U.C. Santa Barbara, suggests that partying and academic apathy increase in
direct proportion to family income, that whites party more in college than any
other racial group, and that students who had to "sacrifice" to attend college
spend the most time on their academics (see the Chronicle of Higher
Education , Nov. 25, 1998). If affluent students gave their computers to
poorer ones they would get a lot more use. It's only in Shuger's world that
they trade Apple in for Pioneer.

            -- Christopher
Newfield
            

            Associate professor

            Department of English

            
University of California, Santa Barbara, Calif.

            
               A Private
Opinion
            

            Re Scott Shuger's idiotic statement on black
colleges. Don't you realize that these are mostly private institutions!
Many of them are quite elite in their own right. Think of Spike Lee at
Morehouse College. Why would you assume that this comment has to do with
African-Americans anyway? I teach at a school with many poor whites and
Latinos, many of whom can't afford home computers or did not learn how to use
them in high school. We do provide access to them here, but there is initial
resistance.

            Try to examine your
assumptions about poverty and race before making any more statements of the
type you made today. I was embarrassed for you.

            -- Patrick
Kelly
            

            Assistant professor of
history

            
University of Texas at San Antonio

            

               
                  Scott Shuger replies : The reader e-mail response to this
column is an unfortunate illustration of how race clouds the mind. Contrary to
readers' complaints, I didn't assert anything about any group. The
New York Times item at issue reported that a survey showed a great
disparity in computer mastery between first-year students at elite private
colleges and those attending traditionally black public institutions, and went
on to suggest, via quoting two academics, that this was because of a great
economic gap. My comment was that there was another possibility besides
economics: namely, that black college students might disproportionately prefer
spending their disposable income on items besides computers, such as sound
systems and cars. I didn't say I know this to be true. I merely suggested that
it would make sense to add some questions about this to the next survey. If it
turns out that there's nothing to this, then so be it. What are readers so
afraid of finding out?
            

            
               
                  A comment from
the editor:
                
               Scott Shuger has the rare privilege among
journalists of publishing his work unedited, partly because he is talented and
trustworthy, but mainly because his "Today's Papers" column is posted at around
3 a.m. every day. When I read Today's Papers at a more reasonable hour that
morning, I e-mailed Scott making points similar to those from these readers. I
was hoping that Scott might see things differently in daylight as well. But,
judging from his reply--which, as a Slate colleague, he has the right to
make--apparently not.
            

            
               Just to spell it out: The fact that blacks at
Freaknik drive fancy cars does not prove--or even suggest--that fancy cars have
anything to do with the alleged fact that 60 percent of black students lack
Internet access. The most reasonable assumption is that Freaknik draws mostly
from an affluent slice of black students that is smaller than, and included in,
the other 40 percent. And Scott's
I-only-called-for-a-study-what-are-you-afraid-of reply, it seems to me, is a
cop-out. Presenting evidence X and calling for a study of Y clearly is meant to
imply that X is suggestive of Y. Twice the percentage of whites than blacks
have Internet access--but something like twice the percentage of whites than
blacks probably also drive fancy cars. Should we study whether whites who don't
have Internet access are buying fancy cars instead?
            

            
               That said, let me add
that Scott is not a racist--just a little weak on statistical inferences, like
many otherwise excellent journalists.
            

            
               Ruffed
Up
            

            In the Jan. 20 Scott Shuger's description of
Charles Ruff as a foot-stomping defense counsel for the president is either
mean or ignorant. The man is in a wheelchair, for crying out loud.

            Shuger's description of
Mr. Ruff's emotional remarks at the end of his presentation was also very wide
off the mark. It's best to let viewers and readers decide for themselves
whether what they are seeing and reading is genuine or not.

            -- Thomas
Slinkard
            

            
Wheaton, Md.

            
               Clinton Boom
Busted
            

            My heartiest thanks to
Timothy Noah from "" for having the memory (more than two weeks is remarkable,
according to standard propagandist lore) and the intellectual honesty to point
out that Clinton can claim precious little credit for the health of our
economy, though he consistently points at himself as the author of our current
prosperity. As neither a Democrat nor a Republican, I am amazed at the
party-and-ego-induced conjunctivitis that has given this pathetic president a
mantle of glory as he balances precariously on the shoulders of those who came
before him. Thank you, Mr. Noah. I appreciate your pen.

            -- Judith
Lawson
            

            Essex,
Mass.

            
               Jordan Full of
Air
            

            Hooray for Jonathan Chait. In his Jan. 19 "," he is
right that the continual hagiography of Michael Jordan ignores the damage that
Jordan has done to the concept of teamwork. In playgrounds across America,
young basketball players eschew team play in favor of taking on defenders
one-on-one, dunking, and "taking over the game" in crunch time, because they
want to "be like Mike," as the advertisements say. All this is the legacy of
Jordan's continual selfish play and denigration and belittling of his
teammates. Everyone remembers Jordan's last shot to take the lead in Game 6 of
the NBA Finals against the Jazz, but does anyone remember the series of shots
he missed in the 4th quarter to put Utah back in the game? Why wasn't any other
Bull shooting the ball?

            Michael Jordan is a
great athlete. He happened to come along at the right time--when marketing was
taking over sports and his flashy style of play could be successfully marketed.
But Jordan could have never won on his own. Basketball is a team sport, and the
continual Jordan hype has always ignored that, in the constant push to sell
tickets and merchandise.

            -- Dilan A.
Esper
            

            Los
Angeles

            
               From a Basketball
Fan
            

            Thank you, Jonathan
Chait, for articulating my thoughts and feelings flawlessly. I, too, hate
Michael Jordan.

            -- Erik C.
Troberg
            

            Portland, Oregon

         
      
   
