
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Drawing upon her rich experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her
friends) responds to questions about manners, personal relations, politics, and
other subjects. Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries
should not exceed 200 words in length. Please indicate how you wish your letter
to be signed, preferably including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I went to a New
Year's Eve party thrown by a friend, at her loft. She's a lawyer, and I'm a
semi-starving artist. At one point in the evening I stood up from her couch and
an end-cushion fell to the floor, knocking a full glass of red wine onto her
Persian rug. It was my roommate (semi-starving artist as well) who had set the
wineglass on the floor. We were both apologetic, and the hostess seems to have
forgiven us but, Prudence: 1) What's the best way to try removing the stain? 2)
What's the best way for me and my roomie to make amends?
            

            

               --Butterfingers
            

            Dear Butt,

            Prudie is not a dry cleaner. Had we, by some
mysterious mechanism, been in touch the moment after the spill, Prudie would
have told you something she just happens to know: Pouring white wine on red
wine is the antidote. But this only works immediately after the calamity.

            Alas, Prudie is as up in
the air as you. Do offer to pay for the rug to be cleaned at the finest rug
cleaner you can rustle up. If the lawyer-hostess declines, then send lovely
flowers. If she tells you everything's fine and only a faint hint of color
remains, suggest she tell friends the Persian weavers were famously big
drinkers.

            
--Prudie, spotlessly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               My best friend was
married two years ago, and I was his best man. I was somewhat lazy in procuring
a gift, and in the intervening time my friend has got a divorce and is soon to
be remarried. He tells me that I need to "double up" on his gift. What do you
think is the proper protocol for this situation?
            

            

               --Richard Vagge, Los Angeles
            

            Dear Rich,

            Prudie is so busy
sputtering she hopes she can type! Your friend, the groom, is way out of line.
Double up, indeed. Why don't you respond that, in the infinite wisdom of your
procrastination, you somehow divined the marriage would be a dud, and you think
you will give this one a similar two year trial period?

            
--Prudie, archly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I have but one living relative, a female first
cousin. Her son has three children. The girl has just finished college and
married. During her time in college I contributed $40,000 to the family, most
of it for her tuition. The older of the two boys is now in college, and the
second will enter in the fall. His father wants me to give him $50,000 net to
cover a portion of his tuition fee of $21,000 annually by giving him stock to
that amount plus what he estimates will be his tax liability on the gift. It
will amount to about a third of my remaining nest egg (most went to my
university as a "planned gift," for which I get a quarterly dividend).
            

            
               Recently I bought
insurance (annual premium $11,000 plus) that supposedly will pay nursing home
care after Social Security and employers' insurance coverage are exhausted. I
am 84, in reasonably good health, and my cousin will get the estate after
inheritance taxes. My friends say don't do it, and I am of the same opinion.
What do you think?
            

            

               --Old and Tired of Hassle
            

            Dear Old,

            The beneficiary family seems to be proving the old
adage: No good deed goes unpunished. You were most generous to your cousin's
daughter. Prudie imagines the gift was your idea. To be asked for more--and a
particular amount, yet--seems grasping. Prudie might point out that the group
to which you refer is also not immediate family.

            Security for the rest of
your life certainly comes before anything else. Discussion closed.

            
--Prudie, assuredly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I am a single woman, and I frequent a chichi
coffee shop near my home. This establishment provides four bistro tables, which
obviously fill up quickly on weekends.
            

            
               It is my habit to enjoy my coffee, pastry, and
Sunday paper in the shop when it first opens and to leave as the crowds begin
to come in. This Sunday, as I was poring over my outspread paper, an older
woman came over to me and said, "Would you mind if three of us joined you at
this table?" (!) As I silently looked up at her, she demurred. "Or would you
rather read your paper?" I asserted that I would rather, indeed, but added that
I'd soon be packing up.
            

            
               Prudie, I think you
would agree that most of us linger over coffee, within reason. Lately, though,
a young man has also begun to frequent the shop, so singles occupy two of the
four tables. I'm afraid he appears not to be the type I would approach to
suggest sharing a table, though this issue is not under my control, as he comes
in shortly after I do. If you were I, what would be your policy here?
            

            

               --Kick Me, Northwest of Boston
            

            Dear Kick,

            Prudie's instinct is
yours: An unknown threesome would not be the group with whom I'd want to share
Sunday breakfast. As for the young man, however, here's what you do. Alter your
time a bit (or hide behind a lamppost), allowing the single gentleman to enter
first. Then you come in, "notice" he's by himself, and ask if he is inclined to
have you at his table so that two singles will not occupy half of the available
tables. If he is welcoming, that means you guessed wrong about his
approachability. If he declines your overture, you will have definitive
information that the Coffee Shop Man holds no possibilities ... and you can go
back to the Sunday papers.

            --Prudie, strategically

         
      
   
