
   
   
      
         
            No. 168: &quot;East/East&quot;

            

               "We've been made the butt of a joke in New York--on television, in the
newspapers. We take it not as funny but as something very serious." Who said
this about what?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Monday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Monday's question (No. 167)--"East/West":
            

            

               Fill in the blank. Bernard Salick's entrepreneurial ideas may play in
California, but they'll never make it in New York, says Warren Enker: "Not too
many people want ____________ at 4 a.m., so it's not that great a
gimmick."
            

            "Mr.
Salick to tell them they're pretty ... and smart, too."--Jennifer
Miller
            

            "To be
killed by a former pro athlete simply because you decided to return some
designer eye wear to a pretty, young divorcee."--Tim Carvell
            

            
"Us magazine: Books on Tape."--Larry Amaros
            

            "A
cheese-fondue-bearing Joan Didion at their front door."--David
Rakoff
            

            
"Greased up, shiny little Sushi Boy, in his shiny little sequined
shorty-shorts."--Molly Shearer Gabel
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            That several jokes about
California cuisine mention cilantro is unexceptional (click ). That many jokes
about California's erotic life mention enemas is disconcerting. Are we 5 years
old? Are we English? Are we meat and potatoes men who never get near fresh
fruits or vegetables? No, we're not. We're constantly frolicking about in all
that damn cilantro. We Californians apparently do little else. We eat eccentric
meals and enjoy sex and drugs with our film business colleagues, all of whom
look fabulous courtesy of the surgeon's art. And if technically cilantro is
neither fruit nor vegetable, that's the least of my classification problems. Is
a Gabor sister sex, food, lifestyle, or something more sinister? Is a liberal
president the one who makes the biggest increase in defense spending in a
decade, restricts habeas corpus, guts the protections of immigration law, and
sends weapons to the Colombian army? Taxonomy is exhausting. I could use a cup
of cilantro coffee.

            
               Ontological
Answer
            

            Radiation.

            With cancer likely to pass cardiovascular disease as
the nation's No. 1 one killer, many hospitals are vying for cancer patients,
offering treatments still aloof from the financial restraints of managed care.
Dr. Bernard Salick's chain of 24 for-profit cancer clinics has done well in
California, making flexible schedules a part of its patient-friendly approach,
but Dr. Warren Enker, associate director of New York's Beth Israel Hospital,
remains skeptical.

            (Editor's note: No
response exploited the suffering of anyone afflicted with a dreadful disease;
all targeted profit-making medicine, California foolishness and, of course, the
surviving Gabor sisters, should there be any.)

            
               Implausible
Assertions Extra
            

            Match the hard-to-swallow
statement with the speaker who managed to get the words out without
laughing.

            Statements

            1. "I enjoy his company. I just think he's a hell of
a guy."

            2. "It's one of our favorite ways of relaxing."

            3. "Seductively
appealing."

            Speakers

            A. Hillary Clinton, on hanging out with her husband,
reading about the Jacksonian era in America

            B. John McCain, on hanging out with Rudolph
Giuliani

            C. Stephen Holden, on
hanging out at Star Trek: Insurrection
            

            

               Answers
            

            1B, 2A,
3C.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
