
   
   
      
         
            Do as I Say, Not as I Do

            By way of introducing our
subject--providing for the material needs of a baby--a caveat: Whatever it is,
you don't need it.

            In other words, do as I
say, not as I've done. It is permissible, I believe, to shop like a mad dog for
your first child and, when Daughter No. 1 arrived nearly two years ago, I did.
But when my auxiliary daughter appeared on the scene last month, I learned not
one lesson from the mistakes of previous rampages.

            A sort of shopping psychosis overtakes the mind of a father
fresh from the delivery room. It might be rooted in some sort of primal
hunter-gatherer-type urge, the kind that afflicts most men when they enter a
Price Club ("Of course we need 24 gallons of WD-40, honey. You never know when
they're going to stop making it"). Conquer this urge, and you may graduate the
first month of parenthood without fielding a call from an American Express
security officer worried about "unusual activity" on your card.

            Here, then, a quick guide
to what you need and what you don't. This is, obviously, a subjective guide
written by the kind of flawed individual who actually considered buying an
electric baby wipe warmer. It is also the briefest of guides--each subcategory
of baby products is worthy of book-length discussion. Finally, it is
utilitarian: If you are the sort of person who must have a Kate Spade diaper
bag knowing full well that a Kate Spade diaper bag is a waste of $250, I can't
help you.

            D iapers: Diaper bags are a good place to
start, since they are unnecessary: A $20 knapsack and a $2 dry-down--an
absorbent, washable pad--are perfectly sufficient substitutes. Diapers are,
however, necessary, and I would suggest as a first step the purchase of Price
Club diapers, which come in huge cartons and cost about 25 percent less than
the equivalent number of Pampers. Warehouse club diapers aren't as handsome or
sturdy-looking as "premium" or "supreme" diapers, but even standard diapers
today can absorb the contents of a camel's hump without leaking. Avoid
"premium" diapers that contain emollients or aloe vera, which don't transfer to
the baby's skin. The only diaper worth paying a premium price for is one that
changes itself.

            There is no downside (this pun was genuinely
unintended) to Price Club baby wipes, whose very inferiority make them a better
product. Most premium brands--Huggies, Pampers, and the like--are soaked to an
absurd degree with whatever strange chemical cleansers all wipes are soaked in.
Price Club wipes, however, are packaged with more modest amounts of cleansing
liquid, presumably to save the manufacturer money. Which is fine, because wipes
that are too wet must then be followed up with several dry-cloth swipes, which
can irritate the skin. As for electric baby wipe warmers, one of which, in my
local high-end baby superstore Buy Buy Baby (awful names are a hazard of this
trade) sold for $24.99, I have this to say: As much as I want my children to be
sheltered from the cruelties of life on earth, I think they should get used to
the fact that sometimes their asses will get cold.

            One more note, as we
leave the diaper department: An indispensable purchase is a Diaper Genie, a
brilliant little contraption that is a vast improvement over the open diaper
pail. A Diaper Genie (which generally sells for around $25) accepts dirty
diapers through a hole on top, and with a few twists of a canister, seals the
diapers in plastic and eliminates most of the smell. It does not provide Level
4 biohazard containment--ignore the optimistic "odor-free" claim made on the
box--but it will do in most cases.

            C lothing: Even if you are only moderately
popular and come from a modestly sized family, you will receive, on the birth
of your first child, at least $500 worth of Baby Gap clothing. (Which means
that a gift of Gap stock, rather than Gap clothing, should be far more
welcome.) There are those who decry the style hegemony of Baby Gap, but I am
not one of them. The clothing is relatively inexpensive, durable, and
returnable. The point is this: There are plenty of places to dump $100 on a
pair of awfully cute baby overalls that will be worn exactly three times, but
$100 baby overalls, like subzero freezers and Land Rovers, are a sign that you
have too much money.

            
               Car safety: On issues of child
safety, I take the SDI position, which is to say, there is no such thing as too
much defense spending. Hence the Ford Explorer parked outside, which I would
upgrade to an Expedition except that I live in a neighborhood filled with
Naderite public interest lawyers who would firebomb my house if I drove
anything so offensive.

            Two tons of metal are not
enough to defend your children, however. A maximalist position on safety means
only one car seat will do, the Britax. It is more expensive than the
run-of-the-mill Century line of car seats (a Britax runs above $200), but it is
made of material so hard it would crack your knee if you walked into it, and
its belting system is far more encompassing and elaborate than the average car
seat's.

            H ome safety: Every baby superstore
features a section that could be called the Wall of Death. At Buy Buy Baby, the
suburban Washington store with which I'm most familiar, the Wall of Death rises
16 feet into the air and stretches 10 feet wide, and every inch of the wall is
covered with child safety products, some of which are absolutely useless and
most of which I have bought. (I haven't got around to installing the toilet lid
locks yet.) Obviously, outlet guards and rubber padding for low furniture (the
"Coffee Tables of Death," with which most parents are familiar) are necessary,
but the Wall of Death preys on parental fear. Hence, a product called
"fireplace gas valve safety covers," whose purpose was too obscure for me to
understand, and the VCR Lock, which, according to the packaging, "prevents
child from inserting objects into cassette opening." Another way to prevent a
deadly epidemic of object insertions is to move the VCR. Incidentally, the best
way to keep a child from drowning in the toilet is to keep an eye on the child
or the toilet--excessive reliance on safety products tends toward lower
vigilance.

            Then there are the baby monitors, arguably a
necessity if you live in a big house and can't hear the baby crying in her
room--and also a necessity if you're interested in intercepting police
transmissions--but is the Child View Monitor and Television, for $149.99,
really necessary? You can't even use it to spy on a nanny, since it has no
hidden camera capabilities.

            
               Breast

               pumps: Ask someone else.

            C ribs: You can spend $500 (or $1,000) on a
crib, or you can spend $200. Spend $200. All cribs do the same thing, which is
stand there. All cribs sold in reputable stores meet current safety standards,
so no worries in that regard.

            
               Shoes:
Payless ShoeSource, or the equivalent, is the way to go. Actually, barefoot is
the way to go, but in those places where a small child should wear shoes--such
as needle-strewn playgrounds--it is a waste of money to spend more than $10.99
on a pair of shoes. We bought Daughter No. 1 three pairs of $35 shoes, which
she outgrew in a month and wore so rarely in that month that, amortized, the
shoes cost $10 per wearing, money that could have been better spent on
fireplace gas valve safety covers.

            T oys: An endless subject, one that I'm
hesitant to tackle, and my children aren't old enough for me to comment on
Furby with any authority. One general observation, though: The wrapping paper
is always more interesting to a baby than whatever's inside, so my gift
suggestion would be a cardboard box wrapped in bright red paper and filled with
Tupperware and wooden spoons. That is, if you can stand the noise produced by
wooden spoons hitting Tupperware.

            The general subject of toys is a sensitive one in
my house, because it is on toys that I am a serial spender. An example: Four
days after my second daughter was born, I was dispatched to Buy Buy Baby to
find some sort of bassinet accouterment, worth about $9.50. I returned home two
hours later with $300 worth of toys, including a stuffed, mounted, furry rhino
head that cost $89.99. At the time, I somehow believed that my daughters would
grow up healthy and secure if they just had a stuffed, mounted rhino head in
their room. I don't know why I believed this.

            The rhino head has since been returned, and I am
banned from toy stores until such time as I regain my bearings. It was a
foolish purchase, I see now--for $89.99, I could have bought three electric
baby wipe warmers. Or one-third of a Kate Spade diaper bag.

         
      
   
