
   
   
      
         
            No. 175: &quot;Dis Incentive&quot;

            

               "This is a horrible thing that's going on," says Franklin Spinney. "All
it's going to do is reward the pathological behavior that created the problem."
What's going on?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Monday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thursday's question (No. 174)--"Odd Lott":
            

            
               You be the
decorator.
            

            

               In a 1992 keynote speech, Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott said: "The
people in this room stand for the right principles and the right philosophy.
Let's take it in the right direction and our children will be the
beneficiaries." Describe the room.
            

            
"Descriptions are not permitted because they would violate the sacred oath of
Klan secrecy."--Barry Crimmins
            

            "White,
padded, and one biblical quote away from declaring itself a sovereign
nation."--Herb Terns
            

            "Filled
with people who stand up for what they believe in no matter the cost, and so
who in protest last week reluctantly canceled their subscriptions to all
Hustler publications. Even Barely Legal ."--Daniel Radosh
( Gene Geer had a similar answer.)

            "He was
told it stood for 'North American Married Brotherhood League of America.'
Really."--Julie Anderson
            

            "Oh,
for Pete's sake! Just because a man addresses a few white-supremacist
organizations, is that any reason to harp on and on about it? Why, Albert
Einstein addressed the same group! Or, anyway, he would have, if he'd been a
race-baiting, knuckle-dragging reactionary."--Andrew "Pink curtains!"
Solovay
            

             

             

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Devoted to metaphors of field and stream, News Quiz
won't shoot sitting fish or ducks in a barrel. Good jokes surprise you, and
what's an unpredictable comment about racism: that it's bad? Perhaps the task
is not to shoot the sitting duck but to sneak up on it, loop a rope around its
webbed feet, hang it upside down, and hit it with a stick until it bursts
apart, raining toys and candy on the kids cavorting below--something surprising
yet delightfully violent.

            And what if the Lott
piñata dropped grits, spit, and tiny trailers, the artifacts of debased
Southern culture? Would the grits be ducks, or are they fair game for News Quiz
scorn? Fire away, but only if you wrote your reply between acts at the
Metropolitan Opera, after laying down your edition of Plato, in Greek. If you
composed your response within eyesight of a TV set or a slice of pizza, it's
time to reconsider your sense of regional superiority and just go fishing.

            

               Alabastard--Sorry--Alabaster Answer
            

            Lott gave the 1992 keynote speech to the national
board meeting of the Council of Conservative Citizens, the retro-successor to
the Klannish White Citizens Councils. Despite frequent appearances at its
meetings and photographs of him smiling with its leaders, Lott persistently
denies any association with the "pro-white" group.

            And after a hard day of lying and racism, then
what?

            "Trent Lott likes order, neatness, things in their
place. So he has developed little routines, one of which is this: When he
arrives home from work each evening, he drops his briefcase, heads upstairs to
his bedroom, and changes into his cotton pajamas. Then he bounds back down the
steps to have dinner with his wife, Tricia," writes a cheerfully nonjudgmental
Kevin Merida in the Washington Post . (Thanks to Kate Wing.)

            Or to put it another way,
the Capable and Attractive Attorney inquires: Why does every black leader who
ever shook hands with Louis Farrakhan have to apologize, but Trent Lott is
walking around free? In his pajamas?

            
               Sweatless
Extra
            

            Garment workers and human
rights organizations filed suit Wednesday against 18 companies, charging that
their clothing is manufactured in appalling Saipan sweatshops. But apparently
it was all a merry mix-up, judging by the response of the companies
involved.

            THE GAP "does not tolerate this type of conduct in
the factories where we do business." I'm convinced.

            WAL-MART has a "zero-tolerance position with regard
to illegal or unethical working conditions." Good enough for me.

            J.C. PENNEY said Saipan offers a "consistently
reliable source of reasonably priced, high-quality fashion items for their
retailer customers." I'm sorry I doubted them.

            TOMMY HILFIGER said,
"Music is my strongest inspiration, and I feel that it encompasses the true
style of fashion. The Rolling Stones are the greatest rock band in the world,
and I cannot think of another group of artists who have made such an impact on
the world of fashion. Departing from my past ad campaigns, the rock pictorials
portray models who are fresh, young, and all-American, in a cutting edge, high
energy, and modern environment." This may refer to a slightly different aspect
of his operation, but any friend of Mick's ...

            Other undoubtedly
innocent companies named in the suit--Associated Merchandising Corp., Cutter
& Buck, Dayton-Hudson, Dress Barn, Gymboree Manufacturing, J. Crew, Jones
Apparel Group, Lane Bryant, The Limited, May Department Stores Co., Nordstrom,
OshKosh B'Gosh, Sears Roebuck & Co., and Warnaco.

            
               Cell Phone
Finals--Anecdotal Evidence Extra
            

            Light, inexpensive, and
contemptible, the cell phone inspires stories, sneers, and songs, except for
the songs.

            "Recently in a university
lecture I was giving, a student in the front row got a call on his cell phone,
and took the call, letting the entire class wait and stare at him while he
chatted with his girlfriend."--Jonathan E. Snow , Max-Planck-Institut für
Chemie

            "Standing in the wine
section of my local market, I listened to a woman call someone in the meat
department (about 10 yards away) to check on whether she should buy white or
red. Why have a face to face conversation when you can exist as a disembodied
voice on their remote answering service? The only plus about cell phones is the
way they make their owners look like the rest of the folks who shuffle around
the park talking to themselves."--Kate Wing
            

            "I am befuddled by those
who think that the public use of a cell phone is a status symbol. Rather, a
cell phone is a device of convenience, clear and simple. Folks who ascribe more
importance to it than that are the same folks who think that cars are for more
than driving, vacations are for more than relaxing, and clothes are for more
than wearing. What I find interesting is this: Those who think that cell phones
are more than two cans with an invisible string are those who want others to
see them with a Vuitton bag on their arms as they slide into the buttery
leather of their Range Rover on the way to that Vail getaway. Give it a rest,
Mr. and Mrs. Insecure."--Brad Spencer
            

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: Southern junk
culture.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
