
   
   
      
         
            No. 170: &quot;Aust/Test&quot;

            
               I give the
headline, you give the lead.
            

            

               From the front page of South Australia's Advertiser : "1664
IDIOTS."
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 169)--"Eats/Wets":
            

            
               You chew household
objects and drool copiously, and perhaps you defecate or urinate on the
floor.
            

            

               Who are you, and what should you do next?
            

            "You're
Strom Thurmond, and you do whatever it takes to keep Sid Blumenthal from
getting the photos to Larry Flynt or David Talbot."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "You're
Philip Roth, and you should probably chill before your next lover moves
in."-- Andrew "Go Danes" Silow-Carroll
            

            "You're
a toddler, and it's time to grow up."-- Molly Shearer Gabel ( Norman
Oder had a similar answer; as did Matthew Cole , only more personal;
and James Poniewozik , only feverishly baroque.)

            "If my
dog is reading this, he'd better run now."-- Gloria D. Howard
            

            "You're
pre-approved for a 18.8 percent APR Visa card. Just fill out the enclosed
forms, mail them in, and spend away, spend away, spend away!"-- Tim
Carvell
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            It is tempting, when
presented with any list of unattractive qualities--and let's assume copious
drooling is unattractive--to apply it willy-nilly to our ideological foes.
Naturally we resist. Not for us the cheap swipes at Sen. Blowhard and Rep.
Windbag. Not for us the easy recourse to the
our-leaders-are-all-corrupt-and-stupid gag--and let's assume they're not. We
know that knee-jerk cynicism is as uninteresting as persistent
naiveté--although the former is the superior betting strategy if you're playing
blackjack in Vegas with Death. That aside, the rapier is better than the
bludgeon--unless, of course, you are a Los Angeles policeman hamstrung by
goody-goody regulations made by a bunch of stupid, corrupt, persistently naive
politicians who won't let a guy serve and protect. And while we're at it, let's
also admit that today's question drifted into "Smelly, Lethargic, Incoherent"
territory. But aren't you glad it did?

            
               Animal Companion
Answer
            

            You are a dog suffering from separation anxiety. You
should take Clomicalm, an anti-depressant just approved for pets by the Food
and Drug Administration. Also OK'd, Pfizer's Anipryl, for "senior dogs"
suffering from mental deterioration. Both drugs, under different names, are
already used by people.

            Nicholas Dodman, a Tufts
University veterinarian and the author of The Dog Who Loved Too Much ,
noted that Prozac is also an excellent canine treatment, particularly for dogs
with fear of crowds or thunderstorms. "You can buy that dog some time," he said
about Anipryl, "Buy it an extra year where you would have been at your wits'
end in a sort of latrine situation."

            
               Virtually
Metaphoric Extra
            

            Which of the following is
meant literally, and which is meant figuratively?

            1. "We don't want to be the cheapest meat on the
block."

            2. "Pizza with Christie Todd Whitman."

            3. "My ... home is here on the floor."

            4. " 'Snip and dunk' conversions."

            5. "These dwarfs may look
insubstantial, but they are like cannonballs to a giant galaxy."

            
               Answers
            

            1. Literally. John Hargerla of the National Pork
Producers Council hopes people buy the other white meat because it's good, not
just because hog prices have plunged.

            2. Literally. This was a stop on the five month
victory tour for the Toms River, N.J., Little League World Series champs who've
just been invited to the White House.

            3. Figuratively. After being sworn in as speaker,
regular guy Dennis Hastert made his first remarks not from the speaker's chair
but from the well of the House of Representatives.

            4. Literally. In Israel, strict Orthodox Jews
disdain Reform and Conservative conversions as little more than circumcision
for the men and immersion in a ritual bath for the women.

            5. Figuratively and
literally. Astronomer John Kormendy explains new research showing that some
small galaxies have dark matter densities about 100 times greater than that of
large galaxies. Dark matter constitutes most of the universe.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: Strom
Thurmond.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
