
   
   
      
         
            

            

               STARTING MONDAY IN 
               
                  Slate
               
               :
Norman Podhoretz and Midge Decter chew over the news in "The Breakfast Table."
And save your Sunday: Skip the talk shows and let "Pundit Central" brief you on
them; it's posted late Sunday evening.
            

            
               Length
Matters
            

            Several readers complained about the length of last
week's 
                  Slate on Paper
               . This is the document available by
e-mail or download around midday each Friday, containing a week's worth
of 
                  Slate
                goodies nicely formatted for printout on standard size
paper. Last week's was especially long (85 pages) because it included our
annual "
                  Slate
                60" list of rich people ranked by their
contributions to charity. But even in a normal week, 
                  Slate on
Paper
                has been running around 55-60 pages.

            Meanwhile, some America
Online readers have complained about not getting their 
                  Slate
               
e-mail at all. This was an AOL screw up, but we've straightened it out. We
hope.

            As for the length problem: We used to limit 
                  Slate on
Paper
                to 44 pages. Readers complained that we were leaving out their
favorite stuff. So, a few weeks ago, we asked readers whether they would prefer
a file containing everything in 
                  Slate
                each week. The overwhelming
answer was "yes." Even though it will take longer to download? Yes. Even though
it will require more pages to print out? Yes. You're absolutely sure, are you?
Oh yes. Because Mommy and Daddy don't want to send you a great big file if
you're not going to want it. Oh yes, we want it.

            So for those who think

                  Slate on Paper
                is too long, you're apparently in the minority.
And like all minorities in our melting-pot society, you should try to blend in
and not be so conspicuous. Keep quiet and work hard. Consider marrying an
"include-it-all" and raising the children that way. They'll grow up to play
golf and download the long version of 
                  Slate on Paper
               , and you'll
feel like a real American.

            Many readers did raise a good question: Why doesn't the

                  Slate on Paper
                file allow you to choose which articles you wish
to print out instead of all or nothing at all? The answer, as to so much in
life, is: We're working on that. (Or, as 
                  Slate
               's crack software
development team puts it, in the strange argot of their tribe: "Yeah, yeah,
yeah, we're working on that.")

            Meanwhile, the editor has wasted far too much time
poking around the many byways and cul-de-sacs of Microsoft Word, looking for
some quick and dirty solution to this dilemma. Although we say so as a sister
division of the same company, Word is an amazing and underappreciated piece of
software. Amazing for the things it can do and underappreciated because no one
knows about them. No one knows about them primarily because software
instruction manuals get thinner and thinner. Even Word's online Help (in recent
versions an annoying talking paper clip that many people quite rightly refuse
to interact with) doesn't seem to know about some things the program can do.
What other industry besides software goes to the trouble of improving its
product and then keeps the improvements a secret?

            Nevertheless, if you use
the Microsoft Word version of 
                  Slate on Paper
                (we also offer an
Adobe Acrobat version) a couple of Word's features can help you to print out
just the articles you want. They're a bit clumsy for this purpose, but they do
the job.

            

               
                  Outline View. With the slate.doc file on your screen, on
the View menu, click Outline . (Or, in later versions of
Word, click the fourth tiny box in the lower-left corner of the Word
window--just above the page number.) If you then click 1 on the
Outline toolbar that will have appeared (with any luck), you
should get a list of 
                     Slate
                  's departments, from "Today's Papers"
through "The Fray." At the left of each item is a plus sign. If you click once
on the plus sign, you have selected that department. You can then print the
selection (an option on the Word Print menu). Or you can select and
delete all the articles you don't want and print the whole remaining
document. Or, if you want to get fancy, you can create a blank document in a
new window, and then drag and drop the articles you want into it.

            

            
               You also can
double-click the plus sign for any one listing or hit one of the higher numbers
on the Outline toolbar to affect the whole file and expose various
sub-levels of headline, posted date, etc. For departments (such as Today's
Papers, "Moneybox," etc.) that consist of multiple items, you can hit the plus
sign and do your stuff for just the items you want.
            

            

               
                  Master Document view. This is a recherché
variation on Outline view, also available on the View menu. It
allows you to turn various subdivisions of a file into separate files, which
you can then move around or otherwise submit to your will. Try this: Select a
department you want to print (it can't be the first one, Today's Papers, for
some damned reason) and hit the "Create Subdocument" toolbar icon. (It's a tiny
horizontal rectangle inside a vertical rectangle with a turned-down upper-right
flap--just as you would have guessed.) Your selected piece is now a separate
file, set in an attractive gray box. You can drag'n'drop the other stuff you
want into that box, double-click the little square icon in the upper-left
corner of the box to expand the file, then hit Print . It might
work.

            

            There has got to be a way--using these and other Word
features such as macros, templates, fields, styles, and so on to make a simple
selective-printout menu that either could be built into each week's 
                  Slate
on Paper
                file or could be offered as a downloadable tool. What about
using "hidden text"? (Hidden from screen view but printed? Or visible on screen
but not printed?) Or the automatic table of contents generator? (Could the
whole text be turned into a table of contents? What on earth for?) Strictly as
an amateur, the editor has tried them all and admits defeat.

            Is there another amateur among 
                  Slate
               's
readers who would like to pick up the challenge? If you beat the pros to a
solution, we will name it after you, and you'll be immortalized in this little
corner of cyberspace.

         
      
   
