
   
   
      
         
            Impeachment, Strasbourg-Style

            The press in Europe gave
big advance billing Wednesday to constitutional showdowns on both sides of the
Atlantic--the opening Thursday of Bill Clinton's impeachment trial and a vote
the same day in the European Parliament in Strasbourg that could result in the
dismissal of all 20 members of the European Union's ruling commission.

            The main Flytrap angle
across Europe was "porn king" Larry Flynt's accusations of hypocrisy against
Republican Rep. Robert Barr, R-Ga., but comparisons were also drawn between the
impeachment of the president in Washington and what La Repubblica of Rome
called "a European-style impeachment" of the president of the European
Commission, Jacques Santer.

            The paper pointed out that the European Parliament,
although elected by the peoples of the European Union, still doesn't have the
powers of a normal parliament, while the commission, which it was planning to
censure for fraud and other irregularities, isn't a real government but rather
a group of unelected bureaucrats. The "psychodrama" in Strasbourg was the fruit
of "a generalized institutional sickness," La Repubblica said.

            A leading target of the parliament's attack is
former French Prime Minister Edith Cresson, Europe's commissioner for
education, who is alleged, among other things, to have appointed her dentist to
be a scientific adviser. In an interview with the Daily Telegraph of London
Wednesday, Cresson (notorious in Britain for having stated while prime minister
that a quarter of Englishmen are homosexuals) blamed her troubles on "a shadowy
conspiracy of ultra-Rightists who leak lies to the newspapers" and on a new
generation of European parliamentarians, who lack the old European
idealism.

            Lamenting this loss,
Cresson said the European countries had a shared culture that set them apart
from Americans, "who are extremely enthusiastic about something one day and say
exactly the opposite a few days later." She went on, "Perhaps we are more
sceptical. Perhaps we are more reasonable; perhaps we have suffered far more.
We are different, and the world needs that for its balance." In a separate
article, the Telegraph described the European Union as "teetering on the
brink of chaos." The firing of the European Commission "would leave the EU
institutionally crippled only 14 days after the birth of the European single
currency," it said.

            In Israel, the Jerusalem Post reported Wednesday that "material having to do
with Labor Party leader Ehud Barak's campaign for the premiership" had been
stolen in a Watergate-style break-in of the Washington offices of his campaign
advisers, Stanley Greenberg and James Carville. A Barak campaign official said
Wednesday on Israel Radio that it was believed that "Israeli material was the
main focus of the break-in."

            Elsewhere in the Middle
East, Egypt's Al
Ahram daily said in an editorial that "now that it has been revealed
that the U.S. has used UNSCOM for spying purposes, it has become necessary that
the international organization take a firm stance by which to prevent any of
its organizations being used for purposes other than those mandated." The paper
called for "an impartial inquiry" into UNSCOM and the dismissal of chief arms
inspector Richard Butler, "whose record with Iraq has lacked honesty, to say
the least." It also said people are wrong to imagine that Egypt will "abandon
its role in preventing further U.S. aggressions against the Iraqi people"
because of Saddam Hussein's "foolish campaign" against the country. "Egypt
cannot endorse interference in other countries' internal affairs," it
concluded.

            With the Times of London warning Wednesday of future trade conflict
between the United States and Europe and Japan, the Japanese ambassador to
Washington, Kunihiko Saito, was quoted in Tokyo's Asahi
Shimbun as saying that the United States is getting impatient with
Japan's rising trade surplus. Saito said trade friction will be inevitable this
year in certain sectors, such as steel, but that the good performance of the
American economy has so far prevented such friction from becoming serious.
Asked about the U.S. response to suspicions that North Korea was engaged in
underground nuclear development programs, the ambassador said that "the US
government apparently understands the serious consequences of military strikes
against North Korea, similar to the attacks it conducted against Iraq."

            The Financial Times of London carried a front page report of
Rupert Murdoch saying in Singapore that many Internet stocks were heavily
overvalued and unlikely to meet profit projections. He was also quoted as
saying that his company, News Corp, would "certainly not be making takeovers of
large or already over-capitalised companies" and that the Internet was "not the
death-knell of the old" among media organizations. The Internet would destroy
more businesses than it created by "wiping out the middlemen," he said.

            While the Hong Kong-based
South China Morning
Post said that the discontented flight crews of Cathay Pacific Airways
have still not decided whether to implement a plan to stop smiling at
passengers, the Times of India carried an editorial Wednesday calling on the
flight attendants to "have second thoughts." The paper declared, "A smile costs
nothing, but it brightens up the moment for the one who flashes it, and the one
who watches. Grim faces and hardened jaws are not people-friendly."

             

         
      
   
