
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Slate on Toilet
Paper
            

            Although I greatly enjoy
David Plotz's dispatches, the Jan. 27 Dispatch "" may have given me a nit to
pick where it quotes Sen. Ben Nighthorse Campbell. Perhaps this quote should
have been offered without using the senator's name because the remark was
apparently intended to be off the record. The senator was complaining about the
very thing Plotz has now done: getting a sound bite from a senator relieving
himself. If Plotz did not get the senator's permission to use the quote, an
apology may be in order.

            
               --John
Purnell
            

            San
Francisco

            
               Kill Kazan's
Deathbed Oscar
            

            In his otherwise useful and accurate analysis of the
issues involving Elia Kazan's honorary Oscar, "," Jacob Weisberg perpetuates
the myth that Hollywood has for decades been punishing Kazan by withholding
laurels that would have been his had he not named names. "He deserves an Oscar
as much as anyone living--for best director, not for best human being," writes
Weisberg. But Kazan already has two Best Director Oscars, including one for
On the Waterfront , the film in which he "made his case" for snitching,
as Weisberg puts it. He was also nominated for three other Academy Awards and
has won four Golden Globes, three New York Film Critics Circle Awards and two
Directors Guild Awards.

            Honorary (a k a "lifetime
achievement" or "deathbed") Oscars are typically consolation prizes, given to
people whose work was overlooked in its time--such as Cary Grant, Howard Hawks,
Federico Fellini, and Stanley Donen, none of whom ever won a real Oscar. Kazan
was a brilliant director, but he's already been saluted for that, so why give
him a lifetime achievement statue and not, say, John Ford or David Lean?
Apparently Hollywood really does want to acknowledge that Kazan did the right
thing all those years ago. And as Weisberg makes clear, he did not.

            
               --Daniel
Radosh
            

            New York

            
               Scott Shuger Is
Trippin'
            

            Although I'm certain it amused Scott Shuger (an
amusing guy, to judge by the terrific "Today's Papers") to join the ranks of
those who have publicly disparaged Linda Tripp, the fact remains that nothing
in his piece, "," reflects at all on Tripp herself.

            I can't help but wonder if Shuger thought to ask
himself a few simple questions before launching his attack-- questions such as,
did Tripp ask to be moved to her current job? Was it her idea that she be
placed on "leave" and sent home to "work"? Did Tripp have any input into the
salary for her current position? If the job were held by someone other than
Tripp, would it pay any less or involve any more work?

            I suspect I know the
answers to these questions, and I suspect Mr. Shuger does as well. In fact, the
sole purpose of his piece was to continue the media assault on Tripp as some
kind of back-stabbing dragon lady whom we should all view with disgust and
loathing. Well done, Scott!

            
               --Russ
Evansen
            

            
Madison, Wis.

            
               Gordonian
Not
            

            What a precious little world Mary Gordon inhabits.
evoke images of little, high-rise dollhouses full of paranoid writers who
rarely disagree about art and never disagree about politics.

             The goal to life in the Gordonian universe is to do
good--or to do Clinton, provided one isn't too cowardly to snap one's thong.
Clinton is good. He's a compassionate mattress thrasher. Ford Maddox Ford is
good, if maddeningly redundant. He left his wife, and he's kind to Polish
ingrates.

             Joseph Conrad is bad. He's a Polish ingrate. His
wife is stupid, and his children are sickly. He was mean to Ford Maddox Ford,
and women love Ford Maddox Ford. Mary loves Ford. She's on a first-name basis
with him, although it's kind of hard to tell. But it doesn't matter. Ford is
dead.

             The cute boys in high school didn't talk to Mary.
But that doesn't matter, either. Mary's son is cute. He talks to her.

            Republicans are bad. They're mean to Bill Clinton,
which is a lot like being mean to Ford Maddox Ford. The Republicans might kill
Bill Clinton; that's what the crazy old author says. He's crazy, but it still
could happen. Could too!

            Lying is bad, but not real bad. Envy and pride are
the cold sins. They're real bad. It's better to lie and be nice than to tell
the truth and be mean. Clinton is nice. Republicans are mean. You can't tell
the truth and be nice at the same time. 

            Mary wants to be good, but she doesn't know how.
Should she write New York Times op-ed pieces about bad Republicans, or
should she just write novels like Nabokov? Should she read Ford's The Good
Soldier , or should she stop being a coward and salute Bill Clinton's good
soldier? Maybe he'll lie to her.

            Sometimes people expect too much from Mary.
Sometimes she wishes they were dead. That's bad. It's bad to wish people were
dead. Republicans wish Clinton were dead. The world is scary.

            Now I understand. I love
Mary's diary. It's good.

            
               --Tim Ireland
            

            Philadelphia

         
      
   
