
   
   
      
         
            No. 180: &quot;Three for All&quot;

            

               Safer, cleaner, more fun--these are the attributes touted by an
organization's new chairman. What organization?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Monday's question (No. 179)--"A Pair of Weasels":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           Alluding to a verbal dyad, Lamar
Alexander called them "Weasel words, cleverly and deliberately put together to
confuse people by meaning nothing." What two
words?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Dot
com."-- Dan Simon
            

            
"Acceptable level."-- Alfa-Betty Olsen
            

            
"Pottery Barn."-- Colleen Werthmann
            

            "Hilary
and Jackie."-- Susan Burton
            

            "Dan
Radosh."-- Dan Radosh
            

            "Kill
chickens. (Of course, to a weasel, the meaning is quite clear.)"-- Jennifer
Miller
            

            "I
do."-- Chris Thomas , Joydip Kundu , Carole Larsen , John
Leary , and Charles Star
            

            
"Operating system (OK, Bill, where's my check?)"-- Ananda Gupta
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Many responses listed
deft and amusing oxymorons, but Lamar Alexander sought something more insidious
than mere self-contradiction. He was invoking the vicious and sinister
qualities that make weasels (along with stoats and ferrets) such satisfying
villains in Kenneth Grahame's Wind in the Willows , and such pleasingly
greasy stooges in David Letterman's epithet "record industry weasels." (Not
half so much contempt could be squeezed from "record industry squirrels.") That
toothy, ruthless carnivore shows up in this familiar exchange:

            

               Hamlet:
Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?

               
Polonius: By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.

               Hamlet:
Methinks it is like a weasel

               
Polonius: It is backed like a weasel.

            

            A few lines later, Hamlet
says, "They fool me to the top of my bent." Indeed they do, those weasels. It
makes you wonder why anyone could name a product the "Garden Weasel" or why
Lamar Alexander thinks he has a shot at the White House.

            
               Alliterative
Answer
            

            "Compassionate conservative."

            Republican presidential
hopefuls and their myrmidons are carping about the George W. Bush catch phrase.
Religious nut Gary Bauer took it out on Bush Sr.: "The last Bush talked about
kinder and gentler, and that resulted in an election loss." Dan Quayle demurred
typographically, writing "I have ordered my staff to never--EVER--utter the
words 'compassionate conservative!' " Steve Forbes objected manfully,
declaring: "Mealy-mouthed rhetoric and poll-tested clichés are no substitute
for a muscular substantive agenda," then he took a swing at a poor person
bequeathed to him in his father's will. Or maybe he didn't.

            
               Nicole Seligman
Extra
            

            Pros and cons of trying to wangle a blind date with
the impressive presidential attorney.

            
               Pro
            

            Uncanny ability to keep a straight face while saying
"Mr. Manager Graham" means she'd have no trouble buttering up my relatives.

            Her assertion--"Mere repetition no matter how
dogged, cannot create a reality where there is none"--means no nagging.

            

               Ambiguous
            

            No visible wedding ring could imply availability for
dating or recklessness at the poker table or that it's time to break down and
buy a decent television.

            Mysterious white bauble on lapel could be pale and
delicate cameo, membership pin in pernicious organization, or perhaps a dab of
spilled food.

            
               Con
            

            If things got seriously romantic, she might blurt
out quotations from Sen. William Pitt Fessenden, breaking the mood.

            Was on Oliver North's
defense team. After a little tiff, she might get some guy to kill you. In the
national interest.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Win: Lamar Alexander's self-deception.

            Place: President Clinton's equivocating.

            Show: News Quiz's
ubiquity.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
