
   
   
      
         
            Wash This Way

            I do not have a fleet of
washing machines in which to conduct my tests. I don't have a radiation
spectrometer for measuring the whiteness of whites the way Consumer
Reports does. But I do have tools formidable in their own right at my
service in my search for the best laundry detergent.

            I have a laundromat
right across the street from my apartment. I have skin sensitive to the
faintest of soapy residues and an equally sensitive nose. But my biggest asset
is New York City at my doorstep. The dirt, grime, spit, and fouler substances
that regularly adhere to one's clothing here make this fine metropolis a
veritable fantasia of filth.

            But first let me rule out a few of the myths and scams of
the laundry world.

            
               Laundry
Balls/Rings
               : Strange, hard balls or rings--$30 to $90
apiece--that purport to wash clothes without detergent by means of generating
ions, or an undefined substance called "structured water." An apparently bogus
product: Both Good Housekeeping and Dateline NBC have suggested
that they wash clothes no better than plain water, and one manufacturer was
sued for false advertising.

            
               Ultra
Concentrates
               : Remember how 10 years ago laundry
detergent came in huge boxes? Don't they seem small these days? This was no
technological advance. Under pressure from environmentalists, detergent
manufacturers simply removed the fillers with which they'd been bulking up
detergents to give an illusion of value. (The same thing happened with
liquids--they just eliminated the water.)

            
               Powder vs.
Liquid
               : In 1995, a Consumer Reports study
showed that powders outperformed liquids on all fronts. (The one exception:
Tide With Bleach Alternative.) Conventional wisdom (as doled out on laundry Web
sites and detergent hotlines) has it that powders are better in hard water and
for ground-in dirt, while liquids are good for grease, but this was not backed
up by CR 's study.

            Here's the dirt on detergent. There are two key
ingredients: surfactants and builders. Surfactants reduce the surface tension
of the water and increase its ability to rinse and wash. Whimsical chemists say
they make water wetter. Builders create the proper pH balance and deactivate
elements in the water that would reduce the effectiveness of surfactants.
Detergents differ in the way they balance these two elements, and in their
varying use of added ingredients such as bleach, enzymes, fluorescent
whiteners, perfumes, foam control products, or fabric softeners.

            This all presents an analytical conundrum. If each
brand merely offers the same basic ingredients in different proportions, plus
or minus a few bells and whistles, how was I to determine which was the best? I
decided I'd take each detergent on its own terms. The most common label claims
boasted of keeping colors bright, removing stains, eliminating odors, and being
free of skin-irritating perfumes and dyes.

            To the laundromat!

            C olor 
               Fastness Test: Since the
arrival of detergents with bleach and bleach alternatives, color fading has
been a concern of many launderers; various brands have accordingly begun to
claim "color hold" bleaching or even that they "brighten brights while
whitening whites." Normal chlorine bleach removes color indiscriminately: It
attacks stains and dyes alike and converts them into particles that your
detergent can easily wash away. It can also damage fabrics (especially
protein-based materials such as silk and wool). In general, "color-safe" bleach
just means oxygen bleach, which is much milder than chlorine bleach. It works
by releasing hydrogen peroxide to break up or remove the color from organic
materials but is gentle enough that it won't affect most fabric dyes. That
stuff about brightening brights generally just means the detergent has some
dye-transfer inhibitors, which help to stop bleeding dyes from staining other
clothes. There's nothing in detergent that can make your clothes brighter,
other that its inherent ability to get dirt out of them.

            Of the detergents with color-safe bleaches, I tested
All and Wisk (both in powder form), setting them against Liquid Tide With
Bleach Alternative, which was rated the most effective detergent overall by
Consumer Reports , but which made no claims to color safety or
brightening. I hit the infantwear section of Kmart and picked up four cheap
sets of clothing. Each included a tiny red T-shirt, a blue turtleneck, pink
long johns, and two pairs of socks--one lime green, one vibrant purple. I felt
as if I was the mother of Smurfs. I then washed three of the sets 14 times
each, in hot water, with each of the fine household products I mentioned
above.

            After 14 washings, the
washed sets of clothing had lost significant amounts of color as compared with
the unwashed control set. The socks that started out a deep royal purple were
now lavender and covered with whitish fuzz. The differences among All, Wisk,
and Tide were not great, but they were noticeable and surprising. Tide, which
made no claims to color holding, actually resulted in the least fading. All
came in second, Wisk just a shade behind. These differences were only
noticeable under bright light and on close inspection--indicative of the
general irrelevance of the claims on detergent labels. One way to prevent this
type of color loss is to wash clothes in colder water, but all detergents work
poorly in cold water, and many bleaching agents are completely ineffective in
cold temperatures. So while the colors may fade less, your detergent is also
cleaning less.

            S tain 
               Removal Test: For the stain
removal I needed a way of getting the clothes to be tested as dirty as
possible, and what is dirtier that the streets of New York? I figured I'd throw
the test subjects in the street and let cars run over them. But this presented
a new testing challenge, namely that anything in the street in New York City is
fair game. I was faced with either standing guard over the clothing and shooing
away would-be thieves, or picking as my test candidates attire that was a
natural people repellent. I picked underwear, both men's and women's, in the
most gargantuan sizes Kmart carried and, with the help of a friend, threw 20
pairs into Second Avenue under cover of darkness. Unfortunately, while no one
wanted the clothing, the act of tossing it into the street drew no little
attention. Questions from the crowd that gathered included "What the hell are
you doing?" "Are you guys artists?" "Can I have your number?" "I'm in a band
called 'Bag of Panties.' Will you take a picture of us with the underwear for
our album cover?"

            It was all very
diverting, but it wasn't getting our underwear any dirtier. So we dragged each
pair through the gutter (which was still full of street runoff from a rainstorm
earlier in the day). This combined with the occasional big rig and regular
Thursday night taxi traffic did quite a number on the briefs. After an hour
they were gray and covered with skid marks and street custard.

            But they still weren't dirty enough. So into a plastic sack
they went, and into a cab we hopped, headed for the Cowgirl Hall of Fame, a
Western-themed restaurant in Greenwich Village. The cooks there were kind
enough to donate a large platter and a vat of spicy barbecue sauce, but balked
at putting BBQ-Brief sandwiches on the menu. Even sitting on the platter
thoroughly sauced, the briefs still looked like they needed one more good
stain. So off we went to Krispy Kreme for a dozen raspberry jelly doughnuts to
squirt all over them. With that final abuse, we called it a night, and I sealed
the subjects in a large plastic bag and left them to fester in the corner of my
room for two days.

            After dividing the briefs
into four equally soiled piles, I washed one set in Cheer, one in Tide, one in
Dynamo, and one in American Fare (a Kmart store brand). After one wash and a
spin in the dryer, I compared the results. Cheer worked the best overall: It
removed the road grime the best, and there was little trace of the orange
grease left in the waistband by the barbecue sauce. There was no visible
raspberry jelly doughnut filling remaining at all. Tide did a good job on the
grease but was not quite as effective as Cheer on the road grime, which was
still visible in patches. It also completely removed the jelly stains. Third
place went to Dynamo, which did a poor job on the jelly, and whose heavy scent
couldn't completely mask the odor of barbecue sauce. Worst of all was Kmart
brand: When I opened the dryer, the spicy smell of barbecue sauce almost
knocked me over, and the briefs were still covered in splotches of orange
grease and jelly stains.

            O dor 
               Removal Test: For this test I
enlisted the help of a friend who is a fitness instructor. She was kind enough
to donate three loads of sweaty, crusty clothes to my cause. Using my
incredibly sensitive nose, I divided her clothing into three piles of equal
stink factor (and threw in the still-spicy undies from the Kmart detergent
load). I then washed each in a detergent marketed as odor removing: Gain, Surf,
and Fab. Aside from just having more fragrance than other varieties (which the
companies admit), could they actually remove serious stink from clothing?

            Fab and Gain both did a
great job and removed the odors completely. There was no difference in
stink-removal effectiveness between these two, aside from the perfume left in
the clothing. Fab's was plain--a light, clean scent--while Gain's was vaguely
vanilloid. Surf came in last. It did not completely remove pit stink, and the
perfume was a cloying grape scent. Worst of all, the toxic underwear from the
barbecue sauce ordeal still smelled spicy.

            My conclusions? Tide faded colors a bit less, but it was
not enough to make me want to switch brands. Cheer did a great job removing
dirt and grease, but how often are my clothes run over by cars and slathered in
barbecue sauce? About once a year.

            The differences among the name brands were
negligible. The various claims on the packaging are not so much false as true
of all the detergents: With the exception of the cheap store brands, they all
remove odors, stains, and dirt well. You're better off picking your detergent
by its scent (or, if you ask me, lack thereof) than you are judging it by
what's on the label. But among the top-shelf brands, it doesn't really matter
which one you choose: It'll all come out in the wash.

         
      
   
