
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Girls Against
Boys
            

            Cheers to Cathy Young for being a rare, courageous
feminist who doesn't think men are the cause of all women's problems. Jeers to
Wendy Shalit who cannot seem to comprehend that equal numbers of women suffer
from abuse as cause it, and similarly for men.(See the "Dialogue": "")

            Particularly offensive
is Shalit's claim that men are uncivilized and must be trained. Shalit is no
doubt aware that male-bashing, although emotionally satisfying (I assume), is
counter-productive. For those of us working to create a world in which the
genders are treated equally in the workplace, take equal responsibility in
matters of sex, and treat each other socially with equal respect and dignity,
the only practical approach is to start doing it. But to act as though wrongs
only matter when they happen to women, or to assume that women are never in the
wrong when they have conflicts with men, is to retard progress toward a goal
that even Shalit might enjoy.

            
               --Richard
Flint
            

            
Chicago

            
               Malcolm
X'd
            

            "" debate over Janet
Malcolm's new book piqued my interest in reading it. It felt a bit too much
like a discussion between a skeptical reader and Malcolm's publicist, however.
Did Rosen really not find anything in the book that he disagreed with? (Even
positive book reviews usually have some caveats.) I had to sympathize with
Fallows when he wrote that he felt he was walking out on a limb criticizing
Malcolm, given her prominence and connections in journalism. Although I'm sure
Rosen means what he says in his remarks, his own professional connections with
her made a free-flowing discussion, including criticism, highly unlikely. Rosen
is a relatively new writer at The 
               New Yorker , where Malcolm has
long been a star. Malcolm's husband is a New Yorker editor. Perhaps next
time, to avoid the sense that professional concerns are not hampering the
conversation in The Book Club, it might make sense to choose two discussants
with no ties to the people under discussion.

            
               --Chris Shea
            

            
Washington

            
               Historical
Inaccuracy
            

            Can David Plotz (and
everyone at 
                  Slate
               ) please refrain from speaking on behalf of
History? In his Feb. 3 "" from the Clinton trial, he writes, "History and the
American people have already rendered their verdict." Sorry to be picky, but
when precisely did Mr. Plotz speak to History? Is Mr. Plotz accurately
reporting History's opinions? Perhaps Mr. Plotz has a tape transcript of the
interview. If so, would he make it generally available?

            
               --David
Margolies
            

            
Oakland, Calif.

            
               101
Damnations
            

            I am appalled that your publication would
ever consider publishing "." As a Dalmatian owner, I have found nothing but
love and compassion from my Dalmatian. As the director of the Dalmatian
Board at AcmePet.com, Your Guide to Pets on the Internet, I have found
a nation of Dalmatian owners who are the happiest people I have ever
met.

            To quote the author,
"Many of them are deaf, and all of them are dumb. They are, in short, lousy
pets." Excuse me, but have you ever had a Dalmatian as a part of your family
for more than two weeks? True, Dalmatians are more hyper than most dogs, but
what human 2-year-old isn't? Would you skin a 2-year-old because he talks baby
talk too much and always seem to get into things and is harder than heck to
potty train? Dalmatians are the least vocal of any dog. They only bark when
they need to get their point across. Kind of like me. I am a quiet person until
someone jerks my chain a little too hard.

            -- Joseph
Schroeder
            

            Weston, Ohio

         
      
   
