
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Who's the
Greatest?
            

            Your article "" is right
on, Jacob Weisberg, to question the descriptive "greatest" in referring to the
World War II generation. (I have no problem at all with it being used to
describe Muhammad Ali.) I was born in 1937 and have been a student of my
parents' and my generation since then. I thought Tom Brokaw's term was cute
until I saw on television the gist of his conclusion--then I thought it was
stupid and packaged for television. (Did he hear about Peter Jennings writing a
book then rush to get one out first?) The World War II people won a war (two
wars, one on each side of the world) then felt they had earned riches, comfort,
a homogenous society, everlasting youthful looks, the right to never die, the
right to never being questioned with the corresponding right to never being
wrong, etc. You did a good job of starting the dialogue. There's a ton of good,
commercial stories to be had in mining that way of thinking.

            
-- Shannon Smith Yakima, Wash.

            
               Fathers of
Vietnam
            

            Re Jacob Weisberg's piece
"GI Envy": Perhaps we should also remember that those "heroic GIs" are the ones
who ensnared their country in Vietnam and sent the "boomers" into that superbly
planned and managed conflict without the support of their country.

            
-- David Zellman Modesto, Calif.

            
               Bravo, "Book
Club"!
            

            As a recent subscriber
to 
                  Slate
               , I cannot tell you how much I have enjoyed the exchange
between Dana Gioia and James Wood as they reviewed contemporary poetry. How
refreshing to have candor in a review instead of the usual (and predictable)
empty praise that passes for criticism. This is a concept--and these are two
critics--that you need to repeat often in the future in order for me to change
from a trial to a regular subscription. I want more of this type of intelligent
honesty in the criticism I read. Good show!

            
-- Michael Peich West Chester, Penn.

            
               McGwire's
Balls
            

            The Jan. 13 "" mentions
the amount of money Mark McGwire's 70 th home run ball sold for and
points out the difference between the two quoted numbers--$2.7 million in the
Los Angeles Times and over $3 million by the other major papers. The
difference is: The first is the amount that the lucky fan is going to get
(prior to IRS inquiries), and the second number is the first number plus
the auctioneer's fee. This is the amount on the check the new owner writes. So
how much did it sell for? I'd say it was the second number. But if the story
was about the bonanza to the fan, the first number is accurate.

            -- Paul
Strasser Louisville, Colo.

         
      
   
