
   
   
      
         
            Feelin' <I>Groovy</I>

            Have you ever set the dials
in your head to register with maximum sensitivity any new encounter with a
particular word or phrase? I put the dials on high alert a few weeks ago for
groovy , spurred by a spate of printed sightings. People magazine
had just referred to Winona Ryder in passing as "the groovy gamine." The
Washington Post at about the same time complimented the "groovy
appearance" of the iMac computer. The Chicago Tribune published a list
of Web sites for kids that it had found to be "full of groovy games." A
commentary in the London Independent about Britain's fuddy-duddy
Conservative Party and its forlorn attempts at image enhancement observed,
"Here they are, doing their best to be a little bit groovy , a little bit
New Labour, and what do we do? We snigger."

            Meanwhile, a
communication from the editor of 
                  Slate
                brought my attention not
so much to sightings as to hearings. He wrote:

            
               D----S----, a man not given to air quotes,
just told me it was "groovy" that I would call him back later about something.
Young R----, a summer intern, used the word constantly but with a smirk. ...
I've heard it used by grown-ups, without apparent irony, within the past hour.
I guess it's gone the route of "cool"--revived as quaint and retro by young
'uns and gradually de-ironized. I assume the term originated as a '40s or '50s
hip allusion to the LP record. But maybe not.
            

            Well, close. Briefly, the word dates back to jazz circles
in the 1930s and ultimately derives from the phrase "in the groove," meaning
"performing or doing exceptionally well." What the "groove" in that phrase
originally referred to is hard to establish definitively, because several
meanings current in the 1930s all permit plausible theories. Many dictionaries
do link the groove of in the groove to the groove of a record.
But groove could also refer to the path between a pitcher and the strike
zone (and had done so since the turn of the century); a pitcher who was
throwing "in the groove" was throwing very well. Groove also had a
vulgar sexual connotation, which could likewise give in the groove the
connotation of high performance and pleasure. And groove could simply
mean a "style," a sense associated with the parallel between being in a
groove and being in a rut . (In the 19 th century,
groovy actually meant "to be in a rut" or to be "of settled habits" or
"conventional"; the first Oxford English Dictionary citation for this
kind of grooviness is dated 1867.) In any event, by the 1940s
groovy had expanded beyond the jazz world and--a harbinger of what would
happen in the 1960s and '70s--was being used by nongroovy adults in a typically
pathetic attempt to seem hip. Here's a Buick ad, cited by Thomas Dalzell, a
lexicographer of slang, in his terrific book Flappers 2 Rappers : "Stand
off and beam at Buick's years-ahead style--there's something not only favored
by the old folks, but termed by the younger idea, definitely groovy !"
The ad appeared in Newsweek in 1946.

            After the 1940s,
groovy went dormant for a time; reference books begin to refer to it as
"archaic" or "obsolete." Then came its re-emergence in Beat and hippie patois,
and its ascension into totemic status, as the primary pop-cultural word that
future generations would associate with the youth culture of the 1960s. (During
the 1996 presidential campaign, David Letterman's "Top 10 ways Bob Dole is
trying to appear younger" included the following at the No. 9 spot: "Peppers
his speeches with words such as groovy and outasight .") A nuance
that the future may not always appreciate, though, is how ironic or playfully
self-conscious its usage usually was. I suspect that the word has long existed
in a netherworld between interjectional utility and outright put-on. Perhaps an
ingenuous minority used it innocently in its hippie heyday; but most often one
heard it uttered with a bit of wonderment, as if the speaker couldn't believe
that he or she was really using the word.

            Groovy continues to thrive, with the same sort of
ambivalence attached to it. The experts disagree only about the full extent of
its range. Anne H. Soukhanov, who oversaw the most recent (third) edition of
the American Heritage Dictionary and is now the North American editor of
the Encarta World English Dictionary , recalls coming across the word
these days mostly in speech, "especially in sardonic and sarcastic replies to
negative-context statements such as 'Dad, I just wrecked your new car' or 'This
to inform you that the IRS has targeted you for a 10 year audit,' where its use
as an interjectional reply parallels similar use of standard terms like
'beautiful,' 'terrific,' or 'great.' "

            John Morse, the editor
of the Merriam-Webster dictionaries, sees groovy less as a bit of
exotica and more as a robust adapter to an ever-changing present. "Often," he
says, drawing on Merriam-Webster's voluminous citation files, "groovy is used
in reference to something from, or reminiscent of, the 1960s (clothing,
spiritualism, things that glow in black light), but just as often (actually,
more often) the word appears to be used in reference to the contemporary scene.
We have examples of trendy addresses in Miami Beach, biker-gal sunglasses, MTV
videos, parties where hip-hop music is played, and jazz-rap crossover music all
being described as groovy and all without hint of irony." The examples come
from such publications as Rolling Stone , TV Guide , Elle ,
the Village Voice , and The New Yorker . "The word," says Morse,
"appears to live on."

            It lives on, but its evolution seems to be taking different
forms in captivity and in the wild. Such, at any rate, is slang specialist
Dalzell's surmise, and the comments by Soukhanov (about the interjectional
groovy ) and Morse (about groovy in printed citations) illustrate
the point. In the wild--that is, in the more freewheeling and inflected realm
of spoken language-- groovy thrives in a largely ironic state; the use
of the word requires a context of wavelength synchrony between speaker and
listener. In captivity--that is, in the more restrained and stylized realm of
written language--examples of the nonironic groovy tend to predominate
heavily.

            
               Groovy 's staying power--it has maintained
its meaning and its presence for more than six decades--points up the
robustness, and even the relative antiquity, of much of what seems like
linguistic ephemera. Out of sight , meaning "incredibly wonderful" or
"extraordinary," is as current as ever; it goes back not to the '60s but to the
'40s--the 1840s. Cool has experienced a change of intonation in the
1990s, becoming nearly bisyllabic, but it has been widely used over diverse
demographic terrain for most of the 20 th century, and it goes back
as a term of admiration ("That's right [i.e., very] cool ") to the first
half of the 19 th century. Duh , an interjection indicating
stupidity or obviousness, emerged from 1940s animated cartoons, but its period
of greatest efflorescence is probably occurring right now. It enjoys life not
only as an interjection but also as a noun ("The movie's real duh of a
raison d'être"-- Village 
               Voice ) and an adjective ("That's so
duh you've got to smile"-- Los Angeles Times ). Bummer , one
1960s word that really did get its start in the '60s drug culture, is also
proving its hardiness, a testament both to the term's euphony and to the
ubiquity of bummers in the world at large.

            
               Cat , dig , and hipster are
enjoying a resurgence. So are bitchin' and stoked . Every
generation insists on having its own new words for the most aggressively
up-to-date aspects of life. (Well, duh.) But it's also true, as never before,
that the archives of sound and image constitute a continuous retro loop that
people can--and will--draw on. The situation is oddly appropriate: The idea of
retro in a rut restores grooviness to its original meaning.

         
      
   
