
   
   
      
         
            Religious Persecution

            The chief coach of the
English national soccer team was fired Tuesday amid huge controversy over his
eccentric religious beliefs. Glenn Hoddle, the man who steered the English team
to failure in last year's World Cup in France, told the Times of London in an
interview that disabled people were disabled because of things they had done
wrong in previous lives. This created political uproar and sharply divided the
British press about whether or not he should be allowed to keep his job. The
Football Association, soccer's ruling body, fired him after he refused to sever
connections with Eileen Drewery, a faith healer.

            In an editorial
Wednesday, the Times said Hoddle had to go because "he had failed to
separate his rights of free speech from his duties as one of the most
influential men in a game with vast influence over the life of Britain." But
the Daily
Telegraph criticized his dismissal, saying Hoddle's views on the
disabled were shared by millions of Hindus and Buddhists around the world. The
story was big across Europe, especially in the Italian papers, which ran it on
their front pages. "Fired for Karma" was the headline in La Repubblica of Rome,
which said he was perhaps the first person in Europe's 2000 th year
to lose his job for his religious convictions.

            The Daily Telegraph reported on its front page
Wednesday that MI6, the British external espionage service, was having to
consider withdrawing its man in Prague after Czech newspapers identified him as
a homosexual living in the city with another man. Christopher Hurran, whose
cover had been acting as a counselor at the British Embassy, was exposed by the
Czech security service, BIS, after he made a written complaint about the head
of the BIS, Karel Vulterin, who was fired by the Czech government as a
result.

            "The letter that led to
Mr. Vulterin's dismissal is believed to have followed leaks from within the BIS
revealing a successful MI6 operation in which Iraq's leading spymaster in the
region defected to the West," the newspaper said. This was Jabir Salim, head of
Mukhabarrat operations in Eastern Europe, who disappeared before Christmas,
telling colleagues at the Iraqi embassy in Prague that his daughter needed
urgent medical treatment in neighboring Austria. An interesting revelation in
the report was that the British intelligence services, which previously
excluded homosexuals for security reasons, no longer see them as a risk if they
are open about their sexuality.

            There was anger in Jordan Tuesday over suggestions in
Israel that Jordan might now need Israeli "protection" against Syria or other
Arab neighbors, who might seek to exploit King Hussein's illness to destabilize
the country. A Jordanian official was quoted in the pan-Arab Al Hayat as saying, "Jordan
does not sense any danger threatening its security or stability from Syria or
any other Arab party." The kingdom "has always been and continues to be capable
of defending itself against any threat regardless of its source or
objective."

            In Japan, Asahi
Shimbun quoted sources as saying that "the government and the ruling
coalition parties decided Tuesday there is no constitutional prohibition
against private companies transporting U.S. weapons, munitions and military
personnel in emergency situations around Japan." This cleared a major hurdle in
the revision by the Japanese parliament of the U.S.-Japan defense cooperation
agreement, the paper said.

            In Russia, Izvestia reported
Wednesday on a ruling by the Constitutional Court that nobody should be
sentenced to death again until all citizens are guaranteed the right to trial
by jury. But the paper commented that legislators might decide that, in
Russia's current economic circumstances, it is too expensive to provide juries
to all the country's courts and that therefore capital punishment should be
banned altogether.

             

         
      
   
