
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Feb. 26
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Feb.
20, 1999)
            

            The cover story and editorial say deflation threatens the global economy.
Deflation caused by overcapacity and flaccid demand could send the world into a
depression. Japan and Europe must ease their tight monetary policies to boost
consumer demand. ... Two stories urge Turkey to compromise with its
Kurdish minority rather than continue to oppress it. Turkish Kurds don't demand
separation, only limited autonomy, and Turkey ought to grant that to keep the
peace. (One of the pieces begins with the mysterious sentence, "The Turks are
cockahoop.") ... A piece notes the demise of Shaman Pharmaceuticals, a
drug company that paid rainforest folk healers to supply healing plants that
could be turned into advanced drugs. The lesson: Advanced screening technology,
which allows companies to speedily test lots of plants for medicinal
properties, is better than folk wisdom.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , March 8
            

            
               (posted Friday, Feb.
19, 1999)
            

            The editorial heartily
endorses Hillary Clinton's contemplated Senate run, because it will finally
stop her from injecting her politics into her husband's job. "We're far from
certain that her brand of righteous liberalism is what the people of New York
want or need," say the editors, "but we are sure that it would be healthy for
the country to find out." ... An article tallies the early achievements
of Minnesota Gov. Jesse "The Body" Ventura. He and his centrist brain trust
have concocted progressive and equitable ways to spend the state's budget
surplus and tobacco settlement bounty. ... Legal scholar Akhil Reed Amar
calls on Congress to let the independent counsel statute (a "constitutional
Frankenstein") die and to replace faulty Supreme Court decisions on executive
privilege with a comprehensive bill on presidential legal liability. (For more
of Amar's critique of the independent counsel statute, see this week's ".")

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               , Feb. 21
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Feb.
18, 1999)
            

            The cover story
proclaims the end of England's decline and fall. From the dismantled House of
Lords to London's integrated suburbs, England is finally paying more attention
to its cosmopolitan future than to its oft-eulogized past. ... A piece
profiles Linux, an operating system which might pose the biggest threat to
Windows. Written by Linus Torvalds, a Finnish programmer who couldn't afford to
buy a commercial operating system, Linux is free, is maintained by a vast
network of loyal volunteer programmers, and never crashes. ... The
magazine introduces a redesigned front section, which grandly aims to chronicle
"The Way We Live Now." Included is a new ethics column (written by

                  Slate
               's own -meister Randy Cohen), a feature on draft-dodging in
Israel, and a guide to spotting bacteria in bologna sandwiches.

            

               
                  Time
               
               , Newsweek , and

               
                  U.S. News & World Report , Feb. 22
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
16, 1999)
            

            The newsweeklies chronicle Flytrap's denouement.
Time 's cover story toasts the sunny side of the impeachment scandal.
It sparked a vigorous debate about morality, introduced role models who defied
stereotypes (powerful attorneys in wheelchairs, patrician female lawmakers),
and demonstrated that the political process is "sturdy and forgiving." The
Senate's closed deliberations on impeachment were a bonding experience, and
their frankness and intimacy will encourage more teamwork in the future.
Newsweek 's cover
story is darker, emphasizing the trial's lingering stink in the White
House and Congress. The only figure to emerge untainted is Hillary Clinton,
whose approval rating is 33 percentage points higher than it was before the
scandal. U.S. News & World Report 's cover
story moans that notoriety has become acceptable--even desirable--for
political figures. Flytrap's only silver lining: a new concern about the
erosion of privacy. A related
story conveys the isolation felt by many religious conservatives in the
wake of the president's acquittal: Like the 1925 Scopes monkey trial, Flytrap
may encourage them to withdraw from mainstream America. "We have never been a
moral majority," concedes one.

            
               Time reports on
a peculiar development in medical research: fake operations. Researchers are
performing "placebo-controlled surgical trials" in which they cut patients open
and sew them back up without doing anything. Afterward, the doctors compare the
results of the placebo surgeries with those of real operations. ...

               U.S. News 
               profiles Chinese mystic and faith healer Master Li, who
peddles a combination of ancient Chinese healing and American-style revivalist
preaching to 60 million followers. Communist leaders can't decide whether to
suppress Li or co-opt him for their own agenda.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , Feb. 22 and March 1
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
16, 1999)
            

            The magazine publishes a
New York-themed double issue. Arranged marriage is alive and well in the Indian
communities of Queens, says a profile of an imaginative young woman reluctantly
steeling herself to accept her appointed betrothed. She uses her real name in
the hope that a suitable bachelor might pick her out of the magazine instead.
... An article chronicles the entwined histories of the rival New
York Daily News and New York Post , which are as colorful,
scandalous, and gritty as the tabloids' front pages. A highlight: After
Post Editor Pete Hamill was fired in 1993, the staff revolted and
published a protest issue mocking the new owner. ... The magazine
profiles Metropolitan Opera General Manager Joseph Volpe, who began his career
as a set-building carpenter and now rules the institution with workmanlike
practicality and a diva-sized temper. (In a revealing New Yorker
slip-up, the Volpe piece misspells the name of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. In a
passage about the mayor's dictatorial, brutal style, the text calls him
"Rudolf." Rudolf, Adolf, whatever.)

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , Feb. 22
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
16, 1999)
            

            The magazine enlists 22
pundits to opine about the president's acquittal. One calls Flytrap the
American Dreyfus Affair, revealing the rot and corruption at the heart of our
national government. Another compares it to the German triumph at Dunkirk, a
superficial and premature victory that will be overshadowed when Bill Bradley
wins the Democratic nomination for president. Another argues that the
independent counsel distorted the impeachment process: The House should have
been allowed to conduct a more direct and aggressive investigation of the
president, unfettered by Ken Starr. The magazine reprints a poem by W.B. Yeats
("the greatest poet of the twentieth century"), urging the House managers to
"be secret and exult" in their martyrdom.

         
      
   
