
   
   
      
         
            Impeachment Upstaged

            The impeachment of
President Clinton was upstaged on Friday's front pages in Germany by the
European Commission's dramatic survival of a parliamentary censure motion, in
France by Germany's shock decision to end all production of nuclear energy, and
in Italy by fraud in the Milan lottery; but in Britain it was reported with
full pomp and circumstance.

            The Independent of London
dedicated its entire front page to impeachment under the headline "January 14,
1999. The day a President went on trial." The conservative Daily Telegraph , no
admirer of Clinton, made a two deck, seven column headline out of words from
House prosecutor James Sensenbrenner: "His lies were not few or isolated but
pervaded his whole testimony." The Times led with "Battle begins for Clinton's survival"
and the Guardian with "Trial of the century begins."

            But the Daily Telegraph was the only British
national newspaper to devote an editorial to the matter. This accused Clinton's lawyers of
committing a strategic error by falling into "the temptation of picking at the
witness testimony in the Monica Lewinsky case," thus making it "imperative that
these witnesses be called to testify, so that disputes on points of fact can be
resolved." It said, "The result is to undercut Mr Clinton's own desperate
effort to prevent any live witnesses being called."

            The editorial added that
the cross-examination of Lewinsky or Betty Currie was "likely to open up a can
of worms." Few were aware, it said, that "Miss Lewinsky received a telephone
call from Mr Clinton at 2 a.m. on December 17, 1997, suggesting that she issue
a false affidavit to pre-empt a subpoena in the Paula Jones lawsuit"; or that
"on January 21, 1998, Mr Clinton told his aide Sidney Blumenthal, falsely, that
Miss Lewinsky was a 'stalker,' setting in motion the White House smear campaign
against the defenceless, star-struck, exploited girl." The editorial concluded,
"These are little vignettes of caddishness that could start to damn the
President in the eyes of a fair-minded nation. The longer the trial goes on,
the greater the risk that Mr Clinton's famous luck will break."

            In Milan, the Corriere della
Sera carried an interview Friday with feminist lawyer Gloria Allred,
who said that the impeachment crisis had "lacerated the women's rights
movement, which feels obliged to defend Clinton because he has raised many of
us to positions of power." She added, in reference to the throwing out of the
Paula Jones lawsuit against the president, "It is sad to note that the victory
of the supposed feminist Bill Clinton has set our movement back by
decades."

            The failure of the directly elected European
Parliament to pass a censure motion against the European Commission (the
unelected executive body of the European Union) over allegations of fraud and
mismanagement was condemned as a "surrender" in another Daily Telegraph
editorial Friday. "Both the commission and the parliament
are now thoroughly discredited," it said. "They have shown themselves to be
ready to tolerate serious malpractice rather than allow the unification of
Europe to be impeded." Another Europhobic British daily, the tabloid Daily
Mail , called the vote a "fiasco" and said the parliament had "scuttled away
from its challenge to corruption and cronyism in the EU."

            But Europhile papers
took a different view. The Financial Times said that the commission, despite its
victory, had got "a bloody nose" and that the vote had been "an important round
of what may prove to be a long struggle." The European Parliament must now try
"to become more than a terrier snapping at the heels of policymakers: it can
become a guard dog with a respected bark." In Paris, Libération called the vote
"a political earthquake" with which the European Parliament had finally
"justified its existence." Nothing will ever be the same again, it said.

            Russia's Nezavisimaya Gazeta reported Thursday that
the Russian nuclear power industry had a very difficult year in 1998. Strikes
by power workers because they received no wages and a general slackening of
labor discipline in the industry caused a rise in accidents, the paper said.
All in all, 102 nuclear power station "malfunctions" were recorded last year
(23 more than in 1997), and there were 27 unscheduled power shut-offs in 1998
(compared with 18 in the year before). The number of people injured in nuclear
power accidents fell from 38 to 20 last year, of which one died--compared with
two the year before. "Still, this doesn't give any grounds for optimism since
one power worker has already been killed since January 1, 1999," the paper
said.

            In Egypt, the semi-official press has been busy
denying "misrepresentation" in the American media that the Egyptian government
wanted Saddam Hussein ousted as president of Iraq. "For Egypt's foreign
minister to criticize the Iraqi regime ... does not at all mean that Egypt is
inciting the Iraqi people to overthrow Saddam Hussein. That would violate a
cardinal principle of its policy which is characterized by transparency and
avoidance of behind-the-scenes conspiracies and maneuvers," the Cairo evening
paper al-Mesaa said.

            The leading semi-official
daily Al Ahram
said in an editorial Wednesday that the attacks some Iraqi officials had made
on the Egyptian leadership will not deter Cairo from standing by the Iraqi
people and trying to prevent further U.S. military action. Egypt "cannot accept
any new aggression against Iraq ... and cannot accept the principle of external
interference in a state's affairs whatever regime it may have, especially when
that intervention lacks any international cover or consensus."

            In Paris Le Monde 's editorial Friday was devoted to the financial
crisis in Brazil, which it said had not merely brought a premature end to
"europhoria" about the new single European currency but had "destabilized an
international financial system which was just beginning to recover from the
Asian and Russian crises." On the same theme, the Guardian of London
warned that the world economy has yet to feel the knock-on effects of Brazil's
traumatic devaluation. "Don't loosen your safety belts yet," it said.

            Britain's best-selling
tabloid, the Sun , announced as a front-page "world exclusive" Friday
that Texan model Jerry Hall has started divorce proceedings against aging rock
star Mick Jagger at the High Court in London. She has "ignored Mick's please
for forgiveness" over his affair with Brazilian beauty Luciana Giminez Morad,
the paper said.

             

         
      
   
