
   
   
      
         
             State of the Conjugal Union

            Tuesday afternoon at
President Clinton's trial, White House Counsel Charles Ruff emphatically
reminded the Senate that Clinton had confessed to adultery with an intern less
than half his age. Hours later at Clinton's State of the Union address,
senators applauded as the president touted his record on family values. How did
Clinton get away with this compartmentalization? By reinterpreting
"family."

            Ruff's argument before the Senate was a legal
defense but a moral surrender. Clinton couldn't be guilty of perjury before
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's grand jury, Ruff explained, because in his
testimony Clinton had "admitted" the essential truth: that he had engaged in
"sexual conduct" and "inappropriate, intimate contact with Monica Lewinsky."
Yes, Ruff conceded, Clinton had clammed up about the details, but this was
merely "an effort to preserve the dignity of the office" in the wake of the
indignities to which Clinton had subjected it. The president's lawyer
concluded, "We are not here to defend William Clinton, the man." Indeed, Ruff
stipulated that senators were free "to find his personal conduct
distasteful."

            Yet Clinton conveyed no
shame when he entered the House chamber later that evening. Nor did the
Democratic lawmakers who cheered and embraced him. The president sprinkled the
word "family" throughout his speech and devoted one-sixth of the text to a
section titled "Support for American Families." The section didn't mention
marriage, illegitimacy, or any of the other conventional moral topics that
might embarrass Clinton. Instead, it repackaged five other kinds of issues as
family concerns.

            1. Technical support. Republican family issues are
conflicts over contrary goals (hence the phrase "culture war"). Clinton,
however, uses the word "family" to describe issues in which the goal is
uncontroversial and the only challenge is to provide the means. In the "family"
portion of his speech, he bragged about the "Family Medical Leave Act" and
called on Congress to "extend family leave to 10 million more Americans." He
urged lawmakers to provide subsidies and tax credits for "quality child care"
and "after-school programs"--all in the name of "working families."

            
               2. Aid to
individuals. Republican family issues are about relations among family
members. Clinton's family issues are about helping individuals while describing
them as members of families. In his "family" discussion, he challenged Congress
to raise the minimum wage, support HMO regulations, finance studies on
arthritis (because "America's families deserve the world's best medical care"),
and help public hospitals treat "working families who don't have any
insurance." Democrats used to embrace "working people" while Republicans
embraced "family values." By claiming to serve "working families," Clinton
plays it both ways.

            3. Constituency politics. Republican family issues
discriminate between family configurations (straight vs. gay, married vs.
unmarried, etc.). Clinton's family issues ignore these distinctions and instead
discriminate by other demographic criteria that are equally politically useful.
In his remarks on the family, he extolled federal funding of Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's research. He urged Congress to "allow people with disabilities to
keep health insurance when they go to work" and to "give people between the
ages of 55 and 65 who lose their health insurance the chance to buy into
Medicare." This is great news if you're disabled, if you're 55 to 65, or if
someone you care about has Parkinson's or Alzheimer's. But Clinton isn't
speaking to you as a special interest. He's speaking to you as a family.

            
               4. Cultural
liberalism. Republicans use the F word to affirm conservative
principles such as chastity, maternity, and homemaking. Clinton uses it to
renovate or even reverse those principles. "Let's make sure that women and men
get equal pay for equal work by strengthening enforcement of equal pay laws,"
he proposed at the outset of his discussion of "family." Equal pay began as a
feminist cause, but Clinton has made it a family issue by spotlighting mothers
who work outside the home. Likewise, in his speech, he avoided the phrase
"birth control," which connotes hostility to kids and families. Instead, he
spoke up for "family planning," which connotes the opposite.

            5. Paternalism. Republicans advocate regulation of
family matters while defending freedom of choice in economic matters. Liberal
Democrats draw the same distinction but take the opposite positions. Clinton
confounds both camps by blurring the family/economic distinction. His favorite
hybrid issue is tobacco legislation. This began as a public health crusade, but
Clinton has transformed it into an issue of helping parents protect their kids
from tobacco pushers. "Our children are targets of a massive media campaign to
hook them on cigarettes," he charged in his remarks on the family. "I ask this
Congress to resist the tobacco lobby [and] to reaffirm the FDA's authority to
protect our children from tobacco."

            After 10 minutes of
family values oratory and dozens of ovations, Clinton concluded, "If we act in
these areas--minimum wage, family leave, child care, health care, the safety of
our children--then we will begin to meet our generation's historic
responsibility to strengthen our families." Of course, honoring your marriage
vows helps, too. But when you're as smooth-tongued as Bill Clinton, that goes
without saying.

         
      
   
