
   
   
      
         
            No. 183: &quot;Three Times To&quot;

            
               The answer, from
Richard Clarke, the president's counterterrorism coordinator, is: "To extort
us, to intimidate us, to get us to abandon our foreign policy."
            

            

               What's the question?
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thursday's question (No. 182)--"Reign Delay":
            

            

               Out of deference to the pope, the state of Missouri postponed something
until after he left St. Louis and returned to Rome. What?
            

            "The
annual running of the Lutherans."-- Robert Consoli
            

            "Hug a
Married Minister Day."-- Doug Strauss
            

            "
'Margaret Sanger Night' at Hooters."-- Danny Spiegel ( Andrew
Staples had a similar answer.)

            "An
all-male production of Jesus Christ Superstar ."-- Beth
Sherman
            

            "The
execution of triple murderer Darrell Mease, via (in a delicious twist!)
crucifixion."-- Jack Barth
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Hypocrisy is the homage vice pays to NBC Standards
and Practices. That's what La Rochefoucauld said about the old Letterman show
when the generic air crash joke Dave told at the 5:30 p.m. taping turned sour
by the 12:30 a.m. broadcast, due to an actual air disaster around 9 p.m.: "But
if it was now wrong to mock the charred remains of the dead, surely it was
wrong a week ago, and would still be wrong a week hence when Dave resumed
airline ridicule. And if it were in fact an honorable joke, then why not tell
it any time?"

            Another scenario. When the rabbi drops by for dinner
on the night of the big pork and lobster banquet, you change the menu--not
because there's anything discreditable about eating sea and sty, but as a
matter of tact. You're not having it both ways; you're being considerate.

            Test case. A condemned
man is having his last meal, trayf , on a 747. His seat-mate is a
religious personage. The No. 2 engine flames out. You be the captain: What do
you announce over the PA? (Express in French in the form of a maxim.)

            
               Justice Delayed Is
Justice Divine Answer
            

            The rapid pace of religious life has outdistanced
News Quiz. When the question was posted, Missouri's governor had just said he'd
wait to kill Darrell Mease until the pope left the room, postponing the
execution, originally set for Jan. 27 as part of the papal welcoming ceremony
(or perhaps not; I've misplaced my program), until Feb. 10.

            After prolonged pontifical exposure, Gov. Carnahan
commuted Mease's sentence to life imprisonment. The governor assured
disappointed supporters that he will execute other people: "I continue to
support capital punishment, but after careful consideration of [the pope's]
direct and personal appeal and because of a deep and abiding respect for the
pontiff and all that he represents, I decided last night to grant his
request."

            Missouri has executed 33 people since the death
penalty was reinstated in 1976; only three states have killed more. Under
Missouri law, a death sentence may be commuted if someone really famous speaks
up for the condemned. (Or perhaps not, I've misplaced my copy of the penal
code.)

            A day after the pope's
departure, Missouri put another man to death.

            
               First Minute
Shopping Extra
            

            This Valentine's Day, rather than the too familiar
tokens of love--flowers, candy, betrayal, recriminations--why not order your
gift from Country Supply Inc.
Some lovely items from its mail-order catalog:

            

               COWBOY MAGIC. Instantly breaks down dirt and unwanted matter without
damaging hair. $7.98--I believe that was the title and plot summary of Sam
Shepard's first play. And all the rest of them. Except for the part about
"without damaging."

               MUCK MASTER. $6.25--If it's half the Valentine's Day it could be, you'd
better have one. Or two.

               STUD CHAIN. 20" training chain has a 1" wide swivel eye. $2.50--First step
in the training: Stop swiveling that eye, buster.

               THE ULTIMATE CORDURA PAD. On the bottom is a quarter inch layer of our
orthopedic "Absorb-Felt" for its ability to hold up to four times its weight in
moisture. $36.95--His colleagues say after a hard day's caucusing Daniel
Patrick Moynihan has the same ability.

               CHICAGO SCREWS. Keep a package in your trailer, your barn, and a spare
package in the house. $1.39--For that special single entendre someone.

               Various saddles are available, including PRAIRIE ROPER, THE RAMBLER, GOLDEN
PLEASURE, and COUNTRY PLEASURE. $289-$569--I believe "Country Pleasure" was
Justice Rehnquist's CB handle, back when he was a long-haul trucker.

               CABLE TRAINING NOSEBAND WITH HEADSTALL. This effective device is designed
to apply pressure to the ... poll and nose. $6.50--I say if it's that much
hassle, you can do without HBO.

               PROFESSIONAL NIPPERS. ($16.80) PROFESSIONAL CLINCHER ($27.90)--Call me
square, but I think paying for nipping and clinching degrades everyone
involved.

               LEATHER BREEDING HOBBLE. This professional hobble is designed for the
serious breeder. Fully adjustable and comes with panic snaps and pulley system.
$84.95--And you'd be nuts to mess around with a pulley system without the panic
snaps.

               BIG RED APPLE. Cuts down on stall boredom,
cribbing, weaving, and chewing. $12.90--You order that leather breeding hobble,
you can forget about stall boredom.

            

            
               Race Results: What
We Know About Missouri
            

            1. Show Me State

            2. Anheuser-Busch

            3. Branson

            4. The arch

            5. Harry Truman

            
               For Your Listening
Enjoyment
            

            Randy Cohen Week begins
at 3 p.m. ET today at the online site of the humor magazine McSweeney's , featuring stories
from Diary of a Flying Man , a collection published by Knopf and
currently sold only by street vendors.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
