
   
   
      
         
            News from academe

            
               The Rapist in the
Machine
            

            Revered author and
anti-Communist Arthur Koestler repeatedly abused women and committed at least
one rape, alleges a new British biography serialized in the Daily
Telegraph . The book, by Southampton University Professor David Cesarani,
claims that in 1951 Koestler violently assaulted Jill Craigie, the wife of
former Labor Party leader Michael Foot. (Craigie has since confirmed the
story.) The furor over the book led to the removal of a bust of Koestler from
Edinburgh University. Oblivious to the truism that all publicity is good,
Cesarini wrote in the Times Higher Education Supplement that his work
was distorted by the Telegraph 's sensationalistic presentation. His
stated intent: to balance a candid assessment of Koestler's unsavory personal
life with a respectful consideration of the man's achievements as a writer and
political thinker.

            
               Nobel
Gas?
            

            A book debunking
Rigoberta Menchú , the winner of the 1992 Nobel Peace Prize,
has reignited the domestic culture wars. Rigoberta Menchú and the Story of
All Poor Guatemalans , by Middlebury College anthropologist David Stoll,
documents numerous inaccuracies, fabrications, and shadings of the truth in
Menehú's ghostwritten 1987 autobiography. Conservative commentator Dinesh
D'Souza , who first ridiculed Menchú's book in 1991, compared the lefty
saint to Tawana Brawley in a recent op-ed, aligning her defenders with those
who claimed that the truth of Brawley's allegations didn't matter. On the left,
Alexander Cockburn declared that Menchú "survives [Stoll's] scrutiny," arguing
that his revelations are trivial and that the flaws in Menchú's account of her
life are transcended by her success in
bringing world attention to the plight of Guatemalan Indians.
Meanwhile, Stoll's book has accelerated debate among anthropologists and
literary scholars over the reliability of individual testimony and the proper
relationship between autobiographical narrative and literal truth.

            
               Edward
Said--D'oh!
            

            Intellectual celebrity
Edward Said has assumed the presidency of academia's largest and most
controversial professional organization, the Modern Language Association . The Columbia University
literary scholar, music critic, and Palestinian activist is the best-known
figure to represent the profession in years. The Nation hailed his
inauguration as a victory for the left, a sentiment not shared by some inside
the academy, who have noted Said's increasingly critical views about the
radical postcolonial scholars who have followed in his footsteps. Meanwhile,
the New York Times apologized for the mysterious appearance of a Bart
Simpson mask in a photograph of Palestinian demonstrators that accompanied an
essay by Said in its Sunday magazine.

            
               Retroaffirmative
Action
            

            California's new
governor, Democrat Gray Davis, has endorsed a diversity plan for the University
of California system that would replace the programs swept away by a 1996
ballot initiative. Officials worried about falling minority enrollments and
applications are proposing to guarantee admission to the University of
California to any California high-school student who graduates in the top 4
percent of his high-school class. The 
                  Chronicle of Higher
Education
                reports that Ward Connerly, the architect of the 1996
initiative, has extended cautious support to the plan. Connerly and his allies
scored a recent victory in Washington state, which has begun to dismantle its
affirmative action programs after voters passed a clone of the California
initiative in November.

            
               God Is an
Environmentalist
            

            Last October, more than
1,000 religious leaders from various faiths gathered with scholars at Harvard
University for a conference on environmentalism . The Los Angeles Times
described the conference as the most visible manifestation of a rapprochement
between religion and environmentalism. Religious leaders, especially
conservative Christians, have long been suspicious of environmentalism, seeing
links between its exaltation of nature and pagan traditions. And
environmentalists have on occasion attacked religion for promoting human
domination over the natural world. "We still espouse a God-given right of human
beings to use the environment for their benefit," says Barrett Duke of the
Southern Baptists. "Creation was not provided to us by God to consume it into
oblivion."

            
               No! Wait! Sociology
Lives!
               
            

            Not long ago, Lingua
Franca (and others) declared that "sociology is dead." Once considered a
model of social scientific method and a source of broad insights into the way
people live, the discipline had become directionless, intellectually moribund,
and hopelessly overspecialized, with departments across the country scaling
back or disappearing altogether. But now Prospect , a British magazine
that covers politics and ideas, asserts that "sociology is back." The evidence? A renaissance of
sociological research in the United Kingdom, as well as the fact that Prime
Minister Tony Blair's intellectual guru is sociologist and London School of
Economics Dean Anthony Giddens. Prospect adds that the best sociological
research is coming from independent think tanks and corporations, not from
universities.

            
               Serbia Turns Down
American Express
            

            Despite U.S. State
Department intervention, Serbia denied visas to a delegation assigned by
Human Rights Watch to
investigate the suppression of academic freedom in that country. Those denied
visas included philosopher Richard Rorty and several Nobel laureates, who were
to participate in a conference with independent Serbian intellectuals. The
Serbian government also contended that the delegation--which included Lingua
Franca Managing Editor Laura Secor, who recently wrote for the magazine
about the Serb government's crackdown on universities--was part of a CIA
plot.

            
               Economic Star
Power
            

            The 
                  Economist
               's survey of
rising young stars in the economics profession found that this decade's hot
young economists are the same people it named to the list 10 years ago. "Where
are the Paul Krugmans of yesteryear?" the magazine asked, wondering
why so few junior members of the field have crossed over into the public
sphere. The answer seems to be that the very youngest generation is doing work
that is too technical and too mathematical to attract much attention or be
applied to questions of policy.

            
               Class
Struggles
            

            A labor stalemate between the University of
California and its graduate students continues. Graduate students working as
teaching assistants went on strike in December, demanding the right to
collective bargaining for the 9,000 TAs who work for the eight school system.
They then acceded to a "cooling off" period, which ended Jan. 21 without an
agreement being reached. The students, affiliated with the United Auto Workers union, have
had some success: The California Public Employment Relations Board ruled late
last year in favor of their right to organize. The university appealed the
decision, insisting that graduate students, even if they work as instructors,
are students first and foremost. Union organizers have not yet said when the
strike might resume.

         
      
   
