
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Payback
                (Paramount Pictures). Mel Gibson plays a
hard-boiled bad guy intent on recovering some stolen money in this adaptation
of Richard Stark's novel The Hunter (which was also the basis for John
Boorman's acclaimed modern noir Point Blank in 1967). This version is
directed by L.A. Confidential writer Brian Helgeland, and most critics
pan it: "The film is utterly devoid of narrative ingenuity and visual and
dramatic flair. ... What one word might best describe Payback ? How about
'Loathsome'?" (Stephen Holden, the New York Times ). Complaints: 1) The
violence is over the top: "Watching it is like riding a roller coaster through
a meat grinder." 2) Gibson is too chipper for a noir hero: "[H]e's like a
chipmunk with a Smith & Wesson" (Stephen Hunter, the Washington
Post ). 
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein calls it "inflated
Pocket Books pulp." A small cadre, including the Chicago Sun-Times '
Roger Ebert and the Los Angeles Times ' Kenneth Turan, praise the movie
as a sort of film noir parody. (Check out the official site, and read Edelstein's review .)

            
               
                  Simply
Irresistible
                (20 th Century Fox). Negative reviews for
this Like Water for Chocolate -style magical food romance. Buffy the
Vampire Slayer 's Sarah Michelle Gellar stars as a cook in love and in
trouble. Critics blast the sappy romance as well as the "dismayingly formulaic
view of enchantment. Magic is signified by levitating people à la Mary
Poppins , playing wind-chimes on the soundtrack or flooding a scene with dry
ice" (Desson Howe, the Washington Post ). Roger Ebert (who manages to
work the odd sexual euphemism "the old rumpy-pumpy" into his review for the
second time in three months) defends the movie as fun fluff: "The movie is as
light as a soufflé, as fleeting as a breath of pumpkin pie on the breeze from a
widow's window" (the Chicago Sun-Times ). (This fan
site has loads of pictures of the lovely Miss Gellar.)

            

               
                  Rushmore
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Critics lavish
director Wes Anderson and co-writer Owen Wilson (who performed similar duties
on Bottle Rocket ) with praise for their film about a bright but
underachieving high-school misfit (Jason Schwartzman) who ends up competing
with Bill Murray for the affection of a young teacher: "an exuberantly original
comedy" (Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ). Murray has won several
critics' awards for his performance, but now that the film is in general
release (it had a brief run in December to qualify for the Academy Awards), a
few dissenters have surfaced, including the Wall Street Journal 's Joe
Morgenstern and 
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein, who says the writers
"spend a lot of time patting themselves on the back for being aggressively
unconventional." (Watch a clip from the movie here and read
the rest of Edelstein's review .)

            
               
                  Dry
Cleaning
                (Strand Releasing). Critics call this French farce
remarkably tame and wonder if an industry known for its cheerful sex romps has
lost its edge. The story follows a bourgeois small-town couple with a dry
cleaning business whose lives are turned upside down after a young drag
performer they meet in a club ends up moving in with them. This sounds like
racy stuff, but critics say the story has the "structure and implacable
momentum of a stern moral fable" (Holden, the New York Times ) and is
more interested in dissecting the slow tragedy of the couple's disintegrating
marriage than in high jinks. (Find out more about French star Miou-Miou
here.)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  Werewolves in
Their Youth
               , by Michael Chabon (Random House). David Foster
Wallace wrote in Infinite Jest : "Talent is its own expectation. ... You
either live up to it or it waves a hankie, receding forever," and many
reviewers seem to see the hankie waving here at the boy wonder who a decade ago
wowed the critics with The Mysteries of Pittsburgh . As Michael Gorra
says in the New York Times Books Review , "Promising is still the word
I'd choose" to describe this collection, "but after 10 years and four books
that adjective has to seem a disappointment." Critics say that despite a few
outstanding exceptions, most of the collection is overly self-conscious and
marked by stories that start out interesting but end up failing when Chabon
ties them all up too neatly at the end. (Read an excerpt courtesy of the New
York Times [free registration required].)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  You're a Good
Man, Charlie Brown
                (Ambassador Theatre, New York City). Broadway's
revival of this amateur-theater staple gets solid reviews and a few performers
get all-out raves, most notably Kristin Chenoweth as Sally Brown. John Simon
describes Chenoweth's performance as "perfection" and says that after the show
he wanted "to wrap her in tissue paper and take her home" ( New York );
Ben Brantley describes her performance as "one of those break-out performances
that send careers skyward" (the New York Times ). Some critics say
several of the actors aren't up to portraying children but that those who
succeed make the whole show worthwhile. (Find out about show times and ticket
prices here; you can get Shockwave animations of various
Peanuts characters here.)

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  She's All That ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The 24 Hour Woman ;

               
                  Movie -- Still Crazy ;

               
                  Movie -- My Name Is Joe ;

               
                  Book--
                  What Our Mothers Didn't Tell Us: Why Happiness
Eludes the Modern Woman , by Danielle Crittenden;

               
                  Book
                  --Amy and Isabelle , by Elizabeth Strout;

               
                  Book -- Heavy Water , by
Martin Amis.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie
                  --
                  Gloria ;

               
                  Movie
                  --
                  Playing by Heart ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Another Day in Paradise ;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Reporting Live , by Lesley
Stahl;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Face-Time , by Erik Tarloff;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Miss Nobody , by Tomek Tryzna.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Varsity Blues ;

               
                  Movie -- At First Sight ;

               
                  Movie -- In Dreams ;

               
                  Book -- Duane's Depressed , by Larry McMurtry;

               
                  Book -- The Intuitionist , by Colson Whitehead;

               
                  Theater -- Fosse: A Celebration in Song and Dance
(Broadhurst Theatre, New York City).

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Affliction ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Hilary and Jackie ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Hi-Lo Country ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in
America--The Stalin Era , by Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev;

               
                  Book
                  --Note Found in a Bottle: My Life as a Drinker , by
Susan Cheever;

               
                  Book
                  --Glamorama , by Bret Easton Ellis.

            

         
      
   
