
   
   
      
         
            No. 190: &quot;Unworkable&quot;

            

               Speaking on Capitol Hill Thursday morning, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan
said, "I think some of them are not going to work, and they will cause
significant problems." Referring to ... ?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 189)--"Slogan's Run":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 The slogan "Feed the
rush" is being replaced with "Life's a scream."
Why?
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Why
indeed? Didn't they just CHANGE the $20 bill a few MONTHS ago?!!"-- Jack
Barth
            

            "Jerry
Falwell found 'Feed the rush' way too gay."-- Daniel Krause ( Julie
Anderson and Peter Carlin had similar answers.)

            "I
don't really have an answer for this, but I did want to tell everyone that WHAT
I'M READING RIGHT NOW is the fabulous new Elmore Leonard book, Be Cool .
(Delacorte Press, available from Amazon at a 37 percent discount, plus
shipping, which kind of wipes out the discount, but what the heck.) If you like
authors LIKE ELMORE LEONARD or are IN THE MOOD FOR MYSTERY, check this one out.
It's DESTINED FOR GREATNESS. (Small fee paid for this mention by Delacorte
Press, but I would have recommended the book anyway. Really.)"-- Fred
Graver
            

            "The
Federal Reserve Board likes the roller coaster allusion. Plus, 'Hey, you never
know' was already taken."--Jennifer Miller
            

            
"Becauseitsafullyloadedcitrusbeverageright? Yeah! Right! SUUUURGE! SUUUURGE!
Mustgorunaroundongolfcourse untilbeveragewearsoff."-- Kate Wing
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            With its limited advertising budget--limited to
zero--News Quiz has no spokesmodel (despite my rambling, drunken midnight phone
calls to Ellen Barkin), no Happy Meal ("Aw, Mom, I already have Tim Carvell!
Make them take it back."), and no slogan. Unable to afford a professional
slogan, something hip and hot and happenin' (Do the kids still say happenin'
with the apostrophe and all, or is there some swingin' new punctuation?), we
must make do with the public domain. Under consideration:

            

               "Human life is everywhere
in a state in which much is to be endured, and little to be enjoyed."

               "The natural flights of the
human mind are not from pleasure to pleasure, but from hope to hope."

               "You will see in me an
extraordinary example of the effects of a bad education."

               "The
truly comic is the blossom of the nettle."

            

            All T-shirts 100 percent
cotton.

            
               Heavy Citrus
Answer
            

            The new slogan is meant to induce 12- to 24-year-old
males to drink Coca-Cola's Surge instead of Pepsico's Mountain Dew, the
dominant soda pop in the "heavy citrus" category. Or, in the delightfully
jargon-laden prose of Doug Jackson, senior brand manager for Surge, to
"energize the brand for the next phase of growth."

            Jackson rejects their
previous ads: "The campaign was grounded in the two core teen values of action
and sociability, but was initially focused on the intensity more than the
sociability," he says without a trace of embarrassment. Jackson notes that the
casts of the new ads have "a more urban feel," i.e., include African-Americans.
"And with urban kids today, there's more of a melding of the races." The new
campaign will begin on Monday with what he calls "a youth-targeted media spike"
i.e., with commercials during Dawson's Creek .

            
               Photo Fun
Extra
            

            Match the organization
with the photo it retouched to remove an offensive cigarette.

            

               Organization
            

            1. U.S. Postal Service

            2. Tina Brown's Vanity Fair
            

            3. Pravda
            

             

            

               Photo
            

            A. Guitar-playing Robert Johnson

            B. Paint-splattering Jackson Pollock

            C. Gestating Courtney Love

            D. Parade-watching Joseph
Stalin

            

               Answers
            

            1. A and B. The new Pollock stamp and an earlier
Johnson stamp, both based on photographs, eliminate the cigarette from each
man's mouth, and the adulterous gleam from Pollock's eye.

            2. C. Brown said she didn't approve of pregnant
women smoking so she had the cigarette airbrushed out. Presumably, she did
approve of the murderers photographed in other issues.

            3. D. On Stalin's own
order, they retouched a photo of him on the reviewing stand in Red Square for
the 1949 May Day Parade. He felt the long rhinestone cigarette holder undercut
his butch image. I read that in Commentary . Or maybe I didn't.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Limbaugh--a fat man named
Rush.

            
               Slogan
Citations
            

            The first and second are
Dr. Johnson, the third is Boswell, and the fourth is Coleridge.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
