
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Over the past year and a half, several pieces have appeared in Slate
that delve into the cultural and political dimensions of race in the United
States. In honor of Black History Month, Slate is proud to present a few
of these pieces, most of which have only been available to
subscribers.
            

            Not Just
Talk

            A
five-point program for better race relations.

            
               By
Jacob Weisberg
            

            To the growing legion of
Clinton cynics, the president's race-relations initiative, unveiled last
weekend, is an exercise in cheap talk. Liberal and conservative pundits
disagree about affirmative action and welfare reform, but concur that a series
of town meetings, an advisory panel, and an eloquent report are sorry
substitutes for decisive action.

            If they were talking
about Social Security reform, the critics might have a point. There, endless
calls for more study postpone necessary but unpopular changes in policy. But
when it comes to race, the power of words should not be so lightly dismissed.
If President Clinton can use his rhetorical gifts to change attitudes on both
sides of the divide, he will be accomplishing something of great significance.
It's also all he can really hope to do right now. The public's current
skepticism about activist government stymies new initiatives. Having screwed up
his first term by misjudging the public demand for reform in the far less
difficult area of health care, the president would be foolish to present a
costly multipoint program on race.

            But if we had the money--and the will--what would we do
about race relations? A few years of peace, prosperity, and balanced
budgets--and a deeper awareness of just how bad our race problem is--may create
a climate where such a program could succeed. When that moment arrives,
Clinton, or his successor, should have a five-point plan ready.

            De facto segregation
exists throughout society. But the essence of the problem is the condition of
the worst-off blacks in the urban ghetto. White fears of the urban underclass
are distorted into broader stereotypes about blacks as a whole, which poison
relations between the races at all levels. Next week, Dateline NBC will
report on the south Chicago suburb of Matteson, which is tipping from an
upper-middle-class white suburb into an upper-middle-class black one. Matteson
ought to be an integrationist's paradise, but whites are fleeing because of
their concerns about crime and gangs, declining schools, and falling home
prices. In reality, schools, safety, even the property values haven't declined.
But fear that these things will happen is not purely irrational. If the whites
all leave, decline may become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Thus subtle racism
and a rational urge to self-preservation are bound up together. Unmaking the
underclass would answer white fears while giving lower-class blacks a chance
they are now largely denied: that of assimilating into the mainstream of an
integrated society.

            Perhaps the most important difference between people who
live in the ghetto and those who live outside it is that most of the former
aren't employed. Breaking down the underclass will require finding new ways to
draw unemployed ghetto residents into the culture of work. The jury will remain
out for some time on the effects of the welfare cutoff signed by Clinton last
year. But even with the jobs provisions included in that bill, it's evident
that there still aren't sufficient jobs in the inner cities, especially when
you consider the prospects of unemployed men, who aren't eligible for welfare.
In his latest book, When Work Disappears , William Julius Wilson argues
that there is a "spatial mismatch" between workers in the cities and jobs in
the suburbs. Wilson's answer is a transportation program to get blacks to where
the jobs are, and a big WPA-style jobs program (the details of which he borrows
from the journalist Mickey Kaus). These sub-minimum-wage jobs--doing basic
neglected work like repairing roads and bridges--would constitute the missing
bottom rung on an economic ladder.

            The second step is to
address the extreme isolation of the inner-city poor. This means a housing
strategy that shifts more decisively in the direction it has been inching under
Clinton. Instead of trying to tame inner-city housing projects with different
kinds of architecture, lower density, and income mixing, the Department of
Housing and Urban Development should redefine its purpose: to help its tenants
escape the ghetto. It should take a sledgehammer to every high-rise
under its control and instead provide vouchers. But these vouchers can't be the
kind conservatives prefer, which are sharply limited in value so as to
forestall real integration while directing tenants toward private-sector slums.
Vouchers need to be worth enough to afford real avenues of escape. They should
also steer beneficiaries away from other beneficiaries, to keep pockets of
concentrated poverty from re-emerging farther from the city's core. An easy way
to do this would be to enforce strict limits on the percentage of voucher
tenants allowed in any one building.

            A less obvious factor fostering residential segregation is
the boundary between city and suburb. When whites flee the central cities, they
take with them most of the tax revenue, and leave behind a downward spiral of
city services. As David Rusk, a former mayor of Albuquerque, argues in his
book, Cities Without Suburbs , metro-wide governments where the suburbs
and the city are joined tend to be more racially integrated, and better off in
various other ways as well. Washington can't erase jurisdictional frontiers,
but it can encourage metropolitan government via tax incentives and
cheerleading. Such a policy would displease many black politicians, since it
stands to diminish black political representation in the short run. But this is
a trade-off well worth making.

            All of these measures
together will not cause the ghettos to disappear. Providing escape routes from
the inner city may make the ghettos worse by depriving them of their most
competent residents. What's needed, alongside an evacuation plan, is a
realistic program to stabilize conditions for those left behind. The goal
shouldn't be to make the desert bloom. It should be to create zones where
people can raise children in safety even if they must travel elsewhere to work.
To accomplish this, a strategy would need to focus on crime and schools.

            Of course, neither law enforcement nor education is
principally a federal responsibility. But in both cases, the feds can help. On
crime, Clinton has had basically the right idea with his community-policing
initiative. Cops walking the street create a sense of order and provide good
role models for young boys. This program should be expanded, perhaps with
incentives for police to live in the neighborhoods they patrol full time.
Schools are a harder nut, but not an uncrackable one. There are a few good
schools, even in Harlem, which have succeeded by doing end runs around the
unionized bureaucracy of the central system. The federal government should do
more to spur the creation of such institutions, by providing resources, and by
helping to equalize the shameful disparity in funding between rich and poor
districts generally.

            Some of these concepts
have demonstrated their success at an experimental level and are ripe for
expansion. Others are just promising ideas that ought to be tried. All,
unfortunately, are expensive and sure to be controversial. They can't simply be
foisted on a reluctant public. To lay the groundwork for useful action on race
relations, we need exactly what President Clinton is proposing as a starting
point: honest talk, and lots of it.

            

               Illustration by Robert Neubecker.
            

            
               For more articles
from Slate in honor of Black History Month, check out:
            

            

               A prominent that Martin Luther King Jr. might have
been in favor of affirmative action, despite his request that people being
judged by the content of character rather than the color of their skin.

               A leading Harvard professor of the black intelligentsia.

               Americans should over race.

               Were slaves happy? The answer's as you'd think.

               How the death of Martin Luther King Jr. sparked a wave of in American
life.


            

         
      
   
