
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Drawing upon her rich experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her
friends) responds to questions about manners, personal relations, politics, and
other subjects. Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries
should not exceed 200 words in length. Please indicate how you wish your letter
to be signed, preferably including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Larry is an exceedingly good friend, and when
he comes to my city on business it's understood that I am delighted to take him
out on the town, put him up in my guest room, etc. Ditto for when I'm in his
city. As we're both computer geeks, when we happen to be going to the same
trade show or conference, night life plans and party invites for me
automatically include Larry--and vice versa.
            

            
               Enter The Problem in the form of Moe, a common
acquaintance of Larry's and mine who sometimes attends the same conferences.
Moe simply invites himself along to everything Larry and I do for the whole
week. If he gets wind of our plans, he'll turn up to meet us. If he hasn't
overheard anything, he'll simply tag along with one of us all day until lunch
or dinner or whatever. We have attempted to gently give Moe the message that
he's not welcome unless invited, but it just bounces off Moe's tact-proof
armor.
            

            
               Prudie, HELP. Moe's
not a jerk, he's just clueless, and Larry and I are agreed that we'd just like
the freakin' option of him not joining us. We'd like to achieve this without
actually being forced to tell him to **** off, but we're nearing our rope's
end.
            

            

               --Shemp in Seattle
            

            Dear Shemp,

            Prudie deplores the density of your cyberclod
friend and sees no reason for you and Larry to have to be stealth geeks. Since
you've tried tact, you must now be direct with this judgment-free fellow.
Simply tell him you hate like hell to hurt his feelings, but you and Larry use
these gatherings to catch up, and a third party simply changes the dynamic. (It
is, alas, poor manners to ever tell anyone to **** off.)

            You must be benevolent
despots, lest you find yourself manipulated by someone with the hide of a
rhinoceros. Gird your loins, make your statement, and brook no further
discussion ... roger and out.

            
--Prudie, determinedly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               We are often invited to parties and dinners at
some really splendid homes owned by wealthy acquaintances and clients of both
my husband and me. Should we invite these young wealthies back to our
comparatively humble, small home? They know we are not in their league
financially, but we feel a little sheepish inviting them to view our worn
upholstery and carpets. We wonder if they, too, would feel uncomfortable with
our differences made so plainly apparent.
            

            
               Should we just muster
our courage and invite them over, or should we invite them for dinner/drinks at
a restaurant? Would this seem impersonal and contrived?
            

            

               --Stuck in the Middle Class, Toronto
            

            Dear Stuck,

            It has been Prudie's experience that, when invited
to a simple home, she has often been impressed. The hosts in such a situation
usually are genuine, confident, and wise people: genuine because they are who
they are, confident because they know where the real values lie, and wise
because they understand that putting on the dog is pointless. People of quality
do not choose friends on the basis of their possessions.

            Restaurant entertaining
is becoming fashionable, however, and Prudie would recommend that for you if
that choice would not come from shame, and if you would have a better evening
yourselves.

            
--Prudie, entertainingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I am a young woman
who has made the unfortunate mistake of falling in love with my friend. I say
"unfortunate" because he happens to be gay. We both graduated together with the
same major: art history. I have admired his intelligence and sensitivity for a
long time. If it was not for him, I am sure I wouldn't have done nearly as well
in my studies. But I did not expect to become romantically involved! He has
asked me to go to Europe with him, and I do not know what to do about it. If I
tell him how I really feel, I fear he will want to end everything. And yet, the
longer I am with him the worse it gets and the harder it becomes to hide my
true feelings. Should I go to Europe? I would rather be with him than nothing
at all. Thank you.
            

            

               --Confused
            

            Dear Con,

            Ah yes, the old story of a woman falling for one of
nature's bachelors. If it's any consolation to you, this occurrence is not all
that rare. In fact, Prudie cast her eye in that direction while in college
(when ice covered the earth). It is a truism that, straight or gay, certain
people are going to have electricity for certain other people.

            Occasionally, a homosexual person will experiment
in the other arena. Prudie can think of two show business examples (one British
and dead, the other American and living). Both these gay men gave a romantic
whirl to their leading ladies, though the relationships were short-lived. As a
general rule, sexuality is hard-wired and that's that.

            Prudie feels it
important to point out that when you write you are "romantically involved," it
is only you experiencing the romance or the involvement. Prudie believes in the
interest of your mental health that you confess your feelings, thereby
relieving yourself of the stress and pain of a fantasy love affair. When you
'fess up (and your friend may already have figured things out), you might ask
if there is any reciprocal inclination. If not, your cards will be on the table
and together you can decide if the friendship continues, platonically, or if it
seems best to put things on ice. You need a resolution, and better sooner than
later.

            
--Prudie, resolutely

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               This guy I met--but
never dated--at work left for the West Coast about five months ago. When he was
preparing to leave, I wrote him a letter explaining my unease about his
departure, because I felt we had somehow missed our chance at what could have
been a real relationship. I wrote it in the summer, and I still have it. (Never
mailed it.) Without my explaining how or why I feel the "loss" more now than
ever. Can you tell me whether I should mail the letter? I'll spare you the more
complicated question of the mystical power of love.
            

            

               --xxxooo-nyc
            

            Dear xxx,

            Interesting that you
wrote the letter but kept it. Now that almost half a year has past, Prudie
suggests a compromise. Send the object of your affections a letter--but a
different one, a new one. Write to say that you've become aware of missing his
presence and wonder how things are going on the left coast. If he answers, and
if the answer is at all responsive, keep the correspondence going. If things
start to look promising, Prudie suggests you find it suddenly necessary to
visit your favorite aunt/college roommate/former dog trainer, anybody in the
city wherein the correspondent resides.

            --Prudie, plottingly

         
      
   
