
   
   
      
         
             Make Love Not War

            The true irresponsibility
of Kenneth Starr and the Republicans in Congress who turned an innocent affair
into a national crisis is only now becoming clear. Yes, our 13 month
distraction is now over, and the media can return to discussing education
reform and Social Security as they claim to prefer. Yes, Bill Clinton was not
evicted from office. But that doesn't mean our long national nightmare is over.
In fact, it is just beginning.

            Already there are hints
of the trouble ahead. In the past year, our former-peacenik president has
launched missile attacks on Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein at the oddest of
times. The surest-footed politician of our era held a crass partisan pep rally
smack in the middle of the impeachment process. And on the eve of his acquittal
in the Senate, he allegedly let slip that his next major policy initiative is
retaliating against impeachment foes. The White House strongly denies the last
item. But let's face it: It fits a pattern.

            Despite the indignant denials of the president's pursuers,
we're about to discover that Flytrap is indeed about sex. Or at least that the
post-Flytrap era is going to be about lack of sex. Now that it's permissible to
talk about such matters, some big questions arise: With whom is the president
having sexual relations? (Or, to use Clinton's brilliant euphemism, "not having
sexual relations.") When was the last time? Is he getting any at all?

            This is serious stuff.
The president, a k a "the most powerful man in the world," (and this one is
known for his large appetite, to boot) has been collared. Charismatic, suffused
with Henry Kissinger's ultimate aphrodisiac, and looking fitter than ever, our
president nevertheless faces odds of scoring that have to be slimmer than
Beavis' or Butt-Head's.

            Consider the obvious. Hillary. Long-suffering, yes. But a
return to the crime scene any time soon? Doubtful. Out of respect for the first
lady, enough said. Any other candidates? Equally doubtful. With all eyes on the
president, both inside and outside the White House, where is there even a
trysting place, now that the Oval Office has been discovered? And would
Clinton, hanging so tenuously to his legacy, risk what's left by working back
channels with the Secret Service to bring in concupiscent conscripts while
Hillary's out of town? Well, one hesitates to say with certainty that this
particular president ever learns from experience on this particular subject,
but surely, surely , at this point ... after all that's happened ...
knowing what's at stake. Well, I guess the most we can say is: probably
not.

            So, outside of some safe
phone sex, it's a reasonable bet to conclude that the most powerful man in the
world has to be, well, testy. And if so, that sure explains a lot. Missile
strikes against his enemies. Hello, Dr. Freud. James Carville, his personified
id, declaring war on political foes. This isn't rational behavior. It's more
befitting a hormonally unbalanced teenager who is acting out.

            This is very different from the Wag the Dog
hypothesis. The president isn't engaging in military action to distract public
attention from his sexual activity. He's engaging in military action to
distract himself from his lack of sexual activity.

            And the notion of a hormonally unbalanced national
leader, with the world's most powerful arsenal and fighting forces at his
command, is profoundly frightening.

            What to do? First, as a
nation, we must accept that our very human and virile president has very human
and virile needs that aren't being met. Denial is not an option. Believe me,
I've run this by a high-school "health education" teacher. Second, rechanneling
this energy has its limits. Clinton can save Social Security, protect the
environment, improve public schooling, and help elect Al Gore but, at the end
of the day, the problem hasn't gone away.

            Third, we need to cut the president some slack. If the
first lady's job description no longer includes being first, then let's lobby
to create a new post, the last lady--or the latest lady. Unconstitutional? Then
how about more conventional remedies? Road trips. Prostitution is legal in
Vegas. Or how about offshore R & R? Visit Subic Bay Naval station, rally
the troops, or salute their memory, whatever, as long as there's time for
off-base socializing.

            One way or another, the president's needs must be
ministered to (to borrow another terrific Flytrap euphemism). We will all sleep
better at night knowing that our commander in chief's libido is
compartmentalized, and that he's not bombing Sudanese pharmaceutical plants
just to get his Iraqs off.

         
      
   
