
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Blast From
the Past
                (New Line Cinema). Blah reviews for this cutesy comedy
about a family who emerges from a fallout shelter after 35 years. Once above
ground, Brendan Fraser, reprising the naif he played in George of the
Jungle and Encino Man , is smitten with a cynical and standoffish
Alicia Silverstone. The film relies heavily on both Fraser's laughably outdated
notions (at one point he exclaims, "Oh my lucky stars, it's a Negro!") and his
budding romance with Silverstone, which make for amusingly fluffy stuff. Sissy
Spacek and Christopher Walken, though, both stand out as Fraser's daffy
frozen-in-time parents. (Click here to
find out more about Fraser.)

            
               
                  Message in a
Bottle
                (Warner Bros.). This screen adaptation of Nicholas Sparks'
novel stars Kevin Costner and Robin Wright Penn as two lonely folks destined
for each other. It's just as sappy as expected. Janet Maslin writes that the
film has "the warm glow of a hazelnut coffee commercial" (the New York
Times ). Despite the fromage factor, great performances by Wright
Penn and Paul Newman--who plays Costner's father "with the relaxed confidence
of Michael Jordan shooting free throws in your driveway" (Roger Ebert, the
Chicago Sun-Times )--make the film tolerable. (Find out more about
Costner on Celebsite.)

            
               
                  My Favorite
Martian
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Critics call this film spinoff of
the 1960s TV show about a Martian (Christopher Lloyd) who falls to Earth and
befriends an earthling (Jeff Daniels) "loud and labored" (Kevin Thomas, the
Los Angeles Times ). The film steamrollers viewers with a frenetic pace
and loads of slapsticky special effects. Says Joe Morgenstern in the Wall
Street Journal : It "swings between chaos and pandemonium, with occasional
eruptions of bathroom humor." (This site has information on the original television show.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Testament
               , by John Grisham (Doubleday). The latest installment in
the Grisham legal thriller franchise gets good press: It's "personal, moving
and much deeper" than his previous books, writes Deirdre Donahue in USA
Today . Critics say this one is better because Grisham goes beyond his usual
dabbling in social causes and injects honest-to-God Christian spirituality, and
with success: "Grisham's smart use of the suspense novel to explore questions
of being and faith puts him squarely in the footsteps of Dickens and Graham
Greene" ( Publishers Weekly ). A few reviewers find the overt Christianity
preachy and self-righteous, but most say it improves an otherwise standard
page-turner. (In his of Grisham's The Street Lawyer in

                  Slate
               , Malcolm Gladwell argues that Grisham is
America's leading moralist.)

            
               
                  South of the
Border, West of the Sun
               ,by Haruki Murakami (Knopf). After the
success of Murakami's epic The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle , this novel of a
middle-aged man's attempts to rekindle a romance with an elusive childhood
friend disappoints critics. Murakami's aim is to "capture illegitimate
passion's elusive madness," but he "falls short" (Elizabeth Ward, the
Washington Post ). This book lacks the scope of his earlier works, and at
times the language dips into cliché, but some reviewers attribute this to a
poor translation. Mary Hawthorne comes to his rescue in the New York Times
Book Review , calling the novel a "wise and beautiful book ... full of
hidden truths." (Read the first chapter, courtesy of the New York Times
[requires free registration].)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  Death of a
Salesman
                (Eugene O'Neill Theatre, New York City). Strong reviews
and boffo B.O. for this 50 th anniversary production of the Arthur
Miller perennial. Brian Dennehy's Willy Loman is "played with majestic,
unnerving transparency" (Ben Brantley, the New York Times ); Elizabeth
Franz (as Linda Loman) draws equally ecstatic reviews. The production is said
to re-establish Salesman as Miller's finest play and an American
classic. Dissenters include Amy Gamerman of the Wall Street Journal , who
says it's dated ("Salesman is showing its age") and Slate 's Jacob
Weisberg, who praises this production but calls the play itself "unrelieved and
unchallenging." (Read the rest of Weisberg's review .)

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

            :

            

               
                  Movie -- Payback ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Simply Irresistible ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Rushmore ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Dry Cleaning ;

               
                  Book -- Werewolves in Their Youth , by Michael
Chabon;

               
                  Theater -- You're a Good Man,
Charlie Brown .

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  She's All That ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The 24 Hour Woman ;

               
                  Movie -- Still Crazy ;

               
                  Movie -- My Name Is Joe ;

               
                  Book--
                  What Our Mothers Didn't Tell Us: Why Happiness
Eludes the Modern Woman , by Danielle Crittenden;

               
                  Book
                  --Amy and Isabelle , by Elizabeth Strout;

               
                  Book -- Heavy Water , by
Martin Amis.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie
                  --
                  Gloria ;

               
                  Movie
                  --
                  Playing by Heart ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Another Day in Paradise ;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Reporting Live , by Lesley
Stahl;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Face-Time , by Erik Tarloff;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Miss Nobody , by Tomek Tryzna.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Varsity Blues ;

               
                  Movie -- At First Sight ;

               
                  Movie -- In Dreams ;

               
                  Book -- Duane's Depressed , by Larry McMurtry;

               
                  Book -- The Intuitionist , by Colson Whitehead;

               
                  Theater -- Fosse: A Celebration in Song and Dance
(Broadhurst Theatre, New York City).

            

         
      
   
