
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Today's Clintometer:
            

            

               2/12/99 Amid expectations that neither impeachment article
will get majority support in the Senate, both sides gear up for the aftermath.
Everyone agrees censure is doomed. Thursday's New York Times leak:
Clinton is furious at House Republicans for impeaching him and is determined to
drive them from office. Friday's Times leak: Clinton is furious at the
"advisers" who leaked that story before the Senate vote and is determined to
drive them from office. Chance of removal from office:
Zero.
            

            

               For the complete Clintometer and links to all Slate 's Flytrap
coverage, click .
            

            
A New York jury
found gun makers liable for several deaths and injuries inflicted with
illegally obtained weapons. The jury concluded that negligent marketing and
distribution of handguns by nine companies was a "proximate cause" of three
recent shootings, despite the absence of proof that any particular company's
product was involved in any of the shootings. However, the jury awarded damages
in only one case. Gun control advocates hailed the verdict as the first in a
wave of lawsuits against gun manufacturers, likening their movement to the one
against tobacco companies. Libertarians and gun industry lawyers condemned it
for the same reason. (2/12/99)
            

            
               Linda 
               Tripp kicked off her image rehab tour. In
a New York Times interview, she says 1) she acted in Monica Lewinsky's
"best interest" by saving her from President Clinton's abuse; 2) she had feared
that the affair would cause Lewinsky to harm herself; 3) she regrets any pain
she has caused Lewinsky; 4) "As a mom, especially with a daughter close in age
to Monica, I would hope some other mom would do for my daughter what I did for
Monica"; and 5) taping Lewinsky, giving her name to Paula Jones' lawyers, and
giving the tapes to the independent counsel were Lucianne Goldberg's ideas. The
Times dryly offered that Tripp's self-portrayal "might strain
credulity." Biggest surprise: Tripp says that while Clinton should be censured,
expelling him from office would be excessive. (2/12/99)
            

            
The Olympics
scandal is spreading to Japan. Japanese Olympic Committee members issued an
investigative report on possible shenanigans in Nagano's successful bid for the
1998 Winter Olympics. They say nine International Olympic Committee members may
have violated minor rules by visiting Nagano more than once to evaluate the
site and/or bringing too many guests. The investigators say 1) they found no
other problems (contrary to previous reports that IOC officials were given
meals, geishas, and other favors); 2) they regret that Nagano's bid committee
burned its records years ago; and 3) the fact that all the investigators sit on
the Japanese committee and that some served on the Nagano bid committee posed
no conflict of interest. The upbeat spin: Nagano's bid was more honest than
Salt Lake City's. The cynical spin: Japan's investigation is less honest than
Salt Lake City's. (2/12/99)
            

            
The Academy
Award nominations were announced. Shakespeare in Love gathered 13
nominations, beating Saving Private Ryan (which won 11) and coming
within one of the record. Critics agreed that the big theme is World War II:
Private Ryan , The Thin Red Line (about Guadalcanal), and Life
Is Beautiful (about the Holocaust) were nominated for best picture.
Hollywood figures concocted shallow theories for this revival: 1) Americans
want to learn from history; 2) we want to understand the century because it's
now ending; 3) boomer filmmakers are revisiting the great world events of their
childhood; and 4) they're visiting the war because they didn't fight it.
Private Ryan director Steven Spielberg says his current film helped
veterans come to terms with the war, just as his 1993 movie Schindler's
List helped Holocaust survivors: "I feel privileged to be in the driver's
seat for two films that helped people to speak the truth." Hollywood
commentators added the obligatory ethnic spins, noting that "black-themed
movies" were overlooked and that "British actors seemed to have colonized the
acting categories." (2/10/99)
            

            
The Justice
Department is examining whether Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's
prosecutors misled the DOJ a year ago when they sought approval to
investigate the Monica Lewinsky affair, according to the New York Times .
Previous reports have said that beginning in November 1997, one of Starr's
prosecutors had conversations with an attorney affiliated with Paula Jones'
lawyers. However, "newly disclosed notes" indicate that when Starr's
prosecutors sought the DOJ's approval in January 1998, they claimed to have had
"no contact with the plaintiffs' attorneys." The DOJ wants to know whether this
assertion concealed a conflict of interest. The Times also reports that
Starr's office has challenged the DOJ's authority to look into Starr's files.
The spins: 1) Attorney General Janet Reno should fire Starr because he's become
a self-protecting monster. 2) If Reno fires Starr, the Clinton administration
will have become a self-protecting monster. (2/10/99)
            

            
The Rev. Jerry
Falwell says one of the T
               eletubbies is gay . Teletubbies
are characters in an eponymous TV show for preschool kids. Falwell's
National Liberty Journal notes that one of the ostensibly male
characters, Tinky Winky, carries a purse, "is purple--the gay-pride color," and
"his antenna is shaped like a triangle--the gay-pride symbol." Falwell says
these "subtle depictions" are deliberate and that "role modeling the gay
lifestyle is damaging to the moral lives of children." A Teletubbies
spokesman says 1) Tinky Winky carries a "magic bag," not a purse; 2) the magic
bag "doesn't make him gay"; 3) "to think we would be putting sexual innuendo in
a children's show is kind of outlandish"; and 4) Falwell is besmirching
"something sweet and innocent" to advance his right-wing agenda.
(2/10/99)
            

            

               King 
               Hussein of Jordan died. The media praised
him as a great statesman, "man of peace," and friend of the United States. The
Washington Post called him "everyone's favorite Arab moderate."
Speculation turned to whether his son Abdullah, the new king, can shore up
Jordan's ailing economy, retain the allegiance of its Palestinian majority, and
advance the Middle East peace process. While acknowledging Hussein's
misdeeds--attacking Israel in 1967, hosting Palestinian terrorists over the
years, and siding with Iraq in the Persian Gulf War--editorialists lavished
excuses on him: He feared a Palestinian revolt if he didn't attack Israel in
1967, atoned for the 1967 war by sitting out the 1973 war against Israel, and
allied himself with Iraq in 1991 because he feared an Iraqi invasion or
collateral economic damage from the war against Iraq. Commentators politely
overlooked the fact that Jordan is still a monarchy. (Click to read Norman
Podhoretz and Midge Decter on Hussein's inflated reputation.)
(2/9/99)
            

            
White House aide
Sidney Blumenthal is in the hot seat for testifying that he never
mentioned President Clinton's "stalker" description of Monica Lewinsky to
reporters. Last weekend, journalist couple Christopher Hitchens and Carol Blue
signed affidavits claiming that Blumenthal told them last March that Lewinsky
was a stalker. Blue says Blumenthal claimed Clinton had told him that Lewinsky
had made unwanted "sexual advances." House prosecutors urged the Senate to
subpoena Hitchens and Blue, but the Senate declined. Pundits now think the
Justice Department or Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr will look into the
matter. Cynics groaned that Hitchens was aiming at Clinton but has clumsily
shot Blumenthal instead. Hitchens' spins: 1) I was aiming at Clinton. 2) I said
no more than Blumenthal has already admitted. 3) I said no more than I had
already written. 4) I'll go to jail rather than testify against my friend Sid.
5) Clinton will offer Blumenthal as "another human sacrifice" to appease the
forces of impeachment. (Click for Chatterbox's take on "Snitchensgate.")
(2/9/99)
            

            
The
impeachment trial is spinning off new stories . 1) Republican senators
are inviting Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr to investigate a rumor that a
White House taping system may have recorded President Clinton's phone
conversations with Monica Lewinsky. The White House says there's no such
system. 2) The Justice Department asked Starr to look into allegations that his
prosecutors improperly tried to cut an immunity deal with Lewinsky during their
January 1998 sting without her lawyer present. Starr's defenders note that a
judge has already ruled his office broke no laws. 3) The American Bar
Association voted overwhelmingly to oppose the renewal of the independent
counsel statute, concluding that it forces prosecutors to spend too much time
and money examining "minor matters" in pursuit of a single target.
(2/9/99)
            

         
      
   
