
   
   
      
         
             Harkin's Objection

            Friday afternoon, as Rep.
Bob Barr, R-Ga., was urging the Senate to convict President Clinton of perjury
and obstruction of justice, Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, rose and objected to the
"use of the word 'jurors' when referring to the Senate." Reporters scrambled
for their notebooks and senators stirred from their slumber at this deviation
from the trial's script. Sen. Judd Gregg, R-N.H., called Harkin's complaint a
pointless distraction, and Barr dismissed it as a semantic quibble. But
Harkin's objection was neither unscripted nor purely semantic. It was an
important strategic maneuver.

            "Regular jurors cannot
overrule the judge," Harkin told Chief Justice William Rehnquist. "Not so here.
Regular jurors do not decide what evidence should be heard, the standards of
evidence, nor do they decide what witnesses shall be called. Not so here.
Regular jurors do not decide when a trial is to be ended. Not so here. ... I
think the framers of the Constitution meant us, the Senate, to be something
other than a jury." Two days later, on ABC's This Week , Harkin added, "A
jury decides one thing--facts--and sometimes the law. We have a much broader
responsibility. ... We can't hide behind the curtain of saying, 'Oh, I'm just a
juror, I can't take that into account.' We have to take everything into
account."

            Harkin proudly explained that he wasn't surprised when
Rehnquist ruled in his favor, because he had read Rehnquist's book on
impeachment and knew that Rehnquist believed senators in an impeachment trial
were "more than just jurors." He asserted that Rehnquist's ruling "undermines
their case for bringing any witnesses, because obviously we are not jurors."
Above all, said Harkin, Rehnquist was affirming that the Senate "can take into
account not just the facts and the law, but the public good ... [T]he chief
justice really means that we can be expansive, that we can decide on a much
broader set of findings than just the findings of fact or law."

            What Rehnquist actually
said, however, was narrower. "The Senate is not simply a jury. It is a court in
this case," he ruled. The word "court," consisting of judges and jurors, is
crucial. Rehnquist was agreeing that senators could decide questions such as
"what evidence should be heard" and "when a trial is to be ended," which are
the province of judges, not jurors. But judges, like jurors, are bound by facts
and law. Harkin was distorting Rehnquist's ruling into an affirmation that
senators could reach beyond the facts and the law to consider "the public
good."

            Harkin correctly construed the jury metaphor as a
Republican strategy to frame the debate. (Click for more analysis of that
strategy.) "I believe that the continual use of the word 'juror' by the House
managers was meant to sort of circumscribe ... what we could do in the Senate,"
he said. "They were trying to put us in a box" in which "all we could do was to
take the facts and decide" Clinton's guilt or innocence. But Harkin's purpose
was equally strategic: to break out of that box, dispense with witnesses, set
aside persuasive facts and inconvenient law, and instead acquit Clinton based
on the undefined "public good." All the while portraying the GOP's focus on
facts as a cowardly ruse to "hide behind the curtain" of jury scruple.

            The "public good" may indeed be a valid reason not
to remove Clinton from office. But Rehnquist didn't authorize that
consideration, the court metaphor doesn't square with it, and the Democrats
have yet to define it.

         
      
   
