
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Feb. 13
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Feb.
13)
            

            The cover story examines the sorry detritus of the
impeachment scandal, with two conclusions: "First, what has happened over the
past year should never have happened at all; second, there is no guarantee that
it will not happen again." The editorial attributes the president's escape to sheer
dumb luck. ... The latest Northern Ireland peace agreement will crumble,
predicts the magazine, unless Unionists give Sinn Fein
more time to cleanse itself of terrorist associations, both real and symbolic.
... A report chides blue-chip media companies for their rush
to acquire Internet start-ups. The Internet can be unfriendly to traditional
content providers because 1) ad revenue is low; 2) portals are overpriced; and
3) most traditional content (such as video) still looks awkward online.
(
                  Slate
                thinks about this issue once in while. For Editor Michael
Kinsley's take, click .)

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , March 1
            

            
               (posted Friday, Feb.
12, 1999)
            

            The cover package is 21
unpublished letters by Ralph Ellison. Among the recurring themes: his belief in
the primacy of the individual over the group ("[My work] tries to reveal the
extent to which each of us is responsible for his own fate") and his intense,
conflicted Americanism ("I am too vindictively American, too full of hate for
the hateful aspects of this country, and too possessed by the things I love
here to be too long away"). A separate piece reviews a new collection of
Ellison short stories, praising Ellison's conviction that blacks had "a degree
of freedom" despite the confines of American racism, freedom that black
"protest" writers (Toni Morrison, Richard Wright) have unfortunately
downplayed.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               
                  , Feb. 14
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Feb.
11, 1999)
            

            The cover story profiles
Steven Spielberg, Hollywood's premier moneymaker, multi-tasker, mentor, and
mensch . From Animaniacs to Schindler's List , Spielberg
markets patriotic moral lessons to the masses. His many charitable projects--a
genealogical research foundation, a Holocaust archive--endorse the same Norman
Rockwell vision of tolerance as his movies. ... The magazine recounts
the heartbreaking stories of three children forced to fight in Sierra Leone's
vicious civil war. Both the rebel and government armies have conscripted
thousands of boys and girls, who make cheap and loyal (and especially vicious)
soldiers. ... An article explicates the doctrines of tough-parenting
guru John Rosemond, who orders parents to apply conservative, Old
Testament-style standards to child-rearing. Punishment of children, the article
recounts, "should be unpleasant, memorable, and inflicted at a time that is
convenient for the parent." Meanwhile, Rosemond hasn't spoken to his own mother
in 10 years.

            

               
                  Time
               
               and

               
                  Newsweek
               
               
                  , Feb. 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
9, 1999)
            

            
               Newsweek 
               reports on Jesse "The Body" Ventura's wildly successful
honeymoon as governor of Minnesota. So far he's produced a 75 percent approval
rating, a uniformly lauded budget, and a set of toy action figures. ...
The cover story castigates the International Olympic
Committee for shoddy drug testing, a bigger scandal, the story says, than the
ongoing host-site bribery imbroglio. Rampant use of performance-enhancing drugs
tarnishes the games, kills athletes, and encourages drug use among
children.

            The Time 
               cover profiles "the committee to save the world": Treasury
Secretary Robert Rubin, Deputy Secretary Lawrence Summers, and Federal Reserve
Chairman Alan Greenspan. Each economic superhero has a distinct personality and
style--Greenspan is the shaman, Rubin the Midas figure, and Summers the
academic--but together, they stave off worldwide economic panic. The
triumvirate has "outgrown ideology" and practices pure "Realeconomik."

            According to the
magazines, the film Shakespeare in Love has fueled fashion,
entertainment, and academic trends. Time recounts the debate about who
wrote Shakespeare's plays, and Newsweek catalogs the recent profusion of Bard movies. Time devotes an entire piece to
Gwyneth Paltrow's hair extensions, but literary critic Harold Bloom tells Newsweek that she's ... ugly.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               
                  , Feb. 15
               
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
9, 1999)
            

            The cover story calls the nation's home renovation boom a
"historic trend" arising from "ancient" and "fundamentally human" impulses.
... The magazine profiles the fire and brimstone politics of Republican
presidential hopeful Gary Bauer. By losing the nomination nobly and narrowly,
he could assume leadership of the party's conservative flank. ... An
article calls the North Korean government a loosely veiled,
highly effective criminal operation. Crooked officials engage in drug-smuggling
and counterfeiting both to line their pockets and possibly even to prop up the
struggling country's nuclear program. ... A self-identified member of
the "black elite" justifies the group's snobbery and separatism. Descended from
light-skinned slaves who enjoyed a privileged position in the plantation
hierarchy, the "black elite" continues to hoard access to its boarding schools,
social events, and churches: "Why," asks one pedigreed lady, "would I be
socializing with some caseworker or mailman who goes to NAACP events?"

            

               
                  People
               
               
                  ,
                
               Feb. 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
9, 1999)
            

            The real subject of the
much-fretted-about Chelsea Clinton cover story is her devoted mother. The first
daughter anecdotes are light (when Itzhak Perlman played for the White House
grown-ups, she furtively listened). Most of the seven pages are devoted to
lauding Hillary Clinton's energetic and sensible approach to child rearing.
Despite the rigors of first ladyhood, she always made time to chaperone class
trips, organize slumber parties, and check that Chelsea swept up any popcorn
she'd spilled in the White House screening room.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               
                  , Feb. 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
9, 1999)
            

            A former underground
Polish newspaper is enjoying a second act as a communications empire in the
making, complete with lush advertisements and cross-media synergy. The highly
profitable newspaper--which used to print samizdat on smudgy,
single-sided pages--symbolizes Poland's transition from Communist repression to
consumerist democracy. ... A piece argues that Attention Deficit
Disorder isn't merely a psychosomatic affectation but a long-existing
biological deficiency suddenly exposed by society's accelerating pace. Ritalin
might be a safe alternative to the more dangerous substances (nicotine,
cocaine) that people previously used to increase their powers of concentration
and focus. ... A writer examines suicide notes to investigate why people
kill themselves. He never finds out, but the notes are succinct, lyrical, and
uniformly devastating.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               
                  , Feb. 15
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
9, 1999)
            

            The magazine explains why
the president's poll numbers are so high: 1) he courts them ("like a kid who
gets straight A's by flattering the teacher"); and 2) polling questions are
phrased with a calculation and nuance that are positively, well, Clintonesque.
A separate piece insists that Republican poll ratings are low because--and only
because--of weak stances on Social Security, education, and taxes. Impeachment
won't tarnish Republican chances in 2000: If voters don't care about the
scandal now, the argument goes, they certainly won't care in two years time.
... A writer tours a Los Angeles mall and declares American teens A-OK:
the girls coo over clothing at Old Navy, the boys follow sneaker fashion
avidly, and everyone listens to country music. This all means that "parents
have returned to adolescent upbringing in ways that have rendered their
children's normally destructive impulses mute."

         
      
   
