
   
   
      
         
            No. 189: &quot;Slogan's Run&quot;

            

               The slogan "Feed the rush" is being replaced with "Life's a scream."
Why?
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Tuesday's question (No. 188)--"Two Bad":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Starbucks and Time Inc. are
teaming up. To do
what?
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Put
people to sleep and wake them up."--Judith Spencer ( Michael
Wilde , Daniel Krause , GC , and Charles Star had similar
answers.)

            "Battle
the alliance formed by Lipton and Newsweek ."-- Nell Scovell
            

            "Induce
another heart attack in Larry King."-- Greg Diamond
            

            
"Develop a magazine to be written and published by Guatemalan peasants for 9
cents a day."-- Greg Narver
            

            "Pour
coffee into Christopher Hitchens until he's sober enough to finish his cover
story, 'Friendship.' "-- Susan Vance (similarly, Daniel Radosh and
Greg Diamond )

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            A former Nixon aide,
after a few years as a segment producer on the old Letterman show, took over a
magazine called American Smoker . Or perhaps it was called Philip
Morris magazine. Either way, it was his editorial policy that the essential
thing about smoking was not selling a toxic product that kills half a million
people a year; it was freedom of choice. He was always in the market for
photographs of celebrities smoking, kind of the Larry Flynt of respiratory
disease. It is impressive that such a warm and amiable fellow--and he
was--could be so profoundly wrong at least twice. However, if the partnership
under discussion produces a magazine called Coffee-Time that's half as
engaging as American Smoker , I'm subscribing.

            
               Fresh Roasted
Answer
            

            This summer the two companies will launch
Joe , a cultural review to be sold in the 2,000 Starbucks. Joe 's
subhead: "Life is Interesting. Discuss."

            "It's going to be a
cultural magazine, but not in the gray sense, not in the review sense." says
Managing Editor Scott Mowbray. "Not in the lots of big words sense, not in the
complicated ideas that make your head hurt sense, not in the having to think
about stuff so hard that it distracts you from shopping and later that night
you have that little sexual problem again, not me personally but some other
stupider people sense," he didn't add.

            
               Dog and Movie Show
Extra
            

            Yesterday brought the
nominations for the 71 st Academy Awards and the winners of the
123 rd Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show. A comparison.

            

               
                  Dogs : Bit O Gold Titan Treasure,
a Gordon Setter, won the sporting group for an unprecedented third consecutive
time. Movies : Meryl Streep, star of One True Thing ,
nominated as best actress for an unprecedented 107 th consecutive
time.

               
                  Dogs : Windwalker's Yes, best in
the herding group, did not make self-serving speech invoking the Holocaust.
Movies : Steven Spielberg, nominated for best director, did not
bite any of the other candidates.

               
                  Dogs : Best in show winner, Kirby,
weighs 75 pounds. Movies : Best actress nominee Gwyneth
Paltrow, same thing.

               
                  Dogs : Judges say That's My Boy,
the best of nonsporting group winner, "exudes poodley-ness."
Movies : Geoffrey Rush, same thing.

               
                  Dogs : Sunspryte's Just in Thyme,
winner of the terrier group, is owned by Bill Cosby. Movies :
Complicated deal forces best supporting actor nominee Billy Bob Thornton to do
Cosby's yard work.

               
                  Dogs : Deep River Joy Ride, best
in breed among smooth collies, not even considered for the Thalberg Award.
Movies : Norman Jewison, winner of Thalberg Award, unwilling to
compete as a collie.

               
                  Dogs : Sundown Alabaster Treasure,
a Saluki, was an enormously popular choice for best in hound group.
Movies : Elia Kazan, an informer, was an enormously unpopular
choice for an honorary Oscar.

            

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
