
   
   
      
         
             Wag the Doubt

            Did President Clinton "wag the dog" by bombing Iraq
on the eve of the House impeachment debate? Politicians and pundits launched
the rhetorical war over that question even before the first missiles fell in
Baghdad. While the damage mounts in Iraq, the debate at home is dragging
politics to new depths. Here's a glossary of the debaters' latest tactics, in
morally descending order.

            
               1. Overt
Cynicism. The politician accuses Clinton of wagging the dog. Example:
"It is obvious that he is doing this for political reasons" (Rep. Gerald
Solomon, R-N.Y.).

            
               2
               .

               Cynicism by innuendo. The accuser phrases the dog-wagging
charge obliquely so that he can deny having made it. Example: "We have had
either hostilities or threatened hostilities at interesting times throughout
the last year" (incoming House Speaker Bob Livingston).

            
               3. Backhanded
cynicism. The accuser implies dog-wagging by saying either a) he can't
bring himself to believe Clinton would wag the dog; or b) the White House has
assured him it's not so. Example: "While I have been assured by administration
officials that there is no connection with the impeachment process ... [b]oth
the timing and the policy are subject to question" (Senate Majority Leader
Trent Lott).

            
               4
               . Cynicism about
principle. The accuser argues that because Clinton is inherently
unprincipled, any seemingly principled behavior on his part is fishy. Example:
Clinton must have bombed Iraq to avoid impeachment, because "how else to
explain the sudden appearance of a backbone that has been invisible up to now?"
(Solomon).

            
               5. Cynicism by association. The
accuser doesn't allege a causal relationship between the impeachment process
and the bombing, but he blames Clinton for the correlation anyway. Example:
"President Clinton has indelibly associated a justified military response ...
with his own wrongdoing. ... Clinton has now injected the impeachment process
against him into foreign policy, and vice versa" (Jim Hoagland, Washington
Post ).

            
               6. Vicarious
cynicism. Rather than stand behind his cynicism, the accuser
attributes it to others. Example: "It is dangerous for an American president to
launch a military strike, however justified, at a time when many will conclude
he acted only out of narrow self-interest to forestall or postpone his own
impeachment" ( Wall Street Journal editorial).

            
               7
               . Fake idealism about
cynicism. The accuser says other people's cynicism makes it impossible
for Clinton to govern well. Example: "The point is not whether this president
would [wag the dog] ... [b]ut for some significant portion of the population
... there must be that doubt. And that doubt is the crucial nexus. ... A
president must have credibility when he makes decisions about peace or war"
(former Reagan lawyer Peter Wallison, New York Times op-ed).

            
               8. Fake
patriotism about cynicism. Democrats say Republicans who accuse
Clinton of wagging the dog are inadvertently aiding and comforting the
enemy. Example: "Shame on you [Republicans] for playing into the hands of
Saddam" (Rep. Martin Meehan, D-Mass.).

            
               9
               . McCarthyism about
cynicism. Democrats say Republicans who accuse Clinton of wagging the
dog are deliberately aiding and comforting the enemy. Example: The GOP's
remarks were "as close to a betrayal of the interests of the United States as
I've ever witnessed in the United States Congress" (Sen. Robert Torricelli,
D-N.J.).

            
               10. Recidivist
cynicism. Having accused Republicans of cynicism for suggesting that
Clinton cynically used the Iraq conflict to delay the impeachment vote,
Democrats use the conflict to delay the vote. Example: The House should "not
take up impeachment until the hostilities have ended. It shouldn't come up as
long as our troops are in harm's way" (House Minority Leader Richard
Gephardt).

            
               1
               1. Cynicism about
cynicism. While publicly accusing Republicans of tactics aimed at
gaining political advantage, Democrats privately gloat that the tactics will
give Democrats a political advantage. Example: " 'The rules we've always had is
that politics stop at the shore," one senior White House official said,
speaking on the condition of anonymity. 'Somebody changed the rules and it
wasn't us.' But Clinton advisers said that they expected Mr. Lott's comments to
backfire" ( New York Times ).

            
               12. Reverse
cynicism. While accusing Clinton of invoking the Iraq conflict to
delay the impeachment vote, Republicans invoke the Iraq conflict to expedite
the impeachment vote. Example: "I don't see any reason to postpone the vote.
That plays right into Saddam Hussein's hands. That's what terrorists
want--disruption" (Rep. Bill McCollum, R-Fla.).

            
               1
               3. Cynical
anti-cynicism. While accusing Democrats of cynicism for suggesting
that impeachment would undermine the war effort, Republicans argue that
impeachment is the best way to honor the war effort. Example: "As those troops
are engaged now, even now, defending ... the Constitution of this nation, they
have a right to know that the work of the nation goes forward. And in
consideration of this, it is our intention, Mr. Speaker, to begin consideration
of [impeachment]" (House Majority Leader Dick Armey).

            
               14. Circular
vicarious cynicism. Unable to prove that Clinton wagged the dog,
Republicans argue that the mere suspicion of dog-wagging is grounds for
impeachment. Examples: "The suspicion some people have about the president's
motives in this attack is itself a powerful argument for impeachment" (Armey).
"Perceptions that the American president is less interested in the global
consequences than in taking any action that will enable him to hold onto power
[are] a further demonstration that he has dangerously compromised himself in
conducting the nation's affairs, and should be impeached" ( Wall Street
Journal editorial).

            
               Recent "Frame
Games"
            

            

               "": William Saletan says Democrats
could blow up the impeachment process by crying "coup." (posted Wednesday,
Dec. 16)
               

               "": Bill Clinton and Saddam Hussein share the same bag of tricks.
(posted Wednesday, Dec. 2)
               

            

         
      
   
