
   
   
      
         
            Freezer Burns

            I demand hazard pay. In the
course of researching and writing this article I suffered crippling bouts of
gas and added 6 pounds of blubber around my middle. I incurred the derision of
my colleagues by using the microwave in the communal kitchen area to nuke a
Salisbury steak that made the entire floor stink like a middle-school
cafeteria. The stacks of empty Swanson Hungry Man and Healthy Choice boxes on
my desk still get funny looks. I have poisoned myself in so many ways. But I
ate 36 of those dinners just for you, dear reader, so that you can navigate the
frozen dinner aisle in your local supermarket with flair and ease.

            Microwave ovens have
their limitations. Remember that they work by agitating (and thus heating) the
water and fat molecules in food, which means that whatever you cook is pretty
much steamed. This is great for heating up leftovers and coffee, not so great
for baking a cake. Saucy foods work, bready foods don't. But one great thing
microwaves have done is give a new life to an American classic. What could be
better than a full dinner, including dessert, that goes from freezer to table
in seven minutes with no dishes to wash?

            The scores of offerings at your average supermarket divide
down to about four basic categories: traditional, healthy, budget, and
vegetarian. I used the same standards in judging all of them: taste, nutrition,
presentation, and ease of preparation. Here's a list of best and worst by
category.

            

               Traditional : Generally high in fat and calories, these dinners
are the descendants of the TV dinners of old. The main brands are Stouffer's,
Swanson, and Marie Callender's. Marie Callender's is the gold standard here.
Marie offers a full plate of food weighing a whole pound, and there are
separate sauce packets that you heat and add to the dinner when you serve it.
The results are great. The Breaded Chicken Parmigiana, for example, comes out
dry and unsoaked by the marinara sauce. But they have their drawbacks. First,
the fat content puts them into Big Mac territory, generally about 30 grams.
Worse, they require a lot of work. You puncture the sauce pouch, toss the
dinner in, pull it out, peel back parts of the film cover, toss the sauce pouch
in, fire up the oven again, take it out again, pour on the sauce ... It all
adds up to a good 15 minutes of work from freezer to table. You might as well
cook.

            The prize for best traditional dinner goes to Swanson's
Boneless White Meat Fried Chicken Dinner. With 430 calories and 16 grams of fat
(150 calories from fat), this dinner almost meets the American Heart
Association nutrition guidelines, which recommend no more than 30 percent of
your calorie intake be derived from fat. It couldn't be simpler to prepare and
is surprisingly tasty. The chicken's not exactly crispy, but it is remarkably
unrubbery. (The most common flaw of microwaved food is a gag-inducing springy
texture.) The meat has a grain to it, so you know it's not compressed, and the
meal's three side dishes are microwave-friendly: corn, green beans, and mashed
potatoes. The veggies are flavorful with a bit of crunch to them, and the
mashed potatoes are buttery and smooth. Best of all, the dessert is a darn good
brownie: crispy on top, cakey on the bottom, the way they're supposed to be.
And the compartmented cardboard dish is an elegant homage to the classic TV
dinner's punched metal tray, making for a heady mix of convenience and
formalism. A clear winner.

            But Swanson also takes
home the prize for worst traditional dinner. The Boneless Pork Rib Shaped Patty
is a shoddy imitation of McDonald's much beloved McRib. The rib-shaped patty is
studded with visible chunks of fat (reflecting the 37 grams listed on the
label), and it sits in a pool of orange grease. (The label calls it barbecue
sauce.) The beans, too sweet and without a hint of tanginess, were also
disappointing. The dessert was billed as "apple crumb," but it looked like
beige Jell-O and was sticky and bland. The dinner had 1,440 milligrams of
sodium--60 percent of your recommended daily intake--and 750 calories, 330 of
them from fat. All in all, a heart attack on a cardboard plate.

            H ealthy : The meals that bill themselves as "healthy"
varied widely in nutritional content and--a key point--size. Some carry very
low calorie and fat contents. For example, Weight Watchers' Smart Ones Fiesta
Chicken has only 2 grams of fat and 210 calories. Others, such as Healthy
Choice's Country Breaded Chicken With Scalloped Potatoes, Garden Vegetables in
Butter Sauce, and Sour Cherry Compote, with 9 grams of fat and 350 calories,
barely qualify as healthy. The diet dinners have controlled portions--9 or 10
ounces compared with the traditional dinner's pound or so--and you might be
tempted to eat more than one, with a corresponding doubling of the fat and
caloric intake. The category winner, Lean Cuisine's Oriental Beef With
Vegetables and Long Grain Rice, had combination of great taste and solid
nutrition. Weighing in at 9.25 ounces, the dinner included firm meat, crisp
water chestnuts, and flavorful sauce, and it had only 240 calories and 3.5
grams of fat.

            For those watching their weight, microwave dinners
are a better choice than you might think, according to Dr. Louis J. Aronne, a
weight loss specialist and associate professor of medicine at Cornell
University. The portions are controlled and the nutritional information clear.
And compared to other low-effort meals--say, takeout Chinese--these dinners are
far healthier. Add frozen brussels sprouts and a salad to one of the smaller
healthy microwave meals, and you have what Aronne calls "a very reasonable
dinner."

            The prize for the worst
healthy dinner goes to Lean Cuisine's Salisbury Steak With Macaroni and Cheese.
Yep, that's the one that stank when cooking. Surprisingly, the steak itself
isn't bad--it had a nice hint of rosemary--but the macaroni and cheese was
appallingly bland. For only 9.5 ounces of food it had 8 grams of fat, 60
milligrams of cholesterol, and 590 milligrams of sodium.

            C heap: The most common brands are Budget Gourmet,
America's Choice, and Banquet. Best of category is a tough one here. Cheap
microwave dinners are a mark of humiliation--something you eat while crying in
your studio apartment, huddling in front of the space heater, and reading
The Bell Jar . Interestingly, each brand is awful in its own way. The
Banquet Honey-Roasted Turkey Meal offered literally a single slice of
cold-cut-style turkey--about one-eighth of an inch thick--on a sparse bed of
hopelessly damp and chewy stuffing. The gravy formed strings as I lifted the
fork to my mouth. But at least it came on a nice paper plate.

            The worst is the Budget
Gourmet. It is the cuisine equivalent of the landlord banging at your door. You
eat the Chicken With Fettuccini Cream Sauce straight out of the ripped-open
box. The portion is tiny, the chicken is in rubbery cubes so uniform they
barely look like food, and the noodles are all clumped together on one side.
You have to pull them apart with a fork.

            V egetarian : For overall brand consistency, Amy's is
a solid choice and, as a bonus, most of the meals are organic. In fact, Amy's
Cheese Enchilada With Beans and Corn was bound for the winner's circle until
overtaken at the wire by a dark horse: Green Guru, a brand I was able to find
in only one supermarket. Green Guru's Vegetable Gaeng Daeng With Jasmine Rice
enchanted my palate. The rice was light and cooked to perfection, and the
vegetables were nicely steamed in a complex sauce that blended the subtle
flavors of curry, coconut milk, and basil. There was enough hot pepper to be
interesting, but not so much that this tenderfoot was scared off. The
mushrooms, Chinese broccoli, bamboo shoots, and baby corn all retained good
textures, and the tofu chunks seemed like a stroke of genius. At its best, tofu
is supposed to be springy, and this dish proved how ideally suited it is
to the microwave's wily ways. This dinner was better than many I've had in
actual Thai restaurants.

            The worst vegetarian
dinner? Well, there's only one way to describe Hain's Vegetarian Pepper Steak:
Hainous. The rice was undercooked, and the sauce was a viscous, grainy gel. And
the whole concept of it seemed misguided: What vegetarian wants to eat
something labeled as "steak," even if it is molded soy protein? The "steak" was
like the worst hamburger you've ever eaten: sticky, tasteless, and just plain
off.

            TV dinners carry a terrible stigma. They conjure up a
flip-flop-clad matron in a housedress, cigarette dangling from her mouth,
slapping a metal tray in front of a sullen husband at the dinner table. But
what most diners don't know is that the matron was on to something. Aronne
notes that because the vegetables in microwave dinners are frozen, they may
retain more nutrients than those you'd buy fresh. The oxidation of
nutrients is much greater in fresh foods than in foods that are frozen quickly
after harvest. Your fresh supermarket broccoli probably had a long journey from
the place it was grown, losing vitamins all the way. Boiling the veggies at
home compounds the problem, as the soluble vitamins get poured down the drain.
Armed with the hard-won discoveries I sacrificed my waistline for, you can go
to your supermarket and confidently fill your shopping cart. Once home, you can
peel back the plastic film covers of our winners with a steady hand, sure that
the odors that emanate will not offend.

             

         
      
   
