
   
   
      
         
            Squabbling Over Saddam

            An Arab tug of war
continues over the rehabilitation of Iraq, with Arab press commentators
differing over whether to blame Baghdad's rhetoric or Saudi Arabia's
intransigence for the lack of a common Arab policy toward Saddam Hussein.
According to leading Arab affairs analyst Riad Najib el-Rayyes, writing Tuesday
in the Beirut daily an-Nahar , Saddam's reiteration of Iraq's historical claim to
Kuwait is intended as a signal to his Arab detractors that, if they continue
trying to block his rehabilitation, he will make life hard for them by
reopening a number of troublesome "files."

            Rayyes sees Saddam's
pronouncement as a response to Saudi efforts to exclude him from the proposed
Arab summit meeting on Iraq, which is to be discussed by Arab foreign ministers
when they meet in Cairo, Egypt, Jan. 24. Baghdad wants the summit to condemn
U.S. military action against Iraq and to support the lifting of sanctions,
while Saudi Arabia insisted that neither the summit nor the foreign ministers'
meeting should "bestow legitimacy" on Saddam.

            According to the Pan-Arab al-Quds al-Arabi , there may
be a compromise deal under which there will be no talk of an Arab summit until
after the Israeli elections in May, while the Jan. 24 meeting will issue a
"balanced" statement opposing fresh U.S. strikes against Iraq and also coming
out against assistance to the Iraqi opposition in its goal of bringing down
Saddam. Al-Quds al-Arabi said it expects U.S. Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright to use her forthcoming visit to the region to try to
persuade countries such as Egypt and Morocco, both of which are on her
itinerary, to support the hard-line Saudi position on Iraq.

            "The brethren in Saudi
Arabia and Kuwait want to bombard Iraq with missiles, deprive it of half of its
only seaport and finance its dissident groups, but get angry when Iraqi
officials cannot contain their outrage and let fly with a few statements
condemning those who collude in aggression against their country," al-Quds
al-Arabi added. "What do the brethren in Riyadh and Kuwait expect? For Iraq
to anoint them with rose-petal water and fancy French perfume, and organize
carnivals in celebration of their policies?"

            According to the Jordanian news agency Petra Wednesday,
King Hussein's return to Jordan after six months of cancer treatment in the
United States was celebrated with the slaughter of sheep and camels along
Jordanian roadsides. The king's return was also welcomed in Israel, where Yosef
Lapid wrote in Maariv : "He is a good king, a brave king, a wise king, a
friendly king. We hope his recovery will put paid to the struggle for his
throne. As long as he governs Jordan, we have real peace with at least one Arab
country." In the Jerusalem Post , David Newman wrote
Wednesday that King Hussein was seen "not only as an Arab leader who made
peace, but also as one who believes in that peace and, who is prepared to come
and visit the parents of schoolchildren killed by his border guards, as a
person who has really had enough of war and bloodshed."

            David Makovsky,
diplomatic correspondent of Ha'aretz , wrote
Wednesday that Israeli officials want King Hussein's brother, Crown Prince
Hassan, to remain next in line to the Jordanian throne, despite speculation
that the king, under pressure from Queen Noor, might name their 19-year-old
son, Hamza, as the next monarch. He quoted one Israeli official as saying that
Israel hopes Hassan will succeed because he is not only deeply committed to the
peace process but is also "a person of vast experience."

            Under the headline "New Russian Ambassador To Play It Tough
in Washington," the Russian daily Segodnya said that Yuri Ushakov, who
flew to Washington Tuesday to take up his post, had been given instructions
"reminiscent of Cold War documents" by the Russian foreign ministry. It also
said that Ushakov's reputation for toughness might be one of the main reasons
for his appointment.

            "Given his personality, one can deduce that Moscow
doesn't intend to surrender its international standing for the sake of its
friendship with Washington, in spite of serious economic setbacks and the fact
that it is dependent on American benevolence for overcoming them," the paper
said. It added that the new ambassador seems determined to fight to make the
United Nations become the main guarantor of international stability and
security. Moscow needs "one victory," regardless of the price, it said.

            According to the
Copenhagen Post Wednesday, new statistics show that one in every 25
births in Denmark now occurs with the help of artificial insemination
techniques. Four percent of births in 1997 took place with the help of either
"test-tube baby" techniques or in vitro fertilization, it said. Two years
earlier the figure stood at just 2.5 percent.

             

         
      
   
