
   
   
      
         
            No. 172: &quot;Wear and Tear&quot;

            

               A year ago she wore an orange jumpsuit and brandished a torch, now she
wears a look of remorse. Who is she, and what went wrong?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Monday's question (No. 171)--"It Grates Outdoors":
            

            
               Fill in the
blank.
            

            

               It first happened outside in 1960, and now, frets Reba White Williams,
former head of the New York City Art Commission, "it seems as though wherever
there is a vacant spot, anybody can _______________ without any consideration
of how it looks."
            

            
"Daven."-- Evan Cornog
            

            "Put
words in my mouth."-- Tim Carvell ( Fran Stearns had a similar
answer.)

            "Stand
around unself-consciously."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            "Paddle
Bess Meyerson's naked fanny."-- Larry Amaros
            

            "Post
their own personal ad on a penguin at the Central Park Zoo."-- Bill
Franzen
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            The most irritating sight
on a New York street (excluding Donald Trump's naked swing dancing with the
ghost of Boss Tweed) is anyone jabbering into a cell phone. But why is it
annoying? True loathing requires real understanding. So what underlies this
mobile hatred?

            

               It's just showing off? That can't be it. That would be like saying 60 years
ago: "Ooh, Mr. Fancy Pants and his home phone! Too good to make your calls at
the general store like the rest of us?"

               It's rude to perform a private act in public? Nope. I'm just relieved that
the prattler isn't cutting his nails or worse. And I don't mind seeing someone
at a pay phone.

               Who wants to hear that inane chitchat? Nobody. But would I prefer those
conversations to occur in person? This way, I only hear half. And how
sophisticated is my own conversation? Aristotle seldom comes into it.

               This heedless yammering adds to the clamor and prevents me from thinking my
own thoughts? In a restaurant or on a commuter train, perhaps. But how quiet
are the streets of Manhattan? That can't be it.

            

            I sadly conclude that my
anti-cellularism is merely my being a stick in the mud. I'll try to overcome
it. Unless, of course, someone can give me a reason to hate with a clear
conscience. Please.

            
               Please Deposit 25
Cents for the Answer
            

            Reba White Williams said, "It seems as though
wherever there is a vacant spot, anybody can put up a telephone booth
without any consideration of how it looks."

            A company called Telebeam
has erected about 200 new phone enclosures designed by Rudy Fabiano, and many
people hate them. Made of stainless steel, they are much bigger than the Adco
120, the most common model. Applications are pending for 19,965 new phones in
addition to the 32,239 already on the streets of New York.

            
               Jews and the News
Extra
            

            Monday, the National
Security Archive at George Washington University released a book of previously
top secret transcripts of Henry Kissinger's meetings with Chinese and Soviet
leaders. Below, part of his Oct. 21, 1975, conversation in Beijing with Mao
Tse-tung:

            
               KISSINGER: The New York Times has
had a certain position for 20 years, and it has an unparalleled record for
being wrong.
            

            
               MAO: It is said that the New York Times is controlled by a Jewish
family.
            

            

               
KISSINGER: That is true.

               MAO:
And also the Washington Post .

               
KISSINGER: The Washington Post --it is no longer true. (He then
conferred with Ambassador Bush who pointed out that Mrs. Graham was Jewish, the
daughter of Mr. Meyer.) You are right.

            

            
               MAO: The proprietress is
Jewish.
            

            To learn more about the
hell-bound former secretary of State, read The Kissinger Transcripts ,
edited by William Burr, or visit the National Security Archive Web site at
http://www.seas.gwu.edu/nsarchive/.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Win: Excretion

            Place: Parking

            Show: The mayor

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
