
   
   
      
         
             Guilt by Acquisition

            When the German car maker
Daimler-Benz announced plans to acquire a controlling share of Chrysler Corp.,
Jewish novelist Cynthia Ozick announced in the Wall Street Journal that
she would never buy a Chrysler. Other Jews (some of whom would never buy a
Chrysler because they'd only ever buy a Mercedes) saw the issue very
differently. Last May, shortly after the merger was announced, the Jewish
Bulletin carried an article by Natalie Weinstein surveying the range of
opinion, particularly among Holocaust survivors. The responses ran the
predictable gamut. Some agreed with Ozick. But others, such as Rabbi Ted
Alexander, took their cues from Deuteronomy, which admonishes that "Fathers
shall not be put to death for children, neither shall children be put to death
for fathers." "Going by that verse of the Torah," said the rabbi, "I cannot
blame this generation."

            The rabbi's analogy
treats the Daimler-Benz of 1998 as the "child" of the Daimler-Benz that
employed slave laborers in 1943. From a strictly legal perspective, the analogy
is inaccurate: Under the law, a corporation lives forever. The entity that
controls Chrysler is exactly the same entity that collaborated with the Nazis,
not a descendant.

            But it would be wrong to view an essentially moral question
from a strictly legal perspective. A corporation is not a moral entity; it's
the corporation's flesh and blood owners who are moral entities. From that
perspective, the rabbi's analogy fails in a different way: The current owners
of Daimler-Benz are not, by and large, the children of previous owners from
half a century ago. Stocks trade hands every day.

            That observation seems to
strengthen Alexander's position. If we should not punish children for the sins
of their fathers, then surely we should not punish children for the sins of
their fathers' countrymen. But that analysis can be definitive only to those
who believe that nothing can be added to the words of Deuteronomy; otherwise
there's more to be said.

            When is it permissible to punish one person for the wrongs
of another? The question is a tangle of moral and economic issues. Morally,
we're concerned with things such as justice, fairness, and individual rights.
Economically, we're concerned with creating good incentives.

            To see how uncomfortable
it can be when economic and moral issues brush up against each other, consider
the revision of accident law that's been proposed by the
economist-iconoclast-law professor David Friedman. Friedman suggests that when
two cars collide causing a total of, say, $10,000 worth of damage, everyone who
was within a mile of the accident should be required to pay a fine of $10,000.
That way, anyone who sees an accident about to happen will take all
cost-justified measures to prevent it (perhaps by honking furiously to warn of
impending danger). To my knowledge, Friedman's proposal has never struck anyone
as fair, but at least it gets the incentives right.

            Or does it? My own view is that the Friedman plan fails
even by its own strictly economic criteria, because it creates an incentive for
people to avoid high-accident areas and take inefficiently long routes to
wherever they're going--or to cancel their trips entirely. In principle, it
could even increase the accident rate by scaring potential good Samaritans off
the roads. Enforcement, of course, would be a nightmare.

            Those objections aside,
Friedman's proposal does illustrate the tension between economic and moral
considerations. And Friedman's innocent bystanders are at least partly
analogous to Daimler-Benz's innocent stockholders. Let's keep those lessons in
the back of our minds as we revisit the DaimlerChrysler controversy.

            Corporations can be punished for misdeeds in at least two
ways. One is a consumer boycott and another is a (voluntary or involuntary)
fine. Both kinds of punishment have been visited on Daimler-Benz (though
arguably at levels that are small compared with the underlying offenses). In
the 1980s, the corporation paid about $11 million to the descendants of its
slave laborers.

            Who exactly suffers from
those punishments? You might think the $11 million came from the pockets of
those who owned Daimler-Benz stock in the 1980s, but that's not necessarily the
case. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that in 1950 it becomes foreseeable
that Daimler-Benz will eventually make reparations. Then every share of
Daimler-Benz stock sold between 1950 and 1980 sells at a discount reflecting
that expectation. Without the discount, nobody would buy the stock. So given
sufficient foresight, the prospect of a 1980 punishment hurts the 1950 owners,
even if they sell in the interim. And those who buy stocks after 1950 are not
punished at all, because the discount compensates them for the fine.

            Therefore, if all companies are permanently on notice that
bad behavior will eventually be punished, they have an incentive to behave well
at all times. That's an outcome that seems both fair and economically
efficient: The punishment falls on the sinners and thereby deters the sin. But
here are two caveats:

            First, even if punishment is inevitable, it falls
not on the owners at the time when the sin is committed, but on the owners at
the time when the sin is discovered. After all, it's not till the discovery
that the stock price falls. So punishing past corporate sins is not like fining
everyone who was present when an accident occurred, but when it was reported,
which seems both unfair and pointless. But this caveat has a countercaveat: The
prospect of future punishments gives you an incentive to investigate the
corporation's history before you buy, which improves the chance that bad
behavior can be uncovered while the actual perpetrators can still be
punished.

            Second, it's hard to
maintain a consumer boycott, especially when the goal is to punish the past
rather than to influence the future. Consumers can quite reasonably argue that
history can't be changed and so is best forgotten. As a result, corporations
have little to fear from boycotts unless consumers commit themselves to
maintaining the boycotts even when they serve no purpose. It's hard to imagine
how such commitments might be maintained, which suggests that fines are more
effective than boycotts, especially if they are written into law rather than
imposed on an ad hoc basis.

            If you're looking for a firm conclusion to all this, you'll
have to look elsewhere; I hope I've at least illuminated some of the attendant
moral and economic issues--though even these can become very different in
situations that are superficially similar. (Click for an example.)

            And punishing evil corporations is very different
from punishing evil governments. In the first case, we punish stockholders who
invested voluntarily, while in the second we punish taxpayers who might have
bitterly opposed their government's policies. But that is a topic for another
column.

         
      
   
