
   
   
      
         
            

            

               The Clintometer is back. Click for the latest update.
            

            
U.N. aides
accused the United States of using U.N. weapons inspectors to spy against
Iraq . The accusation has raised a furor because the inspectors are supposed
to be independent. The conspiracy theory is that the weapons inspectors were
U.S. spies. The counterconspiracy theory is that Iraq's U.N. allies are fanning
the conspiracy theory in order to soften or get rid of the inspections. U.S.
officials admit they supplied spying equipment to the inspectors but offer
several alibis: 1) We were just helping the inspectors in response to their
request. 2) They authorized everything we did. 3) We gathered information only
to find out about Iraq's weapons programs, not to find out how to kill Saddam
Hussein. 4) At least we were discreet. Other countries put spies directly on
the weapons inspection team. 5) Of course the weapons inspectors spied against
Iraq. That's their job. 6) Without spies, the U.N. building would be empty.
(1/8/99)
            

            
Linda Tripp
says she saw Hillary Clinton's Whitewater "billing records" in Vince
Foster's safe in 1993, when the White House claimed they were missing. She says
something around that time, possibly Mrs. Clinton's "initials" on the records,
indicated that they belonged to Hillary Clinton. This is the fourth claim that
puts Tripp at the nexus of all Clinton scandals. (She also claims she was the
last person to see Foster before his alleged suicide, she was pressured to
commit perjury by Monica Lewinsky in 1997, and she was the person to whom
Kathleen Willey confided a sexual encounter with President Clinton in November
1993.) Tripp issued her latest claim in a deposition for the conservative
interest group Judicial Watch. Meanwhile, the Washington Post reports
that Tripp has sent out a fund-raising letter asking for donations to her legal
defense fund to protect her from Clinton "henchmen" who "have me in their cross
hairs." (1/8/99)
            

             

            
Julie Hiatt
Steele was indicted for lying about the Kathleen Willey
incident . Steele had denied under oath Willey's claim that Willey told
her about being groped by President Clinton. The indictment is being brought by
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr. The spins: 1) This proves Willey was telling
the truth. 2) It proves Clinton's lawyers orchestrated Steele's false
testimony. 3) Starr is cynically bringing the indictment now to inject the
Willey story into Clinton's Senate trial. 4) It proves once again that in
independent counsel investigations, the little fish get caught and the big fish
get away. (1/8/99)
            

            
There were no
fatal U.S. airline accidents in 1998. It was the first year without an air
travel fatality in three decades. This achievement was ignored by most major
newspapers, eventually earning an inside page wire story in the Jan. 7 Los
Angeles Times . The spins: 1) Hats off to the airlines for focusing on
safety. 2) Hats off to the Federal Aviation Administration for making the
airlines focus more on safety than they cared to. 3) Good news is no news.
(1/7/99)
            

            
The National
Basketball Association is back in business . NBA Commissioner David Stern,
representing the owners, and union chief Billy Hunter, representing the
players, struck a deal one day before the league was expected to cancel the
rest of the season. The standoff had already wiped out three months of the
season. The maximum player salary will be capped at $14 million, with a maximum
annual increase of 12 percent, and the players' total share of league revenues
will be capped at 55 percent after three years. The deal still must be ratified
by the owners and players. The league will play a short season of about 50
games per team beginning in early February. The spins: 1) Why did it take the
players so long to reach a deal? 2) Why did it take the owners so long to reach
a deal? 3) A pox on both their houses. We'll never watch another game. We don't
care what happens to this stupid league. 4) Hey, do you think Michael Jordan is
going to retire? (1/6/99)
            

            
The 2000
Republican presidential field was shaken up . 1) Elizabeth Dole announced
she is leaving the Red Cross and giving "serious consideration" to running. 2)
Sen. John Ashcroft, R-Mo., announced he won't run after all. 3) Sen. John
McCain, R-Ariz., and Sen. Bob Smith, R-N.H., formed exploratory committees. The
subtle theories: Dole is running because the country is ready for a woman,
Ashcroft is bowing out because the 1998 elections rebuked his religious right
constituency, and McCain is running because conservatives like his Vietnam
heroism and moderates like his positions on tobacco and campaign reform. The
unsubtle theory: The people who are running are those who can raise $20 million
or who come from New Hampshire. (1/6/99)
            

            
A New York
City woman was pushed in front of a subway train and killed. The mentally
ill man who pushed her evidently chose her at random. The spins: 1) The subways
are getting dangerous again. 2) Don't be silly, crime has declined in New York,
this was an exceptional incident, and you're more likely to be struck by
lightning. The thousands of New Yorkers who are avoiding the subways since the
incident are fools. 3) No, the thousands of New Yorkers who are standing on the
edges of subway platforms reading newspaper stories about the incident are
fools. (1/6/99)
            

            
Rep. Dennis
Hastert, R-Ill., was elected speaker of the House . Former pro wrestler
Jesse Ventura was sworn in as governor of Minnesota. Jerry Brown was sworn in
as mayor of Oakland, Calif. Marion Barry stepped down as mayor of Washington,
D.C. These events surprised nobody, having been foreordained weeks and months
ago. Nevertheless, they were trumpeted throughout the nation, because the media
had little else to talk about. (1/6/99)
            

            

               Eleven European
countries adopted a common currency, the euro. The member countries
have more people and exports than the United States but a somewhat smaller
gross domestic product. Spins on the monetary union: 1) It will make Europe the
United States' new economic rival. 2) It will make Europe the United States'
new political rival. 3) European trade will be good for the U.S. economy. 4)
European meddling will be bad for U.S. foreign policy. 5) The euro pact will
promote fiscal responsibility by limiting countries' authority to run deficits
and devalue their currency. 6) The pact will promote fiscal irresponsibility by
reducing stern German domination of European fiscal policy. 7) Stern German
domination? Now there's a loss. 8) The common currency will help global
corporations while stripping each European nation of its power to make its own
destiny. 9) European nationalism? Now there's a loss.
(1/4/99)
            

            
A winter
storm blanketed the Midwest . Weather experts hyped it as one of the worst
snowstorms in decades. The spins: 1) In the Northeast, it didn't live up to
billing. 2) Yeah, but it killed dozens of people in the Midwest. 3) Yeah, but
many of them died of heart attacks while shoveling snow. 4) Yeah, but the 21
inches of snow that fell on O'Hare airport in Chicago shut down most
cross-country air travel. 5) OK, so it did mess up the Northeast after all.
(1/4/99)
            

            

               David
Duke 
               is back. The congressional seat in Duke's district, which
is 85 percent white, is being vacated by House speaker wouldabeen Bob
Livingston, R-La. Duke came to the suburbs of Washington, D.C., last weekend to
raise money for the race. He told the audience he would "stand up openly" for
white Christians, adding, "If we lose European-Americans, we lose America." The
spins: 1) He's scary. 2) No, he's washed up. 3) If he becomes a serious threat,
Livingston and other GOP leaders will make sure to stop him. 4) Stop him?
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., and House impeachment leader Rep.
Bob Barr, R-Ga., have given speeches to a white citizens' group whose members
attended Duke's latest fund raiser. They should be ashamed. 5) That's why
they'll make sure to stop him. (1/4/99)
            

         
      
   
