
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Jan. 16
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Jan.
16, 1999)
            

            The cover editorial speculates on Brazil's post-devaluation
future. Will Brazil recover, or will it "descend into Asian-style chaos" and
spark a global financial meltdown? The optimistic view: The real was overvalued
anyway, so devaluation could lower the 29 percent interest rate. Pessimists
counter: The incompetence of Brazil's government, investors' lack of
confidence, and the "souring" of international sentiments toward emerging
markets could bring Brazil crashing down, dragging the International Monetary
Fund's name through the mud along with it. ... The "Lexington" column
celebrates the retirement of Michael Jordan, if only because it provides relief
from the recent battle between the game's "short billionaires and tall
millionaires."

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , Feb. 1
            

            
               (posted Friday, Jan.
15, 1999)
            

            The cover story traces
the free fall of Kofi Annan. The U.N. secretary-general, says the article, is a
career bureaucrat who "succeeds at little things and fails at big things."
Among his most notable botches: His involvement as a U.N. official in Bosnia
and Rwanda (before his tenure as secretary-general). Iraq is Annan's latest
debacle--he has cuddled with Saddam Hussein and squared off against the United
States. ... An article advocates "perpetual scorn" as the best
punishment for Clinton, and another scandal article bangs an old but never dead
theme: Washington's unquenchable appetite for sex talk ... An article
disputes Elizabeth Dole's Presidential Paragon status. Liddy may be a good,
strong woman, but she's had her share of professional blunders--and she's
hardly the doting wife conservatives want.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Jan. 17
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Jan.
14, 1999)
            

            The cover story on Bill
Clinton's legacy argues that his greatest achievement is making the presidency
smaller while restoring trust in government. His welfare reform and balanced
budget not only shrank government but also encouraged Americans to believe that
it could work. He also replaced the heroic presidency with the competent one,
asking to be judged by what he accomplished, not by how he behaved. Even so,
the Lewinsky scandal guarantees that he will be a historical joke.
(
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg wrote the piece.) ... "Whatever
happened to the Class of 1994?" catches up with the 73 Republicans elected to
the House in the "Republican Revolution." Only 50 remain in the House, and most
of those still there are chastened. They have assimilated to the institution
and moderated their conservatism. ... Chilean novelist Isabel Allende
writes that even if Augusto Pinochet is never tried in Spain, justice has
finally been done to the former dictator: The European detention has caused
"Pinochet's moral ruin. Henceforth, a man who had the gall to pose as his
nation's savior will take his place alongside Caligula and Idi Amin." Allende
is the cousin of Salvador Allende, the Marxist president deposed by Pinochet in
1973.

            

               
                  Time
               
               and Newsweek, Jan. 18

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
12, 1999)
            

            
               Time 's Y2K cover story focuses on alarmists, especially millennialist
Christians stockpiling for the looming Year 2000 disaster. The story visits the
"Martha Stewart" of Y2K survivalism, who advises suburbanites how to ride out
the chaos in comfort. The dehydrated food industry is booming, Time
notes. (The magazine's own take is more reassuring: There will be minor
glitches but not wholesale societal collapse.) ... 
               Newsweek puts
Don Imus on the cover for a package about the "Stars of the New News." The
lead essay bemoans the replacement of objective,
authoritative, Walter Cronkite-style news by opinionated, entertaining talk.
Imus is hailed as the champion "ringmaster" of the new news: The accompanying
profile --like every profile of Imus--applauds his
sense of the absurd and his ability to bully the famous into speaking
truthfully but worries about his crudeness and his temper. Among the other 20
"Titans of 'tude " are Maureen Dowd, Matt Drudge, Tavis Smiley,
Brian Lamb, and 
                  Slate
               's own Scott Shuger.

            
               Time describes "honor killings" in Jordan,
which comprise a quarter of the Arab nation's homicides. Brothers and fathers
murder women who have been raped or have had sexual affairs because their honor
has been sullied. The men are punished lightly, if at all.

            
               Newsweek
reveals some of the drawbacks of the economic boom. In Fargo, N.D., unemployment
is so low (less than 1 percent) that fast-food restaurants pay signing bonuses
to anyone who works 90 days. And in New York City, it's impossible to get a
table at fancy restaurants.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , Jan. 18
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
12, 1999)
            

            Branching out from its
"Best Colleges" franchise, the magazine describes what makes an outstanding high school and identifies 96 top schools in six
cities. Parents should look for schools with demanding standards, a rigorous
core curriculum, qualified teachers, high attendance rates, small classes, and
lots of parental involvement. U.S. News examines mostly public and
Catholic schools, because independent private schools refused to participate.
... A short piece says kids in Washington, D.C., are being
killed for their Eddie Bauer down parkas.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , Jan. 18
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
12, 1999)
            

            A story demolishes the
idea that Jonathan Pollard didn't harm U.S. intelligence operations while
spying for Israel. In fact, Pollard sold critical details about U.S. signal
intelligence and battle plans that the Israelis probably traded to the Soviets.
He also gave away National Security Agency planning documents that allowed the
Israelis to conduct military operations without U.S. detection. And contrary to
his defenders' claim, Pollard spied principally for money, not to help Israel.
Releasing him from prison, even to further Middle East peace, would be a huge
mistake. ... An article describes the effort by an Icelandic scientist
to document his nation's gene pool. With its isolated and homogeneous
population, Iceland is a perfect laboratory for investigating genetic disease.
The scientist believes that his database, which will be marketed to drug
companies, will be an essential tool for locating and curing genetic disease. A
few Icelanders are worried about losing their privacy, but most want to advance
medicine. ... A "Talk of the Town" item argues that Clinton should be
punished by prohibiting him from giving the State of the Union address.
He would enjoy it too much and would take "too much credit for things he had
too little to do with."

            
               
                  The
Nation
               
               , Jan. 25
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
12, 1999)
            

            A piece reviews the
North American Free Trade Agreement on its fifth anniversary. NAFTA has cost
the United States hundreds of thousands of jobs, worsened Mexican environmental
problems, and overloaded U.S. highways with unsafe Mexican trucks. ...
The cover story
warns that the success of Catholic-controlled health care organizations
threatens reproductive choice. Catholic organizations control 15 percent of
nonfederal hospital beds and are the largest nonprofit health care providers.
Some Medicaid patients are being forced into Catholic HMOs that don't perform
abortions or provide contraception.

         
      
   
