
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  A Civil
Action
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Critics call this courtroom
thriller about a lawyer (John Travolta) on a crusade against a polluting
company "perversely undramatic" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ).
Some say a miscast Travolta fails to convey the finer points of his character's
internal struggles. Most pin the blame on the dreary, endless lawsuit; as David
Denby puts it, "a movie that reaches a climax with the hero writing a letter to
the Environmental Protection Agency has landed in a certain amount of trouble"
( The New Yorker ). Richard Schickel of Time disagrees, calling the
film "smart, tough, yet curiously moving." (Visit the official
site.)

            
               
                  The Thin Red
Line
                (20 th Century Fox). Mixed reviews for revered
director Terrence Malick's first film in 20 years. The subject matter--a group
of World War II soldiers on a mission--strangely echoes Saving Private
Ryan , but critics say this film is much more oblique and spiritual. Despite
A-list star power (Nick Nolte, Sean Penn, John Travolta, George Clooney) and
spectacular cinematography, even positive critics concede the film is "too dark
and cluttered and mysterious to ever achieve the popular acceptance of
Spielberg's movie" (Dave Kehr, the Daily News ). The biggest complaints
are about the film's lack of plot and dialogue (almost all the speaking in the
film is voice-over), which borders on becoming "precious, self-conscious and
even self-indulgent" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). (This
unofficial
site has photographs from the film and message boards; or you can read
about the practical joking on the set here.)

            
               
                  Down in
the
                
               
                  Delta
                (Miramax Films). Poet Maya Angelou tries
her hand at directing, and the critics are pleased with the result. Alfre
Woodard plays a floundering single mother in Chicago who returns to her
Southern roots and, with the help of a supportive extended family, puts her
life back together. Reviews praise Woodard's nuanced performance and call the
film "uplifting, and unapologetically so" (Kevin Thomas, the Los Angeles
Times ). Although it borders on becoming "a cinematic Hallmark card of
familial togetherness" (Stephen Holden, the New York Times ), most
critics find the story emotionally powerful and refreshingly upbeat. (Check out
the official site.)

            
               
                  Hurlyburly
               
(Fine Line). Critics call this depressing coke-fueled vision of '80s Hollywood
lowlifes more an actors' showcase than a drama: It's "a tedious circus of
apoplectic speeches and explosive thespian snit fits" (Lisa Schwarzbaum,
Entertainment Weekly ). Sean Penn and Kevin Spacey both give keen
performances as strung-out movie-biz sharks, but most of the film is just talk
(it was adapted from David Rabe's play), with a few bits of sex and violence
the only action. Janet Maslin, however, says the film is a "misanthropic
triumph" and that "[t]he ensemble acting surpasses that of any other film this
year" ( New York Times ). (See the
trailer.)

            
               
                  Theory of
Flight
                (Fine Line). Helena Bonham Carter plays a feisty young woman
with Lou Gehrig's disease who is determined to lose her virginity, and Kenneth
Branagh is the slightly loony, impotent artist who is her caretaker. Critics
complain that this is a "mawkish tale ... without surprises" (Kehr, the
Daily News ) and recommend that moviegoers "cancel reservations on this
Flight and buy a ticket for a film that goes someplace more unexpected and
entertaining" (Dennis Moore, USA Today ). Thomas of the Los Angeles
Times dissents, praising the film's "steady grace" and "blithe spirit."
(Visit
the official site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Careless
Love: The Unmaking of Elvis Presley
               , by Peter Guralnick (Little,
Brown & Co.). The breathless enthusiasm of Gerald Marzorati's review in the
New York Times Book Review ("not simply the finest rock-and-roll
biography ever written. It must be ranked among the most ambitious and crucial
biographical undertakings yet devoted to a major American figure of the second
half of the 20 th century") is not quite matched by other reviewers.
Yes, this sequel to the spectacular Last Train to Memphis is definitive
and meticulously researched; the problem is the story. Elvis' decline was slow,
bloated, and painful, and writing about it in an interesting fashion is more
difficult than charting the star's dazzling rise was. Nevertheless, reviewers
say that Guralnick tells Elvis' story "with eloquent sorrow and muted
poignance" (Ken Tucker, Entertainment Weekly ). (Click here to check out
the Complete Elvis Presley Database, which has photos, a discography, and
links.)

            
               
                  The Jew of
New York
               , by Ben Katchor (Pantheon). The latest graphic novel
from the author of the acclaimed Julius Knipl, Real Estate
Photographer comic strip is praised as "not only something to read but to
ponder--an object nearly as strange and striking as the story it contains" (J.
Hoberman, the New York Times Book Review ). Set in 1830s New York, the
book features an eclectic cast of characters--hucksters, one-legged actresses,
anti-Semitic pamphleteers, a man who tries to establish a Jewish state in
upstate New York--who combine to form "a richly textured, almost Dickensian
community" (Alexandra Lange, New York ). The New Yorker calls it
"a work of singular, surreal vision." (Check out a few samples of Katchor's
Knipl strip here.)

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Patch Adams ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Faculty ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Stepmom ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Mighty Joe Young ;

               
                  Book--
                  Hundred Dollar Holiday , by Bill
McKibben;

               
                  Book
                  --The Vintner's Luck , by Elizabeth Knox.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  The Prince of Egypt ;

               
                  Movie--
                  You've Got Mail ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The General ;

               
                  Book--
                  Blind Man's Bluff: The Untold Story of American
Submarine Espionage , by Sherry Sontag and Christopher Drew, with Annette
Lawrence Drew;

               
                  Book--
                  Opened Ground: Selected Poems, 1966-1996 , by Seamus
Heaney;

               
                  Book -- The Unknown Matisse: A Life of Henri Matisse, The Early
Years, 1869-1908 , by Hilary Spurling.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Shakespeare in Love ;

               
                  Movie -- Star Trek: Insurrection ;

               
                  Movie -- Rushmore ;

               
                  Movie -- A Simple Plan ;

               
                  Movie -- Jack Frost ;

               
                  Television--
                  The Tempest (NBC);

               
                  Theater--
                  The Blue Room , by David Hare (Cort
Theatre, New York City).

            

            
               Dec.
9:
            

            

               
                  Movie -- Psycho ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Central Station ;

               
                  Movie -- Hard Core Logo ;

               
                  Movie -- Little Voice ;

               
                  Book -- Amsterdam , by Ian McEwan;

               
                  Art --"Edo: Art in Japan 1615-1868" (National Gallery of Art,
Washington);

               
                  Theater -- Electra , by Sophocles (Ethel Barrymore Theater, New
York City).

            

         
      
   
