
   
   
      
         
            Lives of the Artists

            Painters, as a rule, have
livelier lives than novelists do. Where a writer basically sits alone at a
desk, an artist does his thing amid a supporting cast of patrons, models,
dealers, and assistants. While the novelist hones his private style, the
painter joins and repudiates group movements. In the misbehavior category,
there's not even any comparison. As Faulkner nips from a flask in the drawer,
Pollock makes a boozy public spectacle of himself. Hemingway might have a few
wives, but Picasso has scores of mistresses. If the writer has mistresses, the
painter has orgies.

            All this has made art
biographies, since Giorgio Vasari started writing them in the 16 th
century, pretty good entertainment. Yet it's not immediately obvious how such
stories help you to appreciate what's hanging on the wall. If you want to grasp
what Harry Truman contributed to civilization, you would do well to pick up a
good bio. You can't exactly go to a museum to view "containment policy."
Artists, by contrast, endeavor to reach us without words. A critic or art
historian may direct our attention to things we would otherwise miss. But does
the intimate biographer bring us any closer to the experience of art?

            You might derive very different answers to that question
from the three books I read over the holidays. These biographies of Henri
Matisse, Diego Rivera, and Salvador Dalí, all of them by British writers
without backgrounds in art, represent alternative approaches to the problem of
writing a painter's life. Hilary Spurling's Matisse is a careful and tightly
focused attempt to illuminate a painter's development. Patrick Marnham's Rivera
is a breezy life and times, a raucous and gossipy tale that is only secondarily
about painting. Ian Gibson's Dalí is an overflowing dumpster of a book, which
puts forward an irritating psychological argument about its subject. But though
the first two of these biographies are excellent and the third one dreadful,
they all butt up against the same generic problem. Artists' lives are often
diverting but seldom illuminating.

            Let's start with the best
of the bunch. Spurling's biography of Matisse, the first volume of a projected
two, is a subtle account of a great painter's unfolding. The obvious question
about Matisse is how a seed merchant's son from France's ugly and smelly
industrial north became both an inventor of modernism and a master of
Mediterranean color and light. The Unknown Matisse gives us his small
steps, setbacks, and radical innovations. Spurling's scoop is her explanation
of why, after moving several increments toward his mature style, the painter
lapsed into a dark period that lasted from 1902-04. Matisse, she has
discovered, was drawn into the scandal arising from a huge financial fraud in
which his wife's parents were implicated. This took up all his time, strained
his meager resources, and gave him a breakdown. Only after his in-laws were
cleared did Matisse make his Fauvist breakthrough in the summer of 1905.
Spurling draws our attention to some of his influences: the ornate textiles
from the Flanders town where he was raised, paintings by Turner seen on a
honeymoon in London, and a Cézanne painting he bought with his family's grocery
money.

            The thing that is so admirable about Matisse is his quiet
integrity. For the better part of two decades, this reserved man of regular
habits fought poverty, illness, incomprehension, and rejection to make
revolutionary painting. His father considered him a shame to the family and
disinherited him. Teachers in Paris told him he was hopeless. Contemporaries
greeted each of his milestone paintings as more ridiculous than the last. Works
such as Matisse's 1907 Blue Nude shocked even rival-to-be Picasso. "If
he wants to make a woman, let him make a woman. If he wants to make a design,
let him make a design. This is between the two," Picasso said. Soon, Picasso
was imitating him.

            But even a biography as
well-wrought as this one does little to elucidate artistic inspiration. What
made Matisse radically simplify the figure and flatten three dimensions into
two in the way he did in Harmony in Red (1908)? Spurling informs us that
the pattern on the wallpaper and tablecloth comes from a bolt of blue cotton
cloth that Matisse glimpsed from a bus and that in the course of revising the
painting he changed the background from blue to red. This is interesting
trivia, but it does nothing, really, to enhance enjoyment of this masterpiece
or comprehension of how Matisse could have painted it.

            Diego Rivera had a wilder life than Matisse and produced
less important art, a balance wisely reflected in Marnham's entertaining
biography. Rivera had a lifelong involvement with Marxist and Mexican politics,
countless lovers, famous scandals, and a soap opera of a marriage (actually two
marriages) to Frida Kahlo. He was also a fabulist of Marquézian proportions,
spinning incredible yarns about his days as a student cannibal or a fighter
with Emiliano Zapata.

            The true stories are nearly as good as the imagined
ones. Though Rivera didn't, as he claimed, try to assassinate Hitler, he may
have got Trotsky murdered, writes Marnham. Rivera evicted Trotsky from the
sanctuary of his home in Mexico City when he found out that Trotsky was having
an affair with Kahlo. Kahlo seduced Trotsky because of her jealousy over the
affair Rivera had with her sister. Without Rivera's protection, Trotsky was
easier prey for Stalin's assassins. Marnham gives us the Rivera-Kahlo
relationship as black comedy. At one point, Rivera confides to friends that his
wife has become so depressed that he can't even cheer her up by telling her
about his latest sexual conquests.

            But in this biography,
too, we learn the salient facts of an artist's development without really
coming to understand how they happened. In Paris before and during World War I,
Rivera was a member of the French avant-garde, executing competent Cubist works
such as Still Life With Liqueur Bottle (1915). After a trip to Italy, on
which he saw the frescoes from the Italian Renaissance, he dropped Cubism for
what soon became his well-known mural painting. In the public fresco, Rivera
saw the chance to express his political ideas to the masses. But where did this
style come from? And why do Rivera's murals transcend their propagandistic
purpose in a way that works by his contemporaries don't? The mystery at the
heart of genius remains.

            B ritish biographers can usually be counted on to boil
things down for us, but Gibson swamps us with as much boring detail as an
American biographer. His book is crammed full of stray data he has disinterred
about Dalí's Catalan ancestors, his sexual obsessions, and infighting within
the Surrealist movement, which Dalí was eventually drummed out of for his
pro-fascist sentiments. What Gibson never gets around to telling us is why we
should care. The author assumes that Dalí was a great painter, which is not a
given, as with Matisse.

            Gibson's big theory is that Dalí's life was defined
by his feelings of shame. This hardly amounts to a surprising idea about the
creator of a painting titled The Great Masturbator (1929), but Gibson
treats it as a bolt from the blue. He does not, however, come close to giving
us a sense of what went wrong with Dalí's art. Unlike Matisse and Rivera, who
took a couple of decades to attain their mature styles, Dalí's arrival came
quick and early. Surrealism, a style he borrowed from Max Ernst and Yves
Tanguy, gave him a way to express the rancid contents of his own psyche. It's
hard to dispute the virtuosity of a painting such as The Birth of Liquid
Desires , painted when he was 28, in 1932. But Dalí rapidly became slack,
repetitious, corrupt, and in the end completely pathetic. Gibson chronicles his
long degradation but can't begin to explain it.

            After reading these books, I performed an
experiment by going to the Museum of Modern Art and testing my reactions
against the artists in question. Gibson had reduced Dalí to a midget. Several
examples of his early works reminded me that he was not completely worthless
after all. A chunk of a Rivera fresco left me wishing I could see the artist's
great murals in Mexico City again. Finally, I made my way to MoMA's big Matisse
room, my favorite in the museum. Knowing more about Matisse's struggles had
certainly deepened my respect for him. I could have delivered a short lecture
on his early years. But did the book add anything to my appreciation of his
paintings? I can't say it did.

         
      
   
