
   
   
      
         
            

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , Feb. 22
            

            
               (posted Friday, Feb.
5, 1999)
            

            The editorial assesses
the recently released White House budget: It unwisely sacrifices
long-worked-for tax reforms in favor of the president's immediate social
spending priorities. ... A piece argues that despite David Duke's pariah
status on the national level, he has won favor among Louisiana Republicans with
a slick combination of race-baiting and shady quid pro quos. ... An
Iranian academic narrates how, despite his reputation as a moderate, President
Mohammed Khatami's government has actually imposed even harsher restrictions on
women. But by basing its authority on public acceptance of extreme gender
restrictions, his regime "has become far more dependent on women for its
survival than women are on the regime." Most surreal act of censorship: Western
musicals such as Mary Poppins are screened, but every time a female
character sings or dances, she is replaced by an Iranian narrator who provides
spoken commentary instead.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , Feb. 7
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Feb.
4, 1999)
            

            The cover story
chronicles the bittersweet process of reuniting parents and children separated
during El Salvador's civil war. The children were seized and often raised by
the military that terrorized their parents. Now villagers are trying to find
and form relationships with children adopted by their former enemies. These
reunions can give rare substance and progress to the notoriously difficult
process of postwar national reconciliation. ... A piece tells the sad
story of 24 merchant sailors left legally, financially, and physically adrift
on a rotting freight vessel in the Gulf of Mexico. The ship was abandoned by
its bankrupt Pakistani owners and its crew left without food, water, fuel, or
wages. The merchant marine has become "the sweatshop of the high seas."
... The magazine continues its new practice of printing footnotes to its
fashion spreads. To fully understand this week's photos of heavily made-up
models in glittery frocks, readers should consult an annotated guide to the
models' dye jobs, the "artichoke" haircut, and the new way to wear leg warmers
(on your arms).

            

               
                  Harper's
               
               , February 1999
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Feb.
4, 1999)
            

            An amazing story
describes the life of fighter pilots on an aircraft carrier in sweat-inducing
detail. The author finds plenty of technical derring-do, but little Top
Gun -style machismo. The ship is a clammy and morbid universe of its own,
holding great masses of bombs and personnel, all tightly organized. The pilots
are dutiful but terrified. They quietly suppress the reality of killing other
humans and the possibility of being killed themselves. Instead, they put their
faith in athleticism and luck.

            

               
                  Time
               
               and

               
                  Newsweek
               
               
                  , Feb. 8
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
2, 1999)
            

            
               Newsweek 's cover story predicts Flytrap's long-term impact on American
politics and society. The magazine's less than revelatory insights: The
president won't accomplish much this term, the Constitution will survive, and
"consensual sex will continue to be tolerated." A conservative critic
tells Republicans to read--no, steal-- the Clinton
manual on how to update and revive your losing party. They should "pull a
Sister Souljah," loudly distancing themselves from a cultural figure on the far
right, and start oozing compassion (one way to do this: "heartwarming stories
about children with fatal diseases").

            
               Time 's
cover story celebrates "Hip-Hop Nation" and chronicles the
genre's 20 year rise. Hip-hop is the jazz of the 1990s: Its mix of rage,
authenticity, capitalism, and humor have caused nothing less than "a
realignment of America's cultural aesthetics." As for the violence and misogyny
of some rap lyrics: They may be offensive, but they're still "deeply American."
... 
               Time chronicles the emerging partnership between Vice
President Al Gore and House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt. The former
adversaries have formed "a pact of mutually assured ambition," with Gore
gunning for the presidency and Gephardt angling to retake the House and become
its speaker.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               
                  , Feb. 8
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
2, 1999)
            

            A piece recounts Russia's horrific descent. Quality and length
of life, food production, investment, and infrastructure are all bottoming out,
and inflation, pollution, and crime are soaring. The two greatest blunders of
Russia's privatization plan: allowing banks to speculate with government
rubles, and the sale of government utilities at bargain prices in rigged
auctions. The state can no longer even afford to pay Lenin's embalmers.
... The cover story remarks on the diminishing representation
of men in higher education. Since 1979, women have outnumbered men on college
campuses, but now the gap is widening: Fifty-seven percent of B.A.s are awarded
to women. This distorts social life on campus ("the women develop eating
disorders, and the men develop huge egos," complains one undergrad). Colleges
are turning to quiet, informal affirmative action on behalf of male
applicants.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               
                  , Feb. 8
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb.
2, 1999)
            

            A reporter chronicles
the rapacious and mistaken prosecution of a 7-year-old and an 8-year-old for
murder in Chicago. In their zeal to convict, prosecutors all over the country
are steamrollering special protections for juvenile suspects. The legal
consequences are dubious, and the social ones heartbreaking. ... In a
profile, Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan casts a contemptuous eye on President
Clinton: The New York Democrat has stood by the president out of party loyalty
and disdain for the impeachment process, but Moynihan calls Clinton's character
bankrupt and his policy choices morally and intellectually cheap. ... A
doctor debunks the notion that toxic substances cause "cancer clusters." (Such
clusters are the subject of the book and film A Civil Action .) The
apparent concentration of certain cancers in certain places is just coincidence
and "an irresistible error of human perception." ... Look closely at the
cover. It's the Monica Lisa, cherubic, mysterious, and famously silent.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               
                  , Feb. 8
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Feb
2, 1999)
            

            The cover story concedes
defeat on impeachment and beatifies the House Republicans for their willingness
to pursue an unpopular but noble path. The one workable exit strategy is to
"call the final vote and be prepared to lose." ... The editorial
proclaims Henry Hyde the once and future leader of the Republican Party. An
offhand comment made by Hyde during the Senate trial--that he would sacrifice
his seat in defense of the unborn, the nation's security, and the
Constitution--sums up the best Republican agenda for 2000. ... A piece
celebrates director Elia Kazan's lifetime achievement Oscar and argues for his
vindication in the popular memory. Kazan should be lauded for ratting on his
contemporaries in the McCarthy hearings and has been vilified by "revived
leftist fundamentalism." (Click for Jacob Weisberg's take on Kazan in

                  Slate
               .)

            

               
                  Economist
                
               , Jan. 30
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Jan.
30, 1999)
            

            The cover editorial predicts the imminent collapse
of--guess what?--massively overvalued Internet stocks. That crash, if it
doesn't drag the whole stock market down, could be useful for the economy
because it will "restore sanity" to the venture capital industry. Some of the
big Internet pioneers such as Yahoo! and America Online may survive, but the
Dollar.coms and Buy.coms of the world are surely doomed. ... An article
identifies four reasons that company managers are rich yet miserable: 1)
They're working longer hours. 2) Flatter management structures diminish the
sweet sense of victory that used to come from reaching the top. 3) Job
paranoia: Execs get fired more often these days. 4) Outside contractors are
increasingly siphoning power from managers' "fiefdoms." ... An article
finds "feminism" in an unexpected place: primitive, forest-dwelling tribes. The
women are deliberately promiscuous in order to win more male protectors for
their child. Men, not knowing if they're the biological father or not, assume
that they are.

         
      
   
