
   
   
      
         
            No. 185: &quot;Tourist <EM>Tsuris</EM>&quot;

            

               Israel's National Parks Authority was uneasy about a proposed new
attraction but, after consulting church authorities, head of planning Zeev
Margalit concluded that it would "not hurt the feelings of the Christian
tourists and it would not be too kitchy, so we decided to go with it." With
what? ( This story 
                  courtesy of Daniel Radosh. )
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 184)--"Post-Game Blame":
            

            

               
                  Fill in the blank on one Atlanta Falcon's analysis of his
team's Super Bowl loss. "Instead of getting mentally ready for the Broncos, we
were ___________."
               
            

            
"Getting mentally ready for the Bengals. Were we surprised when Denver was
introduced!"-- Mac Thomason
            

            
"Building a fort with our knee and shoulder pads."-- Alex Balk
            

            
"Anticipating that all-new Simpsons episode."--Elliot Cohen
            

            
"Visiting Manuel Noriega in prison."-- Neal Pollack
            

            
"Praying. Which just goes to show you how much power that has, let me
tell you. Thanks a lot, Jesus."-- Tim Carvell ( Chuck Lawhorn had a
similar answer.)

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            What we know about Miami.
Here's the sketch on the place mat in the coffee shop: Sitting in the lobby of
a lovely art deco hotel, Crockett and Tubbs read A Man in Full aloud to
Gloria Estefan. This replaces last year's place mat: Leaving the lobby of a
tatty deco hotel on their way to enjoy an early bird special, my grandparents
are elbowed into the gutter by a coke-sniffing fashion photographer on his way
to Disney World. Next year's millennial mat: A dolphin and his lawyer sit at
the controls of an atomic monorail filled with Latin American millionaires
throwing oranges at the ghost of Jackie Gleason as he flees inside the
Fontainbleu Hotel. Come on down!

            
               Third and Long
Answer
            

            "Instead of getting mentally ready for the Broncos,
we were talking about Eugene ."

            The night before the game, Eugene Robinson, one of
five Falcons visiting the zone north of downtown Miami, was arrested for
soliciting a prostitute.

            Another distraction some Falcons blamed for their
lack of concentration--their families were allowed to travel and stay with the
team.

            "Having families in the
hotel became a hassle to some guys," said Robinson. "We had to drive all the
way to the zone north of downtown Miami to hire a hooker in peace," he did not
add.

            
               Waiting for the
Dough Extra
            

            An experiment reported in
the New York Times shows how waiter or waitress behavior affects the
size of the tip. Will the following increase or decrease it?

            1. Introduce yourself.

            2. Draw a smiley face on the bill.

            3. Touch the customer on the shoulder when asking if
the meal was all right.

            4. Rub the customer on the thigh and wink when
asking, "Anything else?"

            5. Crouch at the table when taking the order.

            6. Crouch under the table
when taking the order.

            

               Answers
            

            1. Increase

            2. Increase for waitress; decrease for waiter

            3. Increase

            4. Not included in experiment

            5. Increase

            6. Not included in
experiment

            In 1998, restaurant tips
totaled over $12 billion, averaging 16.7 percent.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: A Man in
Full .

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
