
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Jan. 9
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Jan.
9, 1999)
            

            Noting that mergers
increased 50 percent worldwide in 1998 and that less than half of mergers "add
value," the cover article advises companies how to make successful marriages.
Suggestions: Don't merge because you're bored with your own company, don't
merge because you're scared, watch out for antitrust law, and make sure your
corporate cultures are compatible. ... A piece chronicles the horrific
implosion of Sierra Leone, where an "incoherent," horrible guerrilla movement
is sweeping through the countryside, destroying what little remains of civil
society. Many of the soldiers are kidnapped children; some practice
cannibalism. ... A piece describes the next cool tool of the U.S.
military: microplanes. Six inches long, weighing 3 ounces, and equipped with
tiny cameras, they will spy on enemy positions. The prototypes fly like insects
rather than like planes.

            
               
                  Vanity
Fair
               
               , February 1999
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Jan.
9, 1999)
            

            The cover article and
photo essay preview the new Star Wars movie, The Phantom Menace .
Among the details revealed: The villains are evil Jedi named Darth Maul and
Darth Sidious, the film starts with the siege of Naboo, a planet whose queen
will become Luke and Leia's mother. Director George Lucas tells Vanity
Fair that he will make only six Star Wars movies--the three that
have already been released and the three that precede them. He has no plans for
movies that take the saga past Return of the Jedi . ... A massive
article about the Clintons' marriage concludes that Hillary covers up Bill's
straying and blames enemies when he wanders. She doesn't talk about intimate
personal matters with anyone, even her mom. She has always been his goad and
his source of fire, but the Lewinsky affair may have changed that. She seems to
be withdrawing from him, an abandonment that is leaving him passive and
impotent. ... A piece tells the incredible life story of Carlos
Mavroleon, the Eton and Harvard educated son of a Greek tycoon who converted to
Islam, joined the mujahideen, became a free-lance TV war correspondent, was
arrested by the Pakistani police while trying to sneak into Osama Bin Laden's
terrorist camps after the U.S. bombing, and died mysteriously of a heroin
overdose days later.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               
                  , Jan. 25
            

            
               (posted Friday, Jan.
8, 1999)
            

            The cover story
describes the Gore 2000 campaign's "mighty machine," already operating in high
gear. With the economy humming and Clinton high in the polls, the campaign's
message, "Clinton II," sounds fine. But will it be out of tune by the time the
election rolls around? ... Two stories view the impeachment and trial of
President Clinton as part of a long-running U.S. culture war going back to the
Salem witch trials. Each side claims (in so many words) that its opponents
"just don't get it," where "it" refers to the correct definitions of virtue and
villainy. ... The "TRB" column doubts that Fidel Castro will cooperate
with the Clinton administration's modest embargo relaxation, "a policy that
announces itself as an effort to gradually undermine his rule." The wily Cuban
dictator will either sabotage the plan or turn it to his own uses.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
                
               
                  , Jan. 10
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Jan.
7, 1999)
            

            The cover story worries
about the rise of the SAT prep industry. Private tutors, who cost up to $415
per hour, and $800 test-prep courses serve only the wealthiest, most
overprivileged kids, thus undermining the idea that the SAT should level the
playing field in college admissions. The SAT has little predictive value for
undergraduate performance, and colleges claim they are decreasing the
importance of the test in admissions, but it is still a critical factor in who
gets in. A sidebar offers test-taking tips, including: "The most obvious choice
... is almost always wrong--but it's not far off." ... Palestinian
scholar Edward Said argues that a single Israeli-Palestinian state is the only
lasting Middle East solution. Such a state, with a constitution and identical
rights for all citizens, could guarantee long-term security in a way that the
current fake peace doesn't. Said is quiet on how Palestinians and Israelis can
be persuaded even to consider such a reconciliation. ... A column
describes several ways the euro could destabilize America. The most alarming:
China could practice financial terrorism by selling Treasury bills and buying
eurobonds, thus weakening the dollar.

            

               
                  Time
                
               and Newsweek , Jan.
11
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
5, 1999)
            

            Both magazines go with health cover stories.
Time 's special issue--"The Future of Medicine"--predicts that the next
100 years will be "the biotech century," in which scientists will manipulate
genes to prolong the lives of healthy humans rather than just treat sick
people, as they have this century. The 50 page package celebrates the Human
Genome Project, new gene therapies, and designer pharmaceuticals and raises the
expected ethical concerns about manipulating embryonic genes and genetically
engineering crops. ... 
               Newsweek 's narrow cover package discusses breakthroughs in treating migraine
headaches. They are caused by extremely sensitive nerves, not by misbehaving
blood vessels, as had been believed. New drugs are effective.

            Both magazines score
interviews with terrorist Osama Bin Laden. If this is Bin Laden's idea of a PR
campaign, he needs a new adviser. He tells Time , "God knows that we have
been pleased by the killing of American soldiers," and advises Newsweek
                that "[a]ny American who pays taxes
is ... our target" (another good reason not to file this year). Both interviews
note that Bin Laden thanks God before every answer. ... 
               Newsweek
picks the 11 most important ideas of the past 2,000 years, including the stirrup,
plumbing, the printing press, numbers, erasers, and clocks, but not
electricity.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
                
               , Jan. 11
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
5, 1999)
            

            The cover
story describes the difficult path to Catholic sainthood, "the world's
most complex legal process." Consideration can't start till five years after
death, the candidate's life is exhaustively scrutinized, and two miracles must
be proved. The miracles must pass a five doctor panel, who seek any possible
medical explanation. A sidebar profiles potential saint Katharine Drexel, a nun who
gave her vast fortune to charity while ministering to poor blacks and Native
Americans in Louisiana. Miracle No. 1 has been accepted: In 1974--long after
her death--a prayer to Drexel cured a child's ear illness. ... A
long story argues that the Food and Drug Administration
approved Viagra too quickly. More than 100 people have died after taking the
drug, most from heart failure. Viagra's label did not adequately warn users
with weak hearts and manufacturer Pfizer was not required to perform clinical
trials on people with heart disease.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , Jan. 11
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
5, 1999)
            

            A fascinating article
describes the societal importance of people who bring other people together. By
connecting people to jobs, to friends, and to activities such people build
critical social networks. (The article focuses on one such social hub, Lois
Weisberg, who happens to be the mother of 
                  Slate
               's Jacob
Weisberg.) ... A piece on Chief Justice William Rehnquist suggests that
he may preside over the Clinton trial more liberally than many people expect.
In the only trial over which he has ever presided, Rehnquist allowed the
defense to introduce a remarkably large amount of evidence.

         
      
   
