
   
   
      
         
            No. 174: &quot;Odd Lott&quot;

            
               You be the
decorator.
            

            

               In a 1992 keynote speech, Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott said: "The
people in this room stand for the right principles and the right philosophy.
Let's take it in the right direction and our children will be the
beneficiaries." Describe the room.
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 173)--"Woon River":
            

            
               When the
Woonasquatucket River near Providence, R.I., moved into the No. 2 slot, behind
New Jersey's Passaic River, signs went up along its banks reading: "Peligro!
Los Peces De Este Rio No Se Deben Comer."
            

            

               Loosely translated, what would that be in idiomatic
English?
            

            "Ice
Cube! Get back on the boat because a giant, man-eating snake lurks in these
waters."-- Tim Rogers
            

            
"Danger! Vaguely racist jokes based on a limited knowledge of high-school
Spanish ahead."-- Dennis Cass
            

            
"Pellegrino! The Pescis and Esther Williams won't come unless they get
some!"-- Tim Carvell
            

            
"Migrating birds! You're going the wrong way."-- Matthew Singer
            

            
"Pelicans! The feces in this river are not safe to eat."-- Steven
Levy
            

            
"Danger! Fish are not working up to their full potential."-- Beth
Sherman
            

            
"Attention! If you can read this, you're too Hispanic. Paid for by Pat
Buchanan."-- Matthew Singer ( Larry Amaros had a similar
answer.)

            
"Welcome! The INS invites you to enjoy fishing and swimming here!"-- Karen
Bitterman
            

            "Alas!
The fish in this river are impotent."-- Steve Smith
            

            "Drink
this water, but we can't promise that John Travolta will represent you in
court."-- Jon Garfunkel
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            When someone makes a
movie about the Woonasquatucket (Adam Sandler, call my people), he'll have a
rich riverine tradition to draw on. Heart of Darkness , The African
Queen , Deliverance --each is a kind of flooded road movie. There are
hundreds of them, if memory serves, and I can assure you that it doesn't. In
The River , Mel Gibson and Sissy Spacek struggle to save their farm from
flooding caused by Jewish bankers. In Wild River , Elia Kazan rats out
his hillbilly co-workers to the Tennessee Valley Authority. River of No
Return is the one where Robert Mitchum escapes savage cartoon Indians by
floating down a river on Marilyn Monroe. There are Rivers of Death, Grass,
Tears, Stone, and No Return. There are Rios Bravo, Conchos, Grande, Lobo, and
Rita--this last featuring Abbott, Costello, and singing cowboy Nazis. That's a
memory I'm sure of. What I'm less sure of is this: When John Travolta turned
down the $20 million that his clients clearly wanted, why would Meryl Streep
risk her life to row him through the rapids?

            
               Aquatic
Answer
            

            "Danger! River Fish Are Not Safe To Eat!"

            The Woonasquatucket
trails only the Passaic for dioxin in its sediment. Informed of the problem,
Robert Vanderslice, head of the Rhode Island Department of Health, swiftly
ordered an interagency urban rivers team to post the bilingual signs, put on a
slide show, and hand out brochures. The source of the dioxin is unclear. Legal
action is pending. Swimming is discouraged.

            
               Cell Division
Extra
            

            A few more thoughts on
why we hate what we hate.

            
               The
Problem
            

            "I detect two things. First, a mild feeling of envy
along with irritation, as if someone had noticed something one can get away
with that I hadn't thought of. Second, cellulites seem to be waving some part
of their good fortune in my face.

            "Add these two
impressions together and you find the missing element that explains my own
irritation: the public display of advantage. Maybe that's why listening to a
cellulite strikes me as identical to watching the beautiful people in
commercials as they breeze through the world in their SUVs, or endlessly amuse
each other in the back seat of a convertible on their way to THE LIFE YOU WILL
NEVER HAVE. All this shall pass when there are so many cell phones that no one
is remotely likely to confuse their use with a ticket to heaven. Veblen remains
a prophet, no?"-- Jason Potter
            

            
               The Solution
            

            For nature's Darwinian
response to the mobile phone blight, try www.smn.co.jp/keyword/0158k01e.html, courtesy of Kate Wing.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
