
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Drawing upon her rich experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her
friends) responds to questions about manners, personal relations, politics, and
other subjects. Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries
should not exceed 200 words in length. Please indicate how you wish your letter
to be signed, preferably including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Pru!
               
            

            
               My sister married (18 years ago) a man who,
while talented and charming when in the mood, turned out to be very abusive
(verbally) and have a major bad temper. This affected her well-being but,
instead of concentrating on the marriage or seeking treatment for him, she
decided to blame our parents for all her ills ... including the choice of a
husband.
            

            
               She spends hours
talking about the "abuse" we were subjected to as children. Our parents were
not perfect, but about average, or maybe a drop below. I believe that dwelling
on the past is just an excuse and easier than dealing with the present. What
can be done to convince her that, despite all the psychobabble we are exposed
to, the past is not as important as the present? I want her to get on with her
life, get help for her husband, and stop driving my parents and everybody in
the family nuts.
            

            
               Respectfully,
            

            

               --Forward-Looking in New York
            

            Dear For,

            Prudie's guess is that your sib has not been
receptive to your suggestions, so save your breath to cool your soup. Your
sister's life has not turned out as she had hoped, and her way of coping is to
apportion blame. Unfortunately, in her game of emotional Tag, your parents are
"it."

            Prudie hopes you will
disengage from the marital psychodrama and be as supportive as possible to your
folks. Also, in the name of self-defense, you might decline to listen to your
sister's version of her difficulties. Simply say that you, for whatever reason,
did not experience any parental abuse, and you wish her well in what is,
essentially, a private matter: her marriage.

            
--Prudie, palliatively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Why assume that a benefaction to animals
wouldn't be beneficial to people--including the homeless? (See the letter from
"."
               ) Here in our unnamed fair city, we have a huge population of feral
cats and dogs--and our share of homeless. Feral dogs have been known to attack
the homeless and their food supplies! Feral cats in poor neighborhoods like
mine spread diseases, and their large number can make you feel you're living in
a litter box.
            

            
               Please send some of
those animal dollars our way and neuter these poor neglected creatures ... for
all our sakes.
            

            

               --D.
            

            Dear D.,

            Alas, Prudie is not the dispenser of the windfall
for animals, but she cannot disagree with any of the points you make. She had
always been aware of feral dogs but not the cats. Goodness, if the city
authorities don't get a hold of this situation, there's going to be Rigor
Morris on a grand scale ... loosely translated, too many dead cats.

            Prudie suggests you
badger the proper agency in your community to do something about all the
livestock roaming the streets.

            
--Prudie, supportively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Weighing in on the "Have a nice day" debate
(for a recent entry, click ); look up the etymology of "nice" in a good
dictionary (I used Webster's New World ), and you'll find that the root
meaning of the word is "stupid, foolish, ignorant." If you think about this,
this explains a lot. "Have a nice day" is a subtle insult, and instinctively we
all know this.
            

            
               Personally, I like
to say, "It's good to see you" (when it is). Otherwise I just say,
"Hello."
            

            

               --David Rosenthal, Sedona, Ariz.
            

            Dear Dave,

            Prudie feels so much
better knowing the subversive underpinning of that goofy greeting. Bless
you.

            
--Prudie, appreciatively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               The reason "" does not have a long-term
relationship that is good for her is due to her willingness to settle for
crumbs, i.e., "something is better than nothing." The fact is, her attitudes
are actions that have led to her current state.
            

            
               She needs to get rid
of the current crew, get herself into insight psychotherapy, and get rid of
anyone in her life who tells her all the good ones are married or gay. If she
is overweight, she needs to get rid of that, as well. Men do not go for fat
women, regardless of the stories one may hear.
            

            

               --Faithful Reader
            

            Dear Faith,

            Thank you for being a Prudie.

            What, by the way, is
"insight psychotherapy"? And just for the record, there are, in fact,
men--called "chubby chasers"--who, for whatever reason, do like generously
proportioned women.

            --Prudie, expansively

         
      
   
