
   
   
      
         
            Clinton in the Senate Dock

            Commonly described in
headlines as "the trial of the century," the impeachment proceedings against
Bill Clinton received massive coverage around the world Friday, with
journalists clearly under strain to find anything new to say about the
president's troubles. The angles varied widely from paper to paper. An editorial
in the Jerusalem
Post compared the impeachment in the United States with Israel's
current political turmoil and said that "[I]n both nations, people are getting
frustrated with political systems that have become obsessed with themselves,
and wish that what they see as unseemly distractions will be quickly over."

            In Paris, the
conservative Le
Figaro repeated the usual French view that Flytrap is a symptom of
demented American puritanism. "Wake up, Tocqueville, they've gone mad!" began a
front-page editorial signed by Franz-Olivier Giesbert. "When one observes the
depressing spectacle presented by American democracy today, one imagines that
the man who talked best about it cannot be feeling very well in his heaven.
There is decidedly something rotten in the kingdom of democracy. The American
obsession with truth and purity has turned morbid and demanding of
psychoanalysis. It is even endangering the whole political system."

            In Tokyo, the Japan Times said the impeachment drama had been
"sordid and embarrassing, lending itself to the worst sort of moralistic
posturing and inevitable charges of hypocrisy and opportunism." It went on, "It
has ended or done serious damage to several once-promising political careers.
... For all his accomplishments, Mr. Clinton's legacy has been permanently
stained."

            The British broadsheets
strove for originality in their front-page headlines. The Daily Telegraph 's was "They
came in, two by two, to call for Clinton's head" over a picture of the House
prosecutors arriving in the Senate. The Independent 's was "
'Judge in Black' is sworn in for trial of century," focussing on
Chief Justice William Rehnquist's funereal garb. The Guardian 's was weirder
still. "A moment of history to connect Andrew (1868) with Strom (96)," was what
it said.

            Only the Times of London was content with a normal headline: "The
President goes on trial." The paper's main editorial Friday was not about the
impeachment process but about a new revelation that Britain's D-Day commander
and military hero, Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, had referred 50 years ago
to the African as "a complete savage" whose only hope would be a British
colonial "master plan" to carve out giant West, Central, and East African
federations and unlock their vast wealth for Britain's benefit. "Had Monty won,
Britain would have imposed an indefensible, and unsustainable, version of
apartheid," the paper said. But it concluded that "the sobering fact remains
that Africans today are poorer than they were" when Montgomery unveiled his
plan.

            Two continental European papers indulged their
frequent penchant for interviews with American historians on current political
questions. On Friday the Corriere della Sera of Milan, Italy, interviewed
Professor Arthur Schlesinger Jr., who said that even if the impeachment of
Clinton didn't succeed, "its effect in weakening the institution of the
presidency will continue to be felt for generations." In Le Monde of Paris, the
historian Fred Greenstein of Princeton University said nobody apart from
"hezbollah Republicans" wanted the impeachment trial to continue beyond
mid-February or for witnesses to be called. But Clinton had "generated an
almost paranoiac fury among right-wing extremists who hate and despise him, and
for whom he personifies the 'permissive' generation of the Vietnam war."

            In Canada, the new
conservative national paper, the National Post , commented Friday that, despite its show of "serene confidence a
trial will end in victory for Mr. Clinton and disaster for his opponents," the
White House was in reality "on the edge of panic." This was because this
"impeachment trial requires the White House to argue two tough--even
incredible--propositions: first, the president did not perjure himself and did
not obstruct justice; second, that even if he did, perjury and obstruction are
not grounds for impeachment if they are committed in the context of sex." The
paper asked, "Can Mr. Clinton trust the Democratic senators, most of whom don't
like him much, to go on repeating these unconvincing lines week after week,
month after month?"

            In Australia, the Sydney Morning Herald called it "Clinton's Trial by
Chaos" and said in a commentary by its Washington correspondent that "beyond
the elaborate facade of formality, the opening of the trial of William
Jefferson Clinton was more reminiscent of a football scrum in a particularly
vicious game." The papers said, "It is like a parody of an
end-of-the-millennium crisis. ... Can the world's greatest power really be
reduced to this--a serious legal argument in front of the Senate about such
issues as whether Bill Clinton did indeed touch Monica Lewinsky's breasts and
genitals?"

            The Sydney Morning
Herald also carried an interview Friday with Richard Butler in which the Australian
weapons inspector conceded that intelligence gathered in Iraq by his UNSCOM
team might have been secretly passed to the United States. "The idea that
somehow products of our work could be diverted to other purposes is
theoretically tenable," he said, "but I have no knowledge of that."

             

         
      
   
