
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  She's All
That
                (Miramax Films). A clichéd high school Pygmalion
story is enlivened by some witty writing: "not a great movie, but it has its
moments" (Roger Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ). Freddie Prinze Jr. plays
a smart, rich, popular jock who (on a bet) transforms Rachael Leigh Cook, an
earnest, morose art nerd, into prom queen material. Critics take note of both
stars, especially Cook, who is likened by many to a young Winona Ryder. Kevin
Thomas of the Los Angeles Times gives the film a glowing review, saying
it "puts a priority on intelligence" and is a "special delight for anyone for
whom high school was something less than nirvana." (Visit the official site.)

            
               
                  The 24 Hour
Woman
                (The Shooting Gallery). Rosie Perez fast-talks her way
through this drama of a woman torn between her career and new baby. Most
critics call it flat: "a homey compendium of feminist talking points laced with
awkward satire" (Janet Maslin, the New York Times ). The film's breakneck
speed, mostly showing Perez being pulled in six directions at once, is "a
scream--not because it's funny, but because screaming is about all anyone does"
(Jack Mathews, New York Newsday ). A few enjoy the
high-decibel/high-speed film, such as the Village Voice 's Amy Taubin,
who says it's "a tour de force of barely controlled hysteria that's as funny as
it's insightful." (Did you know Rosie Perez cut a woman's throat at age 12?
Find out more about her at CelebSite .)

            
               
                  Still
Crazy
               (Columbia Pictures). Nice but unenthusiastic reviews for
this account of a fictional 1970s rock band's present-day reunion. While
comparisons to This Is Spinal Tap are inevitable, critics say this is
much more a straightforward feel-good comedy than a satire. Written by The
Commitments ' authors Ian La Frenais and Dick Clement, the film isn't about
making fun of aging rockers as much as it is about rekindling old friendships:
"winsome if entirely predictable" (Eric Brace, the Washington Post ).
(Download the trailer here.)

            
               
                  My Name Is
Joe
                (Artisan Entertainment). Critics praise director Ken Loach's
departure from agitprop filmmaking: "a pleasant surprise--there's no overt
political content" just "a delightful, heartwarming, grown-up love story"
(Jonathan Foreman, the New York Post ) about a recovering alcoholic in
Glasgow, Scotland, putting his life back together. Peter Mullan won the best
actor award last year at Cannes for this "raw, emotionally charged" performance
(Mathews, New York Newsday ). (Loach talks about his previous work in a
RealVideo clip and an interview here.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  What Our
Mothers Didn't Tell Us: Why Happiness Eludes the Modern Woman
               ,by
Danielle Crittenden (Simon & Schuster). The conservative writer and
commentator offers a solution to the modern woman's problems: Marry young, put
career after kids, get comfortable with the idea of being supported by hubby.
The critics don't buy all of it. The Weekly Standard predictably doles
out praise: "This wonderful, breezy book reads as easily as all the women's
magazines the author uses for her evidence. But it bravely faces what those
magazines, steeped in feminist ideology, steadfastly avoid" (Carolyn Graglia).
But others note that despite Crittenden's claim that "feminism has failed
women," it "does not seem to have failed the author, a married mother of two
who is building her own career based in the subject" (Elizabeth Glieck, the
New York Times Book Review ). Conservatives and liberals alike agree that
Crittenden oversimplifies both the nature of the contemporary workplace and
women's choices. (Read the first chapter here, courtesy of the New York Times [free registration
required].)

            
               
                  Amy and
Isabelle
               , by Elizabeth Strout (Random House). Raves for this
first novel about a mother warring with her teen-age daughter, whose blossoming
sexuality and questionable relationship with a teacher upset the careful
balance of their existence together. Alice Truax calls it "an excellent novel
about enduring the banalities of ordinary life" ( The New Yorker ).
Suzanne Berne in the New York Times Book Review agrees: "one of those
rare, invigorating books that take an apparently familiar world and peer into
it with ruthless intimacy, revealing a strange and startling place." (Read an excerpt from the book.)

            
               
                  Heavy
Water
               , by Martin Amis (Harmony Books). Critics agree that Amis is one
of the most talented writers of his generation; they disagree as to whether
this collection provides fresh evidence. A.O. Scott marvels at Amis' ability to
write stories that "seem to have been written on a dare, or as entries in a
contest to see who could get the best results from the worst ideas" (the New
York Times Book Review ). But some are unimpressed with these tossed-off
tales. Michiko Kakutani seems downright irritated: "The volume is basically a
case of a skilled writer lazily using his sleight of hand to toss off what
(with two or three exceptions) are pure exercises in craft" (the New York
Times ). (Find out more about author Amis on the New York Times '
"Featured Author" page.)

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie
                  --
                  Gloria ;

               
                  Movie
                  --
                  Playing by Heart ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Another Day in Paradise ;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Reporting Live , by Lesley
Stahl;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Face-Time , by Erik Tarloff;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  Miss Nobody , by Tomek Tryzna.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Varsity Blues ;

               
                  Movie -- At First Sight ;

               
                  Movie -- In Dreams ;

               
                  Book -- Duane's Depressed , by Larry McMurtry;

               
                  Book -- The Intuitionist , by Colson Whitehead;

               
                  Theater -- Fosse: A Celebration in Song and Dance
(Broadhurst Theatre, New York City).

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Affliction ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Hilary and Jackie ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Hi-Lo Country ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in
America--The Stalin Era , by Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev;

               
                  Book
                  --Note Found in a Bottle: My Life as a Drinker , by
Susan Cheever;

               
                  Book
                  --Glamorama , by Bret Easton Ellis.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  A Civil Action ;

               
                  Movie -- The Thin Red Line ;

               
                  Movie -- Down in the 
                  Delta ;

               
                  Movie -- Hurlyburly ;

               
                  Movie -- Theory of Flight ;

               
                  Book--
                  Careless Love: The Unmaking of Elvis
Presley , by Peter Guralnick;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  The Jew of New York , by Ben
Katchor.

            

         
      
   
