
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Affliction
                (Lion's Gate Films). Nick Nolte's
outstanding acting and Paul Schrader's masterful directing earn this film
uniformly high marks from critics. As a tragically repressed and alcoholic
small-town cop, Nolte conveys a "fierce, anguished intensity" (Janet Maslin,
the New York Times ). Critics say Schrader's style is a perfect match for
Russell Banks' novel, and that the director "has hit, in this exquisitely
shaped, paced, painted, and edited production, a new, deep level of artistry"
(Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ). Only complaint: The voice-over
narration by Willem Dafoe (as Nolte's brother) is a bit stilted and portentous.
(Read this
interview with Banks by Pinckney Benedict, and click for David Edelstein's
review in 
                  Slate
               .)

            
               
                  Hilary and
Jackie
                (October Films). Based on the life of phenomenal British
cellist Jacqueline du Pré, as remembered by her sister, this film has the
critics split. Anand Tucker's film is often unflattering to the late musician,
and some reviewers mark it as the work of a jealous sibling out to tarnish her
sister's hallowed image. Gwendolyn Freed's outraged review in the Wall
Street Journal attempts to refute many of the film's claims and says it
"paints a repulsive portrait of du Pré." Others rave, calling it "a compelling
look at the most intimate and troubling of family dynamics" (Kenneth Turan, the
Los Angeles Times ), with a stellar performance by Emily Watson as
Jackie. As Jack Mathews writes in Newsday , the film is "superb," and
"accurate or not, it makes a great story." (Visit the
official site.)

            
               
                  The Hi-Lo
Country
                (Gramercy Pictures). The "chaps and Stetsons here prove
an ill fit" (Peter Rainer, New York ) for British director Stephen Frears
( Dangerous Liaisons ) as he tries his hand at a 1940s western. Woody
Harrelson is "spectacularly kinetic" (Stephen Holden, the New York
Times ) as a ne'er-do-well cowboy, but the rest of the film drags. Billy
Crudup (as Harrelson's best friend and business partner) is stiff, and Patricia
Arquette, playing the object of both their desires, fails to generate the heat
her temptress-extraordinaire part requires. Dennis Lim of the Village
Voice calls it a "perfunctory, often dreary love-triangle melodrama."
(Visit "Groveling At The Feet Of A Goddess," a "Patricia
Arquette Shrine," and Edelstein's pan in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The Haunted
Wood: Soviet Espionage in America--The Stalin Era
               , by Allen
Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev (Random House). Reviewers praise this exposé
based on reams of declassified KGB documents detailing Soviet espionage in the
United States from the 1930s to the early '50s. Critics say reading it is
"rather like looking into the new edition of a book from which half the pages
had previously been torn out" (Joseph F. Perisco, the New York Times Book
Review ). Controversial figures such as Alger Hiss, the Rosenbergs, and
others thought by many to be the victims of the Red hunts of the '40s and '50s
are confirmed as spies. "The importance of this book cannot be overstated"
(Arnold Beichman, the Washington Times ). (Buy the book at Amazon.com.)

            
               
                  Note Found
in a Bottle: My Life as a Drinker
               , by Susan Cheever (Simon &
Schuster). John Cheever's daughter takes a beating: Jonathan Yardley says Susan
Cheever's memoir of her struggles with alcohol is "Grade B
literary/journalistic opportunism-cum-sensationalism" (the Washington
Post ). Alex Beam goes further in the Boston Globe , calling it a
"despicable, wooden memoir." The "inescapable conclusion of Note ," he
continues, "is that Cheever is a horrible person, engorged with self-regard,
who has been masticating the corpse of her dead, successful father for fun and
profit." A few pipe up to defend her: Publishers Weekly calls it "a
powerful story written in precise, emotionally intense prose." (Read this interview with Cheever in the New York
Times [requires free registration], in which she responds to Yardley's
comments in the Post : "That's just what he did to Daddy.")

            

               
                  Glamorama
               , by Bret Easton Ellis (Knopf). Ellis'
latest novel of ennui and anomie among America's beautiful people irritates
reviewers to varying degrees. Michiko Kakutani is dismissive in the New York
Times , calling it a "glutinous hodgepodge of a book ... a lugubrious,
repetitious tale." While never resorting to praise, The New Yorker 's
Alex Ross concedes that it may be Ellis' most fully realized novel since The
Rules of Attraction and describes the prose style as "mysteriously
elegant." The most apt description of Ellis' achievement comes from Rhonda
Lieberman in the Village Voice , who says that in this portrait of
"post-macho," name-dropping, Prada-clad male models, Ellis "captures a cultural
moment of radical dandyhood." (Join the Bret
Easton Ellis Discussion Forum.)

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  A Civil Action ;

               
                  Movie -- The Thin Red Line ;

               
                  Movie -- Down in the 
                  Delta ;

               
                  Movie -- Hurlyburly ;

               
                  Movie -- Theory of Flight ;

               
                  Book--
                  Careless Love: The Unmaking of Elvis
Presley , by Peter Guralnick;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  The Jew of New York , by Ben
Katchor.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Patch Adams ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Faculty ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Stepmom ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Mighty Joe Young ;

               
                  Book--
                  Hundred Dollar Holiday , by Bill
McKibben;

               
                  Book
                  --The Vintner's Luck , by Elizabeth Knox.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  The Prince of Egypt ;

               
                  Movie--
                  You've Got Mail ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The General ;

               
                  Book--
                  Blind Man's Bluff: The Untold Story of American
Submarine Espionage , by Sherry Sontag and Christopher Drew, with Annette
Lawrence Drew;

               
                  Book--
                  Opened Ground: Selected Poems, 1966-1996 , by Seamus
Heaney;

               
                  Book -- The Unknown Matisse: A Life of Henri Matisse, The Early
Years, 1869-1908 , by Hilary Spurling.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Shakespeare in Love ;

               
                  Movie -- Star Trek: Insurrection ;

               
                  Movie -- Rushmore ;

               
                  Movie -- A Simple Plan ;

               
                  Movie -- Jack Frost ;

               
                  Television--
                  The Tempest (NBC);

               
                  Theater--
                  The Blue Room , by David Hare (Cort
Theatre, New York City).

            

         
      
   
