
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Gloria
                (Sony Pictures Entertainment). Pans for
director Sidney Lumet's remake of a 1980 John Cassavetes film about a tough
moll whose heart gets melted by a youngster who falls into her charge: "Easily
qualifies as the most tired, unexciting mob movie in recent history" (Godfrey
Cheshire, Daily Variety ). Of Sharon Stone as the title character, played
by Gena Rowlands in the original, Jack Mathews says: "It's not so much a bad
performance as an unnecessary one. Anyone who has seen Cassavetes' film can
imagine Lumet's and save eight bucks" ( Los Angeles Times ). Lawrence Van
Gelder is alone in support, calling it "smoother, funnier, more suspenseful and
more endearing" than the first film ( New York Times ). (Compare Rowlands'
almost tasteful suit in the poster for the
1980 film with Sharon Stone's racy bustier in the current
version.)

            
               
                  Playing by
Heart
                (Miramax Films). Stephen Holden of the New York Times
calls this "a likably sappy romantic comedy that suggests Robert Altman's
Short Cuts dipped in chocolate." The huge, star-studded cast (Gena
Rowlands, Ellen Burstyn, Jon Stewart, Sean Connery) pairs off into happy and
unhappy couples. The surfeit of mildly interesting plots surrounding each duo
results in a film that is "the cinematic answer to one of those parties where
you pig out on canapés" (Anthony Lane, The New Yorker ). The highlight of
the film: a wonderful performance by Angelina Jolie (Jon Voight's daughter) as
a tough club kid who falls in love with a blue-haired Ryan Phillippe. (Find out
more about star Connery at CelebSite.)

            
               
                  Another Day
in Paradise
                (Trimark Pictures). Melanie Griffith and James Woods
play a drug-addled couple who adopt a pair of young thugs-in-training while on
a road-trip-cum-crime-spree in a sort of '90s version of Bonnie and
Clyde . Critics like this better than director Larry Clark's first film, the
teen shocker Kids , and Woods' performance is called "scene stealing"
(Richard Corliss, Time ). Overall, though, reviews are so-so. On the
negative side, critics say it "rolls in sleaze and squalor like a mangy dog on
steaming roadkill" (Rod Dreher, the New York Post ). On the positive
side, Janet Maslin praises Clark for the way he manages to create "bad times
with a wicked way of looking good" (the New York Times ). (This fan site is packed with video stills from the film; find out more
about director Larry Clark at alt.culture.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Reporting
Live
               , by Lesley Stahl (Simon & Schuster). Mixed reviews for
Stahl's account of the backroom scrapping and hard work it took for her to get
taken seriously in the old boys' club of network news in the '70s and '80s.
Most reviewers, such as the Washington Post 's Jonathan Yardley, complain
that Stahl "pulls her punches" and spends too much time on anecdotes about past
presidents and too little on exactly what it took for her to get where she is.
Stanley Cloud writes in the Columbia Journalism Review that the book
lacks deep analysis: Stahl "never even seems to wonder if perhaps the
celebrityhood, egos, careerism, and inflated salaries of on-air journalists
such as herself might have contributed to the decline" of network news, which
she bemoans. Robin Toner in the New York Times Book Review is less
critical: "What shines through this memoir is how much Stahl loved the work."
(Check out this photo of Stahl, which aptly illustrates the trouble she details
in finding the right hairstyle.)

            

               
                  Face-Time
               , by Erik Tarloff (Crown). This book gets a
few nice reviews--Carolyn See calls it an "excellent first novel" in the
Washington Post --but most critics are interested in only in terms of the
insider scoop it promises. This Primary Colors -type story of a president
who has an affair with a young staffer was written by a former Clinton
speechwriter. Critics praise Tarloff's rendering of political power dynamics:
"What makes the novel riveting is its almost anthropological description of the
ebb and flow of power and status in official Washington" (Margaret Carlson,
Time ). Overall, though, the dish is more appealing than the prose. (Read
an excerpt here.)

            
               
                  Miss
Nobody
               , by Tomek Tryzna (Doubleday). Reviewers agree that this is a
"fearlessly ambitious debut novel" (Brian Hall, the New York Times Book
Review ), but some find that stylistically it doesn't live up to its own
best intentions. The glimpse it gives into the manic highs and lows of female
adolescent friendship as seen through a tortured trio of friends in the
twilight of Communist Poland is remarkably vivid--full of symbolism, magic
realism, and fairy-tale qualities--but most reviewers call the book as a whole
a near miss. Some blame a shaky translation from the original Polish; others
say the author's use of so many varying literary devices and styles squelches
the heart of the novel: "Only a spark of life survives its mannerisms" (Richard
Eder, the Los Angeles Times ). (Read the first chapter here.)

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Varsity Blues ;

               
                  Movie -- At First Sight ;

               
                  Movie -- In Dreams ;

               
                  Book -- Duane's Depressed , by Larry McMurtry;

               
                  Book -- The Intuitionist , by Colson Whitehead;

               
                  Theater -- Fosse: A Celebration in Song and Dance
(Broadhurst Theatre, New York City).

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Affliction ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Hilary and Jackie ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Hi-Lo Country ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in
America--The Stalin Era , by Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev;

               
                  Book
                  --Note Found in a Bottle: My Life as a Drinker , by
Susan Cheever;

               
                  Book
                  --Glamorama , by Bret Easton Ellis.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  A Civil Action ;

               
                  Movie -- The Thin Red Line ;

               
                  Movie -- Down in the 
                  Delta ;

               
                  Movie -- Hurlyburly ;

               
                  Movie -- Theory of Flight ;

               
                  Book--
                  Careless Love: The Unmaking of Elvis
Presley , by Peter Guralnick;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  The Jew of New York , by Ben
Katchor.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Patch Adams ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Faculty ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Stepmom ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Mighty Joe Young ;

               
                  Book--
                  Hundred Dollar Holiday , by Bill
McKibben;

               
                  Book
                  --The Vintner's Luck , by Elizabeth Knox.

            

         
      
   
