
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Go North,
Impeachment!
            

            As the author of a book on the politics of the
Iran-Contra affair (especially the congressional hearings), I was pleased to
see Michael Kinsley's "" on impeaching Reagan and Bush. Clearly the issues then
were of much greater constitutional import.

            Besides quoting Rep. Henry Hyde, you could have
also quoted Rep. Bill McCollum and Sen. Orrin Hatch. Hatch told North: "I don't
want you prosecuted. I don't. I don't think many people in America do. And I
think there's going to be one lot of hell raised if you are." McCollum (now one
of the House managers, I believe) told North that he had "served your country
admirably" and that he was "a dedicated, patriotic soldier" for whom McCollum
and the country was "grateful." These statements were made, of course, after
North (under a grant of immunity) proclaimed that he had previously misled and
lied to Congress. And, as you point out in your piece, these were issues
involving life and death--not only TOWs in Iran but also aid to the guerrilla
fighters in Nicaragua, who were regularly implicated in killing peasant
villagers and others.

            Keep up the good
work.

            

               --Amy Fried , author of Muffled Echoes: Oliver North and the Politics
of Public Opinion University of Maine
Orono, Maine

            
               Who's an Artist?
Who Cares?
            

            As an artist, I was very pleased to see Jacob
Weisberg's review of the current crop of biographies in "." His conclusion that
the lives of the artists provide little (or no) illumination of their artistic
production is entirely accurate. To understand the work, look at the work and
understand its aesthetic context. Literary insights are to be found in other
writing--criticism, theory, philosophy, art history, and the artist's own
writing. Visual creativity is driven by a variety of elements (social,
political, cultural, intellectual, theoretical, aesthetic); an artist's
physiology, by virtue of idiosyncrasies of the mechanics of vision, has more
effect than the artist's psychology on his or her work.

            Although the artist's
biography may be interesting, and at times inspiring (as is the case with Henri
Matisse), it more often than not distracts from the work and leads to the most
inane and invalid interpretations. Thanks to Weisberg for addressing this issue
and providing the reader with an appropriate perspective!

            
               --Jo
Scraba Brooklyn, N.Y.

            
               Ultra-Fat Cats
            

            Discussing the SAT prep
industry article in the New York Times Magazine , the writer of ""
describes rich kids as "overprivileged." "Privilege" itself already suggests to
me the sense of overness, if you will. Privilege is above and beyond the
normal. Either someone is privileged, or he is not. To use "overprivileged"
suggests that while a certain amount of privilege is acceptable, too much
privilege is wrong and should be taken away. This seems to me a wholly
irrational distinction to make.

            
               --Joel D. Smith
            

            New
York City

            
               Tasty
Spatulas
            

            In "," Jeffrey Goldberg alluded to, but didn't quite
hit on, the ideal baby toy for the two month to 18 month set, i.e., a spatula.
You can buy a darn nice spatula for about $2--wooden with a rubbery blade--and
it's easy for kids to grip. It makes no noise when they whack things with it
(unlike a wooden spoon), and the blade gives them something to gnaw on, which
they find very satisfying, and there's no risk of splinters. It's also quiet
when they're in church (hey, I'm from the Midwest, OK?) unlike, say, squeaky
toys or a set of car keys. I suppose the only hazard is the noxious chemicals
they use to make the blade rubbery, but if you post this in

                  Slate
                there will undoubtedly be an organic rubber
spatula with black-and-white geometric patterns (in soy ink) on a sustainably
harvested tropical hardwood (grown by a women's cooperative) handle available
soon for $29.95.

            Good luck with the
squirts. The only other valuable child raising hint I have is to dress the kids
in orange shirts when they get mobile, because then they're easy to spot in a
crowd (nobody wears orange voluntarily), although if you put this in

                  Slate
                and everyone does it, it won't work anymore.

            

               --Matthew Cole Saint Paul, Minn.

            
               "Trial" an
Error
            

            About the trial coverage (""): We need to be clear
about something. The trial of the president in the Senate will not really be a
trial, or at least not a trial that any of us recognize. First, let's set aside
any pondering about what the chief justice will or will not do. He can't really
do much of anything. On any ruling by the CJ as to admissibility,
relevancy, or objections to testimony that the justice may make, the jury (the
senators) can overrule him by a simple majority of 51 votes. There are 55
Republican senators, so getting to 51 is not a high hurdle. Second, in any
ordinary trial, meetings, conversations, or even deals are not made between the
prosecutors and the jury. Here the House team is the prosecution team and the
senators the jury. The House team and various senators have been in constant
contact, making deals and arrangements. That would be considered jury tampering
and would get any other case thrown out of court. In any ordinary trial, the
judge sets the rules and the time frame. In this trial, the senators can change
the rules from day to day--doing on one day what they would not allow on
another. They can decide mid-presentation (if they want to) to permit testimony
that was disallowed during the previous presentation. Or mid-witness if it
comes to that. Remember it takes only 51 votes to make any decision, and there
are 55 Republican senators.

            I do not have any
confidence that this trial will observe long-established rules of law. The
senators have made it plain, to anyone who is listening closely to their
"Senatespeak," that they will do it their way .

            -- Lois
Erwin Waldwick, N.J.

         
      
   
