
   
   
      
         
            No. 171: &quot;It Grates Outdoors&quot;

            
               Fill in the
blank.
            

            

               It first happened outside in 1960, and now, frets Reba White Williams,
former head of the New York City Art Commission, "it seems as though wherever
there is a vacant spot, anybody can _______________ without any consideration
of how it looks."
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thursday's question (No. 170)--"Aust/Test":
            

            
               I give the
headline, you give the lead.
            

            

               From the front page of South Australia's Advertiser : "1664
IDIOTS."
            

            "A
testy Alex Trebek lashes out at contestants for not knowing the year New
Amsterdam became New York."-- Joydip Kundu ( Tim Carvell had a
similar answer.)

            
"HYANNIS PORT, MASS.--At a recent clan gathering, all family members with
political aspirations ..."-- David McShane
            

            
"Natural selection takes hold among millionaire yachters."-- Ananda Gupta
(similarly, Charles Atkinson )

            "A
recent discovery in Britain's Royal Archives has revealed that six men were
executed by King Charles II in 1664 for inappropriate dress at a royal levee.
The six men appeared at court wearing tunics with 'Bring Back Oliver Cromwell'
embroidered on the front. No Australians were harmed in the incident."-- Evan
Cornog
            

            "Last
week's poll results are in. Slightly more than 1,600 of you answered 'yes' to
the question 'I still giggle when I hear the phrase "down under." ' "-- Jon
Hotchkiss
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            The silly accents, the
comical food, the inadequate TV shows--it must be foreigners. Americans are
denigrated for a lack of ability to find other countries on a map and a lack of
interest in trying. But here's what News Quiz respondents know about one other
country, based on a count of all submitted answers:

            

               
                  Australia Reference Tote Board
               

               Kangaroos--0

               Koalas--0

               Pandas (misinformed players only)--0

               Dingoes, eating of baby by--5

               Bee Gees, eating of baby by--0

               Paul Hogan--4

               Attacks by sharks--0

               Attacks by Robert Hughes--0

               Beer--1

               Convict forebears--2

               Marginality re larger
world--0

            

            OK, as it turns out, we
don't know all that much. But in a hypothetical reverse version of the News
Quiz run in an imaginary Australia, most responses refer to a big,
beer-swilling Elvis cruising in a big, gas-guzzling car; insensitively fondling
a big, busty blonde on the seat beside him; and firing a pistol out the window,
i.e., America in 1957, or what I like to call "Australia."

            
               Aussie
Answer
            

            "Police
have branded as 'impatient idiots' 1,664 drivers caught on speed cameras at
well above the limit. Many of them believed they could drive safely at high
speeds because they were 'an expert' behind the wheel. The 1,664 drivers paid
around $500,000 in fines, a minimum of $305 each.

            
               Know the Showbiz
Extra
            

            Below, four recent headlines from Daily
Variety , each followed by two possible leads. Which is genuine?

            1. ELDER POISED FOR
NATIONAL EXPOSURE

            A. "A chance to gape at a naked old man on a
motorcycle lured millions of Americans to movie theaters this weekend for
Waking Ned Devine ."

            B. "Look for Larry Elder, the self-described 'sage
from South Central ,' to break into the national talk radio landscape
this year."

            2. THAILAND SAND TRAP

            A. "A nude granddad on a Honda was arrested on a
Thai golf course Sunday, in an act police say was inspired by 'an adorable
Irish movie about puckish, beer-swilling stereotypes.' "

            B. "A Thai group this week threatened to sue
20 th Century Fox, claiming The Beach , starring Leonardo
DiCaprio, was responsible for the destruction of a beach in a protected
national park area."

            3. ECHOSTAR, PSEUDO
PACT

            A. "A foxy grampa was released from custody Monday,
after repeated pledges to a Bangkok judge to stay off motorcycles. He left
Government Square pants-less on a Honda, chattering away in a grotesque
caricature of an endearing brogue."

            B. "EchoStar Communications, one of the leading
direct broadcast satellite providers, has signed a deal with Internet
programmer Pseudo Programs to add Pseudo's programming to EchoStar's
interactive channel lineup."

            4. PROVIDENCE PICKS UP
PEACOCK

            A. "A bare-assed codger was killed near Bangkok this
morning when his motorcycle collided with a low-flying game bird that police
say was 'hurled in his path by a vengeful god.' "

            B. "Providence has
intervened on behalf of slumping NBC, premiering Friday with a divine 13.1
rating, 21 share, best for the Peacock in that 8-9 p.m. slot with non-Olympics
programming since March 6, 1992 ( Matlock )."

            

               Answers
            

            
               1-B,
2-B, 3-B, 4-B.
            

            
               Race
Results
            

            Prime target: U.S.
Congress.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
