
   
   
      
         
             My Son, the Antichrist

            The Anti-Defamation League
is hopping mad at Jerry Falwell for his speech last weekend in Kingsport,
Tenn., where he told a gathering of prophecy-heeding Christians that the
Antichrist is "probably" alive and, as a "full-grown counterfeit of Christ," is
without a doubt a Jewish male. The ADL said the remarks were typical of "an
especially vicious tradition of Christian theological anti-Judaism."

            The Antichrist is
Jewish? It does sound bad, especially given the 2,000 year history of Jewish
persecution by cranky Christians. The speech was also confusing to longtime
Falwell buffs and those of us who have watery knowledge of the Book of
Revelation, the New Testament text that causes all this prophecy hubbub. Isn't
Falwell a longtime "friend of Israel"? Then why is he making anti-Semitic
comments? And does Revelation really say the Antichrist must be a Jew?

            The answers: 1) Yes, he is a friend of Israel. 2) In his
mind and heart, he wasn't making an anti-Semitic comment. As for 3), it's
difficult to say whether the Antichrist is Jewish, because there's no mention
of an Antichrist in Revelation, though there is mention of a Beast whose number
is 666, who is presumed to be the Antichrist. The word "Antichrist" is
mentioned in 1 John and 2 John.

            Falwell is a Baptist, but
in prophecy matters he's a "premillennialist," which simply means he thinks
mankind is living in a time prior to the millennium, a thousand year period of
peace that will ensue once Christ returns and kicks Satan's butt. More
precisely, he's a "pretribulational dispensationalist," an unwieldy label that
refers to two separate but intertwined beliefs that were popularized in the
early 1800s by John Nelson Darby, an English minister and a special sort of
screwball genius whose ideas later spread to America. Darby put his eyes too
close to the Scripture pages and decided that history, past and future, was a
series of "dispensations": divinely ordained historical epochs in which the
Chosen People had been and would be tested and found wanting by God, always
leading to the next dispensation.

            Most of these dispensations, such as "Israel Under the
Law," are behind us. The most recent was the "Church Age," when Jesus was alive
and spread the Word. Next up is the Millennium, followed by the Eternal State.
Right now we're living in a weird between-dispensations limbo known to premills
as "the Great Parenthesis." This kicked in after Jesus was crucified, a moment
they crisply refer to as "Messiah cut off." Next up--according to an
exceedingly complex timetable that is pieced together with help from
future-specific "time texts" such as the Old Testament's Book of Daniel--is the
Tribulation, a seven year period when the Antichrist will bring wrack and ruin
to this world, before God dishes out his Wrath and Christ returns to fight the
Battle of Armageddon.

            Pretribulational
premills such as Falwell believe an early highlight of the Tribulation will be
an event called the Rapture, when Christ will rescue the souls of righteous
individuals by "meeting them in the air." (Rapture isn't mentioned in
Revelation, either. Try 1 Thessalonians.)

            O nce that happens, you're finally into the Technicolor
material that is found in Revelation: the Whore of Babylon, the Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse, and so on. The action starts when Revelation's
author, John, sees a vision of a heavenly throne surrounded by 24 white-robed
elders. The throned figure, God, holds a book with seven seals that are
successively broken by Christ, who is represented as a slain lamb.

            Each broken seal brings
forth visions of terrors to come. When the seventh seal is broken, John learns
that 144,000 faithful Jews, 12,000 each from the 12 tribes of Israel, together
with great multitudes who "came out of the great tribulation," will ultimately
appear before God, who promises them salvation.

            It goes on and on like this, often incomprehensibly. Israel
is all-important because premills believe the final dispensation couldn't occur
until the Jews were restored to Israel. This is why they've been so supportive
of the Jewish state since 1948. Now that the Jews are back, the Tribulation
could happen at any moment. (Falwell also said he thinks the Second Coming will
happen within 10 years.) When the hard rain falls, as Falwell would gladly tell
you, the Jews come out relatively OK. With the raptured Christians gone,
everyone else--including dud Christians who have been judged unworthy, Jews,
Muslims, atheists, New Agers, pagans, you name it--will be left behind to duke
it out with the Antichrist and his gruesome legions. Above all, they must not
accept the "mark of the Beast," or they'll be damned for eternity.

            When the worst is over,
at least 144,000 Jews will make it, possibly many more, though they'll all have
to convert to pass muster. It's true that many, many Jews will be killed. John
F. Walvoord, a major pretrib writer, recently wrote that "two out of three
Israelites will perish" during the Tribulation. But that seems equitable
enough. Many, many of everybody will be killed. Hey, it's the End of the World.
What did you expect?

            The Bible never clearly says the Antichrist is a male Jew.
It doesn't say much of anything on the subject. Premills basically believe the
Antichrist will be a charming rogue and great communicator who will dupe Israel
into following his lead, and then will turn on the Jewish people to destroy
them. Most Falwell-style Christians would probably say yes, since the
Antichrist is a false Messiah, he'll have to be Jewish, like Christ himself.
Otherwise, who'll be duped? But throughout history, others haven't seen it that
way, and past nominees for the Antichrist have included Nero, Napoleon, Hitler,
and good ol' Mikhail Gorbachev, with his "mark of the beast" forehead.

            James BeauSeigneur, a premill from Rockville, Md.,
has written a fictional trilogy dramatizing the End Times. BeauSeigneur says
most premills figure the Antichrist will be a Jew--but not all. For instance,
in a hot-selling series of novels co-authored by the well-known preacher Tim
LaHaye, he's Romanian. In BeauSeigneur's novels, the Antichrist is Jewish, for
sure, but he's also a man who was produced in a lab by misguided scientists
using cells taken from the Shroud of Turin.

            So the Antichrist may be Jewish, but he's cloned.
Jewish mothers of America can relax.

         
      
   
