
   
   
      
         
            More Than Monica

            On New Year's Eve, the
Guardian of
London published a survey of last year's media agendas from countries around
the world. Headlined "1998: More than just Monica," it highlighted the news
priorities that prevailed in different countries during the period. In China,
for example, the big story had been the Chinese government's self-proclaimed
diplomatic triumphs, such as President Clinton's visit to Beijing and Chinese
President Jiang Zemin's visits to Moscow and Tokyo; in Russia it had been the
collapse of the post-Soviet financial system and the humiliation of market
reformers; in Israel the disintegration of Benjamin Netanyahu's government amid
bitter divisions over the Middle East peace process; in South Africa the report
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission on apartheid-era crimes; in Germany
the September election that ousted Chancellor Helmut Kohl and brought the
Social Democrat Gerhard Schröder to power; in Italy the country's success in
qualifying to join the new euro currency; and in France its soccer team's 3-0
victory over Brazil in the final of the World Cup.

            But if 1998 involved
"more than just Monica," it was also certainly Monica's year. Hers was a story,
which, more than any other, united all the papers of the world in a common
obsession. However, there was widespread reluctance around the world this week
to report the allegations in the American tabloids that President Clinton may
be the father of the teen-age son of an Arkansas prostitute. Only in Britain
did the story play prominently. The Times even led its Monday front page with it, under
the headline "Clinton faces DNA test on prostitute's son, 13." In Germany, the
press showed more responsible news priorities, with the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
leading Monday with Clinton announcing the biggest increase in defense spending
since the end of the Cold War.

            But the biggest story around the world as the week began
was the launch by 11 countries of the new single European currency, the euro.
The reporting of this event in Europe was imbued with euro-euphoria except in
Britain, where euro-skepticism continues to predominate. All Rupert Murdoch's
British papers--the Times , the Sunday Times , the Sun , and
the News of the World --are campaigning vigorously against Britain
joining the euro, as are Conrad Black's papers the Daily Telegraph and
the Sunday Telegraph . But even the British press had to agree with the
rest of the world that the launch of the euro, after 40 years of planning, was
an historic achievement.

            It was especially
welcomed outside Europe in countries yearning for an alternative to dependence
on the U.S. dollar. For example, in Havana the weekly Juventud Rebelde
announced that Cuba would be the first country in the region to substitute the
euro for the dollar in its foreign commercial transactions. From January 2000,
it said, Cuban companies would be obliged to use the euro for their trade with
China, Vietnam, and North Korea. Granma , the Cuban Communist Party daily, described the euro
as a force for "tranquility and stability" and "a challenge to the economic and
financial hegemony of the United States."

            In India, the Hindu devoted its main editorial Monday to the euro under the headline "An epochal
experiment." It said that the euro could benefit developing countries by
mounting an effective challenge to the dollar. "The global preference for the
dollar as a reserve currency has not only meant that the U.S. has had access to
inexpensive funds but also that the rest of the world effectively finances its
chronic account deficit," the Hindu concluded. In Singapore, the
Straits
Times led its front page Monday with a story anticipating that the euro
would boost the value of Asian currencies against the dollar.

            Among various hyperbolic
editorials in the European press, Le Monde of Paris appealed Tuesday to a reluctant Britain to overcome its fears
about loss of sovereignty and to join the single currency. "Englishmen," the
editorial began, "it's now your turn to play! The euro awaits you, Europe and
its infant currency need you." It continued, "Your country's participation in
the euro is also, for us Frenchmen, a necessity. ... The euro needs Europe's
diversity--to be neither a clone of the deutsche mark nor a Siamese twin of the
Italian lira. The support of your culture--of your pragmatism and your distrust
of bureaucracy, etc.--is indispensable to the stability and solidity of the
euro. With you present, the euro is more likely to become one of the great
international currencies. As an ancient superpower, you know the advantages we
can all draw from that."

             

         
      
   
