
   
   
      
         
            No. 186: &quot; 's cool&quot;

            

               Joining a national trend, the superintendent of schools in West
Greenwich, R.I., ordered these turned off during the day. What?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 185)--"Tourist Tsuris ":
            

            

               
                  
                     Israel's National Parks Authority was uneasy about a
proposed new attraction but, after consulting church authorities, head of
planning Zeev Margalit concluded that it would "not hurt the feelings of the
Christian tourists and it would not be too kitchy, so we decided to go with
it." With what? ( This story 
                        courtesy of Daniel
Radosh. )
                  
               
            

            "A
large monument honoring Daniel Radosh."--Greg Diamond
            

            
"Silhouette brooches of popular Disney characters made from the bones of slain
Crusaders."-- Jim O'Grady
            

            "The
Christians-only lion petting zoo."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "An
I've Got a Secret style quiz show where celebrity evangelists question
groups of male Jews about which is the real Antichrist."-- Howard
Burchman
            

            "A
sound and light show mocking the beliefs of Hindus, Buddhists, and
Muslims."-- Andrew Silow-Carroll ( Noah Meyerson had a similar
answer.)

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            I'm afraid this is kind
of a one joke question, and the joke is cheap and easy blasphemy. Well, maybe
two jokes if you count Heritage USA; is that still for sale? Shouldn't someone
inform Mr. Gates? Actually, three, if you count Jerry Falwell's Jew Town, but
that's a scary place. You know if Christ and Antichrist come into direct
physical contact, there'd be, like, a big explosion that would blow stuff up.
Cool! I learned that in religious physics at my Christian academy. Just before
the building was struck by lightning. OK, not the entire building, just my
desk.

            
               Simulated
Miraculous Answer
            

            They're building a sunken
ramp into the Sea of Galilee to let tourists simulate Jesus' walk on water,
reports Emma Blijdenstein for the Associated Press. The 13 foot wide, 28 foot
long, crescent-shaped floating bridge will be submerged 2 inches below water,
and can handle 50 people. To enhance the "walking on water" effect, the bridge
will be unrailed. Lifeguards and boats will be standing by.

            
               You Make the Call
Extra
            

            Can you figure out the
next step in each scenario?

            
               1. You Be the
Former Monkee
            

            "They decimated my business; they decimated my
catalogue, by luring me into this kind of complacently by lying to me. I closed
the business down in the shambles that it was, swept everything clean, moved to
Santa Fe and ... "

            What did Michael Nesmith
do then?

            
               2. You Be the
Former Presidential Adviser
            

            "We used to have a 7:30 a.m. meeting and Erskine
[Bowles] would sit at one end of the conference table in his office and I would
sit at the other. Every now and then, when things got a little tense, I would
... "

            What did Rahm Emanuel do
then?

            

               Answers
            

            1. " ... wrote a novel."

            When a video deal with
PBS went sour, PBS sued Nesmith who countersued. Last Monday, a jury awarded
him $47 million.

            2. " ... walk over and give him a little kiss on the
forehead."

            Both men now work on Wall
Street.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: Christian
kitsch.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
