
   
   
      
         
            No. 179: &quot;A Pair of Weasels&quot;

            

               Alluding to a verbal dyad, Lamar Alexander called them "Weasel words,
cleverly and deliberately put together to confuse people by meaning nothing."
What two words?
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thursday's question (No. 178)--"W-O-M-A-N":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        "She was quite a talented girl, and she was
cute as a button too. And being the woman, she did give it the woman's touch."
Who said this, about whom, for doing
what?
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Clarence Thomas, about Cheryl Mills' presentation at the impeachment
trial."-- Deb Stavin ( Dan Radosh , Charlie Glassenberg ,
R.C. Leander , Greg Diamond , Andrew "Your Trial of Trials"
Solovay , Danny Franklin , and Anna Pond had similar
answers.)

            "Rep.
Bob Barr, re his abortionist."-- Chris Kelly
            

            "Cary
Grant, about Randolph Scott's ability to put together a lovely window
box."-- Larry Amaros
            

            "That
would be one of Hallmark's new 'Saucy Gent' Mother's Day cards."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "Nicole
Kidman, describing her husband's ... Oh, wait. My lawyer just called. I've been
hit with a restraining order prohibiting me from finishing the
sentence."-- John Leary
            

             

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            "She takes--bakes?--just
like a woman." One way or the other, that's how Bob Dylan put it, and who was
hurt when he did? Perhaps a few malcontents given to phrases like "incoherent
nasal honking." But, fortunately, this was a rhetorical question meant only to
remind us that we can't judge the praise of the past by the praise of five
minutes ago. On the other hand, those who encourage us to forget the past are
usually Gen. Augusto Pinochet. So how should we respond to the ostensible
compliment in question? Is it churlish to rebuff praise? Not if it's
pseudopraise, the poison ivy disguised as a rose bouquet: "You look great. I
didn't recognize you!" Our quoted compliment employs the implicit tokenism of
the definite article--"the woman"--the condescension of "girl," the dubious
virtue of "talented," suggesting that her abilities were something she was born
with, not something she earned. So perhaps it's not a matter of changing mores
after all, just hidden dish. Or as the old tambourine man put it--now I
remember--"She rakes just like a woman." You know--gardening, nature: It's so
feminine.

            
               Your Answer of
Answers
            

            Carl Reiner thought he was praising the late Lucille
Kallen, a writer for Sid Caesar's Your Show of Shows , who died last
Monday at 76.

            "At the time, I felt it
was one big happy family," Kallen once remarked, "but later I said, What an
idiot! There was a male phalanx, and then there was me. But when we were
working, there was no difference." The basis (with later Caesar writer Selma
Diamond) of Sally Rogers on The Dick Van Dyke Show , Kallen went on to
write six novels. The male phalanx included Neil Simon, Mel Brooks, and Woody
Allen.

            
               Augmented
Quotations Extra
            

            (Each final sentence added
by News Quiz.)

            

               "I'm a big fan of the
Museum of Tolerance. I think we need more tolerance in TV. More busty
lifeguards and more tolerance."-- NBC West Coast
president Don Ohlmeyer, at a conference on "Jews in Primetime Television" at
the Four Seasons Hotel in Beverly Hills
               

               "I've always thought of
this magazine as akin to Rolling Stone . And I
see myself as a dead ringer for Dame Margot Fonteyn."-- Steve Brill takes a long, hard look at Brill's
Content

               "I didn't set out
dreaming about being president when I was a kid, nor did I dream about being
governor. I dreamed about being Willie Mays. I'd wake up in a cold sweat,
shrieking my guts out: He's black, you know."-- George W. Bush, interviewed in the Dallas Morning
News

               "No more torture or other
forms of abuse. There must be an end to the unnecessary recourse to the death
penalty. When it's necessary, OK, but let's not go nuts."-- Pope John Paul II, speaking in Mexico City
               

               "Please be quiet. Please
shut up. Please give me back my pants."-- Robin
Leach quells the unruly crowd at the Cool Site of the Year Awards
               

            

            
               Race
Results
            

            Submitted top target: Monica Lewinsky.

            Actually run top target:
Cheryl Mills or, more precisely, condescending reactions to Cheryl Mills.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
