
   
   
      
         
            Saint Monica

            The majority of newspapers
around the world disapproved of the impeachment trial of President Clinton and
hoped for his acquittal. The exception was the British press, which divided
along predictably partisan lines. Following the Senate votes, the conservative
Daily
Telegraph said, "a decent man would have resigned when his public lying
had been revealed," whereas "Mr. Clinton hung on, correctly calculating that a
mixture of brazenness, legal equivocation and personal charm would see him
through." But the paper pronounced him "the lamest of ducks," which, it said,
is "a loss not only to the Americans, but also to their friends around the
world."

            The Times of London, another
anti-Clinton paper, splashed the headline "Clinton: The Great Escape" across
its front page and said in an editorial ("Suspended Sentence") that a "revival
in Mr. Clinton's standing can only be achieved through foreign policy," which
will require a huge investment of his time for uncertain returns. "Some
[foreign policy initiatives] would invite internal opposition and risk damaging
his precious poll numbers," the Times said. "That should not be an
excuse for inaction. Alan Greenspan's financial decisions have been the making
of the Clinton presidency. It is time that the Chief Executive made rather more
of his presidency himself."

            In an editorial it called "The end of the Zipper," the
liberal Guardian said one of the losers in the scandal was the
American media, which constantly predicted a national mood swing against the
president, when none was there. "They also compromised some of their own most
cherished ethical standards, a mistake they may live to regret," the editorial
said. It acknowledged, however, that three "stars" of the affair had emerged
with credit: Monica Lewinsky "who showed some class in her testimony ... and
who refused to surrender to the bullying of Mr. Starr's witchfinder-general";
the U.S. Constitution, which "showed it is robust enough to survive even the
madness of 1990s puritanism"; and the American people, who held their nerve
throughout and "were able to distinguish between the President and the man,
accepting one even as they acknowledged the flaws in the other."

            The liberal Independent on
Sunday , in an editorial headlined "The stained presidency," said that "to
anyone sane it was always obvious that impeachment was a hideously
inappropriate and disproportionate punishment for President Clinton's 'low
crimes and misdemeanours,' " but that didn't absolve the man. "Clinton's
behavior has been contemptible throughout, from his initial offences, to his
legalistic evasions, to his unbearably mawkish and snivelling apologies," the
paper said. "Although Clinton has shown again an astonishing talent for
survival, it cannot be pleasant for him to contemplate how his presidency will
be remembered by posterity."

            In Rome, La Repubblica focused on Clinton's loneliness as he prepared to repay,
against Republican opposition, those who had stood by him for 13 months--the
black lobby, the women's organizations, the left-wing Democrats, and his wife
Hillary--who would now be presenting their bills. The paper said Saturday that
Clinton's task in his remaining 18 months in office is to show that he has
become a man. His first step--his apology to the American people in the Rose
Garden on Friday--was "a step in that direction," La Repubblica said. It
concluded, "Perhaps even Monica, watching him from afar, felt a last shudder of
tenderness and regret for her ex-lover, so important and so alone."

            In its editorial Sunday
headlined "The rout of the Starr judges," Le Monde of Paris called Clinton's victory in the
Senate impeachment trial "the first serious setback for the crusade led by the
neo-conservatives since the beginning of the 1980s to dictate the morality and
sexuality of Americans." It said, "A certain America has triumphed over the
other: that of humanist good sense has beaten that of the fundamentalist
preachers, that which wants to preserve certain achievements of the 1960s has
beaten that which wants to abolish them. ... The country has recognized itself
more in Bill Clinton than in Kenneth Starr, and so much the better."

            Canada's most influential newspaper, the Toronto
Globe and
Mail , said Monday in an editorial that the reason Americans had
forgiven Clinton his lies and misdemeanors was that he was a victim of
entrapment--"by a politically motivated independent prosecutor ... using
information that invaded his privacy and subjected him and his family to
worldwide humiliation." The paper added, "If Mr. Clinton survives as something
of a victim through all this, Monica Lewinsky survives as something of a
heroine. Of all the people involved, she is the one who apparently never lied
or knowingly broke a confidence. She never sought publicity about her affair
with the President, and so far has done nothing to exploit it. ... Ms. Lewinsky
has behaved with admirable restraint and dignity throughout the piece, the only
player to come out entirely clean."

            In Egypt, the
semi-official press was determined not to write off Clinton as a lame duck. "It
is difficult to concede to the argument that, despite his acquittal, U.S.
President Bill Clinton is likely to be paralyzed through his remaining period
in office," Al
Ahram said in an editorial Monday. But it pointed out that "some of
Clinton's major achievements, such as the peace deal in Ireland, the strategic
partnership with China and the Wye Plantation Memorandum between the
Palestinians and the Israelis, have been attained at the peak of his crisis.
... It does not stand to reason, then, that the man who so succeeds while
preoccupied with a moral scandal that could have cost him his seat at the Oval
Office, would be paralyzed and disabled once the episode is over."

            Following Madeleine Albright's visit to Rambouillet,
France, Sunday to inject some momentum into the stalled Kosovo talks,
Le Figaro of
Paris said Monday that there was a rare unity at the moment among the six
members of the "contact group"--the four leading western European powers,
Russia, and the United States--despite America's constant temptation to put
NATO, "the unchallenged instrument of its politico-military domination of
Europe," at the center of the stage, which, in the view of Paris and Moscow,
would risk benefiting the Albanians and threatening only the Serbs. The paper
said the most important question remained what would happen if an agreement
isn't reached by the extended Feb. 20 deadline, and to that "nobody knows the
answer." Libération carried a cartoon of a fierce-looking Albright
brandishing a fly swatter and saying, "Make peace or shit!" But it said she had
"broken the ice" at Rambouillet.

            As he prepared to leave
London to set up an American Shakespeare Company in Los Angeles, Britain's most
famous theater director, Sir Peter Hall, wrote in the Mail on Sunday
that Prime Minister Tony Blair, promoter of "Cool Britannia," has in fact
betrayed the arts by refusing them subsidies. Hall said that Britain has
enjoyed "a half-century of pre-eminence in this field of endeavor" and that
this could now be destroyed. "Never forget that, in Shakespeare's time, we
created the greatest theater culture in the history of the world. ... Some 30
years after his death, the theaters had been destroyed, the actors dismissed
and the playwrights sent into exile. The Roundheads had arrived. They seem to
be visible again."

             

         
      
   
