
   
   
      
         
            No. 191: &quot;Enlistment Drive&quot;

            
               President Clinton,
the pope, the Salvation Army, and NATO are rumored to be on a list of
118.
            

            

               List of what?
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thursday's question (No. 190)--"Unworkable":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Speaking on
Capitol Hill Thursday morning, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan said, "I think some
of them are not going to work, and they will cause significant problems."
Referring to ...
?
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"American Airlines' plan to fire its pilots and restaff using Vietnamese
laborers borrowed from Nike."--John Leary
            

            "Whoopi
Goldberg's smug political jokes at the Oscars."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Those
wacky ideas Ayn Rand put in her books."-- Doug Strauss
            

            "My
kids after they graduate."-- Pam Stewart ( Charles Star had a
similar answer.)

            
"Internet sites that attempt to charge subscribers $19.95 per year for wry
political and cultural commentary."-- Tim Carvell (similarly, Faxon
Bishop and Rick Mueller )

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            When Greenspan speaks,
everyone listens because we have money riding on his remarks. Whether through a
mutual fund, mortgage, or credit card, we've each placed a bet on the economy,
and it's a lot more exciting to watch the game when you have a little something
on it. A few years ago, I watched an NCAA basketball playoff game at Caesar's
sports book in Vegas. It was the most intensely engaged audience I'd ever seen
at any dramatic production. And that's the basis of my election reform plan.
Forget motor-voter: People will go to the polls if you let them bet on the
outcome. You can already do it legally in England and, except for royal
marriages and Martin Amis book advances, their society is intact. Here's how it
would work. When you vote, you get a ticket that allows you to legally bet on
the election at any OTB. Try it next time in New Hampshire, and turnout will go
up by at least 50 percent. I'd bet on it.

            

               Greenspanswer
            

            Addressing the House
Banking Committee, Greenspan was referring to the current wave of mergers.
While some will undoubtedly fail, he said, there will be no bailouts using
public money. Asked if he was concerned about the increased concentration of
economic power, Greenspan replied, "No."

            
               Cop Shopper
Extra
            

            Valentine's Day is past,
but if you still need handcuffs, evidence kits, radar guns, battering rams, and
some very attractive clothing, try the catalog from Gall's Inc., "America's
largest supplier to public safety professionals." I use the print version, but
Gall's and parent company
Aramark (a specialist in
college and prison catering) are online. A few highlights:

            

               "Friskmaster Gloves. Searching for evidence can be
a dangerous business. That's why Gall's is proud to introduce the ultimate
armor for your hands. $36.99."--Every day is Valentine's Day when you slip on
the Friskmasters.

               "Thunderwear® Holster. This unique design allows you to hide your weapon
inside the front of your trousers. $42.99."--No fancy symbolism, no easy irony,
no dime-store Freud, just straightforward gun underwear. Oh yes, my cynical
friend, that is a pistol in my pants and I am glad to see
you.

               "StabPro Vests. Because They Have Nothing To Lose. It can happen anywhere:
in the yard, in cell extraction or transporting prisoners. Suddenly, they
attack you with razor blades, shanks, picks, shivs, or sharpened rebar. They
swing chair legs, pipes and mop handles. And when nothing's left, they use
their fists and their feet. Because what are you going to do? Toss them in
jail? $459.99 and up."--I'll never complain about those Seventeen
magazine editorial meetings ever again.

               "Trico's Transport Cell. Transporting prisoners can be tough on your
vehicle interior. Blood stains on the carpet and seats, torn headliners, marred
door panels, not to mention broken windows all add to your frustration.
$699.99."--Hey, you kids! Don't make me stop this car and come back there!

               "Straight Knife Tool. Opens key-operated filing cabinet locks and padlocks.
A good basis for starting an opening kit. The Master/Presto Tool opens
combination-lock briefcases in less than a minute without damaging the locks.
$14.99 each."--Only slightly more expensive than a legally obtained search
warrant.

               "Polycarbonate Riot Batons. This virtually indestructible baton is great
for use in riot & crowd control situations and comes with a lifetime
warranty. Impact strength is greater than wood or aluminum batons. Will not
warp, dent, or splinter. $49.95."--It's Giuliani-tough,
Giuliani-affordable.

            

            After shopping, relax
with "In the Line of Duty: true life experiences from our customers." The
current issue, stapled between Pages 170 and 171, includes a story from Sgt.
Paul Bugarin of the Calexico, Calif., police department, which begins: "One
summer morning I was dispatched to a non-injury accident within a residential
area." If you can find a better example of cop-speak, buy it.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            House managers.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
