
   
   
      
         
            

            
               
                  Slate
Goes Free
            

            Almost a year ago,

                  Slate
                began charging a subscription fee for access to most of our
contents and services. Effective today, all current editorial content will be
free. E-mail deliveries, our weekly print-out edition, "The Fray," and "The
Compost" (the 
                  Slate
                archive) will still be available to
subscribers only, and we will be adding new subscriber benefits. Current
subscribers will get a special offer for continuing under the new arrangement.
If you're not satisfied with it, we will happily refund the balance of your
subscription. Well, happily is an exaggeration. But we do appreciate the
folks who've put their $19.95 on the line, and we don't want anyone to feel
cheated or abused by this new subscription policy.

            
               FREQUENTLY ASKED
QUESTIONS
            

            
               Q: "New subscription policy" my Aunt Sally.
Who are you trying to kid? You're obviously backing down.
            

            A: No, no, you see
there's always been a mix of free and paid stuff ... we're just
changing the mix ... OK, OK, sure: We're backing down.

            
               Q: Why?
            

            A: In a nutshell, it now
looks as if it's going to be easier to sell ads but harder to sell
subscriptions than we thought a year ago. Ten to 15 people visit our free areas
every month for each one paying subscriber. (That's counting a reader just once
no matter how often he or she visits.) It's painful to think of turning away so
many 
                  Slate
                readers from so much of our content--not to mention
the potential readers who don't come in the first place. The spreadsheet
wizards figure that ad revenue from the increased traffic will more than
compensate for the lost subscriptions.

            
               Q: Well, duh! Everybody said you
can't charge for content on the Internet. Information wants to be free! Unless
it's about sex or stocks. But oh no, you knew better. You'd show the world.
You'd charge for news digests, for political analysis, for cultural
discussions, for poetry f'r Chrissake. Don't you feel like
jerks?
            

            A: Not really. OK, maybe
a bit. But look: This is terra incognita. We never claimed to have found the
one true path. We tried one thing, now we're trying something else, and we'll
keep trying until we figure it out. Although we are owned by a rich company,
becoming financially self-sustaining remains a crucial goal. And it's not as if
anyone else has figured it out either. Let him or her with a Webzine that's
breaking even cast the first stone. (And "going to break even next year"
doesn't count. Every money-losing magazine in history is going to break even
next year.)

            
               Q: But clearly, at least in hindsight, you
got something wrong. What was it?
            

            Clearly, yes. It may just have been that we were too
early. There is too much free stuff out there, the process of paying and
accessing what you paid for is too clumsy and unfamiliar, and so on. Some of
this may change. But we also may have missed a couple of more fundamental
truths about the Web. One concerns readers and one concerns advertisers.

            Web readers surf . They go quickly from site
to site. If they really like a particular site, they may visit it often, but
they are unlikely to devote a continuous half-hour or more to any one site the
way you might read a traditional paper magazine in one sitting. This appears to
be in the nature of the Web and not something that is likely to change. And it
makes paying for access to any particular site a bigger practical and
psychological hurdle.

            Web advertisers, meanwhile, don't seem to place any
special value on reaching paying subscribers. That was a bit surprising, since
traditional magazine advertisers usually require paying subscribers.
Even profitable magazines often spend more money finding and signing up
subscribers than those subscribers will ever pay. But if they just gave the
magazine away, advertisers would lose interest.

            Why doesn't this apply on
the Web? Probably because Web advertisers pay on the basis of ads served. If
you buy an ad in a print magazine with a 500,000 circulation, you have no way
of knowing how many of those readers actually saw your ad. But if they paid for
the magazine, you at least have some assurance that they picked it up. On the
Web, that assurance is unnecessary. If you buy 500,000 ad impressions on

                  Slate
               , you know that your ad has been put on someone's computer
screen 500,000 times. This is a great selling point for Web advertising, but it
radically changes the economics of charging for subscriptions.

            
               Q: Isn't this change a sign that you're
getting desperate, that Microsoft is losing interest, that you're about to
fold, that the end is nigh, strange and dreadful diseases are about to ravage
the population, the stock market is going to tank, Linda Tripp will get her own
TV talk show, and so on?
            

            A: For heaven's sake,
you made the same sort of dire predictions when we started charging for
content a year ago. We have had nothing but support from the company, both in
general and for every stage of our ongoing experiment. One benefit of making
our current content free is that 
                  Slate
                will be able to
participate more fully in the new Microsoft "portal" site, msn.com.

            
               Q: Do you promise this is the last big
change in Slate that you'll put us through?
            

            A: Absolutely not. This
is an adventure. Thanks for joining us on it.

            
               Q: One final question. What does Bill have
to say about this?
            

            A: It's true we approached the CEO with some
trepidation, and his initial reaction was not encouraging. He turned to his
guard dogs and said, "Neukom! Herbold! Kill!" But then he said, "Wait. What
will happen to that Emily Yoffe who writes the column about the tabloids?"
She'll get many new readers, we explained. "And 'Dear Prudence,' and
Edelstein's movie reviews, and all those e-mail back-and-forths?" Ditto, ditto,
ditto, we replied.

            "OK," he said, turning to his canine
physiotherapist, "Ballmer, call off the dogs. Give them some print magazine to
eat instead. They just love the Economist ."

         
      
   
