
   
   
      
         
            Ah, Youth

            Max Fischer (Jason
Schwartzman), the 15-year-old protagonist of Wes Anderson's well-reviewed
comedy Rushmore , looks like Tom Cruise with his face pinched between a
giant's thumb and forefinger so that his tiny eyes are squashed together and
his big nose and teeth pop out. With his thick black glasses, he looks as if
he's being photographed through a fishbowl, an effect that the director
intensifies by shooting much of the movie with a fishbowl lens. A student at a
prestigious prep school, the Rushmore Academy, Max travels amid décor that has
a cartoon flatness of perspective and is painted in near luminous primary
colors, with some added deep brown, green, crimson, and gold leaf to convey the
institution's toniness. Intent on erecting a multimillion dollar aquarium to
impress a prim first-grade teacher with whom he's obsessed, Max himself seems
the king fish of a giant tank.

            How we are intended to
view Max is the overriding--albeit unstated--question raised by
Rushmore , which played the New York Film Festival last September, opened
for a week in New York and Los Angeles in December to qualify for the Academy
Awards, and begins a nationwide run this week. My first impression was that Max
is supposed to be vaguely repulsive, but after spending some time with him (and
seeing the movie again) I decided that there was nothing vague about it--he's
just repulsive. My take, I concede, is not the only one. Anderson and his
co-writer, Owen Wilson (who starred in the pair's last film, the tediously
quirky 1996 Bottle 
               Rocket ), play a funny game with their
indefatigable protagonist. On one hand, they let us know that Max is a screw-up
and a hustler; on the other, they collude with him in myriad ways, to the point
of warping their mise en scène to reflect his worldview and enhance his
stature. It's this tension that leads some people to regard Rushmore as
having dramatic complexity, but I think Anderson and Wilson are just trying to
have it both ways. Like their hero, they spend a lot of time patting themselves
on the back for being aggressively unconventional.

            Max, whose mother died when he was 7 and whose elderly
father is a barber, attends Rushmore on a scholarship but is one of the
school's worst students. The movie merrily relates the ways in which he
compensates for poverty and academic disgrace. He tells people that his father
is a neurosurgeon. He is shown leading the debate society, the fencing club,
the French club, the chess club, and the "Max Fischer Players," who perform
wildly inappropriate dramatizations of such films as Serpico to
undiscriminating audiences. He has, we are told, spent the previous year
petitioning to have Latin expunged from the curriculum; now, to impress the
teacher (Olivia Williams), he campaigns to have the course restored. When a
self-made millionaire businessman (Bill Murray) delivers a cynical, derisive
speech to the privileged student body, Max recognizes a kindred spirit and
aggressively befriends the tycoon, eventually enlisting him in his extravagant
aquarium scheme.

            How, I repeat, are we
supposed to take Max? Are we to cheer his ludicrous efforts to bed a woman
twice his age? Is it supposed to be cute when he sites the aquarium in the
middle of the school's baseball diamond and brings in the bulldozers without
informing anyone in the administration? Anderson and Wilson are poker faced:
Max's obnoxiousness might be meant as a state of grace.

            R ushmore does captures something of adolescence that
few movies come near: It often unfolds in a narcissistic trance. That's not a
negligible feat. What I wanted, however, was a larger perspective, something
more insightful than the one-thing-after-another existential whimsy that made
Bottle Rocket such a trial. In one scene, ripped off from My Left
Foot (1989), Max gets drunk in the course of a celebratory dinner and
insults the teacher's date: "I have a hit play. What did you ever do?" His
churlishness isn't compelling, it's just an embarrassment, a callow cry for
attention. "Notice me!" says the character, and you say, "Why?"

            As the teacher, Williams
has the right combination of standoffishness and warmth, but she's more
colorless than this passive part requires. Murray, in a dry, "straight" turn,
lowers the volume on his wiseacre act, confining his trademark irony to an
occasional glint in the eye and, in the face of crisis, an escalating air of
gonzo dissolution. He's fine, but the raves (and the awards) for this
performance are baffling. Much more fun is Brian Cox as Rushmore's headmaster.
A truly weird actor who, in Manhunter (1986), made for an eerier
Hannibal Lecter than Anthony Hopkins, Cox rules with the kind of settled
irritability that suggests why prep schools are petri dishes for acts of
adolescence defiance.

            In the "Arts & Leisure" section of last Sunday's New
York Times , director Anderson recounts how he traveled to the Berkshires to
show Rushmore to the retired New 
               Yorker critic Pauline
Kael, from whose writing, he says, he learned to watch movies. Hoping for an
ecstatic reaction from this most vital of critics, he found instead an old
woman hobbled by Parkinson's disease, and one whose response to his film was
gnomic and gently dismissive. Bummer, huh? So Anderson turned around and wrote
up the encounter, in a way designed both to deflate his own persona and to make
sport of Kael's infirmities and memory lapses.

            I met Kael in the mid-1980s while I was writing
criticism for the Village Voice , but only got to know her after she
retired from The 
               New Yorker . In general, she's a lot more lucid
than, for instance, me. The memory lapses over the summer were caused by
something else, specifically Sinemet, a powerful Parkinson's drug that has been
the talk of various Web sites devoted to the disease. The consensus is that the
medication mitigates crippling tremors but that users need to have their levels
monitored carefully because too much can leave you muddled. It was in this
phase of Kael's Sinemet trial that Anderson made his appearance with film cans
in tow--and poised to tell the world that she no longer remembered who Bill
Murray was.

            Given the state of her health at the time, it was
gracious of Kael to entertain this chucklehead for even a minute--a mistake she
probably won't make again. Anderson, meanwhile, probably doesn't realize that
he did anything unseemly. "What do you expect?" said a friend. "He's like the
kid in Rushmore , a callow narcissist." At least the kid in
Rushmore confines his aesthetic offenses to high-school auditoriums.

         
      
   
