
   
   
      
         
            No. 176: &quot;Wrecking Ball&quot;

            

               "It did the Vice President and me a lot of good to pick up those
hammers and crow bars and tear something down," President Clinton said Monday.
Tear what down?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Monday's question (No. 175)--"Dis Incentive":
            

            

               "This is a horrible thing that's going on," says Franklin Spinney. "All
it's going to do is reward the pathological behavior that created the problem."
What's going on?
            

            "The
Academy Awards."-- David Finkle ( Jennifer Miller and Daniel
Krause had similar answers.)

            "The
Super Bowl."-- Lois Ambash (similarly, R.C. Leander )

            "But
Furby LOVE play! Teach Furby play again, then singing!"-- Kate Wing
            

            "Mr.
Spinney is arguing that the Make-A-Wish Foundation actually encourages children
to get sick."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "I'm
giving the dogs free run of the pantry. Is that wrong?"-- Doug
Ingram
            

             

             

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            To many of you, the
horrible thing that's going on is going on in Congress. Of course, if we had a
parliamentary system, the president would simply call for a vote of confidence
and--one way or another--we'd swiftly move on. If we had the metric system, we
could easily calculate how far we'd moved on. If we had a decent system of
public education, filled with healthy children enjoying universal access to
medical care, easily reached by high-speed maglev trains driven by
bioengineered dogs fed on the limitless bounty we farm on the ocean floor, then
we'd all learn that metric system and reward ourselves by zipping off on our
unicopters to the space port for our two week vacation on the moon. I'm sure
these are just some of the visionary ideas the president will be propose in
tonight's State of the Union address. Along with school uniforms.

            
               Bang for the Buck
Answer
            

            President Clinton's proposed defense budget.

            His suggested massive
increase in military spending, the biggest in two decades, is a dreadful way to
strengthen America, says Pentagon analyst Franklin Spinney. No major adversary
has emerged since the collapse of the Soviet Union. A swollen military budget
robs the nation of resources for education and other actual needs. It subverts
reforms in the Pentagon's culture of waste and inefficiency. Spinney also
argues that the increasingly complex weapons under consideration are too
expensive to be purchased and maintained in adequate numbers. "Spending more
money the same way isn't going to fix anything," he says, criticizing what he
calls "Versailles on the Potomac."

            
               Either/Or
Extra
            

            

               "We believe that killing is not an acceptable management tool for
us."--Either Bill Gates is announcing a policy change at Microsoft, or Richard
Avanzino is promoting humane animal shelters for the SPCA.

               
                  Tara Road , by Maeve Binchy; River's End , by Nora Roberts; and
A Sudden Change of Heart , by Barbara Taylor Bradford.--Either they're
just not trying at the National Book Awards, or there's a new kind of giveaway
in specially marked cases of Coca-Cola.

               "My monument has won!"--Either this is a line in a gay porn remake of
Spartacus , or architect Peter Eisenman is delighted that some good has
come out of the Holocaust--he got a commission.

               "After this past week, when people here say Yankee trash, they think it's
redundant."--Either yet another person is offended by Mayor Giuliani's
swaggering know-nothingism or ... oh, wait, it is Mayor Giuliani's swaggering
know-nothingism.

            

            

               Correction
            

            The Japanese cell phone
death story attributed to someone was actually submitted by someone else.

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: bad
movies.

            
               Correction of
Correction
            

            The lack of specificity
in the previous correction rendered it ineffectual. The story was actually
submitted by Jennifer Miller.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
