
   
   
      
         
            No. 173: &quot;Woon River&quot;

            
               When the
Woonasquatucket River near Providence, R.I., moved into the No. 2 slot, behind
New Jersey's Passaic River, signs went up along its banks reading: "Peligro!
Los Peces De Este Rio No Se Deben Comer."
            

            

               Loosely translated, what would that be in idiomatic
English?
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Tuesday's question (No. 172)--"Wear and Tear":
            

            

               A year ago she wore an orange jumpsuit and brandished a torch; now she
wears a look of remorse. Who is she, and what went wrong?
            

            "My
sister, back when she was at Bennington at that 'Take Back the Night' rally
thing. All her co-workers at J.P. Morgan keep giving her shit about
it."-- Brian Fix
            

            "She is
Nathan Lane. What went wrong is that Encore Encore sucked
sucked."-- Larry Amaros
            

            "She is
Dale Evans, and everything went wrong for her last year. First Roy dies, and
then she gets booed off the stage at Foxwoods just five minutes into her
Salute to the American Indian ."-- Bill Franzen
            

            "A
Drudge Report world exclusive: Susan McDougal no longer carries a torch
for ex-lover William Jefferson Clinton. In tears, jailbird confesses to her
role in the murder of Vince Foster and 'anything else Ken Starr wants.'
"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "She is
Crystall, the $200 an hour Miss Utah Olympics."-- Kate Wing ( Doug
Welty and Norman Oder had similar answers.)

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Mistake or metaphor?
That's what many of you wondered when you read the question. Unless you were
Barbara Lippert, and then you just went ahead and decided: error. (For rush to
judgment, click .) And while she is literally correct that flags were waved and
technically accurate that torches were not brandished, isn't there a deeper
brandishing, a rich symbolic brandishing? (Not to some. Click for judge, jury,
and executioner.) I suppose witnesses will have to be called to decide this.
Fatuous, self-aggrandizing speeches will have to be made. I can't prevent that.
All I can do is calmly and modestly get on with News Quiz's business. Please
don't be distracted by my quiet courage.

            
               America Loses Its
Innocence for the First Time Again Answer
            

            As most of you know, Salt
Lake City's mayor, Deedee Corradini, accepted the Olympic flag at the close of
last year's winter games in Nagano, Japan. Monday she ended her political
career, announcing she would not seek a third term. A member of the Salt Lake
City Olympic Committee board of trustees, she insists that this has nothing to
do with the bribery scandal: "I want you to know this is a purely personal
decision."

            
               Cell Division
Extra
            

            It is not enough to hate;
one must hate with clarity and understanding. Below, some reasons to loathe
cell phones.

            "It's
the same as seeing someone walk past you on the street busily shaving himself
with a cordless electric razor, an action that implies not that this is an
especially busy person but rather that this is a person who's very interested
in impressing upon others that he's an especially busy person."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            
"They're status objects and umbilical cords for people so insecure that they
need constant and instant connection and constant and instant interruption in
their life in order to feel powerful and worthy. Getting a call in public on
your cell phone is like flaunting how many Christmas cards you receive. It's
immodest and a sign of insecurity. People who don't have real jobs and real
lives tend to pack cell phones in order to appear occupied and loved, when in
fact the reverse is true. They should, like the proverbial quarter in your
pocket, be used only in a real emergency."-- Carrie Rickie
            

            "Unlike
someone talking at a pay phone, or two people talking to each other in person
or, indeed, one person talking to herself, cell phone users always seem to give
the impression that they enjoy having strangers listen to their conversations.
It's as if every conversation is a tiny act of performance art--cheap, banal,
mundane performance art. They exploit themselves, by depriving themselves of
that private life so essential to a modern liberal society, and at the same
time they exploit the casual passerby by forcing that person to eavesdrop and
act as audience. A cell phone user simultaneously withdraws from public life to
discuss his taxes or what's wrong with the cat or whatever, and insists that
the public intrude into his private life. It's that combination of zombielike
self-absorption and fatuous exhibitionism that is so repugnant. What jerks they
are."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            "I hit
on this explanation while reluctantly overhearing the inane chatter of a man
describing, into a hand-held mouthpiece, in excruciating detail, a friggin'
haircut! It is that hubris, that 'this conversation is SO important it cannot
wait for a less bothersome venue' characteristic of public cellular
intercourse."-- Dave Ross
            

             

            
               Race Results
            

            Reference No. 1: The
Statue of Liberty.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
2
            

            All right. All right.
She's telling the truth. I misread the article. Flag, torch--it all blurs
together. I was under a lot of pressure. Nobody was supposed to get hurt. I'm
just glad to get it off my chest.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
