
   
   
      
         
             Linda Tripp's Payoff

            You give the president a
blow job and he gives you a soft job: high pay, no qualifications, no heavy
lifting. Right? That's what poor Monica Lewinsky thought. And the theory of the
Republican impeachment drive is not too different. Although the alleged quid
pro quo was the helping to cover up the sex, rather than the sex itself (and
although Lewinsky never actually enjoyed the alleged payoff), the articles of
impeachment nevertheless assume that Flytrap is about an exchange of
favors.

            How naive. Anyone who
understands bureaucracies should know that the way to get a cushy job isn't to
make yourself desirable but to make yourself undesirable. That's why, while
we're suffering through a national crisis over alleged favors to Lewinsky, the
one person who clearly has enjoyed a big payoff--at taxpayer expense--is the
arch-dragoness, Linda Tripp.

            Tripp was a secretary at the White House, a holdover from
the Bush administration. When she began to look like trouble, she was
transferred to the Pentagon. The choice of the Pentagon is no surprise.
Although conservatives who inveigh against overpaid, do-nothing federal
bureaucrats probably have in mind the Department of Health and Human Services,
if your urgent need is a government job in general, rather than anything in
particular that job might accomplish, apparently the Pentagon is your best
shot.

            Besides a military force
of one and a half million people, the Defense Department employs about 800,000
civilians. Linda Tripp is one of them, holding the position of public affairs
specialist with a civil service ranking of GS-15, Step 6. That puts the
49-year-old high-school grad at the top of the Pentagon's middle management
ranks. Like all GS employees, she just received an across-the-board-pay
increase. Tripp's raise, including a "locality" adjustment for working in the
Washington, D.C., area, was 3.68 percent, bringing her salary to $94,098 a
year.

            For which she does ...? Since March 1998, nothing. Although
she has supposedly been working at home, she was stripped of her duties--but
not her pay or her title--shortly after the scandal broke. Tripp has
characterized this as a politically motivated "demotion." It will strike many
as a demotion devoutly to be wished.

            Monica Lewinsky's title
at the Pentagon was confidential assistant to the assistant secretary for
public affairs. Her job was writing press releases, for which she was paid
$33,000. Note that Lewinsky got this job as a payoff for being undesirable to a
presidential aide, not for being desirable to the president.

            Officially, Tripp is the public affairs specialist for a
program called the Joint Civilian Orientation Conference, an arguably
worthwhile annual propaganda effort that takes 60 civilian "public opinion
leaders" on a weeklong tour of military operations. Tripp had primary
responsibility for the paperwork involved in the selection process, for making
travel and hotel arrangements, as well as for other logistic odds and ends such
as the week's kick-off banquet. According to the New York Times , before
Tripp took the job, this position was part-time.

            When pressed for more detail, the person now doing
Tripp's job used the word "coordinating" a lot, but that was about it. There
is, it turns out, no official description of the job. Writing one is among the
tasks Tripp is being paid to perform now.

            But there are official
descriptions of other GS-15 public affairs specialist positions. For instance,
the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights is currently looking for someone to "assist
in the reviews and analysis of numerous requests for speeches; to develop,
clear, release, and distribute a wide range of information and data concerning
the nature and objective of the Commission's programs; [and to] prepare press
releases, fact sheets, etc. and arrange press conferences." Translation: PR
grunt. Salary: $80,658 to $104,851.

            To try to get some sort of independent measure of what
these jobs are worth, I called Kelly Services, the nationwide temp agency.
Without mentioning Tripp or the Pentagon, I described her job there to the
woman at Kelly. Oh, she said, that's high-end secretarial. How much would you
have to pay somebody to do a job like that, I asked. Oh, $18 to $25 an hour,
she said. That's $36,000 to $50,000 a year--roughly half of what Tripp is being
paid not to do it.

            What's more, there is no
evidence of any competitive evaluation of Tripp before she was offered this
job. The employee, a problem in one place, was simply moved to another. There's
a name for this personnel technique: It's called "Pass the Trash." Federal
civilian employees who don't commit felonies and don't cuss out their
supervisors pretty much have a guaranteed job with guaranteed wages for life.
Tripp has spent 26 years in this cocoon, which will enable her to retire on a
handsome pension, based on the average of her three highest consecutive years
of pay.

            Will her job description be done by then? How long could it
take? "She's still working on it," a Pentagon source tells me. What's the
opposite of stress? Where else could you pull down over $90,000 and live such a
deadline-free existence? And have that much free time to gab with your
girlfriends?

            Not all the time-wasters in the Pentagon are
civilians. There are plenty of dead-end GIs in dead-end jobs, too. But at least
most of them did something important earlier in their careers--and probably
something dangerous, to boot. And Tripp's pay and retirement benefits are
staggering compared with those of the men and women in those hard jobs now.
Most of the folks on duty in the skies over Iraq make about half of what Linda
Tripp makes. Indeed, Tripp pulls down more than all but a handful of the U.S.
military's most senior officers. She earns more than a ballistic missile
submarine commander and is on a par with aircraft carrier skippers in the
Persian Gulf and Army generals ready to lead thousands of troops into
combat.

            Imagine what Bob Barr and Henry Hyde would say if
Monica had got a deal like that.

         
      
   
