
   
   
      
         
            No. 167: &quot;East/West&quot;

            

               Fill in the blank. Bernard Salick's entrepreneurial ideas may play in
California, but they'll never make it in New York, says Warren Enker. "Not too
many people want ____________ at 4 a.m., so it's not that great a
gimmick."
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Monday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Thurs
               day's question (No. 166)--"AC in
D.C.?":
            

            
               Rule 12 of the
Senate Impeachment Rules states, "At 12:30 o'clock after noon, or at such other
hour as the Senate may order ... the legislative and executive business of the
Senate shall be suspended, and the secretary shall give notice to the House ...
that the Senate is ready to proceed ... in the Senate Chamber, which chamber is
prepared with accommodations for the reception of the House of
Representatives."
            

            

               Fred Graver and Betsy Steyer Graver ask: What sort of
accommodations?
                
            

            
"Fatal."-- Alfa-Betty Olsen
            

            
"Real-time stock market big board. 'Another thousand points off the NASDAQ,'
remarked Republican Bob Barr, 'and we'll nail that slick sumbitch.' "-- Jim
O'Grady
            

            
"Trained monkeys with trays of wine and cheese."-- Joe Lengieza
            

            "A
small, dark room filled with the screams of innocent Cambodians. Oh, no, wait.
That's Henry Kissinger's accommodations in hell. Never mind."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "I
don't know, but I'm sure it's a waste of my tax dollars (my grandfather's
philosophy on everything)."-- Matt Sullivan
            

             

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Most replies envisioned a community of corrupt,
childish, lubricious egomaniacs--much like Lord of the Flies , but with
overt sex and more guys who look like Piggy.

            Or, to put it another way, perhaps the reason the
president risked in-office eroticism rather than taking her to a nice hotel is
that there is no nice hotel. Not the right kind of nice hotel. If we live in an
age of rampant infidelity (generally the most popular kind, by the way), it is
in spite of the failure of the free market to provide seductive accommodations.
Oh, there are hot-bed motels out near the airport, a lovely thing for those who
can only function sexually in 1972; the waterbeds and mirrors must be a great
comfort. It's like bad pornography expressed as architecture.

            In France, there are romantic rooms available for
passionate afternoons well away from any flight path. In Tokyo, where the
apartments are small, there are "love hotels" in a goofy and playful variety of
styles. In New York, where the apartments are small, there is Starbucks.
Manhattan hotels cater to the business traveler; there are high-resolution fax
machines but low thread-count sheets. And neither is available just for a
languorous afternoon.

            Or to put it another way,
why is there no hotel toothpaste? In their restless effort to offer the guest
simulated luxury, hotels provide a sewing kit, soap, shampoo, body gel, a
Bible, a robe, and a shower cap, but no toothpaste. Why not? Just say you were
a dentist seeking a stolen hour of bliss; where would you go? Just say you were
a congressman who looked like Piggy and cared about the Constitution, sensual
delights, and good oral hygiene; what kind of accommodations would you
want?

            
               Fred's
Follow-Up
            

            "While
the imagination runs the gamut from the Hunter Thompson-esque 'Ether ... and a
fax machine' to the Van Halen-esque 'no red M&Ms!!!!,' we are reminded of a
real memo we once read, written by a secretary at Paramount, describing the
accommodations demanded by Barry Diller in his hotel suites. 'A box of fresh
butterscotch candies must be present on the desk. Shake the box--you'll be able
to hear if they're fresh or not.' "-- Fred Graver
            

            
               Financial Headline
Helper Extra
            

            Attention business
reporters: Get a head start accumulating the clichés demanded by the new
European monetary system. And you general readers can get a leg up on the
stories you'll want to skip all through 1999. Help yourself, courtesy of News
Quiz.

            
               EUROPEN FOR
BUSINESS: Now that the money is a different color, foreigners will be
able to buy a lot more things, or perhaps a lot fewer.

            
               ON A
EUROLL: With the new international money, everyone finally knows what
everything costs--it's all surprisingly affordable, apparently--and they're
buying it.

            
               EURONLY AS RICH AS
YOU FEEL: Buying stuff is making everyone happy, even when it turns
out they'd misread the price tag--they thought it was in pesetas--so now
everyone is in debt but euphoric.

            
               NO PUBLIC
EURONATION: A cold splash of reality from the Washington Times ,
insisting that poor people not be made to feel good at the expense of rich
people feeling better.

            
               EURO, EURO, EURO
YOUR BOAT: A lot of people are sailing those huge factory trawlers up
to the North Atlantic to mock the Swedes and Danes for missing out on all the
shopping. Stupid Danes.

            

               ISN'T IT EUROMANTIC: It's tough to explain to the
noneconomist, but wealthy people turn out to have a lot of fun and some sex, as
predicted by John Maynard Keynes. This is good for the French. Or perhaps
bad.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
