
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Varsity
Blues
                (Paramount Pictures). Critics say this film is pretty fun
for a formula sports flick: "brisk and wholehearted and smarter than you
expect" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ). Dawson's Creek
star James Van Der Beek plays a second-string quarterback thrust into the
spotlight of a football-obsessed Texas town when the star is injured. The
benefits that come with the new position (free beer, cheerleaders slathered in
whipped cream) get lots of screen-time, and at points the film is almost "a
poor man's Porky's " (Andy Seiler, USA Today ). John Anderson pans
it in the Los Angeles Times ("a trashy little movie about drinking,
football and drinking"), saying it "pretends to moralize about the very
behavior it milks for every giggle it can get." (Get all the Van Der Beek-cake
you can handle on this fan site.)

            
               
                  At First
Sight
                (MGM). Critics are down on this
based-on-a-true-Oliver-Sacks-story of a man (Val Kilmer) who regains his sight
after an operation encouraged by his sighted girlfriend (Mira Sorvino). Rod
Dreher of the New York Post is scathing, dismissing it as "ooey-gooey
schmoopie slop" and "ersatz romantic tapioca" and comparing the personality of
Kilmer's character to that of Snuggles the fabric-softener bear. Not everyone's
this harsh, but the film has only one true supporter, the Los Angeles
Times ' Kevin Thomas, who deems it "an exceptionally touching and
provocative love story." (This fan site
has lots of stills.)

            
               
                  In
Dreams
                (DreamWorks). Most agree that this "dismayingly schlocky
and literal-minded thriller" (Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ) is
leavened only by a fine performance by Annette Bening as a woman plagued by the
dreams of a serial killer. Director Neil Jordan ( The Butcher Boy ) gives
viewers plenty to look at--creepy underwater sets, lush dream sequences--but
the film comes up short anyway. As Roger Ebert says, "[T]his is a well-made bad
movie" ( Chicago Sun-Times ). (For a review by 
                  Slate
               's David
Edelstein, click . Find out more about Neil Jordan in this profile in Time .)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Duane's
Depressed
               , by Larry McMurtry (Simon & Schuster). Good, not
great, reviews for the final novel in the trilogy that began with The Last
Picture Show and continued with Texasville . Critics say that
although this is not on a par with McMurtry's finest work, "every page is as
welcome as a letter from home" (Kyle Smith, People ). Others think the
extended musing on the depression of 62-year-old oilman Duane Moore focuses so
much on his malaise as to become boring, but most agree with Malcolm Jones of
Newsweek : "both heartbreaking and hilarious, sometimes on the same
page." (Read more about McMurtry in this Newsweek article.)

            
               
                  The
Intuitionist
               , by Colson Whitehead (Anchor Books). Critics
describe this detective novel, the author's first, as "part Thomas Pynchon,
part Ralph Ellison" (Dan Cryer, New York Newsday ) and praise Whitehead
as a refreshingly original voice. The story follows Lila Mae Watson, the first
black elevator inspector in a New York-like metropolis in the 1940s. Watson is
an "intuitionist," one of a minority of inspectors who judges elevators by
intuition, as opposed to the empiricists, who inspect in the traditional
fashion. The twisting plot explores race relations, with elevators serving as
metaphors for social mobility and transcendence. Mark Rozzo of the Los
Angeles Times is not as impressed as most, saying the book "diverts more
than it excites." (Listen to the author reading a passage from the book
here, and read an excerpt here.)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  Fosse: A
Celebration in Song and Dance
                (Broadhurst Theatre, New York City).
Reviewers are split on this retrospective of the work of Broadway choreographer
Bob Fosse. Some call it a testament to Fosse's genius, with fulsome,
blurb-ready praise: "The old razzle-dazzler has done it again--posthumously ...
an inevitable hit, a galvanizing eruption of energy, panache and arrogantly
surefooted stagecraft" (Terry Teachout, Time ). Others, contrarily, find
evidence of Fosse's limits: The New York Times ' Ben Brantley writes,
"Numbers that, in the context of their original shows, sparkled with wit and
vitality often register as repetitive examples of virtuosic proficiency." Some
are more critical, calling the dances "dated" (Amy Gamerman, the Wall Street
Journal ). (An "under construction" Fosse site lets fans discuss the master. You can buy
tickets at the show's official
site.)

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Affliction ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Hilary and Jackie ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Hi-Lo Country ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Haunted Wood: Soviet Espionage in
America--The Stalin Era , by Allen Weinstein and Alexander Vassiliev;

               
                  Book
                  --Note Found in a Bottle: My Life as a Drinker , by
Susan Cheever;

               
                  Book
                  --Glamorama , by Bret Easton Ellis.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  A Civil Action ;

               
                  Movie -- The Thin Red Line ;

               
                  Movie -- Down in the 
                  Delta ;

               
                  Movie -- Hurlyburly ;

               
                  Movie -- Theory of Flight ;

               
                  Book--
                  Careless Love: The Unmaking of Elvis
Presley , by Peter Guralnick;

               
                  Book
                  --
                  The Jew of New York , by Ben
Katchor.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Patch Adams ;

               
                  Movie
                  --The Faculty ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Stepmom ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Mighty Joe Young ;

               
                  Book--
                  Hundred Dollar Holiday , by Bill
McKibben;

               
                  Book
                  --The Vintner's Luck , by Elizabeth Knox.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  The Prince of Egypt ;

               
                  Movie--
                  You've Got Mail ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The General ;

               
                  Book--
                  Blind Man's Bluff: The Untold Story of American
Submarine Espionage , by Sherry Sontag and Christopher Drew, with Annette
Lawrence Drew;

               
                  Book--
                  Opened Ground: Selected Poems, 1966-1996 , by Seamus
Heaney;

               
                  Book -- The Unknown Matisse: A Life of Henri Matisse, The Early
Years, 1869-1908 , by Hilary Spurling.

            

         
      
   
