
   
   
      
         
            Drink, Hold, or Fold

            As the new year turns, amid
the journalistic farrago of year end summaries and photo spreads, with world
crises recapped, celebrities remourned, and cartoons reprinted, I always look
forward to the year's first issue of the 
                  Wine Spectator
               . This issue contains the magazine's
updated "Vintage Chart," the key to ordering well at a restaurant.

            I quickly put the chart
into my wallet and toss out last year's out-of-date one. The size of a large
business card, the Wine Spectator vintage chart unfolds like an
accordion. Its six pages of data-crammed grids include lists of the major wine
regions of the world and scores (on a scale of one to 100) for each year with a
note to "drink or hold" (in other words, enjoy it now or bank it and let it
appreciate).

            The Wine Spectator chart is the best of its kind,
mainly because it is the most comprehensive. Even a wine expert who tracks
these things might not remember, as he scans a wine list, what conditions were
like for French Alsatian wines in 1996. (Good: The cheat sheet hands out a high
"92 Drink/Hold." ) Or whether to order that underpriced Barolo 1994? (No: The
Piedmont region in 1994 gets a lousy 77.) Taillevent, a superb restaurant in
Paris, supplies its own chart for patrons, and even includes a line on tiny
Jura, a region on the border between France and Switzerland. Even if you don't
know what Jurançon is, go ahead and order it if the restaurant's chart has it
in its very best year of the decade. (Actually, be careful because some
Jurançon is dessert wine.)

            Vintage charts are a
great idea because they isolate the most important variable in the making of
wine: the year. The best way to find a good, underpriced wine is to look for a
type of wine you like (Bordeaux, California cabernet, pinot noir) in an
excellent year (click here for an annotated list of grapes and varieties).
Even if you have never heard of the producer, the chances are it's pretty good.
In general, prices follow name brands not years, so you will find bargains as
well. And if the winemaker is half decent, in a great year he will have done
well. So a 1990 Bordeaux or Burgundy is likely to be first-rate if made by a
respectable, even if unknown, winemaker. Similarly, 1994 was a balmy year for
California cabs: You simply can't go wrong if you order one or even purchase it
in a shop that stocks selectively. (Note re buying wine in restaurants: You're
also relying on the restaurant's screening system. There are truly awful
winemakers who could make plonk even in the best year. But few restaurants
carry such wines.)

            Obviously, year isn't the only determinant. The region, the
grape variety, and the winemaker's skill have an enormous effect on wine
quality. The French tend to talk lyrically about the terroir , the
characteristics given by particular climate and soil, while Americans worship
winemakers instead, turning them into celebrities. But by concentrating on
nature rather than nurture, the French are probably closer to the truth than
the Americans are. At the end of the day, wine is an agricultural product. Just
as the year to year quality of oranges, potatoes, and tomatoes is determined
primarily by the weather, so it is with grapes.

            The comparison isn't
perfect because wine is not simply an agricultural product. Grapes must be
pressed, fermented, blended, and aged to make wine, so it's better described as
a semi-processed food product--one whose quality is shaped as it sits and
decays in vats, barrels, and bottles. I say semi-processed because wine is not
the mass-produced, machine-made, processed food that orange juice is, so the
winemaker cannot interfere as much with the process. Consequently, a bad year,
with some exceptions, means bad wine, whether at Château Lafite-Rothschild or
at Gallo. Cabernet sauvignon in a bad, that is, excessively cold, year tastes
acidic, weedy, and vegetal. Pinot noir simply tastes thin and fruitless.
Chardonnay is a hardy grape, which is why it is so widely produced all over the
world. You're unlikely to get something really "off" when you order a glass of
Chardonnay, which explains its ubiquity on wine lists.

            Of course you can compensate for weather--within limits.
Just as in a good year you can do well easily, in a bad year almost nothing can
make a first-rate product. Winemakers who make fine champagne, special Napa
cabernets, and single-vineyard burgundies do not make their best wines--say
Stag's Leap Cask 23 or Vintage Bollinger--in a bad year. At the great Sauternes
vineyard Château d'Yquem they make none of their legendary wine if the weather
has been particularly bad--a crippling financial decision, less and less likely
to be made as the old standards of the owner, the Comte de Lurs-Saluces, are
replaced by those of management gnomes.

            What makes a good year is a very complicated matter,
since different grapes and regions are best served by different weather
conditions. In general the fruit should form in good-sized bunches on the vine,
ripen at a reasonable pace, and be plucked when fully ripe. The great enemies
of grape growers are extremes and sudden change--fluctuating temperatures,
sudden rainstorms, heat waves, flash frosts. (In fact, even the banalities I've
just written are actually the subject of intense controversy.) It's a complex
grid, too complicated for the average imbiber to chart for himself, which is
why you should celebrate every new year with a nice bottle and the Wine
Spectator cheat sheet.

         
      
   
