
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , Jan. 23
            

            
               (posted Saturday, Jan.
23)
            

            The cover editorial chastises Americans for remaining
loyal to President Clinton, calling their fidelity "a mixture of opportunism
and delusion." The opportunism: Democrats have stuck with Clinton because his
poll numbers are high and Republicans have botched impeachment. The delusion:
Americans credit the president for national prosperity he has nothing to do
with. ... A story notes the decline of Europe's political right, which
now runs only one country in the European Union. As in the United States, the
European left has co-opted the right's policies. The emerging, alarming trend:
Center-right parties are beginning to ally with neofascists such as the
National Front. ... A 16 page package on the Nordic countries--it's more
interesting than it sounds, OK?--concludes that they're not all alike. They are
badly split over the questions of the euro and Nordic neutrality. But all still
have thriving economies, lavish governments, and too-high taxes.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , Feb. 8
            

            
               (posted Friday, Jan.
22, 1999)
            

            The cover bypasses
impeachment and instead goes with a George Soros mini-package. A review slams
Soros' "embarrassingly banal" new book, which was "rushed into print" in order
to play up Soros' views on the Asian and Russian crises. Soros' economic
theories, the author (an MIT economics professor) argues, are naive,
simplistic, and occasionally flat-out wrong. Another article asks: Did Soros
kill the Russian ruble by predicting its death? (Answer: No.) ... On the
impeachment scene, one hand-wringing article decries the triumph of
partisanship over any meaningful ideological principle. Another proposes that
Clinton take a constitutionally permitted "temporary leave" while the
impeachment trial continues (he can come back after he wins in the Senate).

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Jan. 24
            

            
               (posted Thursday, Jan.
21, 1999)
            

            The cover story by
Michael Lewis relives the enviable rise--and precipitous fall--of Long-Term
Capital. Lewis, a Wall Street convert himself, interviews media hermit and
Long-Term mastermind John Meriwether and his legion of smart "young professors"
who gambled on market hyper-rationality to power their finance strategy (as
Lewis explains, "things people did with money when they were frightened was an
opportunity for more reasonable people to exploit"). What sequence of events
beat 50,000-to-1 odds and crunched Long-Term? Retrospectively, says Lewis, the
Aug. 17 Russian ruble debacle was but the precipitating event; an expanding web
of media and finance market rumors, plus Wall Street sharks out to plunder
Long-Term, ensured the firm's collapse. Now Meriwether and his multimillionaire
troops are back where they started--sentenced to work for a piteous $250,000 at
conventionally dreary Wall Street firms. ... An article profiles Leon
Wieseltier, the crack literary editor of the New Republic . Wieseltier
virtually dropped out of sight after hobnobbing with the literati elite during
his mid-'80s "summit of punditry." But his new hot-selling book,
Kaddish , returns him to visibility.

            

               
                  Time
               
               and Newsweek , Jan. 25
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
19, 1999)
            

            
               Newsweek 's Michael Jordan cover story focuses on off-the-court Jordan. He mostly hangs
out with a group of older, Southern black men, who call him "Jumper" and "Black
Cat." They reveal that he swears a lot, drives like a terror, quizzes his
friends on state capitals (he was a geography major), and viciously holds a
grudge. A sidebar repeats the traditional wisdom that Jordan helped
advertisers become colorblind. ... 
               Time 's cover warns that kids have "Too Much Homework." The article
is full of anecdotes about 11-year-olds who don't finish their schoolwork till
11 p.m. The amount of homework done by 6-year-olds to 9-year-olds has tripled
since 1981. Conclusion: Homework is critical at reinforcing lessons and
building discipline, but sometimes less is more.

            
               Newsweek says
that a whistle-blower could help American cities in their
lawsuits against gun companies. Robert Hass, a former vice president for
marketing at Smith & Wesson, has testified that his company did nothing to
stop the flow of arms to criminals. The company could have monitored
distribution better but didn't because it wanted to keep its hands clean, Hass
has said. ... 
               Time makes yet another contribution to what must be the most tired idea in American
journalism: the story of the middle American town where they're indifferent to
impeachment. Time visits Emporia, Kan. (Why do they always go to
Kansas or Illinois? What's wrong with New Jersey or Oregon?), and finds
that--guess what?!--Kansans care deeply about their local affairs and not at
all about Washington.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , Jan. 25
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
19, 1999)
            

            The cover
story on the Internet stock bubble states the obvious warnings:
Internet stocks are wildly overvalued, and the traditional rules of investing
haven't changed. But it can't quite bring itself to tell investors to sell:
After all, day traders and amateur stock pickers are making a fortune on
the stocks. The only Internet stock that may not be overvalued, according to
U.S. News , is America Online. ... A grim article describes winter life in a northern Russian town
where there is no heat in the schools, the local industry--Soviet-era
gulags--has vanished, most of the able-bodied workers have moved away, and
those who remain have been reduced to hunting for food. ... A
piece warns people receiving monthly disability payments not
to sell them. Some companies pay lump sums of cash to accident victims (and
others receiving annuities) in exchange for their regular payments. This may
seem attractive, but it's almost always a bad deal.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               
                  , Jan. 25
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, Jan.
19, 1999)
            

            A long piece chronicles
the horrific civil war in the Sudan, where 2 million people have died, millions
more have been displaced, and thousands have been enslaved, without any end in
sight. The Muslim fundamentalist government in the north is waging a brutal
campaign against Christian and animist rebels in the south. The government
forces kill prisoners, bomb hospitals and churches, and enslave women. The
United States and most of Africa support the rebels but don't care enough to
intervene. ... An article ponders the Restoration Hardware phenomenon.
The store promotes the notion that its yuppie customers are making the world
better by buying handsome goods made the old-fashioned way. In fact, the
customers are just shopping. (For Timothy Noah's take on the phenomenon, see ""
in 
                  Slate
               .)

         
      
   
