
   
   
      
         
            No. 178: &quot;W-O-M-A-N&quot;

            

               "She was quite a talented girl, and she was cute as a button too. And
being the woman, she did give it the woman's touch." Who said this, about whom,
for doing what?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               Wednesday's question (No. 177)--"Them!":
            

            

               
                  
                     In his inaugural address Tuesday, Texas Gov. George W.
Bush said, "We should celebrate them in festivals, we should enjoy their
traditions in our homes, we should share them with friends."
What?
                  
               
            

            
"Marlboros."-- Katha Pollitt
            

            "The
poor."-- David Rakoff
            

            "The
surviving Branch Davidians."-- Steve Lyle
            

            "Graven
images. Now he'll really never win over the religious right."-- Daniel
Radosh
            

            
"Pornographers in wheelchairs. And if that doesn't sound like kissing up to
someone who's got something on you, I don't know what does."-- Chris
Kelly
            

             

             

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Why is it hard to swallow a plea for tolerance from
Texas?

            Is it the fondness for executions--half of the
nation's last year--the Civil War, the border patrol, the oxymoronic phrase
"compassionate conservatism," the sweaty midnight memories of the Bush-Quayle
administration, that paunch on John Wayne in The Alamo ? Is it just
metropolitan prejudice, the Southern thing but with cattle?

            Lenny Bruce explained
Jack Ruby's actions as essentially lone star: "Texas, they're really concerned
with balls. Got 90-year-old men biting rattle snakes' heads off, and shooting
guns. And a Jew is a tailor there. So Ruby, he figured: If I kill the guy that
killed the president, the Christians'll go wheeeew! What balls he had! See, a
Jew at the end saved everybody. And they'll kiss him and hug him and lift him
on high." But I just can't believe they'll enjoy his traditions in their homes
or share him with their friends.

            
               Mesquite Melting
Pot Answer
            

            Bush embraced the
well-known cultural diversity of Texas. "We should be proud of our various
heritages," he said.

            
               Republican Stars of
Tomorrow Extra
            

            Eager to counter their mean-spirited geriatric
image, the GOP wanted its response to the president's State of the Union
to be delivered by bright, young party stalwarts, but instead ... well, make up
your own joke. And while you're at it, let's meet Steve Largent.

            

               Earned Christian Coalition's 100 percent rating.

               Made People magazine's "50 Most Beautiful People" list.

               Has seen Braveheart 10 times.

               Unembarrassed to hold goofy historical views. "As Rep. Steve Largent
reminded us during the Congressional debate over DOMA [the Defense of Marriage
Act], no society that embraces homosexuality has ever survived."-- Breakpoint With
Chuck Colson, a Christian Perspective on News and Trends
               

               Has a proud heritage of union busting. "As a professional football player,
he'd been physically threatened by other players for refusing to join a
strike."--Matthew Rees, the Weekly Standard
               

               Once faced down a pudgy, middle-aged speaker of the House. "In a firm
voice, he told Gingrich, 'I've been in smaller rooms with bigger people, and I
can't be intimidated.' "--lovesick Matt Rees, ibid.

               Is pleased with traditional male incompetence. "Shares a dingy Capitol Hill
townhouse with (fellow Congressman) Wamp and fellow Oklahoma freshman Tom
Coburn. 'We haven't cooked a single meal in that house,' says Largent."--Thomas
Fields-Meyer, People
               

               Believes God plans NFL rosters. "In a speech following his 1995 induction
into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, he thanked 'my Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ.' "--ibid.

               Is not a wild-eyed, right-wing, radical conservative fruitcake. " 'They
would love to tag me as a wild-eyed, right-wing, radical conservative
fruitcake,' he says, smiling. 'But that's not me. I'm not weird; I'm normal.'
"--Melinda Henneberger, the New York Times
               

            

            
               Race
Results
            

            Top target: The little
brown ones. (And yet the Bartlett's editorial board persists in its
obstinacy.)

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
