
   
   
      
         
            No. 192: &quot;Where It's At&quot;

            

               Fill in the blank in Dr. Orville Gilbert Brim's report on a 10 year
study funded by the MacArthur Foundation: "On balance, the sense we all have is
that ________ is the best place to be."
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Monday's Question
(No. 191)--"Enlistment Drive":
               

               

                  President Clinton, the Pope, the Salvation Army, and NATO are rumored
to be on a list of 118. List of what?
               

               "Those
brave enough to have lunch with Christopher Hitchens."-- Alfa-Betty Olsen
( Charles Star had a similar answer.)

               "Less
lame-ass settings for Le Misanthrope than backstage in London, or
wherever Uma Thurman thinks she is."-- Chris Kelly
               

               
"Oppressors. By the way, I'm a sophomore in college."-- Colleen
Werthmann
               

               "And if
you don't think a person such as the Pope or Bill Clinton can be a setting for
Molière, you obviously haven't seen my modern-dress Scapin, the
Trickster set inside John Ehrlichman's rotting corpse."-- Chris
Kelly
               

               "Former
lovers of the late, great Juliet Prowse."-- Larry Amaros
               

               "They
all play chess by mail with Marilyn vos Savant, and she kicks their
ass."-- Chris Kelly
               

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

               In lieu of the usual wrap-up, here's a little more
from "In the Line of Duty: true life experiences from our customers," a
supplement to the catalog of Gall's Inc., "America's largest supplier to public
safety professionals." It's an excerpt from a story by Charles Webb, M.D., of
the Munson Urgent Care Clinic in Traverse City, Mich.

               "Surprise! No bullet in the pelvis! An abdominal
film also failed to turn up the elusive missile. Where could it be? There was
nothing that could be construed as even a fragment of a bullet. Certainly,
nothing was evident over the pubic bone. Nor was the bone fractured. Bullets
don't just vaporize!

               "While pondering this, his wife remembered that the
paramedics had a lot of difficulty getting his zipper down. She looked at his
pants more closely, noting that the zipper was deformed. Behind the zipper and
in front of the protective cloth panel overlying the zipper, she found the
spent bullet."

               It's Humor in Uniform
1999. And the patient? He's going to be just fine. "He was started on
antibiotics and discharged with follow-up instructions and pain medication."
Happy ending.

               
                  Dynamite
Answer
               

               All are thought to be candidates for the Nobel Peace
Prize.

               Geir Lundestad, director of the Nobel Institute,
confirmed that 85 individuals and 33 organizations have been nominated for the
prize, but he may not reveal particular names.

               Members of all the
world's parliaments, professors of law or history, former laureates, and
members of the Peace Prize Committee may make nominations. The five member
committee meets on Feb. 26 to pare down the nominees to a short list.
International scholars will be chosen to report on those candidates. The winner
named in October will receive about $965,000, a gold medal, a diploma, and the
knowledge that he's done as much for peace as Henry Kissinger.

               
                  Either/Or
Extra:
               

               

                  "If you're a camper, it can be
a treat. They run right over your face when you're in a sleeping bag," says
Gary Davis, a biologist at Channel Islands National Park--referring either to
the Wayans brothers scavenging for gags or to deer mice infested with
hantavirus.

                  "This is a very obedient
crowd. When they were told to come, even if they did not really understand this
issue, they came," said Israeli David Zilbershlag--referring either to writers
contributing to the latest New Yorker theme issue or to demonstrating
ultra-orthodox Jews.

                  "Before Schindler's
List , I found actual events dry and boring," said Steven
Spielberg--referring to the revivifying effects of either mass death or to
non-fiction storytelling.

                  "At our meetings there's
panic," says Lucio Pinetti--referring either to the Republican National
Committee as it contemplates the next elections or to the Italian Vending
Association as it contemplates the massive task of retrofitting his country's
machines to accept euros.

                  "The fundamental question is
would we be better off fighting it together or separately?" said President
Clinton--referring to U.S.-Mexican action against either those pesky Wayans
brothers or drug smugglers.

               

               
                  Common
Denominator
               

               Jerry Falwell's
gaydar.

            

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
