
   
   
      
         
            Holy Sheet

            The Constitution is more
than the supreme law of the land. It's the supreme political weapon. If you
oppose an idea--say, censure of the president or the effort to establish
"findings of fact"--just damn the idea as "unconstitutional" to silence the
opposition. Whatever your opponent's politics, he'll have to . Constitution
worship extends beyond politicians to judges--notably Robert Bork and Chief
Justice William Rehnquist--who embrace the , the belief that we should obey the
Constitution's meaning as intended by its framers.

            The problem with all
this veneration is that Americans quarreled openly about what the Constitution
meant when it was adopted. Few thought it unassailable, and not even its
authors claimed that their views should be fixed for eternity. So how did the
Constitution become sacred? And when did judges decide they must recover its
"original" meaning?

            The Constitution grew out of a convention held in 1787 by a
cabal of elite politicians, including James Madison and Alexander Hamilton, who
decided that the nation's founding document, the Articles of Confederation, was
too weak to hold the . But many citizens eyed the Constitutional Convention of
1787 warily, worrying that a strengthened federal authority would metamorphose
into precisely the sort of tyranny they had just toppled. Patrick Henry said he
"smelled a rat" and stayed home. Such self-selection screened out critics so
that those who gathered agreed on most key questions. Contrary to myth, the men
who would become known as the Founding Fathers spoke for no cross section of
American opinion. One state, Rhode Island, wasn't represented at all.

            The framers built their
Constitution on shaky ground. The Articles of Confederation explicitly stated
that revision required the consent of every state, but the Philadelphia
conventioneers, doubtful they'd achieve unanimity, lowered the threshold to
nine of 13 states--on no authority but their own say-so.

            To placate skeptics, supporters emphasized not the glory of
the new Constitution but its imperfections, promising it would be improved over
time--with the Bill of Rights as a down payment. (Even then, North Carolina and
Rhode Island didn't ratify until after George Washington had been sworn in as
the first president.) In No. 38 of The 
               Federalist Papers --a
series of editorials that Madison, Hamilton, and John Jay wrote to sell the
Constitution--Madison opined: "It is a matter both of wonder and regret, that
those who raise so many objections against the new Constitution, should never
call to mind the defects of that which is to be exchanged for it. It is not
necessary that the former should be perfect; it is sufficient that the latter
is more imperfect." In Federalist 85 , Hamilton added, "Time must bring
it to perfection." Far from sacrosanct, the Constitution was billed as a work
in progress.

            Only after the new
government took over did Americans feel a need to suppress the document's
flaws. Their first government had failed, and it remained uncertain whether the
fragile new one could withstand challenges to its legitimacy. Historians began
to rewrite the saga of America's founding, now casting the Constitution as its
inevitable climax rather than as the sharp turn in the road it really
represented. George Washington's Farewell Address of 1796 began the
practice of using religious language to describe the document, as he shared his
wish that "the Constitution be sacredly maintained." John Quincy Adams'
Inaugural Address 30 years later completed the apotheosis. "Administered
by some of the most eminent men who contributed to its formation," Adams said,
alluding to his own father, "... it has not disappointed the hopes and
aspirations of those illustrious benefactors of their age and nation." He went
on to deliver a veritable paean to the piece of parchment.

            The framers' opinions, now widely considered the keystone
to interpreting the Constitution, traveled a similar path to legitimacy.
Ironically, the doctrine of original intent was itself not part of the
framers' original intent. "As a guide in expounding and applying the provisions
of the Constitution," wrote Madison, the document's primary author, "the
debates and incidental decisions of the Convention can have no authoritative
character." Though he had taken extensive notes throughout the Philadelphia
convention, Madison never relied on them to buttress any constitutional
arguments he made, whether as congressman, secretary of state, or president.
(The notes weren't even published until 1840.) Others shared this aversion to
referring to the convention proceedings because, it was felt, each generation
had to make sense of the Constitution for itself. Similar practices favored by
originalists today, such as appealing to the authority of The

               Federalist Papers .

            When did Supreme Court
justices and other constitutional interpreters began appealing to the framers'
original intent? Historian Leonard Levy argues that only with the Supreme
Court's notorious Dred Scott decision of 1857 was the doctrine of
originalism codified. In that decision--the first in 54 years to rule an act of
Congress unconstitutional--Chief Justice Roger Taney wrote that nothing "should
induce the Court to give the words of the Constitution a more liberal
construction ... than they were intended to bear when the instrument was framed
and adopted." Of course, Dred Scott , which ruled that blacks, whether
slave or free, couldn't be citizens, came to be condemned not just as racist
but as a quintessential example of tortured reasoning in the service of a
judge's personal prejudice--precisely the kind of jurisprudence that
originalism's advocates claim it alone can avoid.

            This argument--that judges only use originalism to dispute
decisions they don't like--is as compelling a reason to distrust originalism as
any historical reason. As Levy notes, when judges use history, it's typically
after they've made up their minds on how they want to rule. "The Court resorts
to history for a quick fix, a substantiation, a confirmation, an illustration,
or a grace note," he writes, "it does not really look for the historical
conditions and meanings of a long time gone ... to decide a case in one way
rather than another. The Court, moreover, cannot engage in the sort of
sustained historical analysis that takes professional historians some years to
accomplish." It would be nice to believe that originalists really apply their
doctrine without first deciding the case on political grounds. And it would
also be nice to believe that every Republican truly thinks censure--and every
Democrat thinks a finding of fact--would be that worst of all possible things,
unconstitutional.

         
      
   
