
   
   
      
         
            Values, Shmalues

            The major premise of the Pieter de Hooch
retrospective in Hartford, Conn., incredibly the first show ever to be devoted
to this Dutch master, is that de Hooch is the supreme painter of Dutch
domesticity. "Most of his art expresses a clear moral point of view," writes
Peter Sutton, director of the Wadsworth Atheneum and the world's leading
authority on de Hooch, "above all of the values of patriarchal Dutch society
and their celebration of domestic virtue." Sutton quotes liberally from the
"flood" of domestic conduct books of the period, including some rhymed couplets
from the wildly popular manual of Jacob Cats, such as (in my translation): "A
man obeys the law of the land; a woman obeys the will of her man." Pictures
such as A Woman Nursing an Infant With a Child (circa 1658-60) are, in
Sutton's view, compendiums of family values. The little girl feeding the dog is
practicing for the nurturing rituals of motherhood. The birdcage above the
contented mother's head may well symbolize, Sutton suggests, the "sweet slavery
of marital love" (another proverb from Cats).

            Little is known of his
life, early or late, and his pictures (37 in the Wadsworth show, carefully
culled from a total of perhaps 170) are the sole evidence of his
preoccupations. Born in 1629 in Rotterdam, de Hooch apprenticed himself to a
Haarlem landscapist called Nicolaes Berchem before making his way to Delft
around 1652. There he married and had several children before changing his base
of operations to the burgeoning city of Amsterdam, where he died in 1684.

            De Hooch's paintings can be easily divided in subject and
style among his three geographical locales, as his own life ascended from
working class to middle class to high bourgeois. In Haarlem, he painted shadowy
lowlife scenes of soldiers and barmaids carousing in vaguely rendered brothels
and dives. In Delft, his art snapped suddenly into focus, with a few figures
deployed in sunlit interiors or courtyards, their architectural surroundings
meticulously evoked with dazzling tricks of perspective. In Amsterdam, his
palette darkened; marble floors replaced earthenware tiles, satin supplanted
homespun, and a dream--it cannot have been more than that for de Hooch--of
luxury reigned.

            The short stay in Delft
resulted in de Hooch's greatest paintings, and these dominate the Hartford
show. It was in Delft that de Hooch mastered the expressive balance of
architectural setting and human character, as in his ambitious A Family in
a Courtyard (circa 1657-60). Visible through the arched entrance of the
Hartford installation, the picture displays many of de Hooch's signature
details: the ubiquitous dogs, the bewilderingly complex perspective and, above
all, the recession down a corridor, often with a door ajar in the distance. In
Swann's Way , Marcel Proust compared the little phrase of the composer
Vinteuil, the "national anthem" of Swann's love for Odette, to one of "those
interiors by Pieter de Hooch which are deepened by the narrow frame of a
half-opened door, in the far distance, of a different color, velvety with the
radiance of some intervening light."

            "Velvety radiance" actually sounds more like Jan Vermeer
(Swann's obsession) than de Hooch, and the precise relationship between the two
painters still elude scholars. No document links them, but shared motifs (a
woman weighing gold, a trompe l'oeil curtain drawn just so) in their
paintings--especially from a magic moment around 1658--suggest an intimacy akin
to such famous partnerships as Vincent Van Gogh and Paul Gauguin, or Pablo
Picasso and Georges Braque. Current critical consensus is that de Hooch was the
innovator, Vermeer the perfecter, while current taste (as evidenced by the
overwhelming attendance at the Vermeer show in Washington three years ago)
prefers Vermeer. De Hooch cannot match the sheer glamour of Vermeer, the
meditative inwardness of Vermeer's women, the pearly mystery of their moods as
they mull over love letters or listen to music.

            If we compare the two
painters on Vermeer's terms--mystery, glamour, serenity, simplicity of
design--de Hooch is the inevitable loser. If we accept the view of de Hooch
advanced by the Hartford show and catalog, as a propagandist for Dutch family
values, it's hard to explain the peculiar hold that his paintings have, or
ought to have, on us. I think the Hartford show overemphasizes de Hooch's
praise of domesticity--clean tiles and contented mothers--while underplaying
his alienation.

            Here's another way to look at de Hooch's pictures: Where
Vermeer is serene and transcendent, de Hooch is edgy and ill at ease. De Hooch,
in marked contrast to Vermeer, is a painter of this world, with all its social
precariousness and unavoidable melancholy. Vermeer's single shaft of luminosity
from window or door evokes an otherworldly reality. De Hooch deploys several
sources of light casting shadows every which way. His windows and doors relieve
the claustrophobia of his interiors, but they imply no other realm. The
enigmatic figure with his back turned to us that we see down so many of de
Hooch's recessions may suggest an escape route, but there's no promise that
where he's headed is any different from here.

            Once we're tuned to this
unsettling frequency in de Hooch's work, we notice how many hints of
confinement and escape there are in his work. All those birdcages may imply
something less comforting than love's "sweet slavery." The dogs prowling
around, stand-ins perhaps for the observant artist, give an unruliness to
family gatherings. Affectionately painted servants in de Hooch's paintings,
such as the housemaid in Woman and Child in an Interior (circa 1658)
handing a mug of beer to an elegantly clad little boy, suggest an affinity with
the lower orders of society. During his Amsterdam period, de Hooch includes
black servants and entertainers in his festive gatherings--another indication
of his sympathy for people on the margins of society.

            De Hooch is at his most appealing when he is poking fun at
the Dutch mania for cleanliness. In the wonderful A Woman Drinking with Two
Men and a Serving Woman (circa 1658), carousers from his drab Rotterdam
pictures have entered the finely nuanced space of his Delft interiors. A
slim-waisted woman, closely resembling the figure down the corridor in A
Courtyard in Delft , raises her cup to two men, one of whom pretends to play
a fiddle with two pipes. Another lovingly rendered serving woman stands by the
mantle, above which hangs a painting of the traditional theme of the education
of the Virgin. Not only does de Hooch play with two ways--secular and
sacred--of "educating virgins," but he deliberately desecrates, with bits of a
smashed pipe and rolling paper, that immaculate expanse of floor.

            After his move to Amsterdam, de Hooch painted ever
more luxurious interiors, probably as bait for wealthy patrons. He set several
pictures in the palatial Amsterdam Town Hall, completed in 1665 and regarded as
the eighth wonder of the world. These pictures--including one depicting a party
held, incongruously, in one of the Town Hall chambers--have a dreamlike aura.
De Hooch's Amsterdam addresses were in the poor outskirts of the city, outside
the town gates, and the Town Hall may have been the only swanky interior he had
access to. At a time when Holland was experiencing a surfeit of
prosperity--what Simon Schama calls its "embarrassment of riches"--de Hooch was
apparently left out in the cold. The last 12 years of his life are a blank. All
we know is that Pieter de Hooch, one of the masters of Dutch painting, was
buried in the cemetery in Amsterdam, his body having been carried directly from
the dolhuys , the house for the insane.

         
      
   
