
   
   
      
         
             Federalize the Schools!

            Let's give President
Clinton credit for attempting, in this darkest hour of his presidency, to
revive a worthwhile if unpopular idea: stronger federal control over the
nation's public schools.

            Clinton's State of
the Union proposal to semi-privatize Social Security may be getting most of
the press, but his plan to penalize states with the loss of federal education
dollars if they fail to enforce strict academic standards was by far the most
interesting policy initiative unveiled in his Tuesday speech. If Clinton sticks
to his rhetorical guns (and hangs onto his job), it could become one of the
most important initiatives of his presidency. If he doesn't, or if the bill
fails to clear a Congress that's sure to be hostile to it, it will rank with
the health care bill as one of the more significant policy disappointments of
his presidency.

            The proposal reaches the table at a time when education
reform has all but disappeared from the national political agenda. Remember
education reform? Back in 1983, a blue-ribbon panel on elementary and
high-school education declared "the nation at risk," and in response states
legislated reforms such as merit pay to boost teacher performance. The cry for
better public schools reached a crescendo in 1989, when George Bush, the
"education president," convened an education summit in Charlottesville, Va.,
which defined national education goals to be reached by the Year 2000. Clinton,
one of the more reform-minded governors at the Charlottesville conference,
tried to establish national standards to help achieve the Charlottesville goals
when he became president. A Clinton-authored grant program inspired by the
conference did become law in 1994. But the standard-setting portion was watered
down by congressional Republicans who perceived it as a liberal plot to create
a national board of education, and by some congressional Democrats who saw
tougher school standards as a threat to the self-esteem of black and Hispanic
students. It was all but gutted after Republicans took over Congress in 1995.
(A special place in hell should be reserved for perpetual Republican
presidential candidate Lamar Alexander, who as education secretary during the
Bush administration promoted national standards only to oppose them when they
were put forth by a Democratic White House.)

            Over the past few years,
education has receded as a subject of national concern. A large part of the
impetus behind the education reform movement had been panic over U.S.
competitiveness in the international economy. Today, of course, the U.S.
position in the world economy is very strong. MIT economist Lester Thurow
recently observed in the New York Times that as recently as 1990 the
United States had only one of the world's 10 most valuable companies. Last
year, it had nine. Unfortunately, the resurgence of U.S. economic dominance
(much of which has less to do with American might than with financial turmoil
in Asia) was not accompanied by much improvement in the performance of U.S.
schools. Education Week recently pronounced the chances were
"practically nil" that the 1989 Charlottesville goals would be met by the
target year of 2000. An accompanying chart shows that 30 percent of fourth-
and eighth-graders met the goals panel's performance standard in reading in
1996, only one statistically insignificant percentage point greater than in
1992; for 12 th -graders, the 36 percent who met the performance
standard was four percentage points less than in 1992. Math achievement
did show significant improvement, especially for fourth- and eighth-graders,
but three-quarters of the fourth-, eighth-, and 12 th -graders
surveyed continued not to meet the goals panel's math performance standard.
High-school seniors were bested by 14 out of 20 surveyed countries on math
achievement, and by 11 out of 20 on science achievement.

            The outlines of Clinton's education proposal are still a
bit vague. They will be sketched in later this year, when the White House
drafts reauthorization language for the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
But at least as conceived at the moment, the plan is to empower the federal
government to withhold funds to state education administrators--roughly 1
percent to 2 percent of the $11 billion that the federal government spends
annually on public elementary, junior high, and high schools through this
law--if the state's schools are not taking steps to end certain harmful
practices. (If the feds got really mad, they could also withhold the actual
funds that go to schools, although that is an unlikely "last resort," according
to Gerald Tirozzi, assistant secretary for elementary and secondary education.)
Among these practices are "social promotion," whereby unqualified students are
kicked up to the next grade level; persistent low academic performance; poor
discipline; and the assignment of teachers to subjects for which they are
unqualified. (This last, aimed mainly at eliminating the issuing of "emergency"
teaching certificates, appears to be a concession to the teachers' unions, but
it will be accompanied by stricter requirements for testing new teachers.) The
plan also requires schools to issue, in addition to report cards on individual
students' performance, report cards on the school's overall academic
performance.

            Howls of protest about
the plan's usurpation of local prerogatives have already begun. Chester Finn, a
senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, who formerly worked in Ronald
Reagan's Department of Education, and who is sympathetic to many of Clinton's
goals, insists, "The states are the constitutional authorities in education."
Such complaints already seem to have cowed the Clinton administration. At a
reporters briefing on the plan earlier this week, White House Domestic Policy
Council Director Bruce Reed said, "I think the headline writer for the New
York Times got it wrong--we're not for U.S. control, we're for state and
local control." Actually, the Times headline, one hopes, got it right:
"Clinton To Urge More U.S. Control on Aid to Schools." Given that the aid in
question comes from the federal government to begin with--and, when combined
with about $9 billion in additional federal spending, accounts for about 6
percent of all money spent on public education from kindergarten through
12 th grade--doesn't the federal government have a
responsibility to make sure the money is well spent? Any state bent on
keeping its "constitutional authority" unmolested is always free to buy back
its sovereignty by refusing federal education aid.

            In fact, the whole notion that education should be purely a
local concern has long reflected Jeffersonian nostalgia more than it has
reality. As Nicholas Lemann observed in the November Atlantic Monthly ,
American public schools are "rhetorically committed to decentralization" but in
fact are "centralized in a patchwork, undeliberate way. We have national
standardized tests, national teachers' unions, national textbook publishers,
and national laws, regulations, and funding programs for schools." And also, he
might well have pointed out, a national economy: Jobs are not parceled out
equally according to school districts. A child being educated in Mississippi
needs to be educated sufficiently to allow him to prosper in Ohio, New Jersey,
or wherever his future employment may be. Sandra Feldman, president of the
American Federation of Teachers, which has lent its support to Clinton's plan,
says, "There has been too great a difference between school districts and
states."

            Will Clinton's plan be radical enough to have much
effect? As Finn rightly points out, a similar but narrower penalty provision in
the 1994 reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act has
never been used; although some states have received warnings, none has lost
funds, as is permitted under the law. There's some real danger that cosmetic
reforms at the state level--more programs, no results--will be enough to stave
off penalties under the new law. Like most major education reforms in recent
years, this one eschews testing of teachers who are already on the job as the
price for union support of testing for new teachers. Finn may be right when he
argues that "to say we're only going to deal with the new ones is to say we'll
solve the problem 20 years from now." (Feldman counters that two-thirds of the
nation's 3 million teachers will be retiring during the next decade.) Another
cause for disappointment is that the Clinton plan will not impose a national
curriculum, which, regrettably, remains beyond the pale in any practical
discussion about education reform because of the ongoing culture wars among
Christian fundamentalists, mainstream educators, and multicultural
leftists.

            Still, bully for Clinton's Hail Mary pass, if that's
what he intends it to be. As a lame-duck president who'll count himself lucky
to inhabit the Oval Office for two more years, this is no time to play it
safe.

         
      
   
