
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Scott's Weed
Killer
            

            Even those of you who never met him, and possibly
didn't appreciate his e-mail missives urging you to subscribe, are going to
miss our retiring publisher, Rogers Weed, if for no other reason than his name.
Where could we possibly find a better named publisher than Rogers Weed? (Now
that he's leaving, the full drama can be revealed: It's actually Alonzo Rogers
Weed.)

            Rogers was publisher of 
                  Slate
                for two
and a half years, in other words almost since the beginning. With business
savvy, personal charm, and Microsoft-style hard-nosed determination, he
mastered the horrors of magazine economics, learned to tolerate the
eccentricities of journalists, and set 
                  Slate
                on the path to
success. He is leaving us to become marketing director of Windows CE, the
Microsoft operating system for pocket computers and other small appliances. We
don't blame him. We're not bitter. The appliances may be small, but the
business is large. At least potentially. And we at 
                  Slate
                are not
ones to sneer at potential. We do like to think that small appliances lack the
glamour and social importance of magazine journalism, but then small appliances
themselves probably feel otherwise. And Rogers will be hanging out with small
appliances from now on, so he can give us a report. Maybe we'll even sign him
up for a "Dialogue" with a PalmPilot.

            Good luck, Rog!

            Our new publisher is Scott Moore, who joins us from
his previous job as advertising director of Expedia, the Microsoft travel site. Scott also has many
fine qualities, and the entire 
                  Slate
                team looks forward to
straining them to the limit.

            Good luck, Scott!

            
               And Don't Call Me
Surly!
            

            Commentators, including

                  Slate
               's own , have accused a few Republicans in Congress of
surliness and worse for boycotting President Clinton's State of the
Union address Tuesday night or for sitting there looking ostentatiously
unenthralled. This is puzzling. It's the Democrats who are supposed to be
pretending that we can conduct business as usual during an impeachment trial.
The Republicans are supposed to be pretending that Bill Clinton has committed
offenses so heinous that he should be the first president ever forcibly evicted
from office. If they really believe this, of 
               course they
shouldn't sit there respectfully and applaud the items they approve of on his
endless wish list. Most Republicans, though, did precisely that, reflecting the
official party line that you can impeach the president and reform Social
Security (and, no doubt, walk and chew gum) at the same time. This may be a
wise strategy for minimizing public annoyance at the whole impeachment thing.
But it makes a mockery of the whole thing too. If congressional Republicans
aren't going to act as if Flytrap is as serious as the result they seek, why
should anyone else?

            
               Inside
Debunker
            

            We'll soon be launching a new department called
"Debunker," noting interesting errors of fact, logic, or mathematics in the
news. The author will be Jonathan Chait, who is conversing with Jodie T. Allen
this week at "." Suggestions are welcome at debunker@slate.com. It's too bad Debunker (someone
suggested we call it "CrapShoot") isn't up and running now, because there were
a couple of nice examples in the State of the Union .

            Take President Clinton's
proposal to invest part of Social Security revenues in the stock market.
Characteristically splitting the difference with conservative Social Security
privatization enthusiasts, he does not propose to let people invest the money
for themselves or to make benefits contingent on how well the investment
performs. These are terrible ideas ( to find out why), but without them the
notion is simply empty.

            There's a pile of money called the Social Security Trust
Fund. (Is there really a pile of money? Well, leave that aside.) Money comes in
through the Social Security (FICA) tax and goes out in Social Security
benefits. Someday, when boomers retire in hordes, more will go out than will
come in. Right now, though, more comes in than goes out, and the excess is
invested in government bonds. The stock market historically has a higher rate
of return than government bonds do. So the argument is that putting some of the
money in stocks will make the trust fund more profitable and avoid, or at least
put off, the day it runs out of money.

            Leaving aside the rate of
return question for a moment, consider the whole transaction. When the trust
fund puts $1 into private markets instead of into government bonds (i.e., the
national debt, which is still here although the annual deficit is not), the
general treasury must then borrow $1 more from those same private markets. If
you believe that the trust fund is an accounting fiction (the government
borrowing from itself, paying itself interest, and writing checks that are
government commitments irrespective of the fund), then the transaction is a
total wash. If you believe that the trust fund exists, then the transaction
amounts to a $1 increase in both the trust fund and the national debt--sort of
a pre-emptive bailout.

            How does the higher rate of return on private stocks change
things? Well, the government is now supposedly borrowing each of these dollars
from the private sector for, say, 4 percent and investing them in the private
sector for a return of, say, 10 percent. Nice deal! Too nice. If arbitrage were
so simple and foolproof, why shouldn't we invest the whole trust fund in
private stocks? And why stop there? Why not issue hundreds of billions in
government bonds and plow the money into Fidelity Magellan? (OK, that would be
irresponsible. So make it an index fund.)

            Come to think of it,
what is wrong with all these people who own government bonds? Don't they
realize that selling a bond is just like issuing one? You get cash, which you
invest in stocks for a higher return. Why aren't the Heritage Foundation, et
al., advocating this? It's the ultimate: privatizing privatization.

            Obviously, there's a catch. Government bonds have a lower
historic return than stocks because stocks are riskier--and the market has
decided exactly how large a premium that risk is worth. People win Nobel Prizes
for figuring out how to minimize the risk of investing in stocks. But even
these geniuses aren't alchemists: They can't make something out of nothing, and
they can't produce a Garrison Keillor financial world where everybody does
above average--or (same thing) where everybody enjoys a risk premium without
taking a risk.

            Ask yourself: If the
government gets more money as a result of investing billions in the private
sector, where does that money come from? Not from higher capital investment:
The net effect of investing $1 and borrowing $1 is zilch. And not, presumably,
from any management improvement because the government owns large chunks of
private companies. Indeed, to ease fears of government meddling, the plan is to
make these investments as passive as possible. Passive investment--money that
settles for an average return--on balance reduces that average, because active
investors, who are constantly acquiring, processing, and acting on information,
make the economy more efficient.

            So the government's windfall, if it exists, would have to
come at the expense of rival private investors. For this to happen, the
government would not merely have to match the average return on stocks but
would have to beat it--regularly, guaranteed, forever. Unlikely--wouldn't you
say?--even if the plan weren't expressly to hit the average. So the
windfall would not come from private investors and would not come from economic
expansion. It also wouldn't come from foreigners or the moon. Conclusion: This
windfall would melt away.

            How? Good ol' supply and
demand. When the government wants to borrow an extra dollar and put it in the
stock market, someone else must be enticed to sell a dollar's worth of stock to
buy government bonds. The interest the government must pay on its borrowing
goes up, and the return it can expect on the stocks it buys goes down (because
it must pay more for the same shares). Since these changes would affect all
government borrowing and investment, not just this particular program, the gap
would not have to close completely for the whole exercise to end up a wash. The
math is beyond us, but we're willing to bet that--on some reasonable
assumptions--that's precisely what happens.

            
               At
Home
            

            A second logical fallacy is easier to explain but
harder to believe. In his Tuesday evening address, Clinton also called for a
tax credit for "stay at home parents." Family values enthusiasts have long
claimed that the tax credit for day care unfairly discriminates against stay at
home moms. Some even maintain that the credit is an exercise in liberal social
engineering, intended to pry women away from their children and into the
workplace. If all it takes is another tax credit to pacify critics of the
original one, Clinton is happy to oblige.

            However, the truth is
that even with the current credit, the tax code discriminates in favor
of women who stay home with the kids and against those who get a
paying job and pay in turn for day care. That's because there's no tax on the
imputed income of taking care of your own kids.

            Now wait, now wait. I told you it was hard to believe. But
before you dismiss it as everything-belongs-to-the-government,
my-goodness-they'll-want-to-tax-farting-next liberal nonsense, consider an
example. Suppose I am taking care of my kids and you are taking care of your
kids. No tax on that. But suppose I pay you to take care of my kids and you pay
me to take care of yours. Suppose the kids are equally adorable and/or
troublesome and we pay each other the same amount. It's a wash, in terms of
effort and cash. But suddenly we both owe taxes.

            When a parent decides to
work for pay and to buy services she might otherwise provide for herself, she
is bringing those services into the money economy, where they are subject to
the same rules as other economic activity. Day care is just one example;
restaurants and prepared food are another. An analogous principle applies to
how you put your money to work. (You'll really hate this one.) If you buy a
house for $100,000, you get to live in it without paying any income tax for the
privilege. But if you bank that $100,000 and use the interest to pay rent, you
have to pay income tax on the interest. (You pay property tax as an owner, of
course, but you pay it implicitly as a renter too.)

            Don't worry, no one is proposing to make you pay a tax on
the implicit $4.95 you paid yourself today to open up a can of tuna fish and
toast two pieces of bread rather than buying a sandwich from the local deli.
And no one is going to tax you on the salary you're not paying yourself for
child care. The purpose of the child care credit is to correct, only partially,
the tax code's prejudice against working parents.

            If you want to give yet another tax break to stay at
home parents because you want to encourage women to stay at home with the kids
or just because you love tax breaks for anything at all, fine. But it's not a
matter of fairness or government neutrality. The opposite, in fact.

         
      
   
