
   
   
      
         
            

            

               The Clintometer is back. Click for the latest update.
            

            

               B
               razil's economic crisis rattled world stock
markets. The Dow Jones industrial average slid nearly 3 percent on Thursday
after Brazil devalued its currency and investors pulled out of the country.
Analysts agree that the underlying problem is Brazil's failure to implement
painful economic reforms and spending cuts. The worst-case scenario is that
Brazil's troubles will spread to the rest of Latin America and the United
States. But on Friday morning, after Brazil stopped trying to prop up its
currency, investors relaxed, and the Dow recovered somewhat. Wednesday's spin
from U.S. and International Monetary Fund officials: Our $41 billion bailout
package to Brazil two months ago saved its economy and stopped the global
financial meltdown. Thursday's U.S.-IMF spin: Don't blame us, it's Brazil's
fault for screwing up its economy again by ignoring our advice. Thursday
night's editorial spin: It's the Russian collapse all over again. Friday
morning's spin: Maybe Brazil can still escape that fate. (1/15/99)
            

            
President
Clinton will propose a 55 cent a pack tax hike on cigarettes to finance
$8 billion a year in extra domestic and military spending. The programs include
long-term health care, after school programs, new cops, and aid to disabled
workers. This comes after the tobacco industry killed last year's legislation,
backed by Clinton, that would have brought the federal government hundreds of
billions of dollars. Now that the states have struck their own settlement deal
with the industry, Clinton is considering whether to extract some of that money
by withholding Medicaid reimbursements to the states. Old spin: Clinton
underestimated the tobacco industry's savvy, resolve, and ruthlessness. New
spin: The tobacco industry underestimated Clinton's savvy, resolve, and
ruthlessness. (1/15/99)
            

            
The 2000
presidential race was shuffled again. On the Republican side, House Budget
Committee Chairman John Kasich, R-Ohio, and former Gov. Lamar Alexander,
R-Tenn., formed exploratory committees, joining Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., and
Sen. Bob Smith, R-N.H. The major headline is still the evidently emerging
candidacy of Elizabeth Dole. She trails Gov. George W. Bush, R-Texas, 42-22 in
the latest national poll of GOP voters, but she edges Bush 31-30 in New
Hampshire, with the other candidates eating their dust. On the Democratic side,
Vice President Gore and Sen. Bill Bradley, D-N.J., have launched their
campaigns, while Sen. Bob Kerrey, D-Neb., and Sen. Paul Wellstone, D-Minn.,
have bowed out. The big Democratic story is that House Minority Leader Dick
Gephardt is reportedly planning to skip the race as well, focusing instead on
winning back the House and becoming speaker. (1/15/99)
            

            

                Michael Jordan
retired. He said he was physically fit but mentally "exhausted." The
media responded with worshipful saturation coverage, reciting his records (six
championships, 10 scoring titles, five Most Valuable Player Awards, and the
highest per-game scoring average ever) and replaying highlights, especially his
final shot, which won last year's championship. The spins, in order of
descending reverence: 1) He was the greatest and most popular athlete of all
time. 2) How fitting that he's going out on top. 3) We'll miss his heroism. 4)
Without him, we're left with players who kick photographers and choke coaches.
5) Without him, we're left with players and owners whose greed has nearly
destroyed the sport. 6) His retirement is final--just like last time. 7)
According to Italy's La Repubblica , "America would willingly take
Clinton's retirement in exchange for Jordan's." (1/13/99)
            

            


               H
               ustler publisher Larry Flynt accused Rep. Bob Barr ,
R-Ga., of adultery and hypocrisy. Barr has been one of the House's most
aggressive prosecutors of President Clinton's misconduct in the Lewinsky
scandal. In an affidavit paid for and released by Flynt, Barr's ex-wife accuses
Barr of having an affair with another woman, whom he has since married. She
also says he knew of her plans to have an abortion and didn't try to dissuade
her. Barr refused to answer questions about the affair during his divorce
hearing. Flynt's spin: Barr is a hypocrite for ducking the questions and then
prosecuting Clinton for evasive testimony about sex. Barr's spins: 1) He
declined to answer questions, whereas Clinton answered them falsely. 2) He
"never suggested, urged, forced, or encouraged anyone to have an abortion." 3)
"Larry Flynt's money has been used in an attempt to drive a wedge between the
mother and father of two wonderful boys." 4) "This is very clearly an effort to
take old documents" and "divert attention" from Clinton's trial. 5) "I'm going
to do the honorable thing and present the case that I've been elected to
present in the Senate." (1/13/99)
            

            
The baseball
Mark McGwire hit for his 70 th home run last season sold for $3
million. The previous record price for a baseball was $126,500. The record
price for a baseball card is $640,000. The cost of the McGwire ball before it
went out of the park was $10. The spins, in order of ascending cynicism: 1)
Isn't it swell that Philip Ozersky, the $30,000 a year medical researcher who
caught the ball, is now a millionaire? 2) The bidding went nuts because
baseball fever is back. 3) The bidding went nuts because rich people have money
to burn. 4) Three million dollars for a baseball makes sense because players
are beginning to get $100 million contracts. 5) Now the fans who caught
McGwire's other home run balls and returned them for free feel like suckers. 6)
Ozersky's spin: "I'm glad I did this. I was just a research scientist; now I'm
a media star." 7) At the same auction, the ball Hank Aaron hit for his
record-setting 755 th career home run drew no bids.
(1/13/99)
            

            

               Egypt 
               and Saudi Arabia called for the overthrow of
Saddam Hussein. First, Saddam urged Arab "masses" to overthrow Arab leaders
"who boast of friendship with the United States." Then Iraqi legislators
accused Saudi Arabia and Kuwait of complicity in the recent U.S.-British
bombing of Iraq and proposed to rescind Iraq's recognition of Kuwaiti
sovereignty. The official Saudi press agency responded by urging an Iraqi
"revolution" against Saddam, and the Egyptians agreed. This is the first
explicit advocacy by Arab governments of Saddam's overthrow. The rosy spin:
Saddam is playing with fire. The sober spin: So are Egypt and Saudi Arabia,
whose governments' moderate, pro-United States policies are unpopular at home.
(1/11/99)
            

            
Attorney General
Janet Reno became the longest-serving attorney general of the
20 th century. The spins: 1) It's amazing, considering she was
President Clinton's haphazard third choice. 2) It's amazing, considering she
oversaw the Waco fiasco barely a month into her tenure. 3) It's amazing,
considering she's done nothing of note in six years. 4) It's amazing,
considering Clinton doesn't trust her. 5) It's unsurprising, since if Clinton
replaced her with somebody he trusted it would look like an attempt to shield
himself from further scrutiny by the Justice Department. 6) It's unsurprising,
since she's served Clinton well by quashing independent counsel investigations
of his scandals. 7) What's amazing is that the press is so bored it's making a
fuss over how long she's been in office. (1/11/99)
            

            
The National
Football League semifinals are set. The Minnesota Vikings will host the
Atlanta Falcons in one bracket. The Denver Broncos will host the New York Jets
in the other. The Vikings-Falcons winner will be the first team to get to the
Super Bowl after playing its home games in an indoor dome. In the on-field
tournament, the Vikings have the NFL's best record this year and set a record
for points scored in a regular season, but the Broncos are the defending champs
and were undefeated until their final three games. However, in the off-field
(sentimental) tournament, the Falcons and Jets have more appealing story lines.
The Falcons were 3-13 two years ago and are inspired by their coach, Dan
Reeves, who had quadruple bypass surgery a month ago. The Jets were 1-15 two
years ago and are one win away from their first Super Bowl since the famous Joe
Namath triumph in 1969. Both teams' story lines are marred by the fact that
their coaches have been to the Super Bowl with other teams.
(1/11/99)
            

         
      
   
