
   
   
      
         
            Killing Them Softly

            Wednesday, several Iraqi
fighter jets zipped into the "no-fly" zone over southern Iraq, encountered U.S.
and British warplanes, and sped away without firing. Rather than pursue the
offenders, the allied U.S. and British pilots rained bombs and missiles on
unrelated Iraqi radar, missile, and communications facilities. This was the
latest chapter in a seven week assault on Iraq's air defenses that has earned
scant media coverage and no outcries in Congress or at the United Nations,
thanks to an ingenious U.S. public relations strategy of spontaneity,
self-defense, and silence.

            Last December, when the
United States and Britain bombed Iraq for four days, television networks
covered the onslaught live. Governments around the world cringed, many
protested, and the bombing had to be halted. Since then, Saddam Hussein has
repeatedly defied the no-fly zones, using his jets, radar, and anti-aircraft
weapons to provoke allied pilots. The conventional wisdom, distilled last week
by the Los Angeles Times , is that Saddam is shrewdly provoking the
allies and that they're taking the bait, engaging in a "war of attrition" that
will "keep world attention focused" on Iraq and leave the United States
"looking like a bully."

            But over the past month and a half, the United States has
learned how to wage war under the guise of ad hoc retaliation. President
Clinton authorized pilots to attack air defense sites unrelated to those that
have threatened their planes. Gen. Anthony Zinni, who commands U.S. forces in
Iraq, told Congress, "We have the authority to react and attack any part of the
air defense system any time there's a threat. And it's not particularly geared
to the cause of the threat." U.S. officials indicate that pilots patrolling the
no-fly zones deliberately pass over predetermined targets, obviously in the
hope that the Iraqis will provoke them. In late January, for example, the
allies noticed that Iraq had moved three anti-ship missile launchers toward the
Persian Gulf. Only after a separate Iraqi battery fired on allied patrol planes
on Feb. 2 did the United States drop a dozen bombs on the anti-ship launchers,
destroying two of them.

            In short, the allies are
beating Saddam at his own game of provocation. "He's provided an opportunity
for us to pick apart his military machine," one U.S. official explained to the
Los Angeles Times . In January alone, allied aircraft patrolling the
no-fly zones dropped some 60 bombs and missiles on Saddam's air defenses,
scoring more hits than they achieved in December's four day campaign. On
background, the Clinton administration admits that its aim is to destroy
Saddam's air defenses, demoralize his generals, and provoke a coup. He is
losing the war of attrition.

            Meanwhile, the world isn't paying attention. Wednesday's
bombing made Page A5 of the New York Times and Page A33 of the
Washington Post (as a wire story). Congressional critics and Arab
governments are silent. The U.N. Security Council is ignoring Iraq's protests.
That's largely because, in contrast to the overhyped December bombardment, U.S.
officials are playing down the recent assaults, justifying them in terms of
self-defense and providing scant information on the damage. "We are responding
in a comprehensive way when [Iraq] threatens our pilots," National Security
Council spokesman P.J. Crowley told the Post . Meanwhile, officials
anonymously concede that the piecemeal retaliatory strategy is designed to
mollify Arab and European leaders. One senior official told the Post ,
"It's a way of pursuing an objective in a way that everyone's comfortable with.
You get things done without rocking any boats. If we started a broad bombing
campaign people would say, 'What provoked this?' "

            None of this implies
that the bombing raids are unjustified. There is broad international agreement
that Saddam is a menace and scofflaw. Furthermore, he can always moot the
allies' self-defense argument by ceasing his provocations. But evidently he's
too dumb and stubborn to restrain himself. Meanwhile, a White House that
couldn't resist staging a pep rally for its impeached president has remained
scrupulously gloat-free about its military success in Iraq. Sometimes the best
spin is no spin at all.

         
      
   
