
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Today's Clintometer:
            

            

               1/22/99 Former Sen. Dale Bumpers, D-Ark., wows the media with
his closing argument in Clinton's defense. Republicans groan at anti-Clinton
televangelist Pat Robertson's admission that the battle to remove Clinton is
"over." Buoyed by Clinton's impressive poll numbers following his widely
acclaimed State of the Union address, Senate Democrats press Republicans
to scrap their plans for witnesses. Chance of removal from
office: 2 percent .

            

               For the complete Clintometer and links to all Slate 's Flytrap
coverage, click .
            

            
A Mexican
judge convicted Raul Salinas , the brother of Mexico's ex-President Carlos
Salinas, of ordering a murder and sentenced him to 50 years in jail. It's the
first time a Mexican court has punished a close relative of a powerful
politician for a major crime. The spins: 1) This proves Mexico's judicial
system is finally becoming honest and independent. 2) Honest? There was no
jury, no interrogation of witnesses in court, and the judge admitted there was
no "direct proof." The supposed evidence was hearsay from biased witnesses.
Salinas had been held in harsh confinement without conviction for years, and
the prosecutor previously assigned to the case had tried to plant a corpse on
Salinas' property to frame him. 3) That's OK, they framed a guilty man.
(1/22/99)
            

            

               C
               onservative Republicans attacked Gov. George W.
Bush , R-Texas. At the Conservative Political Action Conference, Steve
Forbes ridiculed "compassionate conservative" rhetoric, "mushy moderates,"
"mealy-mouthed rhetoric and poll-tested clichés." Former Gov. Lamar Alexander,
R-Tenn., said Bush's "compassionate conservatism" was full of "weasel words."
Conservative activist Gary Bauer called himself a "Reagan Republican," unlike
the 2000 derby's "Bush Republican" (George W.) and "Dole Republican"
(Elizabeth). The conservatives also noted that the Bushes and Doles had lost
the last two presidential elections. The rebuttals from George W. Bush's camp:
1) He's not mushy, he's conservative. 2) The attacks show he's the man to beat.
(For more on the CPAC meeting, click .) (1/22/99)
            

            
The National
Basketball Association opened a wild player-trading session . Having lost
nearly half the season to a labor standoff, the NBA is compressing the trading
and signing period in order to begin the season quickly. This has produced a
mad scramble for players over a period of hours rather than weeks, with stars
hopping from one team to the next. The big stories: 1) With Michael Jordan's
retirement, the Chicago Bulls are dissolving. Scottie Pippen has jumped to
Houston. Dennis Rodman threatened to retire, then said he would play only for
the New York Knicks or Los Angeles Lakers, both of which said they didn't want
him. 2) Star forward Antonio McDyess, who had been traded from Denver to
Phoenix, decided to go back to Denver, then got cold feet amid rumors that he
might go back to Phoenix. 3) Golden State guard Latrell Sprewell, who had
choked his coach, was traded to New York. The cynical spin: The Knicks won't
tolerate a violent old veteran (Rodman), but a violent young prodigy (Sprewell)
is OK. (1/22/99)
            

            
President
Clinton delivered his 
                  State of the Union message . His proposals
included using the federal surplus to bolster Social Security, raising the
minimum wage, and suing tobacco companies. Newspapers noted congressional
Republicans' tepid reactions and carried obligatory references to the "surreal"
juxtaposition of the widely acclaimed speech with Clinton's embarrassing Senate
trial earlier in the day. Republicans oohed and aahed over Clinton's rhetorical
prowess. The New York Times played up remarks from televangelist Pat
Robertson, who said Clinton "hit a home run" and "won" the PR contest and that
the Senate "might as well dismiss this impeachment hearing and get on with
something else, because it's over as far as I'm concerned." Political analysts
praised Clinton's speech because it offered goodies to everyone. Policy
analysts criticized it for the same reason. (1/21/99)
            

            
President
Clinton proposed big changes to Social Security . He proposed 1) to
devote 62 percent of the federal surplus to shore up Social Security; 2) to
invest up to a quarter of the transferred funds in stocks; and 3) to spend
another 11 percent of the surplus to set up voluntary 401(k)-style "Universal
Savings Accounts." Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan applauded the first idea but
shot down the second, on the grounds that making the government a shareholder
in companies would create dangerous conflicts of interest both ways. Other
criticisms: 1) Clinton is using the surplus to avoid proposing benefit cuts,
which will eventually be necessary. 2) The stock investment idea is
nationalization in disguise. 3) Workers, not Social Security administrators,
should get to choose their investments. Pro-Clinton rebuttals: 1) Workers would
squander their money if they chose the investments. 2) By devoting the surplus
to Social Security, Clinton is keeping congressional Republicans and Democrats
from squandering the money on tax cuts and spending, respectively.
(1/21/99)
            

            
The offices of
the American pollster for the leading challenger to Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu were broken into twice in one week. The
burglars targeted disks and files relating to the campaign of Ehud Barak, the
leader of Israel's Labor Party. Meanwhile, in Israel, four Labor Party campaign
officials reported break-ins at their homes, in addition to three previous such
break-ins. The Israeli press is calling it Barakgate, a play on Watergate. In
this analogy, the Nixon character would be Netanyahu. But spokesmen for
Netanyahu's Likud Party have denied involvement, condemned the break-ins, and
threatened to sue those who imply that Likud is responsible.
(1/21/99)
            

            
A new study
indicates that fiber doesn't prevent colon cancer . The study followed
88,000 women for 16 years. The spins: 1) There goes the latest faddish cancer
prevention theory. 2) The study is flawed because it didn't include men. 3) The
study is flawed because it assumes the participants correctly recalled their
dietary habits. 4) Even if fiber doesn't prevent colon cancer, it does prevent
other cancers and heart disease. (1/21/99)
            

            
The Kosovo
crisis erupted again. First, Serb forces massacred 45 ethnic Albanians,
including women and a child. When the American diplomat who supervises the
international peace monitors in Kosovo accused Serb police of the massacre, the
Yugoslav (i.e., Serbian) government denied responsibility (claiming the victims
were rebel fighters) and ordered the diplomat to leave Yugoslavia. Meanwhile,
Yugoslavia refused to let a U.N. war crimes official into the country to
investigate the massacre. Then the Serbs, in defiance of a cease-fire and NATO
and U.S. warnings, shelled the area around the massacre site. When two NATO
generals tried to schedule a meeting to tell Yugoslav President Slobodan
Milosevic to stop the assaults, Yugoslav officials said Milosevic was too busy
to see them. Editorialists agree that Milosevic is a treacherous butcher, but
nobody knows how to stop him without a major bombing campaign, for which Europe
and the United States lack the stomach. (1/19/99)
            

            
The Atlanta
Falcons will meet the Denver Broncos in the Super Bowl. The Falcons upset
the Minnesota Vikings 30-27 after 1) the Vikings' kicker, who hadn't missed a
kick in 122 consecutive attempts, botched a field goal with two minutes
remaining; 2) the Falcons drove back down the field for the tying touchdown in
the closing seconds; and 3) the Falcons drove for the winning field goal in
sudden-death overtime. In the other bracket, the Broncos beat the New York
Jets. The spins: 1) The Super Bowl will be a grudge match between Broncos
quarterback John Elway and former Broncos coach Dan Reeves, who now coaches the
Falcons. 2) No, it'll be a grudge match between Reeves and Broncos coach Mike
Shanahan, whom Reeves fired as the Broncos' offensive coordinator years ago for
"insubordination." 3) The Falcons, who have stunk perennially, are football's
best Cinderella story in years. (1/19/99)
            

            
The American
Medical Association fired the editor of its journal for publishing a study
about oral sex. The 8-year-old study says 59 percent of a sample of college
students think oral sex doesn't constitute "having sex." This coincides
conveniently with President Clinton's view. The AMA executive who fired the
editor accused him of "interjecting [the journal] into a major political
debate" by "publishing that article in the middle of the congressional
proceedings" in order "to extract political leverage." The spins: 1) The editor
published the study to help Clinton. 2) The AMA fired the editor to mollify
congressional Republicans who control legislation on HMOs and Medicare payments
to doctors. 3) Publishing an oral sex article during Clinton's trial is
sensationalism. 4) Actually, it's standard journalistic practice.
(1/19/99)
            

            
Delaware lawyer
Thomas Capano was convicted of murdering his mistress . He is a former
chief counsel to the governor; she was the governor's secretary. The trial had
transfixed the state and attracted national attention for months. Capano
claimed he had dumped the victim's body after his other mistress accidentally
shot her. The jury didn't buy it. Capano's lawyer called the case "O.J. Jr.,
but with the opposite verdict." (1/19/99)
            

         
      
   
