
   
   
      
         
            Panetta: &quot;It's All Dick Morris' Fault&quot;

            In an interview Monday with
the Corriere della Sera of Milan, Italy, Leon Panetta, the former
White House chief of staff, lashed out at former Bill Clinton adviser Dick
Morris and blamed him squarely for Clinton's troubles. Asked if impeachment had
been avoidable, Panetta replied, "Of course. All Clinton needed to do was to
tell the truth at once, instead of listening to the advice of his
double-crossing ex-consultant Dick Morris. It was Morris, immediately after the
scandal exploded a year ago, who explained to Clinton that America would never
forgive him for his escapades with Monica. I had warned Clinton from the
beginning about the bad influence of that man, who cares only about opinion
polls, bends with the wind of the moment, and doesn't give a damn about moral
and political principles."

            Panetta said Clinton is
in a state of enormous anxiety because "he knows he has damaged the historical
inheritance, which he valued more than anything else." His mental equilibrium
is preserved by his powers of work and concentration, and his ability "to
separate problems into categories, choosing which drawer to open at a time. ...
But grief and rage are eating his liver out," Panetta said. In reply to a
question about Hillary, he said that she is "such an inexhaustible source of
inner strength that it was unthinkable to imagine that she could abandon him
just at this most crucial moment." He added, "Nobody knows how the crisis may
have affected their marriage: but those who know the first lady well know that
she is a woman of great strength, with very broad shoulders."

            The same Tammy Wynette qualities cannot be credited to the
ex-wife of British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook, who left her to marry his
diary secretary. In a new book serialized in the London Sunday Times ,
Margaret Cook excoriates Cook as a serial adulterer, liar, and drunk. Britain's
best-selling tabloid, the Sun , made the most of the scandal Monday with
a front-page headline asking "Would YOU sleep with this man?"--complete with
phone numbers that allow readers to offer a "Yes" or "No" response. "Robin Cook
is, frankly, no Brad Pitt," it said. "He has been likened in the past to a
garden gnome and even a prawn. ... And the Sun would dearly love to know
the secret of his pulling power." But in an editorial, the Sun said he
should not be fired because "he performed well over the bombing of Iraq and has
built up a solid relationship with his American opposite number Madeleine
Albright."

            Both the Sun and
the Sunday Times are owned by Rupert Murdoch, who was condemned Monday
in an editorial in the liberal Guardian of London for "intrusion into the sad, sorry lives
of others." It said, "An uncomfortable pattern is beginning to emerge. ... In
Britain, Rupert Murdoch's News International puts politicians on alert, whether
by 'outing' [British Agriculture Secretary] Nick Brown in the News of the
World or dishing the dirt on Robin Cook in the Sunday Times . In the
US, the Murdoch-owned New York Post runs (later disproved) hokum about a
Bill Clinton love-child, as if doing its bit to drive the president from
office."

            The Guardian concluded that "perhaps it's time
Rupert Murdoch was held to account--not for his private life, as he insists on
doing with politicians, but for the poisoning of public life across the globe."
In another Murdoch newspaper, the Times of London, columnist William Rees-Mogg wrote an
op-ed piece Monday comparing the cases of Clinton and Cook. "Cast both stories
as novels, and ask what is the core of the plot," he wrote. "A mature woman is
married to a man who is a perpetual adolescent; he is clever and good with
words, but lacks a sense of self-worth, and relieves his depression with
recurrent affairs of varying importance."

            Tony Blair, back from
vacation to try to weld together his fractured and scandal-riven government,
was mocked in the Christmas issue of the satirical magazine Private Eye for
publishing so many articles in newspapers. Under the spoof headline "Blair wins
'Journalist of the Year' Award," it wrote that the prime minister had
"presented himself with the award for writing the greatest number of articles
in newspapers in the last year." The trend continued this week, not only in
Britain but also abroad. There was a piece in a recent Wall Street
Journal about the launch of the euro, and on Monday there were three more
--one leading the front page of the Irish News of Belfast, one
in Libération
of Paris, and one in La
Stampa of Turin, Italy (the last two defending Britain's participation
with the United States in military action against Iraq).

            In a front-page La Stampa editorial Monday, a former
Italian ambassador to Washington, Boris Biancheri, took issue with Blair and
claimed that Britain's part in the Iraq bombing "had above all the function of
covering up what would have otherwise been an excessively visible American
isolation." He wrote, "To pretend that this was done to strengthen American
confidence in Europe and faith in its credibility is frankly to expect too much
of our credulity."

            In France Sunday,
Le Monde devoted a
full page to the alleged role of UNSCOM as "a toy of the American espionage
services" in Iraq and carried a report from Jerusalem about the "decisive" role
of Israel in eavesdropping on Baghdad. In Israel itself, the daily Ha'aretz led Monday
with a report that former Foreign Minister Moshe Arens, who appointed Benjamin
Netanyahu as his top aide at the Israeli Embassy in Washington in 1982, has
decided to stand against his former protégé for the leadership of the Likud
Party and as its candidate for prime minister in the May elections. He made the
decision after commissioning his own opinion poll, which showed that "Netanyahu
has a credibility problem with nearly half of the Likud Party's members who
will vote in the primaries."

             

         
      
   
