
   
   
      
         
            Andrew Johnson: Saved by a Scoundrel

            Every impeachment junkie
has by now heard the tale of the valiant Edmund Ross, the Republican senator
who in 1868 broke party ranks to acquit the impeached President Andrew Johnson.
Last Sunday's New York Times ran a long paean to Ross, and pundits
left and right sing his praises. The New York Times ' Anthony Lewis, an
anti-impeachment stalwart, endorses the expert judgment of John F. Kennedy, who
wrote in Profiles in Courage (1956) that Ross' "heroic" vote "may well
have preserved ... constitutional government in the United States." Meanwhile,
George Washington University's Jonathan Turley, a devout Clinton foe, recalled
wistfully in a recent Wall Street Journal column that for his "selfless
act," Ross was "shunned, physically assaulted and ruined both politically and
financially." Turley proposes erecting a statue in the Capitol of the otherwise
obscure Kansan.

            Most historians agree
that in voting to acquit Johnson, Ross did the right thing--but, they would
add, for the wrong reasons. (Click for a little more on Johnson's record.)
Those who have researched the issue conclude that, contrary to legend, Ross
acted for motives anything but high-minded. That popular wisdom holds otherwise
testifies not to Ross' integrity but to his talent for self-promotion.

            Edmund Ross was a little-known newspaperman with no
political experience when the governor of Kansas named him to fill a vacant
Senate seat in July 1866. (The incumbent had committed suicide.) Six months
later, Ross won re-election with the financial help--some believe bribes--of a
businessman named Perry Fuller. Once in Washington, the newcomer copied many of
his peers and took up the cause of controlling his state's patronage--then the
coin of politics. With a federal government that was tiny compared with
today's, a senator's power lay largely in deciding who would receive plum jobs
with the postal service or, in the West, the Indian affairs bureau. Hungry for
power, Ross tangled with Kansas' senior senator, Samuel Pomeroy, and its
congressman, Sidney Clarke, eschewing the era's weightier battles over rights
for freed slaves and reconstructing the Union.

            Meanwhile, the Radical
Republicans were impeaching President Johnson, a stubborn Democrat, who was
consistently defying their will on various Reconstruction-related measures.
(For more on the issues surrounding the impeachment, see September 1998's "." )
Observers naturally assumed Ross would vote with his party, but when it became
clear in February 1868 that the Radicals wanted to replace Johnson with
Benjamin Wade of Ohio, the president pro tem of the Senate, Ross began to think
twice. Wade was likely to grant Pomeroy the control over Kansas appointments
that had been Ross'. Wanting neither to alienate his party-mates nor lose his
meal ticket in Johnson, Ross tried to avert a vote altogether. He pressed
Johnson for concessions on certain Reconstruction issues in exchange for his
vote and those of other fence sitters.

            When judgment day came on May 16, Johnson survived by a
vote of 35-19, one shy of the two-thirds needed to convict. Since the other six
pro-Johnson Republicans had declared their intentions before voting, the
ensuing attention focused on the apostasy of Ross, whose vote came as the
biggest surprise. But Ross' vote wasn't the lone act of bravery it was later
made out to be. At least four other senators were prepared to oppose conviction
had their votes been needed--a fact that has been forgotten, maybe, because it
doesn't square with the High Noon portrait of Ross as the man of
principle facing down the mob.

            Ross wasted no time
exploiting Johnson's debt to him. On June 6, he wrote to Johnson to have him
install one of his cronies as Southern superintendent of Indian affairs, and
Johnson agreed to oust his own friend in order to comply. Sensing opportunity,
Ross kept upping the ante, like a Mafia henchman running a protection racket.
("Nice little presidency ya got here--hate to see anything happen to it.") On
June 23, he wrote to Johnson to secure a position for Perry Fuller, his 1867
election sponsor. On July 1, he asked Johnson to make his brother a federal
mail agent. On July 10, he pressed the president for jobs for three more
friends, invoking his impeachment vote, just in case Johnson had forgotten.

            The legend about Ross is correct in that his stand earned
him enemies. Newspapers compared him to Benedict Arnold, Jefferson Davis, and
Judas. And he did lose his re-election bid, as did the other pro-acquittal
Republicans. But so did many anti -Johnson Republicans from the same
states, and there's little evidence to suggest the impeachment votes turned the
elections in any of these cases. All "seven martyrs," as they've been lionized,
stayed Republicans and campaigned for Ulysses S. Grant in 1868. Their troubled
fortunes in the years that followed are most plausibly chalked up to the
turbulent climate of the 1870s, when the makeup of both parties--and of the
country itself--was in constant flux.

            Ross didn't see it that
way. Stung by charges that his vote was bought, he turned the tables on his
accusers and charged them with orchestrating the whole impeachment
campaign so as to get their hands on the controls of patronage. He got the
House to investigate charges of bribery involving his rivals Pomeroy and
Clarke--which in fact turned up some damning evidence against them.

            Till his dying day, Ross continued to paint himself as a
martyr. He wrote numerous articles as well as a book etching his self-serving
version of events into the historical record. In a passage later quoted by
Kennedy, Ross wrote in his 1896 memoir: "I almost literally looked down into my
open grave. Friendships, position, fortune, everything that makes life
desirable to an ambitious man were about to be swept away by the breath of my
mouth, perhaps forever." This grandiose account was adopted almost uncritically
by his biographer, Edward Bumgardner, and then by Kennedy, whose Pulitzer
Prize-winning sampler of hagiographies cemented it in the public mind. (Click
for more on Kennedy's warped portrayal of Ross and the impeachment.)

            Perhaps in an
unconscious act of denial--an inability to face up to his complicated but
altogether human motives for voting as he did--the week after his vote, Ross
wrote to his wife: "This storm of passion will soon pass away, and the people,
the whole people, will thank and bless me for having saved the country by my
single vote from the greatest peril through which it has ever passed, though
none but God can ever know the struggle it has cost me." Of course, in a funny
way, he turned out to be right.

            
               If you skipped the
links while reading the article, click for a fast read on Andrew Johnson's
presidency, and for a summary of JFK's hagiography of Edmund Ross.
            

         
      
   
