
   
   
      
         
             Don't Blame It on Rio ... or Brasilia Either

            Back in the 1980s, a friend
sent me a postcard showing the famous statue of Jesus that overlooks Rio de
Janeiro. Underneath the outstretched arms he had written a caption, "The debt
is this big, and only God can repay it." He was wrong: Brazil eventually
worked its way out of the debt crisis and even became a favorite of foreign
investors. As late as last summer, things still seemed to be going pretty well.
And then the bottom fell out.

            The economic history of
Brazil is one of punctured enthusiasms--of brief episodes of hope followed by
bitter disappointment. From the Amazonian rubber boom to the "Brazilian
miracle" of the 1960s, the country has repeatedly seemed on the verge of an
economic takeoff, only to slide back again into stagnation. Or as an old local
joke has it, Brazil is the country of the future--and always will be.

            But what has happened to Brazil over the last six months is
perhaps the saddest story of all, because this time the punishment seems so
unjustified. Back in September, when the backwash from Russia's crisis forced
Brazil to raise interest rates to almost 50 percent, one Brazilian lamented the
situation: "Brazil has never had such a responsible government; the environment
for business has never been so good; why is this happening to us?" Good
question.

            For the fact is that this
time Brazil has tried very hard to play by the rules. Five years ago it
introduced a new currency, the real, and promised to avoid the inflationary
excesses of the past. Thus far it has delivered, with prices basically stable
over the past year. Like other Latin America countries, Brazil also moved to
free up its markets, privatizing inefficient companies, eliminating import
quotas, lowering tariffs, and so on. While the process of reform has by no
means been completed, the progress is real and substantial.

            Then came Russia. What does Brazil have to do with Russia?
Well, to a certain extent both were attracting money from the same
people--specifically, hedge funds that were borrowing in dollars or yen and
investing in higher-interest real or ruble bonds. When these funds lost money
in Russia, some lenders became nervous and demanded their money back--which
meant the funds had to sell off assets, which meant pulling money out of
Brazil. But the main reason for "contagion" from Russia to Brazil was
psychological: Seeing Russia default on its debt raised fears that Brazil,
which also has large budget deficits, might be risky too. And so capital began
fleeing the country. Initially Brazil tried to support the value of the real by
selling dollars at the official exchange rate; but as its reserves of dollars
declined it supplemented this strategy by raising interest rates to punitive
levels in order to persuade people to keep their money in Brazil. Of course,
these high interest rates also made a recession inevitable.

            Now you might say that
this only shows that countries should not run big budget deficits, that Brazil
needed to get its government accounts under control to restore market
confidence. And that has indeed been the thrust of the government's policy,
agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund. But there is something a bit
funny about Brazil's deficit, if you look at it at all closely. You see, Brazil
is actually running a substantial "primary surplus"--that is, if you do not
count the interest on outstanding debt, tax receipts are larger than spending.
The primary surplus would be even larger than it is if the economy were not
depressed, depressing tax receipts too.

            So the problem must be all that debt Brazil ran up in years
past, right? Well, not exactly: It turns out that Brazil isn't particularly
deep in debt, by the usual measures. The government debt is less than half the
annual GDP, no worse than the ratio for the United States and better than that
of most European countries. What makes Brazil's deficit so large is not the
size of its debt but the very high interest rates it must pay on that
debt--interest rates that are high because of a lack of investor confidence.
And why do investors lack confidence? Because of those big deficits.

            In case you somehow
missed the absurdity of the situation, let me say it again: Investors lack
confidence in Brazil because it has a large budget deficit, which is the result
of high interest rates and a depressed economy, which are the result of
investors' lack of confidence. It's completely circular. If markets were
willing to give the country the benefit of the doubt--if, say, they were
willing to hold Brazilian debt at a real interest rate only twice as high as
that on U.S. bonds--Brazil's budget deficit would not look scary at all.

            So what's the answer? Conventional wisdom, embodied in the
IMF program that Brazil embarked on last fall, was that the way to break the
vicious circle was for Brazil to demonstrate its resolve. And the way to do
that was to make that primary surplus even larger and defend the value of the
currency at all costs--which meant keeping interest rates high. This was
supposed to convince the market that all was well, so eventually interest rates
could come down. The trouble was that all that austerity was a hard sell
politically--especially because the economy was going into a nasty recession
thanks to those high interest rates. I don't think you can blame Brazilian
politicians: How well would our own Congress perform if told that taxes must be
raised and spending slashed in the midst of a recession, with no clear reward
except a possible reduction in speculative pressure, maybe, sometime in the
future?

            What were the
alternatives? Some people--notably Harvard's Jeffrey Sachs--said Brazil should
simply let the real fall without raising interest rates, maybe even cutting
them. Others--such as me--worried this would lead to such a massive devaluation
that inflation would surge, and argued (in the wilderness) for temporary
controls on capital flight.

            Which brings us to the story of the latest crisis. The IMF
program fell apart, predictably, though earlier than most people expected.
Still, on the Friday in January when the real was floated things didn't look
too bad. The currency didn't fall as much as some feared, and the stock market
soared. It looked, in other words, as if Jeff Sachs had been right. Then, over
the weekend, Washington officials convinced Brazil to raise interest rates.
When the interest rate increase was announced, panic set in and the currency
plunged. Instead of helping, in other words, the interest rate increase
apparently simply reinforced the vicious circle.

            Maybe it is still possible to push the reset
button--to rewind the tape to mid-January and recapture that initial optimism.
After firing two central bank heads in close succession, Brazil appointed an
aide to George Soros--an interesting move, particularly given the market action
over the preceding couple of days. (For more on the recent turmoil, click .)
And perhaps the new man can somehow say the magic words, find the formula that
will turn self-fulfilling pessimism into self-fulfilling optimism. But win or
lose, the story is, let us say, not exactly a wonderful advertisement for
either the competence of the IMF or the virtues of the New World Order.

         
      
   
