
   
   
      
         
            The Nixon Analogy

            Should President Clinton be
treated just like President Nixon? This week Republicans argued that he should.
Unfortunately, they failed to get their message straight. Two different
Republican camps advanced the Watergate analogy in two different ways for two
different purposes. One camp's case is more persuasive, but the other's is more
exciting. And Democrats are exploiting the difference.

            The
Process Camp, led by House Judiciary Chairman Henry Hyde, R-Ill., is using the
Watergate analogy to justify procedural rules for the Clinton impeachment
inquiry. Wednesday Hyde released an inquiry resolution, which, he noted,
"follows the Watergate resolution, word for word." In a letter to the House
Judiciary Committee's ranking Democrat, Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., Hyde
proposed that "the model for impeachment" should be "the one that you helped to
write in 1974." Hyde thinks that by following the rules of the Watergate
process, which were approved and administered by Democrats, he can force
Democrats to admit he's conducting the Clinton inquiry fairly.

            The more zealous Substance Camp, led by House Majority Whip
Tom DeLay, R-Texas, is using the Watergate analogy to suggest not just that the
Clinton impeachment process should mirror the Nixon impeachment process but
also that Clinton's offenses are as serious as Nixon's. This camp hopes
constant comparisons between Watergate and the Lewinsky cover-up will cause the
former's gravity to rub off on the latter. If Clinton has done "what Nixon
did," DeLay argued on ABC last weekend, "that is impeachable."

            Democrats can't persuasively
rebut the process analogy. (In 1974, for example, Conyers opposed a preordained
time limit on the Watergate probe. How can Conyers now demand such a limit on
the Lewinsky probe?) So instead, they're conflating it with the substance
analogy. Wednesday, when asked about the Watergate inquiry rules, Conyers
replied, "The notion that this investigation should be open-ended like
Watergate ... is preposterous," because "Watergate involved a wholesale
corruption of government which extended through the FBI, the CIA and other
federal agencies. This matter involves the concealing of a private affair."

            Likewise,
White House Press Secretary Mike McCurry argued, "The facts of Watergate and
the Monica Lewinsky matter are entirely different, and I think most Americans
would readily and quickly agree to that, which is why I went through a little
reminder about the enormity of the crimes committed during the period of
Watergate." According to the New York Times , McCurry arrived "armed for
a question about comparisons to Watergate. He got it, and almost ran out of
breath as he rattled off a lengthy list of the accusations against Nixon,
including that he 'misused the FBI, [and] the Secret Service, to conduct
unlawful wiretapping of American citizens [and] maintained a secret unit in the
White House to violate the constitutional rights of citizens.' After pausing
slightly for air, McCurry added indignantly, 'So there's no parallel
whatsoever.' "

            
Once the process analogy is transformed into
the substance analogy, it loses its force. Yes, substantive analogies can be
drawn between Nixon's offenses and Clinton's, e.g., between the Enemies List
and the FBI files or between the Plumbers and the Bimbo Eruption Team. But the
differences are more striking. In the Lewinsky case--the only case presently
before Congress--the president's objective was sex, not power. The underlying
sins were more personal than political. And the secret tapes and wires were
arranged not by the president but by his enemies and investigators.

            The irony
is that it would have been so much easier to deem Clinton's offenses
impeachable on their own terms. He has plainly lied under oath, for example. If
Congress determines that this constituted perjury (which is somewhat more
technical), then Clinton has committed a felony. Republicans could simply argue
that no felon should be allowed to remain president. Instead, they're holding
Clinton to the impossibly high standard of corruption set by Nixon. If, as
"Henry Hyde recently pledged to do," the House "applies the standard that
emerged in 1974, it will decide that the charges against Clinton do not fall
under the articles of impeachment," argued two Watergate-era Democratic
congressmen in a Times op-ed Thursday. They're right: Clinton's offenses
aren't what the Watergate committee meant by an impeachable offense. But that
comparison isn't what Hyde meant by the Watergate rules, either.

            
               Recent
"Frame Games"
            

            "Just Say No": Why
the Democrats' best strategy is to play defense. (posted Wednesday, Sept.
30, 1998)
            

            "The GOP's Gamble":
Why the Republicans will save Clinton by destroying themselves. (posted
Friday, Sept. 25, 1998)
            

         
      
   
