
   
   
      
         
            Cold Comfort

            Zinc has become the hot new
therapy for the common cold. Once just a weak-selling natural cold remedy
touted in health-food stores, it now sells to millions at pharmacies and
grocery stores. Does it work? Probably not. Does it sell? Ask the big
pharmaceutical companies whose immense resources are nurturing the
all-too-credulous market for unproven alternative medicines.

            Zinc, a
nutrient found in red meat, is known to be essential to growth and
immune-system function. It was not plugged as a cold remedy, however, until
1979, when a Texas city planner, George Eby, became convinced that megadoses of
zinc improved his 3-year-old leukemic daughter's response to chemotherapy and
protected her from colds during treatment. While such anecdotes commonly spur
alternative-medicine fads, Eby took the admirable step of instigating a 1984
clinical trial of zinc lozenges that found the treatment cut the duration of
colds in half.

            
Zinc did not really sell, however, until the
summer of 1996, when the Annals of Internal Medicine published a
Cleveland Clinic study with similar results. Patients showing cold symptoms for
24 hours or less were given either zinc or placebo lozenges. They were
instructed to dissolve one lozenge in their mouths every two hours while awake,
until the symptoms were gone. Symptoms in zinc takers disappeared after 4.4
days, compared with 7.6 days for those in the placebo group. The only problem
was zinc's bitter taste. Eighty percent of patients who got zinc complained of
a bad aftertaste, and 20 percent felt nauseated.

            Still,
the evidence for zinc is equivocal. Eby's initial trial stimulated seven other
studies, and while three found zinc worked, four found it did not. Army
researchers in Tacoma, Wash., recently pooled the zinc data for a comprehensive
"meta-analysis," published last month in the Archives of Internal
Medicine . They found no benefit, concluding, "The evidence for
effectiveness of zinc salts lozenges in reducing the duration of common colds
is still lacking." It is also unknown whether large doses of zinc have toxic
effects in the long run.

            
Some scientists question whether it is even
biologically plausible that zinc could cure colds. Zinc backers propose that
the element's positive charge could a) bind it to viruses, blocking their entry
into the cells along your nasal tract or b) allow it to "clamp" nerves that
stimulate congestion. However, University of Virginia researcher Jack Gwaltney
pointed out that zinc in the saliva does not reach the nasal tract, and
therefore cannot exert any of these effects. Furthermore, the zinc levels
needed to kill cold viruses in the test tube are far higher than anything the
lozenges achieve.

            Gwaltney and others believe
a placebo effect may account for the sporadic positive results from zinc. It is
known that inert substances can alleviate symptoms in colds, asthma, sciatica,
and even congestive heart failure through the power of suggestion alone. This
is not to say the symptoms are just in the mind, but rather that the mind can
generate beneficial biological effects. You might think that the fact that zinc
beat the placebo in the Cleveland Clinic trial would rule out a placebo effect.
But a dummy pill only works as much as you believe in it. Belief can be
affected by many factors, including the drug's appearance (certain pill colors
are more effective than others), form (injections often have a greater effect
than pills), or taste (bitter may seem like better).

            
The zinc trials did not, for example, mask
zinc's bitter, medicine-like flavor. Zinc may work primarily because its
distinctive taste helps convince you that it will. This phenomenon has long
confounded research on vitamin C, which, after almost two-dozen studies, has
not been demonstrated to provide benefit in colds beyond its placebo
effect.

            
Nonetheless, publicity from the Cleveland Clinic trial made the Quigley Corp.'s
Cold-Eeze zinc gluconate lozenges a runaway success. Quigley was a struggling
dietary-supplement company prior to the study: It's stock sold for less than a
dollar a share, and revenues for the first half of 1996 were just under
$175,000. The study's release boosted the stock to $37 a share overnight and
has generated $41 million in revenues in the year since.

            
Subsequent revelations that the trial's lead
researcher owned stock in Quigley raised questions of biased results. On the
day that his article was published, Dr. Michael Macknin sold 9,000 Quigley
shares for $145,000 in profit. During the course of the study, Quigley gave
Macknin options for an additional 10,000 shares. According to the Cleveland
Plain Dealer , however, Macknin denied that this was a payment and said he
received the options after his results had already been compiled.

            Others
soon joined the zinc rush. Nu-Wave Health Product introduced Cold-Rid
sugar-free zinc lozenges. Weider Nutrition International offers Cold-Free zinc
acetate lozenges, which it claims have higher zinc concentrations. There is
zinc gum, zinc spray, even zinc lollipops. And now pharmaceutical giant
Warner-Lambert has jumped in with Hall's Zinc Defense, a lozenge backed by a
national TV-ad campaign.

            
If the zinc story were an isolated anecdote, it
would be merely amusing. Thanks to misinformation unrivaled since the pre-FDA
patent-medicine era, however, alternative therapies have become a $14 billion
market, which is growing by as much as 30 percent annually. And now the big
boys want to cash in. In addition to its zinc pill, this fall, Warner-Lambert
introduced Celestial Seasonings lozenges with echinacea, a purple flower that
herbalists promote without clinical evidence as a cold remedy and
"immune-system enhancer." American Home Products plans to market ginkgo, saw
palmetto, and other herbal products under its Centrum label. SmithKline
recently announced plans for a herbal line that includes ginkgo, saw palmetto,
ginseng, and St. Johnswort.

            As with
zinc, many of these remedies become popular solely on the basis of anecdotes,
testimonials, and equivocal studies. Health-food promoters often cite
traditional use by Native Americans or Chinese herbalists as evidence. These
are terrific grounds for deciding to further test substances culled from
nature--some of which will surely prove valuable. But they are not good reasons
to tout them as cures--or even as safe.

            
What's most worrisome about the entry of the
big pharmaceutical firms is that their large marketing budgets will expand the
respectability of these kinds of low-standard claims. Sure the big companies
are more coy in their pitches--the Hall's Zinc Defense box says zinc "may"
relieve cold symptoms and, in small print, denies making any claim to treating
a health condition--but that only makes the sham more effective.

            So what does work for
colds? Drinking plenty of liquids keeps mucus flowing out of the body and
carrying viruses with it. Trials show that over-the-counter combination
decongestant/antihistamines do help relieve nasal congestion and post-nasal
drip. And when suffering from a bout of miracle-cure claims, try a healthy dose
of skepticism.

         
      
   
