
   
   
      
         
            Cybertests

            The paper-and-pencil
standardized test, that mainstay of meritocracy, soon will join the manual
typewriter, vinyl records, and communism on the scrap heap of the
20 th century. Computerized exams are rapidly replacing it. This
October, business school applicants become the latest to put down their No. 2
pencils and take the Graduate Management Admissions Test on-screen.

            The
technology behind the new tests is remarkable. Using a simple form of
artificial intelligence, the computer selects questions tailored to the
test-taker, shortens the test, and displays results instantly. These changes
make some people nervous, but they are nothing compared to the technology's
uses in medical care. Researchers are employing the same advances in artificial
intelligence to create a computer program that interviews patients. And,
believe it or not, it could make your care better.

            In 1994, nurses became the first to switch from paper to
computer for their national licensing exams. Since then, architects,
pharmacists, stockbrokers, and even electrologists (the hair-removal people)
have made the leap. Aspiring graduate students can already opt to take the
Graduate Record Examination on computer, and the paper GRE will be eliminated
in 1999. Physician exams will likely go micro next year. The SAT, required for
admission by most colleges, will convert in 2003, at least in urban areas.

            Test
makers are switching for several reasons--printing costs are lower for
computerized tests, the technology is there--but especially because of
complaints about the length of the old tests. The paper GRE and GMAT took five
hours; nursing exams, two days. They had to be that long, though, because a
paper test is dumb. It can't select which questions to ask. In order to
identify your exact level of, say, math ability, it must ask dozens of
questions that range from ridiculously easy to sort-of-easy to impossibly hard.
Twenty math questions might suffice to rank you in the top or bottom half of
your cohort, but admissions committees want to know whether you're in the
43 rd , 50 th , or 89 th percentile.

            
The breakthrough came when test designers (or
"psychometricians," as they like to call themselves) programmed computers to
select questions based on your previous answers, just as in "." When you get a
question right, the computer asks a harder one, and an easier one when you get
one wrong. If you're at the 63 rd percentile, you'll get all the easy
ones and miss all the hard ones, so the computer skips most of both groups and
sticks to middle-level questions. That saves time (the new nursing exam takes
less than two hours, on average) and also makes tests more accurate, since the
computer can ask more questions around your level to ensure you really are in
the 63 rd percentile.

            Many
people fear the new tests. Enrollment for the final paper GMAT, given this past
June, jumped 25 percent. Others claim the tests are unfair. (For some typical
complaints, click .) The change in standardized testing is just a mouse step,
however, compared with what intelligent question-asking programs will soon do
for medicine. Using the same technology, researchers are now developing
programs to interview patients and measure, sometimes better than doctors can,
how well treatments are working.

            For some diseases, such as diabetes or high cholesterol,
blood tests and other tools help doctors evaluate and fine-tune treatment.
However, many other diseases--arthritis, urinary trouble, depression--have no
such tests, so doctors had to rely on personal experience to evaluate
treatments. Then a new school of "outcomes researchers" suggested an answer:
Regardless of your disease, they argued, effective treatment should improve
your quality of life. So why not devise a standardized test to measure the
quality of patients' lives?

            A few
years ago, outcomes-research guru John Ware designed such a test, the SF-36.
The test asks things like "Does your health limit you in walking a block?
Several blocks? More than a mile?" (If you're curious about your own SF-36
score, click here.) Questions cover pain, mood, physical function, and the
like. Doctors can give patients the test before and after treatment for almost
any disease. It's no substitute for a doctor's evaluation, but it can show how
you're doing in relation to your own previous condition and to others similarly
treated. Research shows, for example, that patients' SF-36 scores consistently
improve after hip-replacement surgery (for severe arthritis) and prostate
surgery (for trouble urinating) when they're done right.

            
Not all treatments are as dramatic as hip
replacement, however. Medicine often produces subtler results that may be
difficult for a five-minute test like the SF-36 to capture. A change in
arthritis medication may enable a patient to button his shirt, or to play
singles tennis as opposed to doubles. To pick up these changes, a paper test
would have to ask more detailed questions, and soon would become impractically
long. The GRE and GMAT designers showed, however, that computer-tailored tests
might help. So, if a patient answers that he has trouble getting out of bed, a
computer could skip questions about vigorous activity and focus on questions
about ordinary daily activities.

            With
funding from Kaiser Permanente, the HMO giant, Ware is designing just such a
test, a kind of standardized computer/patient interview. He expects that, in
five years, 5 percent to 10 percent of all patients will take the test during
doctor visits. He even envisions giving it at home via Internet TV and, if
patients want, having the computer alert their doctors if the test finds their
condition worsening.

            Ware's group has developed the mental-health segment first.
It asks questions like: "Have you wanted to harm yourself? How often do you
feel downhearted and blue? Have you had a lot of energy?" These alone could
have valuable uses. In preliminary studies, for example, the questions can show
if Prozac is working or not. And the computer test may be better than doctors
at recognizing problems in mentally healthy patients. For instance, the test
can catch when drugs cause slight fatigue or make it harder to enjoy life
fully, as some heart medications can. Doctors often miss these effects. The
test may make them think twice about medicines that take the fun out of
patients' lives.

            In the
future, computers might even make up test questions and conduct personalized
interviews of job applicants, college applicants, and even patients. Will that
be good? Well, any technology can be used for good or ill. If doctors start
using computer interviews as an excuse to talk to patients less, medical care
will deteriorate. Patients could certainly get annoyed by having to take even a
five-minute computer test every time they see a doctor. But artificial
intelligence has enormous potential to make care better. The question is, do we
trust Kaiser to use it that way?

            
               Does
computerization give ETS an unfair advantage? If you missed our link earlier,
click .
            

         
      
   
