
   
   
      
         
            Organ Meat

            Some people clearly are
itching to do it. Consider this classified ad from Ruth Sparrow, a 55-year-old
woman who was $20,000 short for a needed gallbladder operation, which ran in
the May 17, 1997, St. Petersburg Times under "medical supplies":
"KIDNEY--Runs good, Taking offers. $30,000/obo."

            Someone
must have called the newspaper, because it pulled the ad after three days,
noting that organ selling is against federal law. That didn't stop John Curtis,
though. The 63-year-old immigrant from England managed to slip this ad into the
same newspaper on May 10, 1998: "BRITISH MADE Kidney shaped item; will swap for
45' motor/sail boat." When it came out that he was selling one of his kidneys,
the newspaper pulled his ad, too.

            Awful, right? Not at all, some say. Organ selling--click
for more examples--is gaining a respectable fan club. Recently, the Cato
Institute posted an article on its Web site backing organ markets, and former
Delaware Gov. Pete du Pont, policy chairman of the National Center for Policy
Analysis, has endorsed the idea. Its most sophisticated defense, however, comes
from University of Chicago law Professor Richard Epstein.

            Epstein is
pursuing an honorable but difficult mission. He wants to alleviate the enormous
shortage of organs for transplantation. He also wants to bring libertarianism
into medicine, an arena in which few ideologues survive. In his book Mortal
Peril and a recent Wall Street Journal op-ed, he stakes a simple
claim: Even in health care, people should be allowed to do what they wish with
their own bodies (as long as they don't hurt anyone else). And that includes
selling their body parts. It's not just because he believes people have the
right. It's because he thinks giving people that freedom will save lives.

            
It's harder to refute Epstein than you might
think. He is probably right about saving lives. The transplant waiting list
currently includes 55,560 patients, and about four thousand of them will die
waiting. Healthy people could conceivably sell their eyes, some skin, a few
bones, a kidney, a portion of their liver, and even a lung and still survive.
If Epstein's organ market opened for business, patients with the resources
would certainly bid up prices enough to attract sellers. Perhaps, as he says,
charity will even raise money for patients who can't pay the going rate. ("If
you could spare just a couple of dollars, ma'am, we'll have enough to buy
someone a beautiful cornea.")

            Epstein
has a ready response for the arguments. Won't organ selling draw down-and-outs
with lower quality organs? So what, he says. The market will reduce the price
for their organs, testing will weed out unacceptable risks, and the risks will
outweigh the lives saved anyway. What about the risk that some people will be
coerced or will act impulsively? He says that we can do careful screening and
require waiting periods. Aren't people who sell their organs out of desperate
financial need acting involuntarily? No more so than when they stoop to
cleaning bathrooms for minimum wage, he says. You might reply that this isn't
just cleaning out toilet bowls. But, he says, if you're really worried about
exploiting the poor then we can require a minimum income for anyone who sells
their organs.

            Well, I am no philosopher, and I remain unencumbered by
legal training, but I still believe the whole idea is warped. My opposition
stems from exposure to ordinary people as they make decisions about whether to
undergo surgery, to take their medicines, and so on. Libertarians have great
faith that people nearly always make rational choices and that having more
choices can't be bad. But any doctor can tell you that's not true. In medicine,
you come to recognize how unreliable the faculty of reasoning is and how
susceptible it is to subtle forms of exploitation.

            Consider a
common decision faced by patients with asymptomatic carotid stenosis, a
blockage of the carotid artery. These patients have about an 11 percent chance
of a stroke or death in five years. Surgery to remove the blockage carries a 2
percent risk of causing immediate stroke or death, but the five-year risk is
just 5 percent. Patients must decide whether the upfront risk of surgery is
worth cutting their overall risk of having a stroke in half. It's not an easy
task. Each individual must define what's most important in his or her life,
then calculate the best course to meet these goals. I can tell you that a lot
of people fail to reason through the options very well. Even when they
understand their goals clearly, they often pick a choice that runs against
their aims. In academician's terms, they fail to maximize their
self-interest.

            
Studies have shown that the brain has
systematic faults in reasoning, especially when processing risk information
like this. For example, the order in which a doctor presents options can easily
sway people. Also, saying people are fine 98 percent of the time after surgery
can lead patients one way, while saying people experience strokes 2 percent of
the time can lead them in the other direction. Yet there is no right way to
frame the options. Another quirk, as gamblers and con artists know all too
well, is that the brain is not good at weighing small chances of big gains (or
losses) against large chances of small losses (or gains).

            When an
organ seller is trying to decide whether the terrible dangers from kidney
removal or the certain loss of sight from surrendering an eye is worth a sudden
cash infusion, his effort to identify his best interest will be confused by how
the question is framed, by difficulties sorting out the statistical risks, by
the vision of all that money, and many other factors. These vulnerabilities are
easily exploited. But even when not taken advantage of, plenty of people get
serious decisions wrong--enough that we should question libertarian beliefs
that people should do what they want and live with the consequences.

            Some options are so terrible and irrevocable, so unlikely
to be in a person's self-interest, and so open to exploitation and flawed
decision-making that society outlaws them. In human experimentation, for
example, researchers cannot pay volunteers so much that the poor could be
exploited. Rules limit how much blood you can donate or sell at one sitting.
And while we allow people to give a kidney to their child, we do not allow them
to donate their heart. Likewise, hawking an organ would be right for so few, if
any, that permitting the option makes no sense at all.

            Isn't this
paternalism? Yes. Even Epstein seems to recognize we need some when he accepts
laws stopping people from selling themselves into slavery or selling a vital
organ such as their heart. People will argue about where to draw the line. Some
think seat belt laws, for example, go too far. But few would discard laws
against organ selling.

            
Iknow that I could find myself on that
transplant waiting list someday. But I'll take my chances. It's certainly
better than living in a society that allows money to entice people to convert
their own health into a commodity. People can be weak, and money is all too
often the way to their heart.

         
      
   
