
   
   
      
         
            Viagra Creep

            The craziest idea coming
out of the Viagra frenzy is that it's somehow scary and wrong for health
insurers to limit reimbursement for the drug. Many insurers will pay for the
erection wonder pills only for men who are tested by a urologist and proved to
have organic--not psychological--erectile dysfunction. Some insurers are also
limiting the number of pills they will pay for to 10 each month, some even
fewer, and a few none at all.

            
Commentators on talk shows and news programs are incensed by the limits
(although no one yet complains that Medicaid programs are likely to refuse
reimbursement altogether). "Get the insurers out of our bedrooms!" is the
rallying cry. But not so fast. As Dr. Michael O'Leary, a Harvard urologist and
expert on sexual dysfunction, told the Wall Street Journal , "I'm not
convinced that it's a God-given right to have an excellent erection."

            
Viagra is just the latest in the boom of
"quality of life" technologies that aim to enhance--rather than save--lives.
Such treatments as Viagra, Propecia for hair loss, and fertility treatments
pose a distinct problem for insurers. True, the treatments address biologically
caused problems, but ones that are hardly incapacitating. Still, there is no
clear distinction between these disorders and such accepted medical problems as
acne or vitiligo (a disorder of skin pigmentation). If severe enough, even
wrinkling or hair loss can be considered medical problems. So these new drugs
erode accepted distinctions between worrisome abnormalities and the normal
variations of human life. While the drugs push in one direction, the insurers
push in the other.

            Before
Viagra, the hoist and pull mechanics of previous impotence
treatments--inflatable penile implants, Caverject erection injections, and
vacuum devices--made them unattractive to most men, impotent or not. Viagra, by
contrast, is simple and offers discretion. Instead of creating erections on its
own, it amplifies the signals men's bodies already have. (The mechanics of
Viagra have been widely reported. Click for a reminder.) The results in
impotent men are better, longer lasting erections and more satisfying sex.

            
These effects might also occur in perfectly
able men. Some are already seeking the drug in the hope that they can sustain
repeat performances--and they're filing claims. One HMO executive even had a
claim from a young man for a Viagra prescription he had procured to enhance his
wedding-night performance. At the very least, insurers should be allowed to
distinguish these kinds of claims from others.

            Tougher
cases became evident to me during a visit I made to O'Leary's urology clinic.
That afternoon, some two dozen patients ranging from 21 to 86 years of age were
lined up for Viagra. I joined him in seeing a few. Each patient bashfully left
the impotence literature and Playboy magazines in the examining rooms
untouched. (O'Leary is one of the few Americans who can take a tax deduction
for pornography.) But the urologist didn't beat around the bush. "Are you here
for Viagra?" was his opening question to each patient. Everyone replied yes,
seeming relieved to have the doctor raise the subject.

            
One patient, I'll call him George Davis, was
around 60, obese, and hadn't had sex with his wife in over three years because
of difficulty getting erections, a problem almost certainly related to his
diabetes. At some age, most people would say impotence is normal. As many as 30
percent of 65-year-old men and probably over 50 percent of 75-year-olds are
unable to "obtain and/or maintain a satisfactory erection for intercourse."
Before Viagra, many weren't quite ready to accept their decline, but few were
ready to accept the treatments. Sex wasn't important enough. So, insurers were
happy to let men define for themselves whether their impotence was worrisome or
not. Now a little blue pill might do the trick. Davis wasn't sure if he was
willing to pay $10 a pop. But he figured his insurance would cover it, so why
not give it a try? Davis was a walking demonstration of every insurer's
nightmare.

            We don't
think people should have to worry about cost when deciding whether to undergo
treatment for cancer or arthritis. But for the life-enhancing technologies,
there's nothing wrong if insurers say that, at some point, cost should come
into play. If Davis is willing to pay $10 for, say, a bottle of wine but not
for sex, why should the insurer pay? If these expensive new drugs were free,
people would demand amounts out of all proportion to the value they actually
place on them.

            
But quality-of-life drugs have social side
effects that are potentially more troubling than the cost strains. The sneaky
thing about Viagra, for example, is that it's so straightforward it makes
not treating impotence seem as strange as not treating pneumonia. Viagra
lowers the bar on what's medically abnormal. Indeed, all the quality-of-life
drugs do. In a current ad barrage, manufacturers encourage people to "ask your
doctor" about drugs for unsightly nails. The prescription skin cream Renova is
hawked for wrinkles. Bristol-Myers Squibb is testing a drug to reverse sun
damage in skin. And, of course, who can miss the ads for Propecia? All these
drugs treat problems that most people hadn't considered medical before.

            
Insurers will try, as they must, to counter the tendency of quality-of-life
drugs to redefine abnormality upward. But the insurers are fighting an
irresistible force. The drugs play on the inevitable--some say genetic--human
desire for youth and immortality. As each new drug is released on a wave of
hype, insurers will fight the deluge, but patients will clamor, and doctors
will go along.

            
The transformation of normal to abnormal may
start with a pill. But the physician's need for diagnosis is what drives the
process. Since the new quality-of-life drugs can have adverse health effects,
the drugs need to come through physicians. But we don't give out drugs
willy-nilly. We must provide a medical reason--a diagnosis. So we call
impotence "erectile dysfunction," baldness "hypotrichosis," and so on. The
rapid increase in attention-deficit disorder is a striking example of diagnosis
creep. The disorder hardly seemed to exist before the stimulant Ritalin came
along. A core group of kids do have a distinct attention abnormality, but
Ritalin worked so well--it can reduce distractibility even in perfectly normal
children--that now almost any "difficult" child is considered for the diagnosis
and drug. A 1990 study found that 28 percent of children diagnosed with the
disorder didn't actually meet the definition. Nevertheless, the percentage of
children on Ritalin has doubled since then.

            By
giving a patient's condition a medical name, we turn it into a medical
abnormality. That creates a presumption that insurers must pay. It also creates
a presumption that it will be treated. If I write a new diagnosis in a
patient's chart, I have to indicate what I plan to do about it. It'd be
malpractice not to. More than that, once a condition is established as a
diagnosis, society practically treats it as a crime not to do something about
it.

            This raises an ironic prospect. Quality-of-life drugs offer
not just the pleasing possibility that you can do something about
impotence, baldness, blackened toenails. They create a culture in which you
must fight against these conditions--even if it means risking serious
side effects (the anti-fungal drugs for nails can damage the liver, Propecia's
anti-testosterone action can decrease libido). By their sheer effectiveness,
the quality-of-life drugs narrow the range of what society accepts as normal.
In doing so, they may ultimately reduce the quality of life for the many of us
who are less than perfectly endowed.

            
               If you
missed the sidebar on how Viagra works, click .
            

         
      
   
