
   
   
      
         
            Roe vs. Wade

            
               "Frame Game" is an
occasional Slate department based on the premise that who wins in
Washington is often determined by how the issue is framed. The author neither
endorses nor condemns any of the views expressed, however laudatory or
repellent.
            

            The 25 th
anniversary of Roe vs. Wade has arrived, and activists on both sides are
eager to tell you what the debate is all about. It's about 25 years of
struggling to protect babies, say the pro-lifers. It's about 25 years of
defending reproductive freedom, say the pro-choicers.

            Actually,
the debate has been about persuading you what it's about. Most of us are
ambivalent. For example, we may agree with pro-lifers that abortion is wrong
while agreeing with pro-choicers that people are entitled to make their own
reproductive decisions. Where we ultimately come down on the issue--and how the
political war turns out--depends on which group can get us to focus on the
viewpoint we share with them. This debate revolves around three fundamental
axes.

            

               1 Realism vs. idealism: This axis
dominated the debate in the 1970s. Several lines of argument hinge on it.

            
               Legal pragmatism vs. legal
moralism: Pro-lifers regard the law as a moral teacher. Roe
infuriates them in part because they think it teaches kids that abortion is OK.
Conversely, they think that an abortion ban, even if it can't be enforced, will
teach kids that abortion is wrong. Unfortunately for them, the past 25 years
have destroyed the public's faith that government can do much of anything, let
alone improve our morals by passing laws. Nixon resigned a year after
Roe . Then Carter screwed things up. Then Reagan persuaded the country
that the government always screws things up. Now we're more susceptible to the
pro-choice argument that banning abortions would just divert them to the black
market.

            
               Illegal abortions vs.
legal abortions: When abortion was illegal, pro-choicers focused national
attention on the gore and repugnance of coat hangers and back alleys. After
Roe , pro-lifers turned our attention to the gore and repugnance of many
legal abortions. The longer abortion remains legal, the more people read about
casual abortions, the more they forget how gory and repugnant abortion was when
it was illegal. That's why pro-choicers constantly moan that Roe is in
jeopardy and that abortion will soon be banned again. To gain the upper hand,
each side needs to convince you that the other side has the upper hand.

            
               Traditionalism vs.
radicalism: Pro-lifers equate the American way with traditional ideas,
threatened by relativism. Pro-choicers equate the American way with pluralism,
threatened by radical fundamentalism. Pro-lifers had the better of this
argument in the late 1960s and 1970s, because pro-choicers got mixed up with
the sexual revolution and the anti-war movement. Spiro Agnew called Democrats
the party of "acid, amnesty, and abortion." As Roe took root, however,
pro-choicers became defenders of the status quo, and pro-lifers resorted to
protest-movement tactics such as civil disobedience. Nowadays, pro-choicers
call pro-lifers "radicals." The association of abortion rights with tradition
and national stability helped persuade the Supreme Court to reaffirm Roe
in 1992.

            
               Capitalism vs.
socialism: Most pro-choicers make an economically rational argument. A
woman's inability to spare the time or the money to raise a child properly is
an acceptable reason for aborting her pregnancy. Such practical logic helped
draw mainstream civic organizations into the pre- Roe movement to relax
abortion laws. By contrast, many pro-lifers insist that society protect and
sustain life at any cost. They apply this argument to neonatal hospital care,
lifelong disabilities, and assisted suicide, as well as to abortion. Absorbing
this pro-life socialism is a long-term problem for Republicans.

            

               Technology vs. self-restraint: Pro-choicers count on technology to
prevent unwanted consequences of sex. Pro-lifers reply that self-restraint is
the only effective solution. This debate began with birth control in the late
1960s (George Bush earned the nickname "Rubbers" for sponsoring family planning
legislation) and continued through abortion in the 1970s to AIDS in the 1980s.
Today, pro-choicers advertise drugs such as RU-486, Norplant, and Ovral as
solutions to the abortion problem, while pro-lifers depict abortion as a
culture of callousness that drugs can only obscure.

            

               2 Woman vs. fetus: In the 1980s, the
focus of the abortion controversy shifted to the relative rights of the
prospective mother and her potential offspring.

            
               Zoom-out vs. zoom-in:
Ever since Roe , pro-life posters and pamphlets have depicted isolated
fetuses. The public-relations masterstroke of the 1980s, a pro-life film called
The Silent Scream , featured ultrasound pictures of the dismemberment of
a fetus. In the 1990s, pro-lifers have used fetal diagrams to illustrate the
horror of "partial birth" abortions. Pro-choicers point out that these close-up
images literally cut the fetus's context--the woman--out of the picture. They
offer alternative pictures--in the "partial birth" debate, for example, they
used a photo of a woman who had gone through the procedure, surrounded by her
husband and kids--to emphasize the woman's humanity and obscure the fetus.

            
               Equality vs.
motherhood: In the 1970s, pro-choicers attached the abortion issue to the
emerging feminist movement. In the 1980s, this combination proved doubly
vulnerable to the New Right's critique: Women's careers bore the bloodstains of
abortions. Today, feminism remains a bad word, but Republicans have adjusted
their philosophy of motherhood to accommodate women's political power (hence
their attention to "soccer moms"). Accordingly, when pro-lifers advocate
measures that would make clinics give women information designed to dissuade
them from having an abortion, they call these measures "women's right to know"
bills. Conversely, pro-choicers accept the culture of motherhood and accuse
pro-lifers of defiling it by forcing women to bear the offspring not of their
husbands but of their rapists.

            
               Persecution vs. civil
rights: Many women who seek Medicaid-funded abortions are black or
Hispanic. From this, pro-choicers conclude that restrictions on Medicaid-funded
abortions are racist because they target black and Hispanic women. Conversely,
pro-lifers argue that pro-choicers are racists because they use Medicaid, and
abortion, to exterminate black and Hispanic fetuses. Pro-choicers defend the
right to abortion as an extension of the "civil rights" granted to blacks and
women. Pro-lifers reply that "civil rights" should be extended not to women
seeking abortions but to their fetuses, "the most defenseless members of the
human family."

            
               Slope vs. slope: Much
of the debate turns on which issues are associated with abortion. Roe
was based in part on Griswold vs. Connecticut , a 1965 Supreme Court
decision that upheld the right to use contraceptives. By arguing for abortion
rights in the context of birth control, pro-choicers persuaded the court to
treat it as a sexual-privacy issue. In subsequent cases, they have argued that
anti-pregnancy measures (such as high postcoital doses of birth-control pills)
blur the distinction between birth control and abortion. This raises the
specter of a slippery slope toward regulating sex. Recognizing this trap, the
National Right to Life Committee refuses to talk about birth control.
Pro-lifers focus instead on the "partial birth" procedure and discuss abortion
in the context of "life" issues such as assisted suicide. This raises the
specter of a slippery slope toward decriminalizing murder.

            

               Murderer vs. murder: Half of all Americans say that killing a fetus is
murder, but few regard the woman who participates in the killing as a murderer.
In Roe , the Supreme Court skewered Texas for enshrining this
contradiction in law. Nevertheless, each camp continues to exploit one end of
the paradox while ignoring the other. In a 1988 presidential debate, George
Bush portrayed the fetus as a human life but said he hadn't "sorted out the
penalties" for taking it. His pro-choice opponent, Michael Dukakis, ignored the
question of the fetus's humanity and instead accused Bush of threatening to
treat women like criminals for choosing abortion.

            

               3 Who decides vs. what's done: While the
other lines of argument continue, in recent years the question of whose
judgment should count in the abortion decision has come to the fore.

            
               Medicine vs. morality:

               Roe struck down abortion laws in part on the grounds that they
interfered with doctors' professional judgment. This scientific veneer neatly
obscured the ethical dimension of abortion decisions. Over the years,
pro-choicers have continued to invoke medical expertise, particularly by
rigging polls to ask whether "a woman and her doctor" (as opposed to a woman
alone) should be entrusted with the abortion decision. Pro-lifers, seeking to
reassert the priority of morality over medicine, always describe physicians who
terminate pregnancies as "abortionists," not "doctors." They also dismiss
"medical" allowances for late-term abortions, such as "mental health," as
pseudoscientific loopholes that let doctors authorize abortions for any reason.
The medicine/morality argument has become central to several battles of the
1990s. Pro-lifers have driven abortion out of mainstream medical facilities and
into specialized, stigmatized clinics. But in 1993, pro-choicers won passage of
a federal law protecting clinics from obstruction, on the reasoning that
they're legal medical facilities. In 1994, pro-choicers tried to insulate
abortion from moral challenge by enveloping it in the Clinton health-care plan,
but pro-lifers thwarted them. In the "partial birth" debate, faced with
embarrassing data about the nature of late-term abortions and the reasons for
them, pro-choicers again are falling back on the argument that doctors know
best.

            

               Families vs. government: Beginning in the late 1980s, the National
Abortion Rights Action League executed the most important framing maneuver of
the post- Roe era. Guided by pollster Harrison Hickman, NARAL used ads,
candidate manuals, and other media to disseminate a new message: "Who decides?"
This message changed the focus of the abortion debate from the morality of the
choice (e.g., how late into a pregnancy abortions should be allowed, and for
which reasons) to the identity of the chooser. Whereas the medical-expertise
argument is defensively neutral, the "who decides" question is aggressively
political. By rhetorically stacking their side of the question (to include
husbands, doctors, and clergymen, along with women) and defining the other side
as "the government," pro-choicers have won the sympathy of voters who dislike
big government more than they dislike abortion. Throughout the 1990s, this
message has deterred pro-life politicians from trying to ban abortion.

            The "partial birth" abortion
ban, on which Congress will soon vote again, represents a shrewd
countermaneuver by pro-lifers to push the abortion debate away from "who
decides" and back toward "what's done," toward the humanity of the fetus and
the repugnance of legal abortion. Pro-choicers call the ban a cynical ploy
designed to regain political advantage, not to prevent abortions. But is it any
more cynical than liberal pro-choicers campaigning against big government? The
25 years of debate since Roe have settled only one thing: An issue
that's supposed to be all about principle has become all about positioning.

         
      
   
