
   
   
      
         
            The Dead Baby Mystery

            One by one, between 1949 and
1968, each of the 10 children Marie Noe bore died. One was stillborn. One died
at the hospital just after birth. And the others expired at home, just infants,
in their cribs, where Noe said she found them blue and either limp or gasping.
Doctors, including some of the most respected pathologists of the time, could
find no explanation for the eight crib deaths. Indeed, the medical community
came to recognize that thousands of seemingly healthy infants inexplicably died
in their beds each year, and they coined the name Sudden Infant Death Syndrome,
or SIDS, for these cases.

            Eight
unexplained deaths in one family do not sit easily. We expect more from
science, doctors, and cops. On Aug. 4, Philadelphia District Attorney Lynne
Abraham seemingly satisfied our expectations when she cited new medical
evidence to allege that Noe, now 70, had smothered the children with a pillow.
"Science," Abraham told the Associated Press, "has been solving old, unsolved
cases." She charged Noe with eight counts of first degree murder.

            Abraham's claim puzzled me. How did she determine the
deaths were homicide and not SIDS? SIDS is not really a disease but rather the
name we've given to one of the great medical mysteries of our time: Any sudden
infant death that remains unexplained after a complete post-mortem
investigation is defined as SIDS. Typically in SIDS cases, a previously healthy
baby is found dead in bed. No cry is heard from the infant prior to its death.
The child may be found with clenched fists or frothy, blood-stained fluid
issuing from the nose and mouth. Although 90 percent of SIDS deaths occur by
six months of age, older infants can die spontaneously and unexpectedly as
well.

            One early
SIDS theory that babies simply stop breathing has been discredited. Two
suggestive findings are that sleeping on soft bedding and sleeping face down
both increase a baby's risk of sudden death. A successful campaign to get
parents to put babies to bed on their backs or sides has been associated with a
38 percent drop in SIDS deaths over four years. Perhaps SIDS will turn out to
be a kind of freak accident in which babies, unable to turn over, are smothered
by their own bedding. The findings raise questions about how in the world you
could accurately distinguish suffocation from SIDS--especially in the Noe cases
in which the original autopsies showed no marks of force, and the corpses are
probably now nothing but bone. Forensic pathologists and child abuse experts I
contacted confirmed that there is no distinctive autopsy finding or new test
that could distinguish SIDS from homicide by suffocation.

            
So what was the basis for charging Noe? An
official close to the case who requested anonymity admitted that there was no
evidence that supported the charges of homicide. The doctors involved simply
reviewed the old medical evidence. Had the previous pathologists missed
physical signs of suffocation? No, the official said. It appears that the
critical factor was the pattern. Eight deaths in one family was highly
suspicious, and Noe was the only person present when each of the children died.
(The district attorney reopened the Noe cases after a March Philadelphia
magazine story about them.)

            In child
abuse cases, science often can only provide circumstantial evidence.
Occasionally, we doctors find convincing evidence of abuse: cigarette burns,
X-rays showing multiple fractures of varying age, bruises that trace the
outline of a coat hanger, a stockinglike burn suggesting a foot plunged into
and held down in hot liquid. However, most cases do not come with such obvious
signs. In deciding whether to sic the department of social services on a case,
we have only vague indicators to rely upon. For example, according to
guidelines used at Children's Hospital in Boston, any bruise, facial
laceration, or long bone fracture in an infant is considered evidence of
possible abuse. In the end, doctors look for the parents to tell us much more
than any physical evidence can.

            Not long ago, my year-old daughter was playing unsupervised
in an adjacent room when suddenly, she screamed. My wife found her lying on the
ground, her right arm bent midway between the elbow and the wrist as if she had
an unnatural extra joint. As near as we could figure, it seemed she had tried
to climb onto our couch, our 2-year-old son had pushed her over, and her arm
had got caught in the slats. As she fell, the bones of the forearm broke in
two. When I took her to the hospital, I was grilled by three different people
asking me over and over again, "Now, exactly how did this happen?" It was, I
knew, a suspicious story--an unwitnessed fall resulting in a bad fracture. The
doctors were looking, just as I do when I see young trauma victims, for any
inconsistencies or changes in the story. It's easy for parents to feel
self-righteous when doctors ask questions as if they're cops, but as advanced
as medicine has become, questions are still our main diagnostic test for
abuse.

            
Ultimately, I must have allayed any concerns. My daughter got a pink cast, and
I took her home without incident. I couldn't help but think, however, that my
social status played a role in all this. As much as doctors may try to avoid
it, when we decide whether to involve officials in a case, social factors
inevitably play a role. For example, we know that single parents have almost
double the risk of being abusive, poor families almost 16 times the
likelihood. One-third of crack-using mothers are found to abuse or neglect
their children. (Race, by the way, is not a factor.)

            
In the case of Noe, these factors played to her
advantage. She was married, middle-class, respectable. But the fact of eight
deaths must mean something, right? As one coroner involved in the case said,
repeating a maxim that has gained currency among pathologists, "One SIDS death
is a tragedy. Two is a mystery. Three is murder."

            The real answer, however, is
that science can't tell us what happened beyond reasonable doubt. Bucking his
colleagues, Pittsburgh Medical Examiner Cyril Wecht says that multiple SIDS
deaths in one family do not automatically mean murder. The numbers certainly
make the Noe deaths suspicious. After all, experts now believe that losing one
baby to SIDS does not increase the likelihood that a family will lose another.
However, Wecht points out, there have been cases of two and three unexplained
infant deaths in a family in which homicide was ruled highly unlikely. Parents
of SIDS babies have been wrongly accused in the past. And most troubling, as I
said before, we don't know what SIDS is in the first place. We may have lumped
several different diseases together in describing the syndrome. Perhaps
multiple natural deaths in a family are possible.

            Although science often
cannot prove even fatal child abuse, it is not without its power. Confronted
with the medical "proof" of homicide, Noe admitted to suffocating four of her
children. She apparently couldn't recall what had happened to the others. Her
lawyer, however, is questioning the reliability of the confession, obtained
during an all-night interview. He says she will plead innocent to the
charges.

         
      
   
