
   
   
      
         
            Centrists vs. Progressives

            Earlier this month, the
Democratic Leadership Council released a new poll purporting to show that
Democratic voters support the DLC's "centrist" agenda. This is the latest salvo
in a pissing match that's been going on for months between the DLC and its
"progressive" rival, the Campaign for America's Future. The two camps are
battling over the soul of the Democratic Party: Should it become more
conservative, or stand resolutely on the left?

            Not
content to argue on merit, each side has hired a pollster to prove its position
is not only right, but also popular. The CAF has hired Stan Greenberg, one of
the "liberal" consultants who helped elect Clinton in 1992 and then got the
boot after the Democrats lost big in 1994. The DLC has hired Mark Penn, one of
the "moderate" consultants who replaced the "liberals" in 1995 and helped
re-elect Clinton. Pollsters have a whole bag of tricks with which to conduct
contests like this one. Here's how Penn and Greenberg play some of them.

            

               1 Rig the questions. Overt bias, such as
asking people whether they oppose "corporate welfare" or "special rights for
homosexuals," is kid stuff. The true art is to rig the question so deeply that
no one can see it. There are several ways.

            
               Stack
the deck. If you're afraid that people won't deem the benefit of your
proposal to be worth the cost, don't mention the cost. Example: Greenberg asks
people whether they'd like to "create" bonds to improve infrastructure. Better
yet, while ignoring the cost of your proposal, assert the cost of the
alternative. Example: Penn asks, "Do you think it would be better to stay
within the existing [Social Security] system--for example, raise payroll taxes
and cut benefits--or would it be better to move toward more structural changes
to Social Security like letting people control portions of their own retirement
savings?" While neglecting to mention the risks involved in privatization, Penn
defines the alternative as a tax hike and (not or ) a benefit
cut.

            
Dictate the dilemma. If your opponent says his
policy will achieve a popular goal, force people to choose between the policy
and the goal. Example: Penn asks, "Do you think the role of government is to
redistribute existing wealth or to foster conditions that enable everyone to
have a chance to make a higher income?" If you favor opportunity for all, you
have to oppose redistribution. Penn also asks, "Do you think that a better
trade policy would limit our trade with other countries and be protectionist,
or would a better trade policy be more aggressive at opening up markets for our
goods and increasing trade among nations?" If you favor opening foreign
markets, the question forces you to oppose trade restrictions--even though the
best argument for trade restrictions is that they're necessary to pry open
foreign markets.

            
               Skew the spectrum. To
prove that Americans want a government of the center, Penn repeatedly asks
people to choose between a left-wing idea, a right-wing idea, and an idea in
between. Guess which idea wins? This is like being asked how you want your
steak cooked: Most people take the middle option. Much of the dispute between
the DLC and the CAF comes down to whether there are two political choices
(left, right) or three (left, right, center). By offering three alternatives,
the DLC poll begs that question. It certainly doesn't address the reality of
the current two-party system.

            
               Define
the alternative. Greenberg asks people why they voted for Clinton instead
of the Republicans. This causes them to focus on the Republican themes Clinton
rejected (cuts in Medicare, education, and the environment) and overlook the
ones he co-opted (crime, family values, budget-balancing). Penn asks people
about Clinton's differences with old-style Democrats. This causes them to
overlook the traditional Democratic positions they count on Clinton to
defend.

            

               2 Massage the data. Once the survey is
completed, the pollster can organize the results in a way that favors his
client. Since the public favors "moderation" but doesn't agree on what it
entails, the DLC uses the word without defining it: "Do you generally consider
yourself liberal, moderate, or conservative?" In answer, 38 percent of
Democrats say they're moderate, 16 percent conservative, and 36 percent
liberal. From this, Penn concludes, "Most Democrats are moderates and
conservatives." It could equally be concluded that three-quarters of Democrats
are moderates or liberals. But since the DLC has already succeeded in defining
"moderate" as the opposite of "liberal," its spin prevails.

            Rather than let voters decide
whether they're "moderate," Greenberg offers them various policies and sorts
their answers into categories, defining the "moderate" group as narrowly as
possible. People who say they chose Clinton on the basis of his support for
welfare reform, fighting crime, or a balanced budget--31 percent of the
sample--are classified as voting for "moderation." Those who chose Clinton
because he supports Medicare, education, or the environment--59 percent--are
classified as voting for "domestic programs." Greenberg spins this as a 2-to-1
mandate for liberalism. What about the 16 percent who voted for Clinton because
of "his support for family values and parents," or the 8 percent who liked "his
support for tax cuts for college"? Weren't those voters endorsing
"moderation"?

            Penn plays
the same trick in reverse, by inventing "Suburban Values" Democrats, who care
primarily about "better, safer schools, safer streets, and the need for
strengthening traditional family values." Penn distinguishes these "values
issues"--including family leave--from the "economic issues" that supposedly
preoccupy liberals. These "Suburban Values" voters double the DLC's
constituency from 28 percent to 56 percent of the party. But aren't education,
family leave, and the breakdown of community "economic" issues? And are voters
who worry about such issues really rejecting government and liberalism? Penn's
taxonomy cheats the "liberal" vote just as Greenberg's taxonomy cheats the
"moderate" vote.

            

               3 Grease the presentation. Any point you
failed to win by rigging the questions and categories can be cleaned up in the
"executive summary" (the pollster's spin) and the press release and news
conference (the client's spin on the pollster's spin). Greenberg's survey, for
example, asks people who voted for Clinton to pick from a list of possible
reasons why they did so. Thirty percent cite, among other reasons, "his support
for education." In the CAF press release, this magically becomes a mandate for
"increased spending on education."

            When the data contradict his
theory, a pollster knows what he must do: Dump the data. Penn and the DLC have
been peddling the theory that Clinton did better than congressional Democrats
in 1996 because he was less liberal. So in his survey, Penn asks people whether
they regard Clinton and the congressional Democrats as liberal, moderate, or
conservative. Surprise! More people apply the term "liberal" to Clinton than to
the Democrats, and more apply the term "conservative" to the Democrats than to
Clinton. This unfortunate result goes unmentioned in Penn's summary, and the
DLC's press release begins as though it never happened: "Democratic rank and
file voters are following President Clinton into the vital center of the
national debate, according to a new survey." The next day's Los Angeles
Times goes with the DLC spin: "Clinton's Centrist Path: Big Draw Among
Party Faithful."

            The point isn't that polls
are dishonest. The point is that they disguise argument as science. Which has a
curious--and perhaps salutary--effect. Politicians skew their politics to suit
the polls. Meanwhile, their pollsters skew the polls to suit their clients'
politics. One profession's sophistry foils the other's cowardice. Just don't
tell them.

         
      
   
