
   
   
      
         
            The Buck Stops With the Doc

            When medical practice goes
wrong, who is to blame? The traditional answer in journalism has been
unambiguous: the doctor. If the press found out a person had died from improper
care or had had the wrong leg cut off, the reaction was predictable. A clamor
went up for the incompetent physician's head--or at least his license. And
doctors everywhere cringed. There but for the grace of God go I, each of us
would say. For all of us make terrible mistakes. Only the unlucky few are
publicly exposed.

            So I've
been intrigued by the increasingly popular alternative explanation--"the system
did it." In many cases, this is the right way to go. Bad systems are more often
at fault than bad doctors. I worry, however, that we have already begun to take
this explanation too far--so far that we are introducing a dangerous murkiness
into the question of who is ultimately in charge when it comes to taking care
of patients.

            Take the recent horror story in which Christopher Sercye, a
15-year-old gunshot victim, lay bleeding to death 35 feet from the door of a
Chicago hospital while the staff refused to help, citing hospital policy
prohibiting workers from leaving the emergency room. (If you somehow missed or
have forgotten the details, click .) The case provoked a national outcry. This
time the white-hot light of publicity focused blame more on the administrators
than on individual caregivers. City, state, and national officials demanded to
know how a medical facility could maintain such an appalling policy. In an
unusual step, President Clinton personally announced that the policy was so
outrageous that he would seek to have the Ravenswood Hospital Medical Center
expelled from Medicare.

            In this particular case,
however, the impulse to hold the CEO more responsible than the doctors seems
wrong. What shocked me was not so much the hospital's policy as the fact that
doctors and nurses would stick by the rules rather than help a person in
desperate need. News organizations demanded an explanation from the hospital
CEO, John Blair, but I could find no reports that mentioned so much as the name
of a staffer who had refused to help.

            This was
not an isolated instance of medical personnel providing bad care in obeisance
to a policy. The Los Angeles Times recently uncovered several cases in
which doctors at Northridge Hospital in Southern California refused to provide
epidural anesthesia during childbirth to women on Medicaid unless they anted up
$400 on the spot. The reason? It was "hospital policy," patients were told. One
patient offered credit cards, a check, and finally had her mother wire in the
money, but the epidural was denied. The cash hadn't arrived in time.

            
Certainly, these policies deserve scrutiny. But
the real issue here is who, ultimately, is in charge of patient care. By
putting all the blame on the rule makers, the public is implicitly accepting
that sometimes the rule makers are in charge instead of the caregivers. That is
a very recent phenomenon, and it should be resisted.

            Hospital
policies, after all, are not federal laws. They do not demand slavish devotion.
In odd cases, rules adopted for the best of reasons can make for bad medicine.
And real life is full of odd cases. I remember one not long ago when, late at
night, a patient came into my hospital at death's door because of a rupturing
abdominal aneurysm. Understandably, our hospital forbids residents to start
operations without an attending surgeon present. But none was around, and this
guy would have died waiting. So we didn't hesitate to break the rules and
operate on our own. It was his only chance.

            Ravenswood's policy may also have been well intentioned.
According to a hospital spokesman, it is an old policy maintained by most
hospitals to make clear that staff should not be expected to sacrifice the care
of sick patients in the ER to go hither and yon. But the dying boy presented a
case where the staff should have broken that rule. (Indeed, the Chicago
Tribune reported that a year earlier, an emergency worker at a partner
hospital with the same policy had done just that. He ran outside to help a
woman suffering a brain hemorrhage in her car.)

            As for
just plain barbaric policies, like the one at Northridge Hospital, I see no way
in which the doctors who follow them are not ultimately culpable. To say they
were obeying an administrator's instructions is not even the slightest defense.
Patients still can (and should) insist on holding doctors responsible for
providing proper care.

            
The managed care debate presents this issue in
a slightly different context. The recent clamor in the press and among some
politicians to allow patients to sue insurers for medical malpractice makes it
sound as if we are going in the wrong direction here, too. But the semantics
are important. The laws under consideration would not actually make insurers
liable for malpractice . Instead, they would make it easier to sue
insurers for failing to pay for proper care. I'm all for giving patients
a fair chance to contest improper refusals of payment, but we should not lapse
into calling such refusals malpractice. Just because an insurer won't pay for a
treatment doesn't free a doctor from providing it. Essentially, a patient in
this position is uninsured. And doctors are still ethically obliged to offer
appropriate care to uninsured patients in need.

            This might sound like I'm
calling for a return to olden times, when medical decisions were nobody's
business except the doctor's and the patient's. I'm not. That fragmented system
without oversight had its problems: deviance (not all doctors provided good
care) and cost (the doctors drove up the bills). Hospitals, government
insurers, and private insurers have stepped in with standard guidelines for
care, review of medical decisions, and changes in how doctors are paid. Much of
this systematization of care has clearly been to public benefit. But not all of
it has, and not all of it will be.

            At the
margin, we doctors have found ourselves being asked to do things that make us
queasy. A new guideline, for example, may tell us to send heart surgery
patients home earlier. It forces us to justify doing otherwise. It's a big pain
in the butt. But it is not a command, and we should not let it become one.
Perhaps the previous way was based on nothing more than fusty old habit, and
being forced to rethink it is good for us. However, if I know the new way is
inappropriate, I cannot be permitted to cave. In Chicago and in Northridge, the
doctors should have known that blindly following policy was bad. The buck still
stops with them.

            
               Missed
our link to the sidebar recapping the Ravenswood case? Click .
            

         
      
   
