
   
   
      
         
            Microsoft Monopoly?

            
               "Frame Game" is an
occasional Slate department based on the premise that who wins in
Washington is often determined by how the issue is framed. The author neither
endorses nor condemns any of the views expressed, however laudatory or
repellent.
            

            On Jan.
13, a federal judge will resume hearing the Justice Department's antitrust case
against Microsoft. DOJ accuses Microsoft of violating a consent decree by
leveraging Windows' 90-percent share of the computer-operating-system market to
corner the browser market with its Internet Explorer. Microsoft says it's
"integrating" IE into Windows. DOJ says that the two products are separate and
that Microsoft is illegally forcing computer makers to load their machines with
IE--first by threatening to deny them Windows, then by artificially repackaging
the two programs as one. Microsoft faces similar charges from competitors,
consumer activist Ralph Nader, and possibly several state attorneys general.
The press has turned against Microsoft, even comparing it to the tobacco
industry. If Microsoft is so shrewd and powerful, why isn't it winning this
public-relations game? Because it's overplaying tactics and neglecting strategy
on several fronts:

            1 Power vs. beneficence. Is Microsoft too powerful?
Bill Gates, like Bill Clinton, answers ideology with economic practicality,
touting the country's prosperity and taking as much credit as he can. Microsoft
isn't committing the sins monopolies are supposed to commit, Gates argues.
Windows is cheap, and IE is free. Lots of companies are selling software, their
products are rapidly improving, and prices are falling. Thanks to high-tech
capitalism, the economy is booming.

            This
change of subject has earned some good press: News stories have quoted analysts
and consumers vouching for the quality and low price of Microsoft products.
"Microsoft's Strategy Has Given Users Some Benefits," proclaimed a New York
Times headline over a laudatory Associated Press story. But whereas
changing the subject usually works in politics, it's not as effective in legal
fights. The court's proceedings keep the media spotlight on the question of
monopoly.

            
2 Big government vs. big business. A
well-known law of politics says that if the debate is about you, you'll lose.
For that reason, Microsoft says the antitrust case is about governmental power.
The company portrays Big Brother as the principal threat not just to Microsoft,
but to free enterprise, consumer choice, and prosperity. Gates calls the choice
between private and government control of software "the question at the center"
of the case. Nathan Myhrvold, Microsoft's chief technology officer, conjures up
the specter of a "Federal Bureau of Operating Systems." Conservative pundits
have flocked to this argument.

            DOJ antitrust chief Joel
Klein offers the standard liberal rejoinder: Big business, too, can threaten
consumer choice, and government is the only institution capable of stopping it.
Klein has repeatedly described Microsoft as the enemy of "choice," declaring,
"No consumer should be denied the browser of their choice because Microsoft
made their computer vendor an offer they couldn't refuse."

            Klein will have a hard time
persuading the public that Microsoft is coercive, because the company exerts
its market-share leverage subtly: It distributes IE free, negotiates with
computer manufacturers to make IE the default browser on their machines, and
links Windows to software and services it wants to promote. These methods allow
Microsoft to argue that computer makers can add other browsers (such as
Netscape's popular Navigator) and that users remain free to switch to them.

            But Larry
Lessig, the legal scholar enlisted by the court to sort out the case, is an
expert on subtle methods by which software providers can steer consumer
choices. He has argued that the cyberindustry's hidden "tyranny of code" can be
more pernicious than the clumsy, overreaching state. These views bode ill for
Microsoft.

            3 Public vs. private interest. While Microsoft
started with the ideological advantage of not being the government, DOJ started
with the ethical advantage of not being a private interest. Microsoft appears
to have evened the score by persuading the press to link DOJ, Nader, and
anti-Microsoft politicians to the company's competitors. When Sen. Orrin Hatch,
R-Utah, held hearings on Microsoft's alleged misdeeds, newspapers noted that
Novell, a rival of Microsoft, is a major employer in his state. The New York
Times observed that at Nader's anti-Microsoft conference, "The panels were
full of Microsoft competitors and lawyers representing them." AP reported that
Netscape was "using" the antitrust case in a marketing campaign.

            Microsoft
has used the image of its competitors' political influence to portray its own
lobbying as "self-defense." Microsoft spokesmen simultaneously profess 1)
"reluctance" at being forced to stoop to lobbying and 2) chagrin at having done
so "belatedly." Newspapers have bought both these spins, alternately praising
and criticizing Microsoft's virginity, but accepting it as a given. (For

                  Slate
               's view, see Jacob Weisberg's "Dear
Microsoft.")

            
4 Browser market vs. operating-system
market. Microsoft's critics point out that Windows has 90 percent of the OS
market. Conversely, Microsoft points out that IE has less than 40 percent of
the browser market, compared with Netscape's 60 percent. On this basis,
attorney Charles (Rick) Rule, who has been retained to represent Microsoft,
accuses DOJ of suing "a company with a smaller share of sales in order to
protect the ability of its dominant competitor to secure an exclusive." (For
Rule's views on the case see "The Case Against the Case Against Microsoft" in

                  Slate
               .) But distinguishing between the two markets undermines
Microsoft's thesis that IE and Windows are "integrated."

             

            5 Technology vs. marketing. Microsoft says its
linkage of IE to Windows yields "improved features and functionality." DOJ says
the linkage is a marketing ploy, not a technical necessity. Rule concedes that
"suppliers and consumers will gravitate toward the most widely disseminated
standard, regardless of whether it is technically the best." Therefore,
Microsoft owes its success to "the good fortune of being the pre-eminent
operating system on IBM PCs." Gates calls the Windows-IE marriage the latest
"incremental step" in Microsoft's "long history" of absorbing "separate
offerings" (e.g., disk compression and networking) into Windows.

            Critics
interpret this kind of standardization and integration, for all their benefits
to consumers, as triumphs of marketing, not technology. On this view, Microsoft
buys out potential rivals or starves them to death by stealing their
innovations and adding them to Windows. It doesn't create breakthroughs; it
absorbs them. The company's recent buyouts of WebTV and Hotmail, the leading
purveyors of TV Internet service and free e-mail, exacerbate this complaint. If
DOJ persuades the court that Windows-IE integration is just one in a series of
Microsoft marketing schemes, the company could lose an image war bigger than
the courtroom battle.

            
6 Platform vs. tollbooth. Much of the
debate turns on a contest of metaphors. Gates calls Windows a "stable," "open,
integrated platform" that gives software and hardware innovators "the certainty
they need to build products." The metaphor emphasizes stability's virtues
(facilitating "openness" and "innovation") over its drawbacks (stifling
competition). By sundering IE from Windows, Gates suggests, the government
would fracture the platform and pull down the whole house of cards.
Pro-Microsoft programmers dramatized this point by staging a press conference
at Nader's forum, crediting their livelihoods and the nation's "small business
development" to the Microsoft platform. The press ate it up.

            
Microsoft's enemies counter with less flattering analogies. Citing a Microsoft
memo, they accuse the company of plotting to parlay its primacy into a
"vig"--i.e., a bookie's percentage--on Internet transactions. Nader and others
foresee Microsoft "tollbooths" at entry ramps to the information superhighway.
(For Nader's views see "The Microsoft Menace" in 
                  Slate
               .) Gates replies that
Windows PCs enable entrepreneurs and artists to reach audiences over the
Internet, cutting out the fee-charging middlemen who control traditional media.
To which critics rejoin: Why not cut out Microsoft, too?

            7 Desktop vs. network. An alliance of
competitors--Sun, Oracle, Netscape, Novell, and IBM--is developing machines and
a universal programming language (Java) based on the network, an alternative
platform to the desktop. Microsoft wants to make sure that the desktop (where
Windows holds sway) becomes the platform for the network, not the other way
around. That's why network advocates have accused Microsoft of tinkering with
Java to frustrate collaboration between Windows-based and non-Windows-based
computers. It's also why Microsoft is marketing a browser, folding it into
Windows, and battling the antitrust suit. "While the Justice Department is
claiming that Windows should not include browsing capabilities," Gates
protests, "Microsoft's competitors are busy incorporating basic operating
system services ... into their browsers."

            8 Danger vs. dinosaur. Faced with two challenges--the
antitrust case and the network-paradigm alliance--Microsoft is pitting the
latter against the former. If the network paradigm is as mature and superior as
proponents claim, asks Gates, how can the government deem Microsoft an
entrenched monopoly? In fact, Gates argues, the network-paradigm assault makes
incorporation of a browser "critical for Windows to stay competitive." Windows
must eat the browser market or be eaten.

            9 Technicalities vs. tone. Microsoft's
argumentativeness has disastrously overshadowed its arguments. Its lawyers have
sought the removal of Lessig and the judge. They've derided a government brief
as proof that "poorly informed lawyers have no vocation for software design."
When instructed by the judge to give computer makers an alternative to
packaging IE with Windows, Microsoft made the alternatives unworkable or
undesirable. This conduct has embarrassed the company's supporters and
triggered an avalanche of editorials calling Microsoft rich, ruthless, sneaky,
petty, arrogant, and stubborn.

            Some reports indicate that
this tone-deaf performance has already irked the judge and has convinced him to
enjoin Microsoft's marketing practices on the grounds that the company can't be
trusted to regulate itself. Even if Microsoft wins the courtroom battle, it
risks losing the war for consumers' hearts and minds. The rap on nerds has
always been that they're technically brilliant but socially inept. Microsoft's
behavior has done little to prove otherwise.

         
      
   
