
   
   
      
         
            Weld vs. Helms

            Bill Weld, the former
Republican governor of Massachusetts, wants the Senate to consider his
nomination to be U.S. ambassador to Mexico. Jesse Helms, the Republican
chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, wants to stop him. Last
week, Weld quit his job to go to Washington to lobby for his cause. Through
surrogates, interviews, and press conferences, the two men are waging a war of
words. This war isn't bound by strict rules of logic, but it's more
intellectual than an arm-twisting match. It's a contest of conceptualization
and persuasion. Whichever player successfully frames the questions at stake
will capture public opinion and political support, and thereby win. So far, the
war has been waged on four fronts:

            
               1.

               Drugs vs. "social policy." Helms has stuck doggedly to a single issue:
drugs. He points out that Weld favors legalizing marijuana for "medical
purposes" (which conservatives place on the slippery slope toward complete
legalization), favors providing addicts with clean needles (to prevent the
spread of AIDS), and that he prosecuted few drug cases as a U.S. attorney. In
short, says Helms, Weld is soft on drugs--the last thing we need in an
ambassador to Mexico.

            Weld could reply that he had opposed California's
medical-marijuana initiative because it was too lax, or that Helms is a pusher
for tobacco, or that it might be a good idea to stop treating Mexico's drug
problem as a "war." But Weld hasn't touched the drug question. How come? One
rule of the frame game is to avoid issues on which you're guaranteed to lose.
This isn't an Ivy League debating society, where you can win by ingeniously
defending a difficult position. In politics, you're in deep trouble as soon as
you question the war on drugs. This is particularly true if you're fighting for
a job in the Clinton administration, where insecurity over the drug war runs
high. Just ask Joycelyn Elders.

            Rather
than answer Helms' charge, Weld shifted and broadened the conflict. On July 15,
he called a press conference to declare: "Sen. Helms' opposition has nothing
whatsoever to do with drug policy. It has everything to do with the future of
the Republican Party. In plain language, I am not Sen. Helms' kind of
Republican. I do not pass his litmus test on social policy. Nor do I want to."
Overnight, the Weld-Helms standoff became a media sensation. This wasn't just
about drugs, reporters concluded. It was about Helms' distaste for Weld's
"moderate" views on social issues such as abortion. With that, the advantage
swung to Weld. While Helms has the more popular position on drugs, Weld has the
more popular position on abortion.

            
Helms spokesman Marc Thiessen resisted this
maneuver. He insisted Helms' concern was drugs, not ideology. The evidence
backs Thiessen up: Helms supported pro-choice Republican Bill Cohen of Maine
for secretary of defense, and has offered to confirm Weld as ambassador to a
country without a major marijuana problem, such as India. But in the frame
game, such petty facts are easily overwhelmed by larger themes. Weld's spin
prevails, for several reasons.

            To begin with, Weld's
argument fits nicely into the context of recent Republican infighting. Having
come apart over foreign policy (trade with China) and fiscal policy (the House
leadership coup), the Republicans seem ripe for a civil war over social policy.
Furthermore, the Washington press corps never tires of writing about Republican
troubles on abortion and gay rights--though Helms hasn't mentioned either issue
in connection with Weld since the confirmation fight began.

            Above
all, the press loves to personalize debates. Drug policy is boring, but a fight
between a saucy blue blood and a surly redneck is fun. Helms wasn't even the
first member of Congress to oppose Weld's nomination. Others who oppose Weld
have pleaded that Helms isn't the point. It's a futile argument. Helms and his
famous wedge issues are just too colorful.

            2 Ideology vs. competence. Congressional Republicans
who support Weld's nomination don't want their party torn asunder in the
process. Their solution is to separate the question of Weld's ideology from his
competence. They point out that he speaks Spanish, knows Mexico, and is smart
and accomplished. "This is not about the heart and soul of the Republican
Party," argued Rep. Chris Shays, R-Conn., in a TV debate July 28. "It's about
whether this nominee is competent to serve in Mexico."

            Helms'
supporters accept this distinction, because it subverts Weld's campaign to
broaden the ideological confrontation. They argue that Weld's indifference
toward the war on drugs has affected his competence as a law enforcer and will
do so again if he becomes ambassador to Mexico.

            
Weld, however, maintains the fight is
about the party's soul, even as Republican moderates protest it isn't. The
Helms/Shays argument (for a distinction between ideology and competence) is
analytically more sophisticated but viscerally less compelling. Which means it
will probably prevail in a confirmation hearing but lose in the court of public
opinion, vanquished by Weld's campaign for libertarian martyrdom. In the frame
game, nuance is almost always a loser. Remember, the last guy to argue for a
distinction between ideology and competence was Michael Dukakis.

            
Perversely, Weld lost the ideology/competence battle by winning the
drugs/morality battle. Not only did he attack Helms July 15, but he
deliberately embarrassed the White House--which had refrained from quarreling
with Helms--by calling on Clinton to speak up for his confirmation. Weld's
caustic apostasy handed his enemies a persuasive argument against his fitness
for the job--that he's "undiplomatic."

            3 Who started the fight? Every kid knows that when a
parent catches you fighting with another kid, the first thing to do is accuse
the other kid of starting it. Weld should have been able to play the victim,
since Helms arguably started the fight by announcing in June that he would deny
Weld a hearing. But Weld blew this moral advantage by attacking Helms July 15.
It wasn't the first punch thrown, but it was the first one most people saw.
This allowed Helms' spokesman to cast his boss as the victim. Senate Majority
Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., latched on to this as an excuse to side with Helms.
Weld "hurt himself by attacking the chairman unfairly and with political
rhetoric that was just uncalled for," Lott complained.

            Belatedly, Weld is trying to
regain the moral high ground. On July 29, he pleaded: "Before I had ever met
[Helms], before the man really knew anything about me, he said I was unfit to
be ambassador, had loose lips, and was soft on drugs. And I said, 'Where does
Jesse Helms get off saying all these mean things about me?' And people in
Washington threw up their hands in alarm and said, 'My goodness, he attacked
the chairman.' " Weld also has claimed to be a victim of Helms' "ideological
extortion."

            The
"ideological extortion" argument is particularly ingenious. Typically,
extortion means that you're threatening someone with harm or embarrassment to
extract a concession. Helms has no illusions that he can make Weld concede
anything. His vow to kill Weld's nomination is a promise, not a threat. It's
Weld who's trying to scare Republicans into supporting him, by threatening to
turn his fight with Helms into an ideological civil war. His charge of
"ideological extortion" is part of his ideological extortion. And it's
succeeding. On Aug. 3, Sen. Dick Lugar, R-Ind., rescued Weld by demanding that
he get a hearing, lest his jihad against Helms ignite "civil war in the
Republican Party."

            
4 Substance vs. process. Having lost the
advantage on fronts 2 and 3, Weld has opened a fourth, more promising front
recently. He has stopped debating the substance of his quarrel with Helms, and
has focused instead on his right to a hearing. At a July 28 press conference,
Weld repeated his favorite question six times: "I'm going to be asking that one
insistent question: Why should there not be a hearing? Why should one man, in a
democracy, block the conduct of the people's business?"

            This new message helps Weld
in the Senate, because it allows Republicans to defend him without exacerbating
the party's internal conflicts. It certainly emboldened Lugar. "A Senate
chairman cannot be dictatorial, ultimately, when a majority of the committee, a
majority of the Senate, a majority of the American people, want action," Lugar
said of Helms Aug. 3.

            Likewise,
the procedural argument allows the White House to challenge Helms' obstinacy
without appearing to foment the GOP's identity crisis. Clinton spokesman Mike
McCurry, who had refused July 21 to comment on "matters in the other party,"
was so moved by Weld's new plea for a "fair hearing" that he repeated that
phrase six times at his July 31 press briefing.

            But the true beauty of the "give him a hearing" argument is
that it capitalizes on anti-Washington populism. In his July 28 press
conference, Weld decried the "Washington rules" that allow a single senator to
thwart the people's will by refusing to schedule a hearing. Framed this way,
Weld's apostasy becomes a virtue instead of a vice, suggesting candor instead
of a lack of diplomacy.

            Which player will win the
game? Helms' allies say the nomination is doomed. They think Weld overlooked
the game's cardinal rule: that Congress has its own rules, including the
absolute power of committee chairmen over supplicants such as Weld. Why, he's
not even a governor anymore, they scoff. He's just a lowly citizen. But maybe
they're the ones who have misjudged the game. Maybe the era of Ross Perot,
satellite feeds, and blast-faxes has ended the invisibility and the certainty
of the congressional back-room kill. Maybe every political fight is a frame
game now. Even if Citizen Weld can't reach Mexico, he can still reach America.
And maybe that's been his game all along.

         
      
   
