
   
   
      
         
            Promise Keepers 1, NOW 0

            On Oct. 4, hundreds of
thousands of "Promise Keepers" assembled in Washington, D.C., to praise Jesus,
repent their sins, and pledge to take charge of their families and communities.
Nearby, protesters from the National Organization for Women chanted: "Racist,
sexist, anti-gay! Born-again bigots, go away!" Usually, the media sympathize
with this particular criticism of conservative Christians, but not this time.
How did the Promise Keepers succeed where the religious right has often failed?
By framing old stereotypes in new ways.

            
               1. Control vs.
responsibility. NOW's chief rap on PK is that it tells men to take
"leadership" at home. This connotes unequal power, a no-no among rights-based
liberals and feminists. But leadership has two sides. PK plays down the power
aspect and plays up the opposite aspect: male responsibility for domestic
tasks. This drives a wedge between communitarian and rights-based liberals,
isolating NOW from its usual allies.

            PK also
argues that the "biblical" (as opposed to "secular") meaning of leadership
is service and that the Bible, while instructing wives to submit to their
husbands, also instructs husbands to submit to their wives. This has led to the
bizarre spectacle of scriptural debates on TV chat shows, in which PK spokesmen
and NOW president Patricia Ireland argue chapter and verse. PK wins not by
refuting Ireland's exegesis but by displaying subtlety in its own--by arguing,
for example, that a true leader recognizes his wife's talents and takes the
initiative to help them flourish. The viewer comes away persuaded that PK is
much more open-minded than the Christian Coalition. Conversely, by showing no
flexibility, Ireland comes across as though she's against the missionary
position.

            

               2 Misogyny vs. masculinity. Critics
accuse PK leaders of crusading against "the feminization of man." True, they
goad men to action by accusing them of acting like sissies. But they also teach
that masculinity lies in moral strength, not in money, power, or stoicism. They
preach vulnerability, humility, contrition, intimacy, sharing, weeping,
tenderness, and surrender. They deride "machismo." Humility, they say, includes
letting your wife pay the bills if God gave her better math skills than you and
letting her pursue the professional dreams God planted in her. Which explains
why Ted Koppel has compared PK founder Bill McCartney, a former football coach,
to Alan Alda.

            
               3.
Segregation vs. self-help. As with Louis Farrakhan's Million Man March two
years ago, feminists have assailed PK's "exclusion" of women. But McCartney
frustrates this criticism by differing from Farrakhan in two ways. He has made
racial inclusion a central project of PK, and he has stipulated that gender
segregation must be a temporary means toward integrating and reconciling the
sexes.

            
McCartney's rationale for temporary
segregation draws heavily on liberal themes. Men, he argues, have been
culturally uprooted and stripped of their identity. They need space to protect
and repair themselves. This argument combines the religious right's standard
defensive posture (we're not imposing our values; we're just protecting them
from assault) with liberal gender protectionism (e.g., girls should be educated
separately from boys so as to free them from cultural pressure) and
multiculturalism (men must preserve their unique masculine culture).

            According
to Coach McCartney, women dominate church attendance and have their own
Christian support groups, whereas PK is men's only refuge. Men won't open up
and cry in women's presence because it's not "safe." They need the company of
buddies to assure them of their masculinity so that they can break down without
feeling like sissies. This message has induced some liberal pundits to call the
Promise Keepers pathetic, thereby undermining NOW's portrayal of them as
dangerous bullies.

            

               4 Materialism vs. idealism. In politics,
practical benefits usually beat principle. Most women feel less oppressed by
their husbands' pretensions to authority than by the work that falls to them
because of their husbands' neglect. PK leaders have won over many women and
assuaged feminist pundits by addressing the latter problem. "Be first to the
dryer," they tell men. "Turn off the television and empty the dishwasher." They
instruct fathers to spend more time with their kids and to forswear adultery,
abandonment, and domestic abuse. PK routinely embarrasses feminist critics by
producing testimony from women who love the way PK has transformed their
husbands' behavior.

            
               5.
Condemnation vs. compassion. Opponents make much ado of PK's injunctions
against abortion and homosexuality. Ireland has lambasted McCartney for
speaking at Operation Rescue rallies years ago and for promoting a Colorado
ballot measure that would have restricted laws protecting gay rights. Usually,
the media view these positions as mean, but PK leaders take a softer approach.
They never speak of gays as an organized threat. And when asked about
homosexuality, they always subsume it in a general rule against extramarital
sex.

            

               6 Reproach vs. repentance. For decades,
feminists have criticized moral conservatives who blame women for untimely
pregnancies and abortions. Now along comes PK to blame men. Instead of
advocating legislation against abortion, PK instructs men to stop having sex
outside marriage and to stop pressuring their wives and girlfriends to have
abortions. To critics who construe this as an attack on abortion rights, PK's
defenders paraphrase the liberal slogan that NOW famously applied to abortion:
"If you don't like Promise Keepers, don't marry one."

            The
Promise Keepers talk far less about abortion and homosexuality than their
critics and the media do. They're more interested in spiritual
self-flagellation and renewal. Their ventures into social topics focus on
alcohol, drugs, domestic violence, adultery, divorce, illegitimacy, crime, and
urban decay.

            

               7 Puppets vs. persons. NOW accuses PK of
being too friendly with the bad boys of the religious right: media mogul James
Dobson (who gave PK its initial seed money and promotes it on his radio
network), Pat Robertson (who promotes PK on television), and Gary Bauer (who
heads the Dobson-backed Family Research Council). PK denies engaging in
politics with these men, but Ireland says PK is acting as their
"religious-right marketing tool."

            Far from
protecting PK's reputation, the boys keep trying to get inside its blouse. PK
President Randy Phillips urged men at the Washington assembly to set aside
politics and focus on God, but Operation Rescue and the FRC showed up to
distribute pamphlets. The FRC invited the men to sign petitions for the
Partial-Birth Abortion Ban, thereby adding their names to its political
database. Others who have signed up for PK have subsequently turned up on
Republican mailing lists.

            

               8 Imperialism vs. enlightenment. Even if
PK isn't in bed with the religious right, many liberals predict that its
commitment to restore traditional morality will inevitably draw it into
right-wing politics. The group's military culture plays into this indictment,
as do Coach McCartney's hideous sports metaphors. Men, he says, have "dropped
the ball." They need a "halftime" pep talk and a new "game plan." They must
defend morality "like offensive linemen protecting the quarterback." Many of
the group's speakers and supporters are prone to using Christian war metaphors:
"battleground," "army of God," "civil war of values." This kind of talk spooks
most folks.

            PK
spokesmen emphatically deny a political agenda. They describe the group as a
"revival movement" aimed at changing hearts, not a "reform movement" aimed at
changing laws. They point out that they postponed the Washington assembly from
1996 to 1997 to avoid getting embroiled in last year's election. Unlike the
Christian Coalition, they don't keep a membership list, and they expect to
disband when God decides that PK's revival mission is complete.

            In this dispute, tone matters more than content. PK needs
to show less of its macho side and more of its sensitive side. So its leaders
have begun to play down the war metaphors. They have turned the other cheek to
NOW's attacks. In Washington, they asked the assembled men to pray for the
country's political leaders instead of judging them. They have also instructed
the Promise Keepers to seek civic assignments from their local pastors, not
from the movement's elite. "We stop short of prescribing what that agenda
should be, because it's beyond our competence," says PK's vice president.

            By projecting this kind of
humility, PK puts its critics in the posture of aggressors. Ireland's
hair-trigger charges of intolerance have backfired, convincing the media that
NOW is intolerant. Ireland persistently denounces PK for "excluding anyone who
is not Christian"--roughly equivalent to denouncing a synagogue for confining
its membership to Jews. NOW's objections to the PK lifestyle have prompted some
journalists to question where NOW gets off second-guessing women who embrace
that lifestyle.

            By now, it's clear who has
won the war. Many feminists, including the president of the Ms.
Foundation, have expressed sympathy for the Promise Keepers and an interest in
coaxing them toward gender equality rather than opposing them. NOW's vice
president, in retreat, says NOW was only trying to "educate" people that PK
isn't purely benign. Ireland complains that PK spokesmen won the war because
they're "slick," like Ralph Reed. Actually, they won because they aren't. They
admit ignorance and error. They answer no-win questions. They listen to
criticism and openly contemplate changing their ways. If they were selling
anything but integrity, they'd be a disaster.

         
      
   
