
   
   
      
         
            E.R. and the Triple Hex

            A couple of months ago, when
my fellow surgical residents and I went around a table divvying up nights on
emergency room duty, one March date sat conspicuously unpicked--Friday the
13 th . C'mon, I thought. This is ridiculous. So when it was my turn
again, I put my name down for March 13. Rest up, one resident told me. You'll
be in for a long night. I laughed and dismissed the thought.

            But
looking at my calendar a while later, I noticed that the moon would be full
that Friday night. When someone noted that a lunar eclipse would be occurring
then, too, I felt my skepticism slip a little. Perhaps I would be in for a
miserable night, after all. Trained scientists such as myself, however, do not
succumb easily to superstition. Like any self-respecting rationalist, I asked
the obvious question: Isn't there a study on this?

            It turns out there is one reputable study that has tried to
assess whether or not luck actually does go bad on Friday the 13 th .
(I'm not sure which is more surprising: that someone actually spent time
researching this or that I could find only one such study. This is, after all,
a world that has studied even how chewing gum distributes saliva around the
mouth.) The 1993 study, published in the British Medical Journal ,
compared hospital admissions for traffic accidents on a Friday the
13 th with those on a Friday the 6 th in a community
outside London. Despite a lower highway traffic volume on the 13 th
than on the 6 th , admissions for traffic accident victims increased
52 percent on the 13 th . "Friday the 13 th is unlucky for
some," the authors concluded. "Staying at home is recommended." How you escape
the bad luck at home they didn't explain.

            You really
can't make much of one study of one Friday the 13 th in one town.
Lots of other factors could have caused that surge of crashes. Still, Friday
the 13 th phobia is widespread. Donald Dossey, a North Carolina
behavioral scientist, has coined a term for it: "paraskevidekatriaphobia,"
which he derived from the Greek for fear of Friday the 13 th . He
estimates that between 17 million and 21 million Americans suffer mild to
severe anxiety or change their activities--performing rituals before leaving
the house, calling in sick to work, or postponing flights or major
purchases--and that businesses lose $750 million in revenues because of these
fears.

            
Superstitions about the moon may be taken even
more seriously. For centuries, and in disparate civilizations around the world,
people have suspected that the cycles of the moon have a powerful influence
over us. A 1995 poll found that 43 percent of people still believed the moon
alters individual behavior. And mental health professionals believed it more
often than anybody else. The centuries-old word "lunatic" derives from the
connection thought to exist between the full moon and madness.

            The idea
of lunar human cycles seems more plausible than a Friday the 13 th
effect. Scientists once dismissed daily biological cycles as preposterous, but
they now widely accept that body temperature, alertness, memory, and mood all
fluctuate according to a predictable "circadian" rhythm. Evidence also shows
seasonal effects on mood and behavior.

            Ifound some one hundred studies testing for "circalunidian"
cycles. My favorite is a five-year study of self-poisoning at a hospital in New
South Wales, Australia, published in the Medical Journal of Australia .
From 1988 to 1993, the hospital admitted 2,215 patients for overdosing on drugs
or poisoning themselves with toxic substances. The researchers checked to see
whether peaks in such events occurred not just according to the phase of the
moon but also according to one's zodiac sign or numerological readings (as
"calculated according to the formulas contained in Zolar's Encyclopedia of
Ancient and Forbidden Knowledge "). To no one's surprise, self-poisoning
rates were not affected by whether a patient was born a Virgo or a Libra. Nor
did Zolar's "Name Number," "Month Number," or "Birth Path Number" for a person
make any difference. However, women (but not men) were about 25 percent
less likely to overdose around the time of a full moon than around a new
moon.

            That
self-poisonings decrease at the full moon actually correlates with the results
of other studies. If any link between psychology and the full moon exists, it
seems to be protective. The authors of a 1996 study of 10 years of suicides in
Dordogne, France, concluded, in charmingly ungrammatical English, that "the
French dies less in Full Moon, and more in New Moon period." Studies in
Cuyahoga County, Ohio, and Dade County, Fla., also found a drop in suicides at
the full moon. These studies don't quite clinch the full moon's happy effect,
however. More than 10 other studies have been done, and they have not confirmed
a lunar cycle for suicide.

            
As for other forms of craziness, the moon seems
to have no effect. Researchers have reviewed logs for calls to police stations,
consultations to psychiatrists, homicides, emergency room visits, and other
measures of our daily burden of madness. They found no consistent relationship,
one way or another, with the moon.

            Somehow, however, the moon
does have an effect on human beings--at least on women. Menstruation typically
occurs on the 28 day lunar cycle. And even the phase of the moon matters. In a
study of 826 women, 28 percent began menstruating during the four days around
the new moon, whereas no more than 13 percent did so during any other four day
period. This puts the peak of ovulation at the full moon. (Could this provide
an evolutionary explanation for the romantic associations we have with the
moon? I'll leave that to Robert Wright, 
                  Slate
               's resident
Darwinian, to sort out.) How this happens is baffling. The lone hypothesis I've
found proposes that the moon generates tidal forces on the 50 percent to 60
percent of our bodies that is water. But that only raises more questions--such
as how tides are supposed to make women menstruate.

            The evidence satisfied me
that neither the full moon nor the inauspicious date threatened my night.
Nonetheless, I came on duty that evening to find the resident from whom I was
taking over swamped with patients. He stayed late to help me catch up. Just
after he left, a new trauma victim rolled in--a 28-year-old who had been
knocked unconscious in a high-speed head-on collision. The police and
paramedics said he had been stalking his girlfriend with gun in hand. He fled
in his car when cops arrived and led them on a chase that ended in the massive
crash. The rest of the night was no better. I was, as we say, "slammed." It's
full moon Friday the 13 th , a nurse explained. I was about to say
that studies showed no connection. But my pager went off before I could start.
I had a new patient coming in.

         
      
   
