
   
   
      
         
            Juicy Journals

            Forget books and magazines.
Turn off the television. Put down the Starr report. If you really want the
lowdown, something that will tell you almost anything you want to know about
people, medical journals are where the action is. One of medicine's hidden
pleasures is that while there is a fantastic amount to learn about human
beings, most of it is already spelled out in some journal.

            In 1997
alone, the National Library of Medicine added references to 519,012 new
articles from some 3,200 journals to its Medline database. The fact that all
these journals can survive and multiply should be a clue that there's something
compelling about them. Subscribers are willing to pay dearly to keep their
favorite journals going. Rates run to $3,000 a year or more for some journals.
As a result, while The New Yorker lost millions last year, the
scientific publishing giant Elsevier put out some 1,200 journals and made a
whopping 40 percent profit on them.

            To be sure, for many doctors and scientists, the interest
in a given journal is purely parochial. Even the smallest ones--Elsevier
produces some with fewer than 500 subscribers--can be the prestige publication
for a tiny field. Moreover, behind the glossy covers and stilted prose, many of
these little journals function as the gossip rags, the People magazines,
for the science niches. My pet journal is Health Affairs (circulation
8,000), the journal that all health policy wonks get and therefore write in.
It's how we keep tabs on what everyone is up to. An infectious disease
specialist friend of mine reads the Journal of Virology (circulation
5,000). My parents subscribe to the Journal of the American Association of
Physicians of Indian Origin (circulation 26,000).

            But people
should not let all the Balkanization and technical-sounding talk scare them
away. Poke around in a few medical journals, and you're bound to find material
as absorbing as anything you'll find in Vanity Fair .

            
The names alone are worth perusing. Many
journals follow the standard "Annals of" or "Archives of" or "Journal of"
approach--you know, like the International Journal of Leprosy . But the
best are the direct, in-your-face journal names: Placenta , Gut ,
Brain , Blood . When you pick up Placenta , you know exactly
what you're getting. What's more, you get the impression that the editors are
proud to give it to you, that they have no second thoughts about the field they
have chosen. Consider, by comparison, Foot and Ankle International . It's
a terrible name. It conveys embarrassment, a sense that the editors thought
"Foot" alone wasn't good enough for them. Even adding "Ankle" was still too
minor league for their ambitions, so they had to tack on that "International."
You want a journal more willing to glory in its small, arcane world.

            Clearly,
however, the cool stuff is what's inside, and a few journals always have
the cool stuff. The Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy is, not
surprisingly, reliably fascinating no matter what your profession. A recent
issue I browsed through at the library (while hiding it in a copy of
Science ) had such topically relevant reports as "" and "Penile
Erections: Shape, Angle, and Length." A quirkier favorite of mine is the
Journal of Emergency Medicine , which is replete with oddball
articles--such as the recent one from the University of Tennessee on 14 cases
occurring over five weeks in which prisoners reported swallowing razor blades
and other metal objects. (Click for more details.) Not long ago, however, I
discovered the journal that never fails to amaze: the American
Journal of Forensic Medicine and Pathology . A typical issue contained an
article on three suicide victims with multiple gunshot wounds to the head
(complete with photos from the death scenes; one poor guy shot himself five
times before he finally died), another on improved methods to determine the age
of an unidentified victim, and yet a third on the homicide rituals of the
Italian Mafia. You'll never go wrong picking up a copy of that journal.

            Each of these specialized journals offers an
obsessive's-eye view of the world around us, a new look at the seemingly
familiar. International medical journals, however, can do the opposite. They
tend to share the common language of doctors everywhere and so can make the
unfamiliar reassuringly accessible, while still conveying a revealing sense of
their national Zeitgeist . I recently picked up the Annals of Saudi
Medicine , for example, and discovered, to my surprise, the telling
obsessions of a modernized country: ulcers, a growing epidemic of obesity,
smoking, heart disease, child abuse. The Indian Journal of Medical
Research , on the other hand, despite all the press reports about India's
burgeoning middle class, is currently filled with reports on infectious
diseases--the scourge of poor nations.

            Sadly, few
people appreciate the refined charms of medical journals. Occasionally,
however, I'll come across a fellow journal junkie. We'll exchange tips like
frat boys do. "Have you seen the Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology ?" one such friend asked me not long ago. "That journal is
hot ." I looked it up at my next opportunity. It did not disappoint. The
first issue I read, for example, had a study of 219 subjects who were
instructed to put on a specific facial expression while looking in the mirror.
What the psychologists found was that participants told to do nothing more than
put on a happy face developed a significantly more positive mood than those
told to adopt a neutral expression. And those made to assume an unhappy
expression had the worst moods of all. The journal was full of strange little
studies like that. I made a mental note to check it out again. And, when I left
the library that evening, you can bet I had a smile on my face.

            
               If you
missed the sidebar on adultery, click . If you missed the sidebar on
razor-swallowing prisoners, click .
            

         
      
   
