
   
   
      
         
            Suicide Watch

            On April 2 this year, Air
Force Capt. Craig Button suddenly went missing in an A-10 Thunderbolt fighter,
finally crashing in Colorado. The evidence released by the Air Force this month
indicates suicide. Why he did it is baffling, however. The case violates even
psychiatrists' common notions about why people kill themselves.

            Button
flew the third aircraft in a three-jet formation that left an Arizona Air Force
base at 10:45 a.m. When the team reached the target bombing range, the flight
leader ordered pilots to update their computers. Button confirmed the order at
11:57. Moments later, when the leader radioed in preparation for the bombing
run, Button did not respond. The lead plane swung around to catch sight of
Button. Despite 40-mile visibility, Button was nowhere to be found.

            Ground radar, however, picked him up. Apparently, Button
turned 100 degrees off his flight path and flew 500 miles straight into central
Colorado. His altitude veered wildly. Sometimes he hugged terrain below 2,000
feet. Other times, he glided above 16,000 feet. Near Gold Dust Peak, he circled
more than 360 degrees, then careened downward below the reach of ground radar.
Reconstructed AWACs radar data showed Button briefly climbed back up to 19,000
feet, a mile above the highest mountain. Minutes later, at 1:40 p.m., he
slammed into Gold Dust Peak at 13,000 feet.

            Button
didn't use any of his three radios. He didn't eject. He didn't attempt to land
at any airports he flew over. He didn't turn on his Friend-or-Foe
identification signal to let others track him. Yet Button's difficult maneuvers
show that the plane functioned well and that he had full consciousness and
capacity. The autopilot would have been incapable of these maneuvers.
Everything indicated that Button deliberately flew into the mountain.

            
What a strange suicide, though. Button had
hardly any risk factors. True, he was male (women attempt suicide more often,
but men succeed five times more). And he had long tussled with his Jehovah's
Witness parents over his abandoning the faith (organized religion lowers
suicide rates). But nothing else fit.

            Over 90 percent of suicide
victims have a history of mental illness (most often depression) or substance
abuse. Button had neither. On a recent visit to see him, his parents thought he
was his energetic, driven self. Friends said he was enthusiastic about his
coming assignment to Germany. He spoke of buying a motorcycle there and maybe
finding a girl to bring home. He had had girlfriends before, but after three
years in the desert town of Del Rio, Texas, he joked to a friend, "it was slim
pickings." The night before the crash, his roommate said he'd ordered a large
pizza so he'd have leftovers for the next night. During the mission briefing on
the fateful day, Button was "cutting up and making his corny little jokes,"
just as he usually did.

            Button
showed no signs of substance abuse. No alcohol or drugs were found during the
autopsy. He was in a stressful job, but that alone does not increase suicidal
tendencies. At 32, Button was young, whereas the incidence of suicide increases
with age and is highest among those over 65.

            Harvard psychiatrist Martin Kelly points out, however, that
in rare cases, suicide may not be motivated by emotional pain. For someone who
doesn't attach meaning to death yet, suicide can be a sudden, rash way out of
trouble. Button seemed like such a person. It wasn't just that he was a
motorcycle-riding fighter pilot. He had a history of foolhardy judgment that
suggested he didn't fully comprehend death's finality. During survival training
in 1988, he was reprimanded for venturing recklessly far into uncharted
wilderness. In 1996, against the rules, he buzzed Del Rio below 3,000 feet,
blew a tire attempting a hotshot "short" landing, and left the authorized route
during a cross-country training mission. Button was impulsive, a
thrill-seeker.

            When
Button boarded his plane that day, Kelly suggests, suicide probably wasn't his
plan, but his impulsiveness may have steered him into trouble and then into
suicide. It's conceivable that he veered off on a whim. Perhaps he took a short
joy ride or prematurely dropped a bomb (his four 500-pound bombs are still
missing). Whatever the case, with each misstep he dug his hole deeper. As
Button flew through Colorado, he may have come to see crashing as a viable way
out because death had no meaning for him.

            
As unusual as Button's case is, it shares one
common characteristic with nearly all the 30,000 suicides that occur each year
in the United States--the victims are not in a rational state of mind. That may
seem an obvious point, but it is one that we often ignore when assisted suicide
is the topic. Like Mark Twain, who said that "suicide is the only sane thing
the young or old ever do in this life," we imagine that the elderly and the ill
desire death rationally. But our prejudices are showing. Suicidal patients,
whatever their age or condition, almost always suffer from addiction or mental
disease. Even when they do not, as with Button, they usually are not thinking
rationally.

            Button's
suicide also shows how, even in peculiar cases, the desire to die arises from
one's individual history and psychology. Yet, in public discussion of youthful
suicide, we're often unwilling to trace it to such causes and try to place
blame elsewhere--on television, music, movies. Earlier this month, a Senate
subcommittee considering stricter restrictions on music lyrics heard an
anguished father blame his son's suicide on shock rocker Marilyn Manson's
music. The 15-year-old died with the band playing on his headphones. Numerous
studies show that there is no association between music and suicide. (One found
that country-music lovers had higher suicide rates, but subsequent research
disputes these results.)

            Of course, ideas do count. We know, for example, that one
adolescent suicide can trigger others, even through media reports, leading to
"suicide clusters." Had later victims not heard about the first suicide, they
may not have done it when they did. But psychiatrists insist that an idea
cannot compel even a child to commit suicide. It is only a proximate factor in
a vulnerable person with stronger causes at work.

            Usually, the causes are an
addictive or mental disorder. Craig Button's case shows how much more complex
they can be. And how bizarre.

         
      
   
