
   
   
      
         
            Manning the Hospital Barricades

            If you walk into the
cafeteria at my hospital--or, I suspect, at any other academic medical
center--you'll find a medical Bosnia. We surgical residents sit at one end of
the cafeteria, the medical residents--or "meddies," as we call them--at the
other. God knows where the psychiatrists sit. In the hundreds of meals I've
eaten there over the last three years, I don't think I've sat down with the
meddies more than half a dozen times.

            I remember one such time,
when the surgery table was full.

            "Mind if I sit here?" I
asked.

            The
pack of meddies eyed me in my green scrubs suspiciously. Someone grunted, "OK,"
and cleared a corner of the table for me. It was my own little Bantustan. The
pack ignored me and resumed a boring conversation comparing how many
"hits"--patient admissions--each had and how little sleep each was functioning
on. Among surgeons, it's a point of pride verging on arrogance that we work
harder than anybody else. So I ate my meal silently, looking faintly bemused at
their complaints. Who wanted to talk with those do-nothing, pill-pushing,
pointy heads anyway?

            
Later I took my share of ribbing from fellow
residents for "going meddie" at dinner. Next thing you know, someone said,
you'll be wearing a dog collar. Meddies, you see, wear their stethoscopes
around their necks. Surgeons, should we need anything besides our bare hands,
keep our stethoscopes coiled up in a pocket of our white coats like forgotten
but occasionally necessary detritus. Like admitting you're tired, being caught
wearing a dog collar is embarrassing. It diminishes you.

            This all
seems childish, I know. Why all this sniping along the medical front? These are
educated, professional people, right? If you pushed surgeons to explain, I
suspect the response would be that the animosity is functional, that patients
would not want surgeons accepting other specialties' softer values.

            
Surgery is not like other fields in medicine
where it is commonly accepted that nature may defeat doctors' efforts. Because
surgery is so violent, surgeons generally do not undertake it unless they
expect to succeed. So surgical training inculcates the view that nothing must
be allowed to go wrong. One learns to take responsibility for almost any
unwanted "surprise"--not just death but an unexpected infection, a dressing
applied carelessly, anything. Once, I had a patient who refused to get out of
bed after surgery and soon developed a clot in his leg. Medical residents might
have thrown up their hands and said, "What could we do?" But the chief resident
gave me hell for it. It didn't matter that the patient wouldn't cooperate. Why,
she asked, didn't I figure out a way to make the patient cooperate?

            As the
argument goes, surgical residents quite naturally disparage specialties with
less rigid--dare I say less virtuous--priorities, because our values are
central to what we do. So we seldom gripe about cardiologists, because they
share our ethic of personal responsibility and keep our long hours. But pimple
poppers (dermatologists)? Forget it. Here's a joke we tell: How do you keep a
dollar bill from a radiologist? Pin it to a patient.

            
This theory of discrimination's functionality
doesn't quite add up, though. Why not simply accept that our group has a
certain set of skills and values that fit our needs, while others have theirs?
If we were sensible about it, we shouldn't need to beat the meddies down.

            It turns
out, however, that to social psychologists there is nothing at all surprising
about this antagonism. In numerous studies, they have documented a deep paradox
about human relations--persons get along, but people don't. Encounters among
individuals are generally positive, supportive, and rewarding, but those among
groups are ordinarily unpleasant and confrontational. What's more, they observe
something called "the minimal group effect." Even if people are randomly
divided into groups, the groups will automatically discriminate against each
other. It seems we can't help ourselves.

            
Afriend recently put me on to a classic
demonstration of the phenomenon--the Robbers Cave study. In 1954, some
experimental psychologists randomly divided 24 sixth-grade boys into two groups
and took them to Robbers Cave State Park, Okla., for summer camp. Initially,
the two groups were kept apart and unaware of each other. Almost instantly,
kids in each group formed bonds of loyalty and group identification. Then, when
the groups learned of one another's existence, the boys immediately drew lines
in the sand. They spoke of "our guys" and "those guys." Each group named
itself--one the Eagles and the other the Rattlers. Name-calling began at their
first interaction. For example, the Eagles called the Rattlers the "nigger
campers," even though all the boys were white. At common meals they glowered
from separate tables. Cabin raids and fistfights ensued.

            People
discriminate even when it's against their own self-interest. In a 1970 study,
teen-age boys were asked their preferences among paintings by two "foreign
painters." Afterward, the boys were told that their choices divided them into a
"Klee group" and a "Kandinsky group." In fact, they were assigned to these
groups at random. Then, each boy was taken aside and asked how he would divide
up rewards among individual boys from "your group" and "the other group."

            
The results were depressingly consistent. The
boys gave more money to those in their own group. Furthermore, when the options
were fixed so that a boy could not give his group more without sacrificing
profits for both groups, the boys still chose to maximize the difference in
rewards between groups. Although they knew each other from school; although
their groups were defined by flimsy, irrelevant criteria; and although
self-interest was not served; they discriminated faithfully.

            In an
influential 1995 paper, the social psychologists Roy Baumeister and Mark Leary
reviewed all such studies and concluded that we have an instinctive "need to
belong." Given the advantages that would have come to our ancestors from
banding together in groups, this is plausible. Might prejudice--the hatred
between the Rattlers and the Eagles, the Klees depriving the Kandinskys, the
surgical residents' disdain for meddies--be instinctive too? I spoke with
Leary, and he wasn't ready to go that far.

            
Given the pessimistic findings, however, we
might ask why groups aren't always at war with one another. Fortunately,
it turns out that despite how easily group hostility forms, it's not that hard
to damp it down. Sociologists have documented many methods--for example,
fomenting competition within a group, even moral suasion. At Robbers Cave,
animosity rapidly disappeared when the "counselors" created common tasks, for
example, fixing a broken water tank. Also, these experiments--like
residency--artificially isolate individuals from families, outside friends, and
other social ties that produce bonds outside group lines.

            In fact, one of the
difficulties I have keeping up my aversion to meddies is that I'm friends with
a few from my medical school class. (Why can't other meddies be like you? I ask
them.) It seems that given the chance, we are legions ready to mass against one
another. Fortunately, we keep getting distracted.

         
      
   
