
   
   
      
         
            Does the Third World Deserve Second-Class AIDS Treatment?

            This September, the New
England Journal of Medicine created a firestorm when it accused researchers
of conducting unethical experiments to reduce HIV in newborns in Third World
countries. The charges, comparing the work to the infamous Tuskegee experiment,
have since halted at least one HIV study. But a closer look suggests that the
critics suffer from an ethical blindness of their own.

            The
studies in question are seeking low-cost ways to prevent HIV-positive pregnant
mothers from transmitting the virus to their newborns. A breakthrough 1994
study found a drug regimen that dramatically reduced HIV-transmission
rates--from 26 percent of births to 8 percent. Doctors in industrialized
nations rapidly adopted the strategy as the standard of care. At $800 a pop,
however, poor countries can't afford the full regimen. It's also too complex.
Mothers must take AZT, an antiviral, five times a day during pregnancy; receive
intravenous AZT during labor; forgo breastfeeding to prevent transmission in
milk; and give their babies liquid AZT four times daily for six weeks.

            Sixteen studies to find simpler, cheaper methods are now
testing everything from vitamin A to a shorter course of oral AZT. The U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of
Health fund nine of these, involving 12,211 women in Uganda, Thailand,
Tanzania, and elsewhere. In every study, some mothers must serve as a
comparison group, and that's where the trouble begins. For two years
researchers debated whether to compare new therapies to the full AZT regimen or
to no treatment at all. In the end, 15 of the 16 trials gave the comparison
group a placebo.

            In their
article reopening the debate, Peter Lurie and Sidney Wolfe, doctors with Ralph
Nader's Public Citizen Health Research Group, condemned these 15 trials.
Researchers giving placebos, they said, were knowingly killing children. They
quoted the Helsinki Declaration of the World Health Organization: "In any
medical study, every patient--including those of a control group, if
any--should be assured of the best proven diagnostic and therapeutic methods."
To them, the only valid question is how new treatments compare to the complex
AZT treatment.

            
The Journal 's editorial was even more
pointed. It accused HIV researchers of "self-serving justification," and
likened their studies to the Tuskegee experiment. Conducted by the U.S. Public
Health Service from 1932 to 1972, that study left 412 black syphilitic men
untreated--even after penicillin became widely available--in an attempt to
determine the natural history of syphilis. The experiment, halted only after
exposure by journalists, remains a textbook example of unethical, racist
research.

            The
Journal 's charges made front-page news. Only a pre-publication leak
allowed NIH director Harold Varmus and CDC director David Satcher to publish
their indignant defense the next week. In an unlikely spectacle, Republican
Sen. Dan Coats stood up for poor Africans to oppose Satcher's nomination for
surgeon general. (Ultimately, the Senate Labor Committee approved Satcher 12 to
5.) Johns Hopkins researchers suspended an Ethiopian study with placebos. Other
suspensions may follow.

            Ethics, the critics insist, demand that U.S. researchers
provide the American standard of care to Third World subjects to avoid
exploitation. But they don't. The critics' arguments seem reasonable only if
they ignore the facts:

            
               This isn't Tuskegee .
In Tuskegee, doctors sought no public review, had no clearly beneficial aim,
and deceived patients into getting no treatment. By comparison, the HIV trials
were reviewed extensively and approved by local governments and the World
Health Organization. The experimental therapies may offer great benefit. And
some subjects receive placebos because, unlike penicillin for Alabama, the full
AZT regimen is out of reach for poor countries.

            
               The complete AZT regimen
isn't coming . By 2000, 6 million pregnant women in developing nations will
carry HIV. Critics are right that a complex AZT regimen would be best for them.
It is the standard of care. So are CAT scanners and heart-bypass surgery. But
poor countries aren't going to get any of these. Cost is a big reason--these
countries typically spend under $20 per person on health care annually. But
even if Glaxo Wellcome gave away the drugs, the complete regimen is still
infeasible in much of Africa and south Asia. There, tubing and skills for
intravenous AZT are scarce. The governments can't afford to give moms formula
to stop them from breast-feeding. Mothers also live too far from doctors to get
therapy early in pregnancy and to keep up with necessary monitoring.

            
               Something may be better
than nothing . If trials compared low-cost therapy to the complete AZT
regimen it's likely that the new regimens will prove less effective. But
such results are useless , since the full treatment is not an option.
Without a placebo group, we still won't know if any of the treatments are
better than nothing and therefore worth giving.

            
               We've
been here before . These issues aren't new. Cheap oral hydration, for
example, has been studied and used to treat dehydration for diarrheal illness
in developing countries. It works--but not as well as intravenous hydration.
Far from condemning its use as unethical, however, doctors have embraced oral
hydration as the model of locally appropriate therapy. Similarly, poor
countries won't adopt a new rotavirus vaccine, despite 600,000 deaths a year
from diarrhea caused by the bug. Inoculating every child at $30 a dose would
divert scarce resources from even better uses.

            The core issue is whether it is ethical for Americans to
conduct Third World studies seeking therapies cheaper and perhaps inferior to
our own. It can be, but only if: 1) Subjects get the best care feasible locally
(they do). 2) It's done for local benefit (measuring a new therapy against
placebo isn't useful for the West; we'd switch only if it were as effective as
the more complex therapy). 3) The new regimens are themselves feasible (at
costs from pennies to $60 per patient, they seem to be). 4) The American
standard is unavailable for legitimate reasons (I've already mentioned all the
obstacles).

            For the folks at Public
Citizen, this last criterion really sticks in their craws. It offends them to
see researchers accepting the high cost of American medical care as a given.
Could drug companies lower their costs? Maybe, maybe not. But this is not the
way to debate free-market pricing of technology. Don't stop the research.
Acknowledging reality isn't unethical, but ignoring it can be.

         
      
   
