
   
   
      
         
            Clinton Shops the U.K. for a Flack

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here. And
if you missed the most recent installments of this column, here they are:
posted Friday, Oct. 2, and Tuesday,
Sept. 29.
            

            In London Monday, the
Guardian reported on its front page that President Clinton tried to
recruit Britain's best-known spin doctor to help him in his present troubles.
It said that the president sought out Tony Blair's aggressive chief press
spokesman, Alastair Campbell, after watching him in action on the prime
minister's trips to the United States. "He dropped him a note suggesting a
transatlantic swap," the paper said. "The tone of Mr. Clinton's note was
bantering but Downing Street staffers are adamant the White House was putting
out feelers with a view to poaching Mr. Campbell and that the idea ... was
given serious consideration." But, the paper said, Campbell had decided, in the
words of a Downing Street source, "to stay with his Tony."

            Also
Monday, the Independent of London reported that White House adviser Sidney Blumenthal's claims (in
his Starr testimony) that he looked after relations between Clinton and Blair
"have not earned him many friends on either side of the Atlantic," because
"[t]here are plenty of other officials, like the ambassadors in London and
Washington for instance, who think they handle that relationship, and regard
Mr. Blumenthal as a nuisance."

            In India, Sunanda Datta-Ray, a former editor of the
Statesman of Calcutta and now an editorial consultant with the
Straits Times of Singapore, wrote in the Asian Age that Indians fear the
Clinton scandal will "set back their own promised freedom of information bill."
In India, he said, "the most innocent trivia provokes official paranoia about
security." Smear and blackmail are widespread political weapons in Asia, and "a
free flow of information could reduce scope for blackmail," he added.

            In Canada,
the Toronto Globe
and Mail ran an op-ed piece by the New York publisher of Harper's
magazine, John R. MacArthur, excoriating Howell Raines, the editorial page
editor of the New York Times , for setting "some kind of record for
sanctimonious nonsense" in his paper's comments on Flytrap. Lamenting "the near
total erosion of the distinction between the upmarket dailies and their tabloid
print and television inferiors," MacArthur attacked both the Times and
the Washington Post for persisting in a "self-righteous persecution of
Mr. Clinton and defence of Mr. Starr's vice-squad techniques."

            
The Australian election result was widely
welcomed in Australia and abroad for its crushing defeat of Pauline Hanson and
her racist One Nation Party. But the Sydney Morning Herald said that the country's re-elected
conservative Prime Minister John Howard "must virtually remake himself" and "be
entirely more sophisticated in grappling with the changing nature of
Australia." Under the headline "Advance Australia Fair," the Straits Times of
Singapore said that "the results of Australia's general election bear testimony
to the resilience of its national character."

            The
meeting of the Group of Seven largest industrial countries in Washington was
criticized in the Financial
Times of London for its failure to come up with a detailed plan on the
world financial crisis. The summit did not mark "the finest hour of
international economic diplomacy," an editorial Monday said. The G7 deputies
"must report back with a plan as soon as possible, and certainly before the end
of the year": The next scheduled G7 meeting (next spring) is too far away. The
Times of India said
that the pauperization of various East Asian nations "is belatedly being
recognised as a ticking time bomb which may explode, plunging the region into
acute political and social chaos," and it criticized conservative policies for
dealing with this. There are "serious questions as to whether this epidemic
ought to be treated as a global crisis, or on the basis of each nation trying
to protect itself even at the cost of others."

            In Russia, Izvestiya said that the government's
latest anti-crisis program will return Russia to the economy of the early
1990s, which was controlled by certain groups and was very unjust.
Sevodnya called the program "a weird cross between barracks-style
socialism and an inflationary plan" that would result in Russia becoming "a
very poor and boring country." Komsomolskaya Pravda quoted Moscow Mayor Yury Luzhkov as saying,
in reply to a journalist's question about what he would do to prevent
starvation in Moscow, "I will eat less."

            In Hong Kong, the South China Morning Post carried a
report Monday saying that McDonald's staff in the territory are the lowest paid
of all business chain employees. On average, a McDonald's worker gets $15.10 HK
per hour, compared with $17.80 HK for a "super-value" meal and $6 HK for each
Snoopy toy McDonald's sells. A trade unionist member of the Hong Kong
government's labor affairs committee has proposed a minimum hourly wage in the
territory of $35 HK.

         
      
   
