
   
   
      
         
            Dear Africa, Sorry! Love, Bill

             

            
               GET
PUNDIT CENTRAL BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            President Clinton's
apology-strewn tour of Africa is Issue 1: He's sorry about slavery; he's sorry
about the Rwanda massacre. And the schoolyard murder in Jonesboro, Ark., Issue
2, bumps the president's sex scandal to Issue 3.

            Deborah
Mathis, Jack Germond, Nina Totenberg ( Inside Washington ), and Brit Hume
( Fox News Sunday ) detect hollowness in Clinton's teary expiation for
international silence on Rwanda. The White House was aware of the genocide,
says Hume, and there is no indication that it would act differently today.
Perhaps the apology tour was Clinton's way of manufacturing "moral parity" with
the great Nelson Mandela, muses Hume.

            The right-wing pundits are incensed by the "most expansive
and extensive groveling and pandering" ever exhibited by a U.S. president (Pat
Buchanan, The McLaughlin Group ). Noting that the Sudanese routinely sell
children into slavery, Buchanan sees no need to offer apologies to "those
people over there." Robert Novak (CNN's Capital Gang ) is appalled at the
"contrition mission," finding Clinton's slavery apologies logically flawed in
light of the many prominent "African-Americans in government, in business, in
athletics, in show business," who would not be Americans without the slave
trade. Capital Gang sters Margaret Carlson and Al Hunt--both appalled by
Novak--are joined by E.J. Dionne (NBC's Meet the Press ) in arguing that,
in fact, slavery is wrong, ergo it's fine for a president to say
so.

            A mudslide
of pundits construes the Africa Tour as political homage to black voters in the
United States, a cornerstone of Clinton's electoral base. But that doesn't open
Clinton to charges of pandering, notes Mark Shields (PBS's NewsHour With Jim
Lehrer ), because politicians of all stripes--from Ronald Reagan to mayors
of New York--routinely visit the Three I's (Ireland, Israel, and Italy) to
mollify supporters. If anything, say the pundits, Clinton is shrewd to solidify
political support during these dark days.

            
Beleaguered McLaughlin liberal Eleanor
Clift--joined by Steve Roberts (CNN's Late Edition ), David Gergen, and
Jay Carney ( The McLaughlin Group )--stresses the tour's salutary
importance in improving U.S.-Africa trade connections. Clift predicts that in
50 years America will conduct a thriving trade with a prosperous Africa.

            The
commentariat is saddened by Issue 2, the senseless killings of four children
and their teacher by two angry youths. Germond and Tony Blankley (Late
Edition ) warn against drawing too many lessons from an isolated, senseless
episode of evil, and Bill Kristol (ABC's This Week ) cautions all against
compounding the crime by "committing sociology," i.e., relieving the two
child-shooters of moral responsibility for their evildoing. But most pundits
shrug off this advice and blame the incident on 1) lax gun-control laws; 2) our
violent, permissive popular culture; or 3) the popular choice: both.

            Clinton's sex scandal dips to Issue 3. Like Paula Jones'
lawyers, most pundits are outraged that the White House produced 16
Willey-related letters lickety-split in the wake of her 60 Minutes
interview but released only two in response to an earlier subpoena. The
commentariat repeats its long-held opinion that Clinton's claim of executive
privilege is bunk. Kristol opines that "it's worth being a little bit outraged"
by Clinton's cynical tactics, but Paul Gigot ( NewsHour ) and Shields
stress that the public does not share his outrage. Clinton elicits a Bronx
cheer from several pundits for admitting no knowledge of whether or not his
lawyers have invoked executive privilege (the president must sign all such
claims).

            Most
commentators are mystified by Issue 4, Yeltsin's unexpected putsch. Clift
suggests that he wanted to install a successor with all the "charisma of a tree
stump." Carney thinks Yeltsin was feeling ignored and did this partly as a
publicity stunt. Several pundits think Yeltsin is crazy like a fox; others
think he's just crazy or possibly boozed out of his mind.

            

               It's OK, Leo Strauss Was a Devoted
Gambler: Someone should slip Kenneth Starr a tape of this week's This
Week , where Kristol admits to being eliminated from the office NCAA pool.
Pundit Central is shocked-- shocked! --to learn there is gambling at the
Weekly Standard .

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
