
   
   
      
         
            The Devil and Mrs. Jones

             

            Questions about the
president's sex life won Issue 1 nods on all the shows. If not for the return
of Iraq to the news, the spacefaring John Glenn and newsmaking Fidel Castro
would have given the weekend the feel of a Kennedy administration
retrospective.

            Paula
Jones' lawyers swarmed the networks, struggling in vain to make their case
despite a judicial gag order. Their plaintiff is "upbeat" (ABC's This Week
With Sam and Cokie ) and "the rule of law is alive and well" (CBS's Face
the Nation ). With the president's men falling silent (a deliberate
strategy, said George Stephanopoulos on This Week ), the liberal pundits
made the case against Jones: She has become a "pitiful pawn" (Al Hunt, CNN's
Capital Gang ) of the wacko right, who are "making hay" (Steve Roberts,
CNN's Late Edition ) and "diminishing the presidency" (Mark Shields,
NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) by dredging up Clinton's dirty laundry.

            The conservatives predicted that this episode, too, would
roll off Clinton's back (Robert Novak, Capital Gang ), as the president
is now "beyond humiliation" (Charles Krauthammer, Inside Washington ).
The smart money insisted that the case would end with a trial and not in a
settlement. When Bill Kristol ( This Week ) referred to Matt Drudge's
unsubstantiated weekend report that Newsweek spiked a story about
Clinton having an affair with a White House intern, co-host Sam Donaldson
barked at him. Maybe Newsweek killed the story because they didn't have
the goods, Donaldson bellowed.

            The
commentariat returned once more to Issue 2, the Iraq crisis, with Sen. John
McCain, R-Ariz. ( Face the Nation ), comparing the situation to "the movie
Groundhog Day : We wake up every morning and Saddam is sticking his thumb
in our eye." After weeks of playing devil's advocate for Hussein, John
McLaughlin ( The McLaughlin Group ) finally threw in completely with the
dictator, endorsing Iraq's claim that Scott Ritter, the chief U.N. inspector,
is a U.S. "spy" whose placement in Iraq was a "calculated and deliberate
provocation." Secretary of State Madeleine Albright (NBC's Meet the
Press ) and U.N. Ambassador Bill Richardson ( Fox News Sunday and
This Week ) promised to answer Hussein's intransigence with more
international peacemaking attempts, a policy condemned by Krauthammer as "the
wages of appeasement." Also working the Neville Chamberlain angle was Hunt, who
said Hussein had "the scruples of Hitler."

            Issue 3 was a tie: the soon-to-orbit John Glenn or the
papal visit to Cuba. The pundits were generally enthusiastic about Glenn's
rocket ride--McLaughlin gushed that it would "change the outlook on who is
old"--although the cynics deemed the trip an "interplanetary perk for a favored
politician" (Kate O'Beirne, Capital Gang ). Juan Williams ( Fox News
Sunday ) worked the issue for the gag: Send Strom Thurmond instead, to
determine "the effect of weightlessness on orange hair." (On This Week
Glenn uncorked an old joke of his own: "How would you feel if you were sitting
on top of 2 million parts built by the lowest bidder on a government
contract?") The commentariat was divided as to whether the pope's visit
presaged the end of Fidel Castro or of the United States' "inane embargo"
(Eleanor Clift, The McLaughlin Group ). Most agreed that Gore's courting
of the Florida vote would prohibit any change in our current policy.

            

               Lost in the Shuffle: Thanks to the
week's busy news cycle, the pundits gave the new developments in the Asian
financial crises a wide berth--not much of a loss, seeing as most of them are
completely at sea about it anyway.

            

               Punditus Interruptus, Week 5: Has Robert Novak lost his nerve? He didn't
even bluff interruption in all his bantering with Al Hunt on the week's edition
of Capital Gang . (Maybe he was calmed by the absence of Margaret
Carlson.) After repeated viewings of the tape, "Pundit Central" referees
charged Hunt with one verbal offside, bringing the running interruption total
to Hunt 5, Novak 2.

            

               Goodnight, David: After only two weeks,
David Brinkley's controversial Archer Daniels Midland ads have been pulled from
the broadcast networks (CNN will continue to show them). An outraged Brinkley
told The McLaughlin Group that everyone's acting "like I robbed a bank
or something." A relieved Sam and Cokie made no mention of his
disappearance.

            
               How About Condoms as
Pledge-Week Premiums? Treading delicately around the Paula Jones case, the
commentariat giggled like schoolchildren over a recent poll proclaiming that
public television watchers have more sex than most. Charles Krauthammer blamed
it on "all those nature shows."

            

               --Kevin C.
Murphy
            

         
      
   
