
   
   
      
         
            Lady or a Tramp?

             

            The commentariat cleaves the
Clinton Scandals into three issues this week: 1) the mud-storm surrounding
Kathleen Willey; 2) Congress' readiness to receive Kenneth Starr's report; and
3) Robert Bennett's about-face on publicizing Paula Jones' amorous life.

            There are
almost as many opinions on Issue 1 as there are pundits. Jack Germond
( Inside Washington ) defines the pro-Willey end of the spectrum. Noting
Willey's initial reluctance to testify, Germond dismisses talk of impure
motives as the White House "trying to throw sand in our eyes."
Middle-of-the-roaders Evan Thomas ( Inside Washington ) and Al Hunt (CNN's
Capital Gang ) agree that Willey's story remains convincing but see some
truth in anti-Willeyism: There "are no clean test-tubes" in this scandal, says
Thomas. At the other extreme, The McLaughlin Group 's two libs (Morton
Kondracke and Eleanor Clift) make quite a show of pitching tent in the
anti-Willey camp. Willey's credibility has been destroyed; the questions about
her motives have been devastating, they maintain.

            Most pundits follow Ellen Goodman (CNN's Late
Edition ) in excusing the White House's anti-Willey smear campaign as
"inevitable" while characterizing it as far from "appealing." George Will
(ABC's This Week ) and Charles Krauthammer ( Inside Washington )
share outrage over the White House's eagerness to release Willey-related
correspondence while failing to answer scores of Lewinsky-related queries
(remember her?). Clift contends that there has been no character assassination
by the White House, only the release of facts. Krauthammer detects class bias
in the sympathy for Willey evinced by the same feminists who refused to rally
around Jones.

            Issue 2--the Hill's hunger
for the Starr report--finds all agreeing that the Republicans must avoid
looking cheap or nasty. Henry Hyde, the widely respected head of the Judiciary
Committee, is the Republicans' "ace in the hole," says Mark Shields (PBS's
NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ). But the committee is filled with GOP "full
mooners," he adds, who will make the Republicans look clownish. Fred Barnes and
Susan Page ( Late Edition ) declare that impeachment proceedings occurring
after the November elections are less likely to unseat Clinton, while George
Stephanopoulos ( This Week ) insists that a late start will permit the
Republicans to "go full bore" without fear of offending short-memoried voters
with their partisanship. The Clinton camp's threat to invoke executive
privilege is widely dismissed as a foolish delaying tactic.

            Issue 3,
Bob Bennett's decision not to detail Paula Jones' love life for the court, is
portrayed as the triumph of politics over sound legal strategy (Robert Novak,
Capital Gang ; George Will).

            

               Hollywood Fever: Two weeks ago, Inside
Washington ian Evan Thomas disputed Gordon Peterson's claim that the film
Primary Colors had a pro-Clinton bias, even though neither had actually
seen the film. Now having viewed it, Thomas reports ( without
blushing! ) that the film is sympathetic to Clinton. Peterson asks
Jack Germond, who has not seen the film, to give some expert commentary based
upon Germond's exposure to TV trailers for the film. Some characters
seem well-cast, responds the perplexed Germond. Rounding out the segment,
Deborah Mathis says she wouldn't mind seeing Paul Newman win a Best Actor Oscar
on Monday. This would be quite a trick, as Newman was not nominated this
year.

            
               Will the Commentariat
Resign First? Charles Krauthammer prefaces his Inside Washington
commentary with a sigh: "I had my usual experience. I thought, my God, this is
gonna do enormous damage to the president, and sure enough the American people
think exactly the opposite." Fred Barnes begins his Fox News Sunday
soliloquy by airing his own self-esteem issues: "There have been so many things
that I thought were going to have tremendous political consequences ... they
haven't happened."

            
               Milli Vanilli Redux:
You heard it here first, folks-- Inside Washington is lip-synced! There
was a very creepy moment about 20 minutes into this week's installment: The
camera cut away from Deborah Mathis, who was holding forth on school uniforms,
to a presumably contemporaneous shot of the whole cast. Mathis' voice-over
continued but the visual was of Krauthammer chatting with Peterson as a nodding
and still-lipped Mathis looked on.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
