
   
   
      
         
            Clinton Newt-ered?

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            Newt Gingrich's public riffs
on the president's moral shortcomings are Issue 1. Chatter about the indictment
of Webster Hubbell and the release of his taped prison phone calls captures
Issue 2. And Thursday's White House press conference--memorable for the answers
Clinton didn't give--is Issue 3.

            
International news, such as the Senate vote to expand NATO, and the European
Union's further move toward a common currency, makes nary a ripple.

            Gingrich's departure from his freshly cultivated
nicey-nicey image is largely unexpected and brings snickers from consistency
mavens: "Was that the new old Gingrich or the old new new Gingrich?" asks Al
Hunt (CNN's Capital Gang ). Eleanor Clift ( The McLaughlin Group )
is not surprised at all: By playing the attack dog, Gingrich is simply
"reverting to form."

            Why such an aggressive
strategy? It's the only way to make people realize that this isn't about sex,
it's about the rule of law (Paul Gigot, PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ).
The Republican right-wingers--Clinton-haters, moralists, religious people--want
"red meat" (Juan Williams, Fox News Sunday ; joined by Pat Buchanan and
Jay Carney, The McLaughlin Group ; and Hunt). Personal attacks are
advance work for Starr's report, a preliminary strike against Clinton's
sky-high approval ratings (Hunt; Tony Blankley, NBC's Meet the Press ).
Newt is simply more comfortable being mean--at heart he's a "bomb thrower"
(Clift; joined by Robert Novak, Capital Gang ; and Morton Kondracke,
The McLaughlin Group ).

            Of course,
notes Mark Shields ( NewsHour ), there's much risk in playing the villain.
Explicitly personal attacks on the president provide exactly the "background
music, the wallpaper" that Clinton would want as a backdrop. Gingrich's
attacks, which came off as terribly partisan, mitigate damage to the
president's popularity caused by some of this week's more embarrassing
developments. George Stephanopoulos ( This Week ) joins the chorus noting
that the president is blessed to have such inept enemies as Gingrich (last
week's target was Dan Burton).

            
Burton--who was publicly flayed last Sunday for
calling Clinton a "scumbag"--is flayed again, this time for releasing tapes of
phone calls between Webster Hubbell, then incarcerated, and his wife. It may be
legal, admits Mara Liasson ( Fox News Sunday ), but it's a rotten thing to
do. Burton was also stupid to so tendentiously edit the tapes he released (Fred
Barnes, Meet the Press ). He did not include sections in which Hubbell
cleared Hillary Clinton, once his law partner, of any wrongdoing in the matter
that initially landed Hubbell in the stir.

            Gigot
thinks the tax fraud proceedings against Hubbell are legitimate and ordinary,
while everyone else regards the indictments as trumped-up mini-crimes meant to
squeeze Hubbell into giving Starr what he wants--cooperation. Maybe Starr
doesn't want the truth at all, ponders Williams; maybe he'll just squeeze
Hubbell until Hubbell fabricates something that hurts Clinton. But Hubbell
won't break easily. Brit Hume ( Fox News Sunday ) compares Hubbell's
understanding of loyalty to the Mob's concept of omertà .

            The presidential press conference, in which Clinton refused
to answer scores of questions about Flytrap, was important to the commentariat
for one chief reason. Clinton finally said with words what he's been saying
with actions for several months--he has no intention of further clarifying his
relationship with Monica Lewinsky or anyone else. This won't work, says
Stephanopoulos, speaking politically: "You can [avoid questions] in one press
conference. You cannot do it for two and a half years." Speaking ethically,
says Williams, this is "disturbing." The president shouldn't hide from the
voters behind fancy-pants lawyers.

            Opinion
was varied about the merits of Clinton's performance. He's usually tiptop at
fielding tough questions, agrees everyone. Most saw this week's conference as
another rhetorical masterpiece in his career of gems, but a few pundits thought
the president looked angry and nervous.

            

               A Nice Head-Shrinking Never Hurt Anyone:
Based on the presidential press conference this week, Gigot senses that Clinton
may be having difficulty separating myth and reality. Clinton, continues Gigot,
has come to regard himself as a latter-day Jean Valjean, a decent man hounded
by inexplicably cruel enemies. Sam Donaldson ( This Week ) thinks it odd
that, at the same press conference, Clinton refused even to affirm that the
president is above the law. Maybe he just "couldn't bring himself to do that,"
says Donaldson.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
