
   
   
      
         
            Bomb Bay, India

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            India's nuclear tests are
Issue 1. Johnny Chung's confession that he deposited Chinese military funds
into Democratic Party coffers takes Issue 2. Scrapping in the distance for
Issue 3 status are Microsoft's antitrust problems, the Indonesia unrest, and
the Israel-Palestine peace talks.

            The
commentariat polishes its worry beads over the Indian bomb tests. (See
"The Week/The
Spin" for more on the framing of the South Asian nuclear issue.) Eleanor
Clift ( The McLaughlin Group ) calls the explosions "a giant finger to the
U.S." But U.S. sanctions, which are required by law, won't sway India from its
path or stem nuclear proliferation. Clinton has "a lot of sticks but no
carrots," says Mara Liasson (PBS's Washington Week in Review ). All agree
that the G-8 nations' refusal to back the sanctions weakens the U.S.
position.

            At midweek, Capitol Hill blamed the U.S. intelligence
establishment for failing to predict the blasts, but by the weekend the pundits
agree that India's intention to light up a few nukes was obvious . The
BJP, India's ruling party, is merely making good on its recent campaign promise
to test the devices (Margaret Carlson, CNN's Capital Gang ; Sen. Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y., ABC's This Week ).

            Sympathy for India abounds on
the shows. Michael Barone ( The McLaughlin Group ) defends India's right
to test its weapons, citing the United States' "de facto military alliance"
with China, India's biggest regional foe. Fellow Group ies Mort Zuckerman
and Jay Carney decry U.S. neglect of India as justification for the tests.
"It's kind of hard to blame [the Indians]," says Bill Kristol ( This
Week ). The way out? Let India join the nuclear club by signing and honoring
the test-ban treaty (Susan Page, CNN's Late Edition ; Moynihan). The
world powers gave France this out after it ruffled feathers with its South
Pacific nuclear tests earlier in the decade.

            Kristol
draws just short of calling the United States "a helpless, pitiful giant" as he
extracts this moral from India's tests: "The signal has gone out that the U.S.
is not serious" about policing rogue nations. He also compares the tests to
similar intransigence on the part of Iraq and China. "I don't think you can
keep this genie in the bottle," says Robert Novak ( Capital Gang ). The
consensus is that too many nations--North Korea, Pakistan, and China, among
others--have advanced weapons technology for the United States to police the
beat effectively. "We can't stop Russia from supplying Iran!" gripes
Zuckerman.

            
Issue 2--the report that the Chinese military
contributed to the Democratic Party through Johnny Chung--redeems Sen. Fred
Thompson, R-Tenn. When Thompson announced at the beginning of last summer's
Senate hearings that he would prove a Chinese effort to subvert the American
electoral process, he was characterized as an overreaching conspiracist. Now
he's considered a prophet (Tucker Carlson, Late Edition ; Sam Donaldson,
This Week ). The conspicuous absence of Clinton spinners playing
"defense" on the weekend shows adds substance to the Chung report, says Tucker
Carlson.

            William
Bennett (NBC's Meet the Press ) contributes the overstatement of the
weekend when he fuses the Chinese money story with the Indian tests: "Did the
[Democrats'] frantic pursuit of money lead to the endangerment of the world
through nuclear weapons?"

            

               Rockin' Jay Carney: Responding to a
question about Frank Sinatra's impact on popular culture, Jay Carney announces
that Guided by Voices, the Dayton, Ohio, riff-rockers, are his favorite
band.

            
               Double
Dribble: Habitual double dribbler Mark Shields sins again. He declares on
both PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer and Capital Gang that the
Clinton administration got away with berating India because the nation--unlike
China, Greece, and Israel--has no lobby in Washington.

            

               For Pundit Completists Only: David Brock
profiles Meet the Press host Tim Russert and surveys the competitive
world of the pundit shows in this week's New
York magazine.

            
               Snow Blind: On Fox
News Sunday Tony Snow inserts his foot in his mouth while questioning
Democratic Party loyalist Frank Mankiewicz about the Clinton administration's
scandals. When Mankiewicz insists that there is no proof of scandals, Snow
responds, "So convictions of Cabinet members don't rise to the level of
scandals?" What convictions? asks Mankiewicz. Former Secretary of Agriculture
Michael Espy has only been indicted. Gibbering, Snow prudently changes the
subject.

            

               --Jack
Shafer
            

         
      
   
