
   
   
      
         
            Bill Bombs

             

            Bill Clinton's public
vivisection continues, as the commentariat tears into his Iraq policy with both
hands. Paul Gigot (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) notes that
congressional support waned after the president made his case, as Capitol Hill
realized that the administration's "ends and means don't coincide." Congress
smells "a [president] who doesn't believe in his own policy," adds Gigot. "
'Contain Saddam' is not a ringing bumper sticker," scoffs Steve Roberts (CNN's
Late Edition ).

            Just as
there was no consensus on how to pronounce Kofi Annan's name, there was no
consensus on how to regard the U.N. secretary-general's 11 th -hour
diplomatic mission. (The commentariat did their gabbing before Annan delivered
his deal.) A sunny George Stephanopoulos (ABC's This Week With Sam and
Cokie ) announces, "I guess I'm a dove this morning," hoping that American
diplomacy backed by bomber squadrons will cow Saddam into accepting Annan's
terms. Bill Kristol ( This Week ), who's been dressed for combat for
months, retorts that if the White House wants to hand the reins of U.S. foreign
policy to Annan, then we ought to anoint him secretary of state. Kate O'Beirne
(CNN's Capital Gang ) and Pat Buchanan ( The McLaughlin Group )
think that Clinton wants Annan to negotiate a "fig leaf," permitting the United
States to bow out of war while retaining some shred of credibility. Thomas
Friedman (CBS's Face the Nation and PBS's Washington Week in
Review ) argues the reverse: Clinton fears that Annan will come back with an
imperfect offer that, for political reasons, the United States cannot
refuse.

            The live Columbus, Ohio, town meeting (which became a town
beating) sent the pundits scurrying for thesauri to find synonyms for "fiasco"
and "disaster." Many connect the Ohio miscue to Issue 2, the president's
Lewinsky troubles. Preoccupation with the scandal led a harried and nervous
president to send his deputies into a sausage grinder, say Gloria Borger
( Face the Nation ) and Fred Barnes ( McLaughlin Group ). A
reluctance to appear in public forums for fear of drawing Lewinsky questions
compromises Clinton as commander in chief, says Gigot on Fox News
Sunday --Clinton "can't compartmentalize these things the way he wants to."
Juan Williams ( Fox News Sunday ) reports that Saddam has subtitled Wag
the Dog in Arabic and is blanketing Middle Eastern airwaves with its
broadcast.

            Will
Clinton invoke executive privilege to veil conversations about the alleged
hanky-panky with Monica? "A political nonstarter," states Al Hunt ( Capital
Gang ). "Richard Nixon did for executive privilege what the Boston Strangler
did for door-to-door salesmen," quips Mark Shields ( Capital Gang ). The
Nixon parallels continue on NBC's Meet the Press , where Joe diGenova
faces off with Clinton spinner Lanny Davis, demanding that the president
confess to having hired private dicks to investigate private citizens
(including himself and his law-partner wife).

            
The pundits offer varied interpretations of
Mike McCurry's interview with the Chicago Tribune , though all agree that
he is too competent to have misspoken (and all claim to be his friend). Robert
Novak ( Capital Gang ) reports the consensus view that McCurry, like
Vernon Jordan, is distancing himself from Clinton. Others suggest that the
remarks must be interpreted as the first steps toward a bawdy version of "I
didn't inhale." No one cared to speculate whether Clinton would ultimately
admit to necking, heavy petting or, mon Dieu , frottage (a k a dry
humping, a k a outercourse).

            Spurred
by the recent governors' conference held in Washington, D.C., the pundits
confer Issue 3 status on the state budgets. Republican governors are acting
like New Democrats, shelling out for costly early-childhood and education
programs. Why? Because that's what people like.

            

               Fish Cheer: 
               Late Edition twice
rolls footage of the Columbus protesters silencing a distressed Madeleine
Albright with the refrain, "1-2-3-4, we don't want your racist war." But even
an amateur lip reader could discern that one chanting activist was not using
the word "racist" but another two-syllable word, which begins with an "f."

            
               Stutter
Step: 
               McLaughlin Group host John McLaughlin is reduced to near
incoherence this week, apparently the victim of a balky TelePrompTer. Returning
from a commercial, McLaughlin turns to the camera and pauses. With falling
expression he stutters, "Uh ... The question is ... uh ... the following ...
What is the question? ... Uh ... The question is ... Uh ..." Finally McLaughlin
turns to a smiling Robin Wright and spits out, "Uh ... What about all this?"
McLaughlin redeems himself later with the observation that, in a recent
appearance, playful Iraqi minister Tariq Aziz chose a beret just like the one
Monica wears in the infamous video where Schmucko gives her the big hug.

            

               Singing for His Supper: Why does
Lewinsky attorney William Ginsburg still rate invitations to the Sunday shows?
This week, he recycles the same suit and bow tie and evasions on Face the
Nation and Meet the Press . He chiefly concerns himself with abusing
archenemy Kenneth Starr, though Tim Russert chastens him by reading back a
series of quotations that document how, not too long ago, the lawyer was a
professed member of the Ken Starr Fan Club. Ginsburg attempts to build sympathy
for his client, though he refuses to discuss his client's account of events,
specifics of her proffer, her legal strategy, her future plans, her definition
of a sexual relationship, or anything else of interest. Why does he bother to
appear? Perhaps to plead for a Lewinsky defense fund, which, as prime
recipient, Ginsburg did in the most shameless manner imaginable.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
