
   
   
      
         
            Midterms and the Single Girl

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            Monica Lewinsky's decision
to retain new legal help is Issue 1. The Supreme Court's rejection of Kenneth
Starr's fast-track request is Issue 2, and upcoming midterm elections--Issue
3--spur the opinion mafia to wonder how the ongoing scandal will react with
congressional races. The post-mortem on California primaries and ballot
initiatives straggles in as Issue 4.

            The
biggest development of the week, according to George Stephanopoulos (ABC's
This Week ) and Kate O'Beirne (CNN's Capital Gang ), is Monica's
revamped legal team. Her new representatives are "famous for cutting deals,"
reports Gordon Peterson ( Inside Washington ). Dumping Ginsburg is a
pretty sure sign that Monica is eager to negotiate with Starr again, agrees
almost everyone. This, warns O'Beirne, could spell "real trouble" for the
president.

            The White House is so spooked by the prospect of Lewinsky
cooperating, believes Jane Mayer ( Washington Week in Review ), that it is
beginning a quiet smear campaign against her. She is not a very credible
witness as it is, observes Capital Gang guest Rep. Bob Matsui, D-Calif:
The tapes contain inconsistencies, and her affidavit contradicts the tapes on
which she anyway admits, "I'll lie any time in order to get ahead."

            The Supremes' unwillingness
to give Starr an expedited hearing--Issue 2--is generally taken as a small to
medium White House victory. It will delay Starr's investigation still further,
note all the pundits, though O'Beirne wonders whether Lewinsky's cooperation
may eliminate Starr's need to quiz Clinton aides. Juan Williams ( Fox News
Sunday ) lobs out the idea that Starr is pursuing Bruce Lindsey so doggedly
because Lindsey knows who authored the infamous talking points given to Linda
Tripp.

            Will this
hiccup lead Starr to offer Congress a preliminary report? Most likely, think
Mark Shields and Paul Gigot (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ).
Definitely, predicts Bill Kristol (ABC's This Week ).

            
Will scandal shape the upcoming congressional
races? It's "a Bill Clinton problem, not yet a Democratic Party problem," says
Jack Germond ( Inside Washington ). But really, who cares! All the
commentariat wants to know is: How will the races shape the scandal? Incumbents
are wary about rocking the boat with scandal hearings.

            The
Republican Party leadership wants Starr to deliver nothing until after the
elections (Shields; George Will, This Week ; Gwen Ifill, NBC's Meet
The Press ; Tony Blankley, CNN's Late Edition ; and David Bloom,
Meet the Press ). In fact, Orrin Hatch's comments on the shows this week
should be construed as signals from the GOP to Starr asking him to withhold a
report, charges Bloom. But after the election, says Blankley, there is a "99.99
percent" chance that a Republican Congress will pursue any case Starr can
deliver.

            The California primaries and ballot initiatives demonstrate
that 1) California voters are content with the status quo (career politicians
won big) and 2) it doesn't take money to win elections anymore (millionaire
political neophytes lost big). It just shows that all incumbents who aren't
under house arrest will win, quips Gigot (the only incumbent to lose was a
representative under house arrest).

            The vote
on Proposition 227 is evidence of the public will, says Gigot--the people
reject screwy ideas such as bilingual education. It shows only that
California's own bilingual education system is unpopular, dissents Clarence
Page ( The McLaughlin Group ), and says nothing about other states'
programs. The defeat of Proposition 226--labor unions can still make political
contributions without member approval--contradicts the idea that money doesn't
matter in California, argue Cokie Roberts ( This Week ) and Robert Novak
( Capital Gang ).

            

               They would have fired him several weeks
ago: The entire pundit establishment is, of course, pleased that William
Ginsburg will no longer haunt Washington offices and sound stages. Careful what
you wish for, Mayer cautions her fellow pundits: You'll miss his clownish
antics when he's gone.

            

               
                  Omnia vincit amor (unless you work for the Weekly Standard): Brit
Hume ( Fox News Sunday ) speculates on why Lewinsky might not cooperate:
She still has a hopeless crush on the president. Though she was crazy for the
man until recently, thinks David Frum ( The McLaughlin Group and the
Weekly Standard ), she now understands that Clinton will never abandon
the first lady. Accordingly, she is willing to turn on her formerly
beloved.

            

               California girls, er, women: Shields
( NewsHour ) cites the astounding fact that until this week a male
candidate had not won a Democratic primary for governor or senator in
California since 1986! David Broder ( Meet the Press ) trots out the
equally astounding fact that this is the first California gubernatorial race
between two white males in 20 years!

            
               Not that there's anything
wrong with lawyers; some of my best friends are lawyers: Lapsed lawyer
Stuart Taylor ( Inside Washington ) on cover-ups and obstruction of
justice: "Lawyers do things every day that would strike the average American as
a cover-up."

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
