
   
   
      
         
            No Sex Please, We're Pundits

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            The collapse of the tobacco
deal (Issue 1), rumblings of Social Security reform (Issue 2), and an end to
Ireland's "troubles" (Issue 3) push Tailgate to the fringe of the marquee.

            Who
derailed the tobacco deal? It was "gold rush, mob psychology" among greedy
politicians, argues Paul Gigot (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ). Senate
legislators were so entranced by pots of money that they lost their heads and
neglected to offer the tobacco firms something in return (Gigot; Evan Thomas,
Inside Washington ). Gigot also accuses prominent Dems--like Sen. Ted
Kennedy, D-Mass., and Rep. Henry Waxman, D-Calif.,--of derailing the bill in
hopes of creating a campaign issue with which to truncheon the Republicans.

            Steve Roberts reports that the tobacco agreement is being
marketed as a protect-the-kids bill (PBS's Washington Week in Review ).
This strikes Charles Krauthammer ( Inside Washington ) as disgustingly
hypocritical, because the original deal--accepted by the tobacco CEOs--contains
the same underage smoking preventive measures as the Senate's. That is,
avarice--not a desire to protect children--is firmly in the driver's seat.

            But the
tobacco firms are political untouchables, the commentariat agrees. Tobacco CEOs
can't even buy congressional friends--an unprecedented spectacle that astounds
Cokie Roberts (ABC's This Week ). Perhaps Congress can unilaterally
implement the derailed provisions, hope a few (Nina Totenberg and Jack Germond,
Inside Washington ; Al Hunt, CNN's Capital Gang ). Thomas
disagrees, arguing that the Supreme Court will ixnay cigarette advertising
restrictions on First Amendment grounds.

            
Tony Blankley (CNN's Late Edition ),
joined by Robert Novak ( Capital Gang ), dubs the hounding and
vilification of legal business enterprises an "ugly moment." Krauthammer and
Bill Kristol ( This Week ) are virtually alone in worrying about the
distributional consequences of a sin tax (Kristol endorses middle-class tax
cuts as offsets).

            The
commentariat marvels that politicians are willing to discuss Issue 2, Social
Security reforms, at all. (On four of the six shows considering Social
Security, a panel member mentions that the issue was formerly the "third rail
of American politics.") Clinton is broaching the issue, says Susan Page
( Late Edition ), because he wants history to remember him as something
other than the prez who coupled with Monica Lewinsky.

            The public is wary of Republicans who want to monkey about
with Social Security, warns Mark Shields ( NewsHour ). Only Democrats can
safely approach the issue--it is like "Richard Nixon going to China," he says.
If the stock market crashes, the calls for privatization will simmer down, say
Shields, Steve Roberts, and George Stephanopoulos ( This Week ). Everyone
praises Bill Clinton for his role in Issue 3--the breakthrough agreement in
Ireland. Even Clinton-hater Kristol respects Clinton's accomplishment,
gleefully suggesting that after Clinton is hounded out of office for witness
tampering and obstruction of justice, President Al Gore should name him a
peripatetic negotiator. But George Mitchell, the former Senate majority leader
who mediated the negotiations, receives greater acclaim: "The Nobel Peace Prize
committee can take a vacation," says Hunt. "It goes this year to George
Mitchell." Success in Ireland just proves that the World's Only Superpower must
intervene more frequently, say Kristol, Steve Roberts, and George Will ( This
Week ). A few pundits stress potential pitfalls along the road to peace. The
"leverage of the ruthless is considerable," says Will.

            The
commentariat has nothing new to say about Issue 4, the president's ongoing
legal battles. Everyone wonders what Starr will do. Everyone wonders how
Congress will react.

            

               The Commentariat Would Like a Nonsmoking
Table, Please: Most polls agree that a quarter of the American adult
population smokes regularly. It's interesting to note that of the 21 pundits
who held forth on tobacco legislation this weekend, only Jack Germond professes
to currently being a smoker. Germond is happy to shell out an extra sawbuck per
pack if only it'll keep kids from getting hooked.

            
               Double 
               Dribble
Results Are In! Steve Roberts medals in singles competition for shoehorning
his opinion that presidential diplomacy is "indispensable" in the New World
Order into both Washington Week in Review and Late Edition . Never
one for complacency, he teams up with his wife, Cokie Roberts of This
Week , for the doubles competition: The pair repeat the prediction that even
privatization-friendly Dems will cynically whack GOP candidates who dare to
support privatizing Social Security.

            
               Legacy, Legacy, Who's Got
the Legacy? With the sex scandal on hold, pundits are back to business as
usual. Which means it's time to dust off the L-word and commence guessing: What
will Clinton's legacy be? Could it be peace in Ireland? wonders Margaret
Carlson ( Capital Gang ). How about Social Security reform? asks
Gigot.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
