
   
   
      
         
            Beijing or Bust

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            The death of the tobacco
bill and Clinton's upcoming visit to China vie for the Issue 1 berth. Steve
Brill is Issue 3. A raft of unfocused speculation about Monica Lewinsky's next
move is Issue 4.

            All the pundits save John
McLaughlin ( The McLaughlin Group ) agree Clinton should use his China
tour to publicly spank the Chinese for human rights abuses. (McLaughlin thinks
"Asiatic" leaders ought to be chided behind closed doors.) Eleanor Clift
( The McLaughlin Group ) believes Clinton needs to flatter his hosts as
well as confront them--she terms it "a delicate dance."

            Steve
Roberts (CNN's Late Edition ) worries Clinton will "wimp out." Clift
points out that Clinton made critical comments during Jiang Zemin's recent
visit to the United States and predicts he will toe the same line in China. All
the hot air expended on China disproves the idea that Americans don't care
about foreign policy, notes a grinning John Harris (PBS's Washington Week in
Review ).

            The anti-tobacco bill is dead because Big Tobacco bought
the Republican senators, charges Margaret Carlson (CNN's Capital Gang ).
True enough, agrees Al Hunt, but let's not forget that the trial lawyers bought
the Democrats. Paul Gigot (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) disagrees,
citing a WSJ/NBC poll taken before the industry's ad campaign that indicates
people viewed the bill primarily as a revenue-raising instrument. Big Tobacco
didn't kill the bill, argues Gigot, the bill killed itself.

            Gigot and
Mark Shields ( NewsHour ) agree that the big loser in the tobacco bill's
death is Bill Clinton. It was his chance to put something in the history books,
says Shields. It proves that he is feckless, says Gigot.

            
Will the vote affect midterm elections? It will
hurt the Republicans, predict Shields and Mara Liasson ( Washington Week in
Review ). It will be "a wash," predicts Gigot, because anti-smoking voters
will be balanced by anti-tax voters. Several pundits suggest the Republicans
may backtrack by passing a slimmed-down bill to cover up their assassination of
this one. (Jeffrey Birnbaum of Washington Week in Review terms this a
"tobacco leaf" bill.)

            In his
second week as press scourge, Steve Brill remains a hot topic. (He appears on
this week's Meet the Press .) Conservatives describe his article as "not
an honest piece of work" and "more than sloppiness" and Brill himself as a
"slime artist," who "on fire ... will never be doused" (Brit Hume, Fox News
Sunday ; Tony Blankley, Late Edition ; Robert Novak, Capital
Gang ; Tucker Carlson, The McLaughlin Group ). The middle way is best
expressed by Howard Kurtz (NBC's Meet the Press )--he scolds Brill for
undisclosed campaign contributions and for overstretching his legal case
against Kenneth Starr but applauds him for casting light on the media.
Lars-Erik Nelson ( Meet the Press ) pronounces Brill's article "a great
public service for the American people."

            

               What on Earth Are These Two Talking
About? John McLaughlin dedicates the final minutes of his show to the
proposition that contemporary American culture sneers at fatherhood: Men are
regarded as "inseminating instruments, superfluous after that." McLaughlin's
take is accurate in "a general, nonspecific way," says Tucker Carlson. Carlson
presumably means that anti-father thinking is a widespread belief of which
there are no instances.

            
               Would
You Say That if He Knocked on Your Door? Gigot's advice to Starr: Whenever
you have the impulse to give an on-the-record interview, you ought to "just sit
down, take a Valium, and get over it."

            

               Well Said: Shields on the Brill flap:
"It's an interesting story, rather than an important story."

            
               A Message for Kids Who
Want To Be Federal Judges Someday: The Seattle showing of Fox News
Sunday had all the usual suspects as advertisers (grain brokers,
telecommunications firms, luxury car companies) as well as one unexpected spot
apparently meant to keep 4- to 6-year-olds off drugs. The ad features a purple
cockroach being spread on toast, all the while singing, "I'd rather eat a big
old bug, than ever take a stupid drug!"

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
