
   
   
      
         
            Press on Press

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            The commentariat elects
itself Issue 1 this Sunday, prompted to self-reflection by a Steven Brill
article criticizing Kenneth Starr's media dealings. The upcoming presidential
trip to China is Issue 2. Political wrangling surrounding the tobacco
bill--Dead? Not dead?--is Issue 3.

            An
admission: Pundit Central, like most viewers, hasn't read Brill's article. The
fact that Pundit Central found himself without a clear sense of the article's
focus or length after sitting through eight hours of TV commentary is no
compliment to the opinion mafia.

            Al Hunt (CNN's Capital Gang and NBC's Meet the
Press ) pronounces it a "brilliant" piece, which analyzes the media's "rush
to judgment" during the scandal's first week. Bob Woodward ( Meet the
Press ) criticizes its conclusions, but agrees that the 28-page article is a
laudable effort to "put the press under a microscope." On Fox News
Sunday Tony Snow doesn't want to talk about the press--he believes the "key
allegation" is that Starr improperly leaked. Ruth Coniff reads the 54-page
article as an argument that "Starr calls up his reporters," and they do his
bidding. Brit Hume assures her that the "20-something" page article makes no
such claim.

            Pundit Central went to the
Sunday edition of the Paper of Record, which tells him that: 1)Brill's article
addresses early press coverage of the scandal; 2)Brill interviewed Starr;
3)Starr admits to meeting with reporters; 4)Starr and Brill disagree over
whether such meetings were illegal; and 5)Brill thinks Starr used overeager
media to squeeze Lewinsky. Brill himself appeared on several of the shows to
discuss Point 4. Clintonians, led by Rahm Emanuel ( Meet the Press ), made
appearances to call for an investigation.

            Juan
Williams ( Fox News Sunday ) speaks for many when he argues that the
article is "one-sided ... distorted," because it ignores White House behavior.
Williams suggests that Brill's article, appearing in the inaugural edition of a
magazine Brill publishes, is more publicity stunt than serious journalism. Wolf
Blitzer asks CNN's Late Edition pundits about Starr's motives in
granting Brill an interview. He's somewhere between naive and idiotic, agree
panelists. Several pundits also fret that talk about Starr and the media will
obscure the big issue--the president's behavior.

            
Margaret Carlson ( Capital Gang ) thinks
Clinton is "being a little bit wussy," on Issue 2, his agreement to visit
Tiananmen Square. Other pundits will be satisfied if he uses the occasion to
lecture the Chinese about the importance of human rights. Mark Shields (PBS's
NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) thinks our China policy is dictated by
commercial, not strategic, interests. Shields and Kate O'Beirne ( Capital
Gang ) would like to see America use its economic muscle to force human
rights reforms. Paul Gigot ( NewsHour ) shares these goals, but thinks
increased trade will prove a more effective strategy.

            Issue 3,
the viability of the long-suffering tobacco bill, confounds everyone. Bill
Kristol (ABC's This Week ) is amazed that the GOP is getting away with
opposing a tobacco bill. Gwen Ifill ( Washington Week in Review ) reports
that Republicans have been emboldened recently by a widely circulated poll
about voter attitudes. George Stephanopoulos ( This Week ) quips that
voters are "for [the tobacco bill], but don't care about it." Shields notes
that the Democrats are in a win-win situation--if the bill dies, the
Republicans can be attacked as pro-teen smoking; if it passes, the Democrats
can claim credit. In the absence of legitimate campaign issues, he predicts,
this could become a relative biggie.

            

               Opinions you can carry in your pocket:
Add "saves need to follow news" to the list of reasons why one should watch
Meet the Press . Host Tim Russert to Woodward: "Where are we in this
story [presidential scandal]? What should the public know or think about this
story: Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky?" Woodward--understandably flustered by
this unenviable task--takes 56 seconds to say, in effect, that l'affaire
Lewinsky is but one episode in a larger scandal.

            
               It's Sunday, what channel
is this? During a rare religious segment on This Week (Southern
Baptist convention provides the news peg), Stephanopoulos mentions a biblical
passage urging women to submit to their husbands, when George Will jumps in.
Will happens to have the Bible with him at the ABC sound stage , and
intends to read the scriptural passage in question! Cokie Roberts and Sam
Donaldson also quote Scripture during the segment to buttress their arguments,
apparently from memory.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
