
   
   
      
         
            Clownin' With the Commentariat

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            Issue 1 is Maryland's
prosecution of Linda Tripp on wiretapping charges. Issue 2 is whether Congress
will actually pass a health insurance reform bill. Issue 3 is the related
question of whether this particular session is a do-nothing Congress. Mostly,
though, the opinion mafia decides to spend time trading bons mots. With
relative stillness this week from the White House, the Hill, Kenneth Starr's
office, and the world of international diplomacy (excepting Ireland,
unfortunately), the commentariat must clown about to keep the crowd's
attention. From the standpoint of wit, rather than substance, it is a good
week.

            Most
pundits agree that the Maryland prosecutor's timing--he began his wiretapping
prosecution just as Tripp began her testimony for Starr--is highly suspect.
Steve Roberts (CNN's Late Edition ) and Margaret Carlson (CNN's
Capital Gang ) think it poetic that Tripp is caught up in a politically
motivated, Mickey Mouse charge, since Starr is using her against Monica
Lewinsky in the same way. Sam Donaldson (ABC's This Week ) and Susan Page
( Late Edition ) note that the main issue is still the president's
behavior.

            Amajority of the commentariat thinks that HMO reform
strikes a chord with voters in a way that tobacco and campaign finance reform
did not. The big dispute between Democrats and Republicans will likely be over
whether patients can sue their HMO, predicts Gloria Borger (PBS's Washington
Week in Review ). A bill will surely be passed--and soon--predicts Page.

            Congress
has recently been accused of doing nothing of importance recently. This is
true, say Michael Bechloss (NBC's Meet the Press ), Bill Kristol ( This
Week ), and Mark Shields (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ). The reason
is that people are generally quite content, say Kristol and Doyle McManus
( Washington Week in Review )--incumbents don't want to rock the boat.

            

               I Work in Politics; COBOL Programming Is
Just My Hobby: The surest proof that political talk shows lack fodder this
weekend is John McLaughlin dedicating the first 10 minutes of his program to
the year 2000 bug. Can someone please tell Pundit Central why exactly the
political pundits of The McLaughlin Group feel comfortable holding forth
on a supremely technical arcanum? Worse still, Y2K threatens to become the
preferred Big Think Question for TV talk shows over the next 18 months, as
modeled by Sam Donaldson ( This Week ). Interrupting IRS Commissioner
Charles Rossotti's thoughtful discussion of IRS legislative reform, Donaldson
bursts out with: "Are you ready for the year 2000? Are the codes in your
computers all changed now?"

            
               While
We're on the Subject of Y2K: The biggest howler of the week belongs to Pat
Buchanan ( The McLaughlin Group ), who suggests that the Y2K bug might
have a silver lining because it puts computer programmers to work. A majority
of economists believes that during a severe depression--which certainly doesn't
describe America right now--it's important to pay people to do make-work
(digging ditches or restoring hiking trails will also do). But Pundit Central
doubts you could find a single economist who would classify a slew of COBOL
programmers fixing antiquated mainframe systems as either a consumable good or
service. Of course any sane person recognizes the importance of paying computer
experts to fix oncoming problems (just as it is important that plumbers fix
antiquated pipes), but the use of their time is a cost, not a benefit.

            

               Wait and See? But Won't the Producers Be
Angry? Said Ken Bode ( Washington Week in Review ): "We're going to
skip [this week on WWIR ] the possibility of Monica Lewinsky testifying
at Linda Tripp's trial and--blah, blah, blah--for this week, and I think our
viewers probably will be happy to hear that we are going to skip it. We'll see
if it happens."

            
               Good
Point: 
               This Week 's round table signs off by predicting the outcome
of Sunday's World Cup final. Only Donaldson was right (France won), but Kristol
admits he picked Brazil just because the French would be insufferable if they
won.

            

               But Which Lady Republican? Mark Shields
( Capital Gang ) reports: "One lady Republican said to me this week, 'If
Ken Starr and Rudy Giuliani switch places, the murder rate in New York City
would triple and Bill Clinton would be indicted.' " On NewsHour he
relates another borrowed quip (from Morris Udall): "When Democrats form a
firing squad, they form a circle."

            
               Margaret Carlson Admits
to Beating Drug-Addicted Wife! In a discussion on the effectiveness of
anti-drug ads, Carlson ( Capital Gang ) says, "I have not used any drugs
since I saw that frying pan ad." (Later during the show she proposes to pay
Robert Novak $1 per minute to keep his yap shut. Both Al Hunt and Shields chip
in. But can these three compete with CNN's deep pockets?)

            
               McGrory Chimes in:
Mary McGrory ( Meet the Press ) on a Time journalist who once
covered the president and recently gave an interview discussing a shared but
unconsummated moment with him--"[Journalists] are supposed to talk about news,
not things that didn't happen. I mean we have enough with completed passes, we
don't need to go into incomplete passes."

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
