
   
   
      
         
            The Not So Secret Service

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday), click here.
            

            The opinion mafia has eyes
for only one issue this weekend: Secret Service testimony. Well, actually they
take a moment to discuss the politics of homosexuality too.

            No one
disputes the legal finding--affirmed by 11 judges and justices--that Secret
Service agents cannot refuse to testify before a grand jury. As to the safety
of current and future presidents, however, the commentariat is evenly split.
Mark Shields (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ), Eleanor Clift, Jay
Carney, and Pat Buchanan ( The McLaughlin Group ) all argue that
presidents are imperiled. William Safire (NBC's Meet the Press ),
Lawrence Kudlow, John McLaughlin ( The McLaughlin Group ), and Brit Hume
( Fox News Sunday ) accept the appeals court's argument that the Secret
Service will not be hampered. Hume suggests the inability to "engage in
felonious conduct" in front of agents should not cramp any president's style.
Buchanan and Clift agree--for once--in their prediction that Congress will
legislate some form of protection for agents from a compulsion to testify.

            And what will the agents have to say? The commentariat
cleaves roughly along ideological lines. Safire, Buchanan, Robert Novak (CNN's
Capital Gang ), Sam Donaldson (ABC's This Week ), Neil Lewis, and
John Harris (PBS's Washington Week in Review ) think the White House's
spirited effort to keep the Secret Service agents away from the grand jury
proves that agents will give damaging testimony. Bill Kristol ( This
Week ) thinks the agents might testify that Clinton met with Monica Lewinsky
Dec. 28--timing that not only contradicts Clinton's sworn testimony (that he
never met with Lewinsky after Christmas) but suggests they met to discuss legal
strategies. Liberals predict the agents' testimony will prove unimportant.
Clift argues that Kenneth Starr already has the Secret Service agents'
logs--their testimony will only be corroborative. Margaret Carlson ( Capital
Gang ) claims sources close to Starr's office say the agents have nothing
damning to relate. Al Hunt ( Capital Gang ) is sure the agents saw no
crimes. It looks like Starr is just on a fishing expedition--he has no solid
reason to question the agents--charges Shields.

            A number
of opinion mafiosi suspect that--since Tripp testified and the Secret Service
agents are testifying--we are in the "endgame" of the Clinton-Starr battle. A
typical comment is Cokie Roberts' ( This Week ): "I think we're now
talking about the endgame. We're going to get this testimony, get Monica
Lewinsky either with immunity or without immunity, and then go to Capitol
Hill." (Question for Roberts: What about Bruce Lindsey?) Pundit Central
cautions readers to beware of pundits bearing predictions (especially the
prediction that Lewinsky's testimony is imminent). For example, one month ago
Michael Duffy ( Washington Week in Review ) predicted Lewinsky would
testify in "the next couple of weeks" and Tucker Carlson ( The McLaughlin
Group ) said she would testify "very soon." Three weeks ago Novak
( Capital Gang ) announced, "this thing is coming to a head," while David
Gergen ( The McLaughlin Group ) guessed that Lewinsky would testify in two
or three weeks.

            
Recent newspaper advertisements suggesting that
homosexuality is a curable disorder are distasteful to most voters, agree
almost all the commentariat. Conventional wisdom is that the conservatives who
funded the campaign intend to mobilize conservative voters and to raise money
for conservative candidates. Kristol notes that the ads are correct in one
sense: A small number of people have indeed practiced then left the homosexual
lifestyle. Tony Blankley (CNN's Late Edition ) diagnoses this as an
instance of the rule that divisive social debate conducted in the political
arena will, at some point or another, become ugly. Buchanan ( The McLaughlin
Group ) thinks religion can, in fact, allow many people to resist their
homosexual urges.

            
               Render
Unto the Representative What Is the Representative's: On Capital
Gang , the discussion turns to Republicans, homosexuality, and the Bible,
whereupon host Mark Shields prods guest Rep. Bob Livingston, R-La., for his
opinion on the moral status of gays. Livingston responds that the Bible and
politics should not mix but affirms that the Bible 1) is very old; 2) has been
"effective throughout the inception of mankind"; 3) is variously interpreted;
and 4) presents a road map to a successful life in America. (Livingston does
not seem to notice the obvious conflict between Points 3 and 4, nor the factual
difficulties raised by Point 2.) Shields is dumbstruck by Livingston's slippery
deftness but gets off this quip: "I have no idea whose side you're on or whom
you're defending but I know you just endorsed the New Testament."

            

               Meta-Meta: 
               Late Edition features
a video clip of Susan Page, Blankley, and Steve Roberts giving their thoughts
on the Lewinsky scandal just after it had sprung (six months ago, in case
you're counting). Then the three were asked to comment on these past thoughts
(none found any errors, of course). As far as Pundit Central knows, this is the
first instance of talking heads elevating their own comments to the status of
newsworthy chat fodder. This makes Pundit Central quite anxious, since
reviewing the commentariat is his job.

            
               But Then Who's Watching
for the English? Steve Roberts ( Late Edition ), during a discussion
of the politics of homosexuality, tells Blankley, "You know and I know that
there are letters going out right now by candidates all over the country
saying, 'The gays are coming, the gays are coming. Raise money.' " Blankley
replies, "And there are fund-raisers going out in other parts of the country to
raise money: 'The conservatives are coming, the conservatives are coming.'
"

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
