
   
   
      
         
            A Courting We Will Go

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            Issue 1 news is that, by
winning in federal court and moving against Monica Lewinsky, Kenneth Starr
lands on top this week. He's a serious prosecutor, not the rogue we once
thought, admit the pundits. The nuclear standoff between Pakistan and
India--Issue 2--frightens just about everyone. Issue 3--the death of a
conservative--provokes a flurry of pronouncements on the life and times of
Barry Goldwater.

            Starr's
flawless string of legal victories--he has won 11 decisions against the White
House so far--legitimizes his investigation in the eyes of many. Bill Clinton
is "on the wrong end of a no-hitter," quips Paul Gigot (PBS's NewsHour With
Jim Lehrer ). What is more, continues Gigot, the court opinion given
midweek--that Bruce Lindsey and Sidney Blumenthal are not protected from
testifying--provides specific and independent confirmation that Starr has
credible evidence. In light of recent court victories, to argue that Starr is a
rogue prosecutor is now to argue that "we have rogue courts too," says Stuart
Taylor (NBC's Meet the Press ). But, adds Al Hunt (CNN's Capital
Gang ), we should remember that even if Lindsey and Blumenthal are compelled
to testify, it is unlikely the two Über -loyalists will spill very
much.

            Most of the commentariat believe that Starr is likely to
indict Lewinsky. It's mostly a move to have Clinton testify under oath,
believes Tucker Carlson (CNN's Late Edition ).

            Bob
Schieffer (CBS's Face the Nation ) and Steve Roberts ( Late
Edition ) both note that recently released court documents unmask White
House arguments that legal battles impede Clinton's official duties. This is in
direct and egregious opposition to earlier and more public statements holding
that it is business as usual in the Clinton White House.

            
Robert Novak sums up the common belief quite
nicely when he labels Issue 2--nuclear weapons tests in India and
Pakistan--"scarier than hell." The question for the world, says Robert
Greenberger ( Washington Week in Review ), is "How do we put the genie
back in the bottle?"

            Who is to
blame for the nuclear standoff? Not the U.S. president, since India and
Pakistan have been at each other's throats since "Bill Clinton was in
knickers," says Margaret Carlson ( Capital Gang ). Novak disagrees:
Clinton, George Bush, and Ronald Reagan share equal blame for treating Pakistan
shabbily since the end of the war in Afghanistan. And let's not forget that
both the Pakistani and Indian governments are highly volatile and unstable,
cautions Hunt.

            The commentariat agrees that Barry Goldwater 1) was a giant
in modern political conservatism and 2) was an endearing straight-talker.
Pundits are wowed by his basic American-ness: "an American original" (Mark
Shields, NewsHour ; Tim Russert, Meet the Press ); "an honest
American" (Shields, Capital Gang ); "a genuine American patriot" (Hunt,
Capital Gang ); "a genuine American hero" (Dan Quayle, Fox News
Sunday ); and "the Bulworth of his generation" (Clarence Page, ABC's This
Week ).

            Even on the heels of his
death, a few voices pipe up about his frightening bellicosity (Evan Thomas,
Inside Washington ; Morton Kondracke, Fox News Sunday ). Others
note that he voted against the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

            Most
legacy talk, however, concerns his influence on the GOP. In Gigot's mind, he is
the "most successful loser" in political history--his failed presidential run
defined a conservative agenda that was eventually elected in the person of
Ronald Reagan. Haynes Johnson ( NewsHour ) credits him with bringing the
South and Sunbelt into the GOP. Novak goes against the flow to argue that
Goldwater retarded the conservative movement by not finding room under his
robes for the poor and the religious.

            

               Have You Stopped Beating Your Spokesman?
Charles Bakaly, Starr's new spokesman, gave his inaugural Sunday show
appearance to Fox News Sunday , only to have interviewers Tony Snow and
Brit Hume run the oldest play in the book on him. Bakaly says "no" to several
Snow questions, all of which essentially ask: Have you decided when to deliver
a report to Congress? Hume follows by asking whether this means that Starr's
office is committed to eventually delivering a report (thereby indicating that
Starr has credible evidence of impeachable malfeasance). Bakaly, looking
positively dyspeptic, answers: "Uh. ... That's probably more accurate, without
making a definitive statement." Possibly, Bakaly meant to give the impression
that Starr has a good hand without formally stating anything, but more likely
it was an unintentional snafu.

            
               Read
Chaucer Lately? The entire McLaughlin Group laughs at John McLaughlin's
views on whether the title "intern" qualifies as a de facto double-entendre. He
contends that, in common conversation, "intern" can signify something akin to
sexual receptacle, ergo no respectable young thing would accept the job
title. McLaughlin's most laughable observation: Delight in double-entendres is
a largely contemporary fascination.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
