
   
   
      
         
            Tripp to China

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            Issue 1 is the Chinese
telecast of President Clinton's sharp comments to Jiang Zemin. Sometimes
gleefully, sometimes grudgingly, the commentariat pronounces Saturday's
telecast an important victory for the United States and Clinton. This week's
obligatory opining on Issue 2-- l'affaire Lewinsky --centers on the
upcoming grand jury testimony of Linda Tripp.

            Just in
time for the Sunday shows, Clinton criticized the crackdown in Tiananmen and
China's general approach to human rights. The televised criticism will have a
long-lasting effect, believes Sam Donaldson (ABC's This Week ): "You let
a little freedom get started, you can't stop it." "Great stuff," agrees Brit
Hume ( Fox News Sunday ). Robert Novak (CNN's Capital Gang ) is
"very proud of the president," though he believes China's evolution into a free
state will not be sped by lectures.

            Many pundits note that at the outset the trip smelled like
a public relations disaster (China refused visas to Radio Free Asia
correspondents and arrested several Chinese dissidents). Steve Roberts (CNN's
Late Edition ) called it "sticking a finger in the president's eye."
Nevertheless, the televised debate "redeemed" Clinton in the eyes of Mara
Liasson ( Fox News Sunday ). But a few critical voices point out that the
decision to broadcast the debate was Jiang's, not Clinton's--further evidence
that Clinton is Jiang's stooge (Cokie Roberts and George Stephanopoulus,
This Week ; Hume; Steve Roberts).

            The
Republican-Democrat role reversal on China policy amazes Steve Roberts--the GOP
talks about human rights while Dems defend business interests. "It's actually
enough to make your head spin," agrees Tucker Carlson ( Late Edition ).
Margaret Carlson ( Capital Gang ) charges that conservatives profess
support for human rights over commerce just to court votes. Conservatives know
that they won't alienate their true constituency--big business--because
conservatives don't control the White House and therefore have no foreign
policy teeth. "The farther you are away from power, the more likely you are to
bash China," says Carlson.

            
The commentariat doesn't have much that is new
to say about Issue 2-- l'affaire Lewinsky . Everyone thinks that Monica
Lewinsky's long awaited testimony is just around the corner. Everyone seems
tired of waiting. John McLaughlin ( The McLaughlin Group ) complains that
Clinton gets to take a vacation in August while the opinion mafia must hang
around swampy Washington just because a new wrinkle might break.

            The only new development is
the revelation that Tripp will testify next week. Eleanor Clift ( The
McLaughlin Group ) thinks the timing is suspect--it may be an attempt to
steal Clinton's China thunder. Let's not forget that Clinton rescheduled the
China trip to coincide with the expected Paula Jones trial date, points out
Hume. Tripp's testimony will be a "bombshell," says Stephanopoulus. Tripp's
testimony is proof that Starr's inquiry is coming to a close, say others.
(Caveat emptor: the same voices that have been predicting a close for
months.)

            Al Hunt
( Capital Gang ) alleges that Starr is an out of control prosecutor. Novak
attacks the president for his tactics of delay. This is an argument that Novak
and Hunt have been having since Day 1 of the scandal.

            

               Won't This Hurt Tony Blair's Feelings?
Most of the Sunday shows begin with a brief news report on the China trip
delivered by a foreign correspondent. Generally, correspondents strike an air
of stern impartiality, just as on the evening news. But not Fox News
Sunday 's Jim Angle, who reports, "Jiang went toe-to-toe with Bill Clinton,
the smoothest talker in the Western world."

            
               Pundits Get It Right:
Pundit Central, responding to reader mail, has decided to keep stats on the
opinion mafia. Last week, Eleanor Clift predicted that China would detarget its
missiles, and Michael Barone predicted the outcome of Colombia's election. Last
month, Paul Gigot guessed that Clinton's scandal would not be resolved during
June. All three are correct and earn a point each, though Gigot loses half a
point for scoring on a bunt.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
