
   
   
      
         
            China Pattern

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            The weekend belongs to Bill
Clinton. Issue 1: Allegations that Chinese and corporate campaign donations to
Clinton and the Democrats compromised U.S. security. Issue 2: The court's
rejection of Clinton's executive privilege claim for Secret Service guards. The
crumbling tobacco deal places a distant third.

            "It's
serious," says Mark Shields (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) of the
prima facie evidence of a Chinese- and corporate-quid for an American
satellite-technology transfer quo. The commentariat agrees. "What was the
national security damage?" asks Paul Gigot ( NewsHour ). The pundits chew
on the question, but nobody can connect the dots of satellite waivers, know-how
leaks, and campaign donations, says Margaret Carlson (CNN's Capital
Gang ).

            Only Pat Buchanan ( The McLaughlin Group ) and William
Safire (NBC's Meet the Press ) discern a distinct pattern of
play-for-pay. Safire expresses "no doubt" that the Chinese influenced U.S.
policy with their money. ("Am I glad we're off the sex topic," Safire adds.)
Bill Kristol (ABC's This Week ) finds watershed significance in the fact
that Hill Democrats deserted Clinton in the vote on future satellite waivers.
The China connection is "driving a wedge" between Democrats and Clinton,
Kristol says, and the Hill vote foreshadows future defections from Team
Clinton.

            Tempering
the hard line are Susan Page and Steve Roberts (CNN's Late Edition ), who
say corporate soft money--not foreign money--is the real problem. Doris Kearns
Goodwin ( Meet the Press ) further puddles the issue, insisting the "whole
system has become corrupted." Other pundits downplay the accusations of treason
and malfeasance, noting that Republican presidents were the first to enlist
Chinese assistance in launching U.S. satellites (Doyle McManus, PBS's
Washington Week in Review ; Eleanor Clift, The McLaughlin
Group ).

            
Clinton's trip to China and scheduled visit to
Tiananmen Square draws fire from Tony Blankley ( Late Edition ) and Chris
Matthews ( The McLaughlin Group ), who calls it Bill's "Bitburg." George
Stephanopoulos finds the symbolism of Clinton's Tiananmen visit "shameful." But
George Will speculates that Clinton could turn the visit into a big moment if
he uses the occasion to denounce the massacre.

            Liberal
Al Hunt ( Capital Gang ) frames the weekend's dull center, imploring Janet
Reno to get to the bottom of Chinagate by appointing an independent counsel to
investigate campaign-finance violations.

            The court's rejection of the executive privilege claim for
Clinton's Secret Service guard--Issue 2--is interpreted as a huge victory for
bruised Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr. Starr is batting "10 for 10" against
presidential legal challenges, note Tim Russert ( Meet the Press ) and
Fred Barnes ( Fox News Sunday ), proving that he's "not a rogue
prosecutor" (Susan Page, Late Edition ). "The judge was downright
scornful of the White House," adds Barnes.

            The executive privilege
ruling is a big so-what for Safire and Juan Williams ( Fox News Sunday ).
Clinton doesn't really mind losing individual court cases as long as losing
buys him time. His "delaying" strategy is to run the clock down until the
November elections, then win Congress back with just 12 new seats and shut down
the Hill investigations with his new majority.

            The
tobacco settlement--Issue 3--is dead for now, says Gwen Ifill ( Washington
Week in Review ). "The Senate just isn't in a barter mood, which is what
[legislation] requires," Ifill says.

            
               Sorry, It Was Never in My Mouth: "The Monica Lewinsky
case, per se, has left a bad taste in a lot of people's mouths," says
pundit-in-training Ruth Conniff of the Progressive ( Fox News
Sunday ).

            

               Mark Shields Loves Late Edition :
Punditry's leading exponent of redundancy, Mark Shields, plows new ground on
NewsHour . Ordinarily, he recycles sound bites from his Friday
NewsHour gig on Saturday's Capital Gang . This week, Shields
expresses amazement at the White House spin machine's "cautious, almost slow"
response to the Chinagate accusations. This precise sentiment was voiced last
week by Tucker Carlson on Late Edition .

            

               --Jack
Shafer
            

         
      
   
