
   
   
      
         
            Dan Burton's

             

            
               GET
"PUNDIT CENTRAL" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Monday morning
delivery of Pundit Central, plus "Today's Papers" (daily) and "International
Papers" (Tuesday and Friday), click here.
            

            The pundits inflate Rep. Dan
Burton's anti-Clintonism to Issue 1. Previously, protestations that Clinton was
getting a bum rap were aimed at Kenneth Starr, right-wing money, or Newt
Gingrich. But the friction between Burton and, well, just about everybody is
now discussed as a Very Serious Issue. Gingrich's continued offensive against
the president is Issue 2, and U.S. pressure on Israel is Issue 3.

            Everyone
agrees that further revelations about the Hubbell tapes, coupled with Burton's
admission that he's out to get the "scumbag" president, have tainted Burton's
investigation. "This is the week Dan Burton imploded," announces Paul Gigot
(PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ). What's more, absent Burton's
stupidity, the Hubbell tapes would have been a slam-dunk GOP victory, leading
Gigot to charge Burton with "political malpractice."

            The commentariat enjoys swapping stories about the extent
of Burton's lunacy. Al Hunt (CNN's Capital Gang ) hears that Burton's
aides wear latex gloves while opening mail, for prophylaxis against
left-wingers sending condoms to his office. According to Mark Shields
( NewsHour ), GOP leaders have always known Burton is a genuine
nutter--remember that stunt with the rifle and the watermelon?--and therefore
the blame must rest on Gingrich's shoulders. The GOP needs to shut Burton up
and make the magisterial Henry Hyde, R-Ill., the face of the GOP investigation,
advises David Gergen ( The McLaughlin Group ). Robert Novak ( Capital
Gang ) reveals that Burton was nearly sent packing by a panicked Gingrich,
who was placated when Burton fired David Bossie, a top aide.

            The
conventional explanation for the newly aggressive Gingrich--he has publicly
supported Burton and advises GOP colleagues to speak of Clinton's "crimes"
rather than of charges--is that he is shoring up support in his political base,
the extreme right wing. This may be sound politics, argues George Will (ABC's
This Week ), because midterm elections are often decided by political
bases. So are presidential primaries, notes Mara Liasson ( Fox News
Sunday ). On the other hand, according to Juan Williams ( Fox News
Sunday ), "Newt Gingrich is the best fund-raiser the Democrats have ever
had."

            
Has Newt tainted himself, à la Burton? Almost
certainly, answers liberal Shields. He undoubtedly treads on "delicate
political territory," euphemizes the conservative Gigot.

            Bibi
Netanyahu's unwillingness to attend Monday's Washington, D.C., negotiations
leads some to blame the White House negotiators and others to blame Israeli
stubbornness. However, most discussion of the issue centers around Hillary
Clinton's publicly revealed support for a Palestinian state. Gigot accuses her
of "practicing foreign policy without a license." Bill Kristol ( This
Week ) spins the most elaborate explanation: The United States has lost
support in the Middle East after the recent Iraq standoff, and the first lady's
intentional gaffe is an unofficial way of placating Arab leaders at the expense
of Israel.

            

               P.S.--I Won't Be Attending Your Funeral,
Either: During a rambling discussion of oncology and longevity on This
Week , Kristol shares the happy fact that his wife has a centenarian
grandmother and a great-grandmother who lived past 100 too. "Having [good]
genes is still the way to go!" grins Kristol. "We'll enjoy meeting her second
husband," mutters Cokie Roberts.

            
               Spin
Doctor, Heal Thyself: On Meet the Press (NBC), one former Bush aide
jeers that "[Clinton is] trying to do a job in Israel--too bad his wife doesn't
agree with him." An unremarkable snipe coming from a noted anti-Clintonite,
except that this particular snipe comes from Mary Matalin, who spent a
quarter-hour this Sunday sneering at every point offered by her fellow
panelist and husband, James Carville. Sample sneer: After admitting that her
hubby's strategizing may have kept Clinton from being ridden out of D.C. on a
rail, Matalin predicts that "Someday, in the history book, you [Carville] will
look back and rue the day that you helped wage this war the way you have."

            

               Speak Into the Ear Horn, Boy! Burton, on
the ropes after a particularly tough Tony Snow ( Fox News Sunday )
question, retreats with the most transparent wiggle of the weekend. "Beg your
pardon?" asks Burton, cupping his ear. Again the question is asked, again
Burton feigns deafness: "I ... I ... I'm sorry. I can't hear you." An amused
Snow lobs Burton a few softballs--What do you think about China? Who does your
transcribing?--which cures Burton's temporary deafness.

            
               Wiggle No. 2: The
second most transparent wiggle of the weekend belongs to Rep. John Conyers Jr.,
D-Mich., who appears to defend his request that Attorney General Reno
investigate collusion between the Democratic Party's two favorite bogeymen: Dan
Burton and Kenneth Starr. Does Conyers have any evidence that could provide
cause for investigation, wonders Brit Hume ( Fox News Sunday ). Well, no,
that's actually what Reno is supposed to investigate.

            

               --Bruce
Gottlieb
            

         
      
   
