
   
   
      
         
            Big Tools

            The New York Times
national edition leads with the battle for the control of Russia. The Washington Post leads with the conflict between President
Clinton and Newt Gingrich over tobacco policy. USA Today
leads with the Supreme Court's ruling that even a white defendant can challenge
a grand jury indictment on the grounds that jury selection discriminated
against blacks. The Los Angeles Times leads with the Senate's rejection of a
White House proposal that would have provided $3 billion for refurbishing
crumbling school buildings.

            On Friday, reports the Times , Russia's legislature will hold its
third and decisive vote on whether to ratify Boris
Yeltsin's nomination of Sergei Kiriyenko as prime minister. Yeltsin has vowed
to dissolve Parliament and hold national elections if the nomination is again
rejected. Boris Berezovsky, reports the paper, one of Russia's richest and most
ruthless businessmen and a former Yeltsin financial backer, has emerged as one
of Yeltsin and Kiriyenko's biggest obstacles (Kiriyenko is also opposed by the
Communists). On Tuesday, Berezovsky used a newspaper he owns to openly tell
Yeltsin what he has to do to avoid a big fight over the nomination: abandon
market reform.

            The Post lead is about the Democratic reaction to Gingrich's comment at a fund-raiser
Monday night that what's happening with teen smoking has "nothing to do with
Joe Camel." More important, he said, are smoke-glamorizing movies like
"Titanic." Yesterday, reports the Post , Bill Clinton responded, saying,
"Teen smoking has everything to do with Joe Camel, with unscrupulous marketing
campaigns that prey on the insecurities and dreams of our children." The
context for all this jockeying is the fate of the tobacco bill, with its
restrictions on teen marketing, now awaiting consideration by the full
Senate.

            The Post notes that Clinton and Gingrich have in the past lamented
the tendency of Washington policy battles to become too personal, and this
story is itself a perfect example of the problem. Although the remark by
Clinton quoted above is the only one of his in the piece that's a direct
response to Gingrich, the headline reads, "Clinton Calls Gingrich a Tool of Big
Tobacco."

            There's real calumny in another Post story inside, which reports that
last week, Rep. Dan Burton, who has been heading up a House investigation into
Clinton campaign finances, told the editorial board of the Indianapolis
Star , "If I could prove 10 percent of what I believe happened, he'd
[Clinton] be gone. This guy's a scumbag. That's why I'm after him." The story
goes on to note that Burton is planning to release tapes made by authorities of
Webster Hubbell's phone calls from prison. He is suggesting that the tapes
reveal incriminating conversations with White House officials. Federal law
would prohibit such tape disclosures--except that it doesn't apply to
Congress.

            
               Damn, why didn't we think of that? The Wall Street Journal reports that China, worried that Avon,
Amway, Mary Kay and other direct marketers are building "ideologically charged
sales networks" headed up by "charismatic leaders," has issued an immediate ban
on door-to-door sales.

            The WP front features a story raising an interesting issue relating
to the new male potency pill, Viagra. The pill is designed to correct impotence, but
there are already indications that huge numbers of men who are not impotent,
but who simply want the sex drive of a 19-year-old, are eager to take it.
(Scientists don't know yet if it would have this effect.) If such a Viagra
Niagara materializes, insurance companies are likely to require, in order to
contain costs, medical proof of impotence for reimbursal. "Maybe some people
would rather have this than a Lexus," says one analyst. "But they should do it
with their own money."

         
      
   
