
   
   
      
         
            Bill Them Later

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with yet another congressional defeat of campaign
reform legislation. The New York
Times goes with the latest on the Senate anti-smoking bill. USA Today
leads with a General Accounting Office finding that most FAA field inspectors
feel their bosses ignore their safety recommendations. And the Washington Post leads with the filing of court papers by
President Clinton's lawyers that charge Paula Jones' legal team with being a
"stalking horse" for Ken Starr and with trying to sabotage the case proceedings
by raising unproven salacious charges, such as, in its most recent filings, an
unsubstantiated third-party version of a 20-year-old Clinton rape rumor.

            The LAT says that prospects for enacting comprehensive campaign reform this year are
pretty much dashed because on Monday the House leadership of Newt Gingrich
and Dick Armey adopted rules requiring any such measure to pass, not by the
simple majority that seemed in the offing, but by a two-thirds
"super-majority." The LAT reminds readers that the House's commitment to
the issue dates from a much-publicized handshake deal Gingrich made with
President Clinton in 1995. The paper quotes a California congressman as saying,
"The process has been rigged. . . . What's happening today is a real sham." The
collapse of reform also makes the WP and NYT fronts.

            This is the third time in recent months that campaign reform legislation has
fizzled. The headline, "GOP Leadership Defeats Campaign Reform Bill," is
getting to be right up there with "Extremist Group Claims Credit for Bombing"
and "Union Officials Indicted in New Jersey."

            Picking up where yesterday's USAT and WP leads left off, the
NYT lead explains that when, on Monday, Sen. John McCain officially
unveiled the comprehensive tobacco bill he'd been putting together, it was seen
to place no restrictions on private lawsuits against the tobacco companies,
although it does contain an annual damage ceiling of $6.5 billion (awards in
excess of that amount would be owed in full, but could be carried forward to
subsequent years). In order to qualify though, reports the Wall Street Journal , tobacco manufacturers would have to
meet targets for reducing underage smoking and cut back on outdoor and cartoon
advertising. The Journal says the absence of a restriction on lawsuits
was a surprise to all sides. A tobacco industry lawyer is quoted in the
NYT saying that the measure would lead to "a massive contraband market,"
and would "almost certainly drive companies into bankruptcy." In the
Journal , tobacco deal strategist Mississippi Attorney General Michael
Moore says industry types "think their stock prices are going to plummet." The
NYT says that despite such opposition, McCain has won substantial
backing on his committee. ("Today's Papers" can't help but notice that McCain's
name is all over the dailies these days--besides his smoking bill, he is also
one of the Senate's chief advocates of banning "soft money." All in all,
excellent issues to run for president on.)

            The WSJ "Work Week" column is given over to a topic near and
dear to TP's heart: working at night. The latest figures from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics indicate there are now 3.2 million folks on "graveyard"
full-time. And yes, it's quiet and you can go to the cheap movies when you're
off, but according to the Journal , night workers are more susceptible to
heart attacks, stomach troubles and depression. And 60 percent more likely to
get a divorce.

            An editorial in the WP notes that a full 30 years after
the passage of the Fair Housing Act, whites are still far more likely to own
homes, even controlling for wealth and income. The piece goes on to note that
in a recent study made in Washington, D.C., when 150 pairs of black and white
testers who were matched in income contacted local lenders, they encountered
evidence of racial discrimination 41 percent of the time. Significantly, says
the WP "the bias did not take the form of a simple 'no' that would show
up as clearly discriminatory in records. Instead, lenders didn't return phone
calls, didn't keep appointments, offered more expensive or inferior products or
made greater demands for credit information." The editorial endorses President
Clinton's budget request for an additional $22 million to combat housing
discrimination. A large chunk of that money will, says the paper, go towards
testers.

            An obvious but politically incorrect fact underlying the Kathleen Willey
brouhaha is that the main reason she got a one-on-one meeting with Clinton in
the first place was probably that she was a woman. If a man has to meet with
someone to accomplish a given task he'd just as soon that the someone have
breasts and smell nice. Women know this and take full advantage. (And why
shouldn't they?) Witness the WP , which reports that Andie MacDowell is meeting with Reps. Dick Gephardt and
John Dingell to lobby for more stringent oil pipeline regulations for western
Montana, where she happens to own a home. Guys, you try getting that
meeting.

         
      
   
