
   
   
      
         
            Goldwater: A View From A Broad

            
               USA
Today and the Los Angeles Times lead with President Clinton's decision to
accept a federal judge's ruling that executive privilege does not protect his
aide Sidney Blumenthal from being questioned by Kenneth Starr. Clinton will
however, the papers report, still pursue an effort in the courts to invoke
attorney-client privilege to block Starr's effort to question another aide,
deputy White House counsel Bruce Lindsey. (This story is also the off-lead at
the New York Times
and the Washington Post .) The NYT goes with the South Korean
president's call for the West--including the U.S.--to drop its sanctions
against North Korea, and the WP leads with the news that Mexican drug
cartels are, via a new far more potent strain of heroin, gaining a growing
share of the U.S. drug trade.

            The LAT says that Clinton's legal shift has the benefit of allowing
him to fight on, but on much less controversial grounds, and yet still perhaps
delaying Lindsey's re-appearance before Starr's grand jury for months. But the
NYT lead editorial still sees plenty of controversy,
calling the tack a "dodge" and describing as "stonewalling" Clinton's refusal
to straight-off cooperate with Starr's "reasonable requests for information in
a legitimate criminal inquiry." What's more, argues the Times the claim
of attorney-client privilege as applied to Mr. Lindsey is "really little more
than another executive privilege claim in disguise," given that lawyer Lindsey
is foremost a political and policy advisor.

            Both the WP front and a piece inside at the NYT report that
Sunday's statement by President Clinton hinting at U.S. support for additional
international financial loans to shore up the Russian economy utterly failed to
have the anticipated soothing effect: Russian stocks fell another ten percent
and the ruble worsened slightly.

            The Wall Street Journal 's political reporting continues to be
disarmingly candid. On the heels of a recent piece that laid bare Trent Lott's
fund-raising, today's Journal surveys the many competing campaign reform bills on the House docket
(one dozen bills; 500 amendments) and concludes that "GOP leaders will assume
the role of full partners in overhaul legislation--in an effort to kill it." In
the end though, observes the paper, it may be a Democrat--Michigan's John
Dingell--who seals campaign reform's fate. He has been collecting Democratic
votes for a commission that would study and recommend further changes in the
system. (A big clue to how lightly Congress takes the issue. When Pearl Harbor
was attacked, FDR didn't appoint a commission to study and recommend further
changes in our defense posture.)

            The LAT front brings word of a legal ruling that may spell trouble for "reality" TV shows like
"Cops" and the use of hidden cameras and microphones by the likes of "60
Minutes" and "PrimeTime Live." The California Supreme Court ruled that
accurate, newsworthy news reports are protected by the First Amendment from
lawsuits merely alleging illegal disclosure of private facts, but the Court
also ruled that story subjects may sue if reporters and/or photographers use
offensive or intrusive methods to get the story. The case prompting the
decision involved a woman car accident victim ministered to by a nurse wearing
a tiny microphone for a TV show featuring real rescues. The woman survived but
the show broadcast her pleas to be allowed to die.

            
               USAT reports that billionaire George Soros has found another
struggling group to give aid to: poverty lawyers. Today, says the paper, with
government legal aid programs on the wane, Soros will launch a
multimillion-dollar initiative to fund 70 two-year public interest fellowships
for young law school grads, supporting their legal efforts on behalf of such
clients as battered women, the homeless, Native Americans and migrant farm
workers.

            Tributes to Barry Goldwater as the last of a breed of terminally
straight-talking politicians continue pouring in, but so far, only David
Broder's encomium mentions that the late Senator once showed reporters the near-nude and suggestively inscribed photo of herself a
woman fan had sent him.

            A bottom front WP story reports that yesterday Al Gore announced an
initiative to have the federal government write its
millions of forms, directive and letters in "plain language." An example he
cited is translating OSHA's "Ways of exit access and the doors to exits to
which they lead shall be so designed and arranged as to be clearly recognizable
as such" as "An exit door must be free of signs or decorations that obscure its
visibility." The Post waggishly provides another example, effectively
Goring the Vice-President: "There is no controlling legal authority that says
this was in violation of the law" should be recast as "There's no law against
it."

         
      
   
