
   
   
      
         
            Too Public Relations

            Killer tornadoes hitting the Southeast lead at USA Today and
the New York Times .
The incredible expanding budget surplus leads at the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles
Times goes with the Japanese prime minister's decision to try
countering his country's sliding economy by offering tax cuts.

            The Times has Pulitzer Prize winner Rick Bragg, whose forte is
Southern atmosphere, on the tornado case. He paints quite a picture of the death (at least 38 victims) and
destruction. "A ragged line of storms ripped through one little town after
another in Mississippi, Alabama and Georgia, destroying homes, churches and
schools, burying hundreds in rubble, even sucking people out of their damaged
houses and leaving one man dead in the branches of a tree." Bragg notes that
the National Weather Service gave the twister the most powerful rating on its
storm scale, but all its victims knew was that it "was off the scale of their
experience."

            The tornadoes are also top front at the WP . And the WP ,
NYT , and LAT all feature stunning top-front pictures of the
devastation. Oddly though, the LAT puts the story itself deep
inside.

            The WP lead drives home the point that the folks who for all those
years did such a below-average job of estimating budget deficits also stink at
estimating budget surpluses. The paper reports that the Federal Reserve now
says the surplus will be at least $50 billion for this fiscal year, up from
recent official estimates of $10 billion.

            The LAT reports that Japanese P.M. Hashimoto has bowed to a "torrent
of pressure from the United States, international investors, and elite Japanese
business leaders" and swapped his trademark fiscal austerity policies for an
economic stimulus package featuring lush tax cuts designed to persuade Japanese
consumers to do some spending. The tax cuts are also on the front pages at the
NYT and WP . As the LAT explains, Japan's increasingly high
savings rate has only exacerbated the Asian economic crisis, by drying up a big
export market for the floundering neighboring economies. And the NYT
adds that the U.S. has been advocating some sort of domestic stimulus because
of the risk that Japan might try to save itself instead by not only reducing
imports but also by dramatically increasing its exports.

            "Today's Papers" is somewhat surprised that none of the Hashimoto reporting
mentions the situation in the U.S. in 1993 when the incoming Clinton
administration was likewise attempting to address a sluggish economy. Within
the new government, there were strong deficit-cutting and economic stimulus
factions. But the deficit cutters got the upper hand and it is now widely
believed that their course of action has been the key to the current good times
here. Isn't this relevant to the Japan coverage?

            A big LAT front-page piece reveals that Microsoft has been secretly
planning a massive media campaign that, the paper says, was designed
to influence state investigators contemplating further anti-trust action by
"creating the appearance of a groundswell of public support" for the company.
The plan included "the planting of articles, letters to the editor and opinion
pieces" to be commissioned by Microsoft but presented as spontaneous local
offerings about "how wonderful it is to do business with Microsoft." When the
paper first asked Microsoft spokesman Greg Shaw about this yesterday, Shaw said
he was unaware of such a plan. But Shaw's name is on some of the confidential
company documents in the LAT 's possession and he later acknowledged the
PR plan but said it was "merely a proposal." The ad campaign per se does not
trouble "Today's Papers," but the idea of planting stories disguised as
independent efforts does. "TP" hopes that the independent stance of the
previous sentence is not thought by readers to in fact be part of a coordinated
company effort to simulate independence (GREG--Was this what you wanted
here?).

            The Wall Street Journal "Legal Beat" column reports that for
the first time ever the International Court of Justice in The Hague, the U.N.'s
main legal arm, has intervened in a U.S. criminal case and ordered the U.S. to
stay the execution of a Paraguayan citizen convicted of murder in Virginia. The
issue here, one that occurs not infrequently in the case of foreign national
criminal suspects, is that the cops forgot to tell the man about his right to
talk to the Paraguayan consulate.

            The NYT op-ed page features a satirical piece by two Harvard Lampoon
editors on the trend of luxury compensation packages being used to lure tenured
faculty stars from one elite university to another. But the piece is anchored
in fact: Columbia recently successfully enticed a Harvard econ prof with a
package that included a $300,000 salary, a $55,000-a-year job for his wife and
help getting their son admission to a tony prep school.

         
      
   
