
   
   
      
         
            Televisionaries

            USA Today
and the Washington Post lead with the FAA's grounding of the oldest 737
passenger jets. The national edition of the New York
Times leads with the U.S. decision to give Benjamin Netanyahu two more
weeks to reply to its proposal that Israel undertake a more substantial
withdrawal from the West Bank. But the later metro edition of the Times
leads with news of an imminent $60 billion phone company merger. The Los Angeles Times
goes with Sinn Fein's overwhelming endorsement of the Northern Ireland peace
deal.

            The 737 inspections ordered by the FAA last week (which USAT alone
led with on Friday) were apparently well warranted: 13 of the first 26 fuel
main fuel pump wires checked showed wear on their insulation, says USAT .
The WP is a little more reader-friendly about the actual
number of planes involved: it says every one of the first 13 planes checked
show some insulation chafing (the NYT , in its front-page story, says instead that this was
true of a majority of the first 13 planes looked at), and that the grounding
order affects 179 U.S. planes and 193 others worldwide. The Post also
helpfully explains that the order only affects planes at least 16 years old.
USAT reports that one 737 with 60,000 flight hours showed clear signs of
sparking in one location inside its main tank and bare wire in another. This is
of concern because electrical sparking inside a fuel tank is now suspected of
having brought down TWA Flight 800. (The story is also front-page at the
LAT .)

            SBC Communications (formerly Southwestern Bell), the West's dominant local
phone company is, reports the Times , set to acquire Ameritech, its counterpart in the Midwest, thus becoming
the nation's largest local phone company and recreating much of the old Bell
phone system. The paper reminds those scoring at home that the $60 billion
merger is the second largest in corporate history, trailing only March's $70
billion Citicorp/Travelers Group union. (And if you are meticulously updating
your copy of this list, odds are you are not scoring at home.) The lengthy
Wall Street Journal account points out that unlike many of
the recent mergers, which have at least attempted a merger of the CEOs as well,
in this deal the Ameritech brass are bailing out (with golden parachutes of
course). The story also makes the USAT front.

            The deep thoughts of television's top executives as they existentially
struggle with life after Seinfeld are on display in a NYT front-page
effort by its TV bigfoot Bill Carter. According to the Times , the mental
life of the tube titans is very complicated, struggling as they do with such
conundrums as the erosion of network share of the total viewing audience, age
demographic nuances, and the thinning of the talent and writing pools. Thank
God for Robert Iger, president of ABC, who has worked out what will surely soon
be known as the Unified Field Theory: "We'd do ourselves a world of good if we
took out the bottom third of our schedule, which is not only performing in
mediocre fashion but which is often mediocre in quality, and replaced it with a
higher quality program."

            
               Poor word choice or obituary humor ? Sunday's NYT carried the
obit of Paul G. Hearne, wheel-chair-bound his whole life but a tireless
advocate for the disabled who, among other accomplishments, helped write the
Americans With Disabilities Act. The write-up described Hearne as a
"wheeler-dealer."

            The WP recently reported that a civilian security guard on duty near
the Pentagon accidentally shot and killed a homeless man. A little story, yes,
but leave it to a Post reader to see the larger point. Why, Howard
Fenton asks, in a letter to the editor today, does the Pentagon of all places
have to contract out for protective services?

         
      
   
