
   
   
      
         
            NATO's Rocky Road

            The LAT leads with the U.S. stating that finally, Iraq has really been
cooperating with U.N. weapons monitoring efforts. The top national story at the
NYT is the Senate's debate about widening NATO. The WP leads with the decision
by federal corruption investigators to let Jimmy Hoffa's son, James P. Hoffa,
run for the Teamsters presidency. USAT goes with the Treasury Department's
launch of an investigation into the tactics of the IRS' criminal division.

            The American admission was made Monday at the U.N. by U.S. Ambassador Bill
Richardson, about inspections of Iraq's nuclear program and previously
off-limits government buildings. But he went on to say that the U.S. continues
to oppose any relaxation of economic sanctions on Iraq or in the U.N.'s weapons
inspection program, citing, notes the LAT , Iraq's continuing
insufficient cooperation in the areas of long-range missiles and chemical and
biological weapons. This story also makes the fronts at USAT and the
NYT , but the latter emphasizes the U.N.'s decision Monday night to
extend sanctions despite Richardson's conciliatory remarks.

            The nuances of the administration's thinking about sanctions are on display
in a NYT front-page piece that depicts Bill Clinton at a White House
meeting of Christian evangelical leaders, unaware that a Times reporter
was there too. Clinton asked the group to withdraw its support for legislation
aiming to reduce religious persecution overseas by imposing sanctions because
he said such bills put enormous pressure on whoever is in the executive branch
to fudge an evaluation of the facts of what is going on." The president needs
flexibility, he said, including the ability to impose sanctions.

            The NYT line on the NATO expansion discussion is that this is a quite
important issue that wasn't receiving its due in the Senate until yesterday,
when "after four hours of dueling monologues, however, something novel
happened: Debate broke out." But judging by the Times examples, it
wasn't exactly Lincoln-Douglas. There was Sen. Joseph Biden saying, "The worst
time to enlarge an alliance is at a moment of threat. This is the time and the
moment, nine years after the wall has come down, to end once and for all the
artificial boundaries," with Sen. Robert Smith responding, "They picked winners
and losers at Yalta. We are picking winners and losers here." (The Times
helpfully explains that Biden is for expansion, Smith against.) And there's
Sen. Jesse Helms' contribution: "The European Union could not fight its way out
of a wet paper bag."

            The LAT lead editorial sees the Senate in a "reckless rush" to
approve NATO expansion, stating that supporters have pressed their case with
slogans, not arguments. The NYT notes that ice cream mogul Ben Cohen of
Ben and Jerry's is actively campaigning against expansion. In Thomas Friedman's
column, Cohen explains why: Expanding NATO would be like Ben and Jerry's still
wanting to drive Haagen-Dazs out of business even if H-D had switched to making
hot dogs. The problem here is that Russia hasn't gotten rid of its, er.ice
cream machines.

            The reader who makes it down to the fifteenth paragraph of the WP
lead gets schooled on what it means to be a clean Teamster. That's where it
says that the federal investigator who gave Hoffa the green light fined him and
several of his running mates in the last union election more than $40,000 for
receiving improper campaign contributions, and held that Hoffa "did not testify
accurately" about his personal involvement in the preparation of campaign
finance reports. By contrast, the NYT , in its front-page Teamsters
story, broaches this point in the first paragraph, and observes in the fourth
paragraph that as a result of the negative findings about Hoffa, neither side
in the upcoming Teamsters election can run as an untainted reform
candidate.

            The WSJ "Work Week" column notes that the machinists union has licensed a
special collector's item for its 110th anniversary: a Winchester Model 94
rifle. Wait till the postal workers union hears about this.

            That NYT piece that caught Bill Clinton speaking off the cuff about
sanctions also includes his confession that late at night he often gets a call
from Chelsea asking him about some item from the next day's paper that she's
read on the Internet, but that he knows nothing about. Mr. President, may
"Today's Papers" humbly suggest."Today's Papers"?

         
      
   
