
   
   
      
         
            Courting and Mating

            The surprise congressional resurgence of campaign reform leads at the
Washington Post , New York Times ,
and Los
Angeles Times . USA Today leads with the FDA's warning about creatine, a
muscle-building supplement widely used by athletes.

            The dailies explain that House GOP leaders agreed to allow campaign finance
legislation to come to floor votes next month because reform advocates were
close to getting enough signatures on a special petition to force a vote
anyway. President Clinton is quoted saying the development was "great news,"
but House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt is quoted saying, "This was a retreat
not a conversion. The Republican leadership still opposes reform that reduces
the role of money in politics." And indeed the coverage points out that the
Senate has already defeated a ban on "soft money" once this session.

            Both the NYT and USAT fronts cover yesterday's oral arguments
in the fourth and final sexual harassment case the Supreme Court is
hearing this term. The issue in this one is whether a supervisor's single
threat saying a female subordinate's sexual compliance will ease her working
conditions constitutes harassment when her non-compliance meets with no adverse
consequences. The issue is an ingredient in the Paula Jones case and hence the
Court's decision here might affect her appeal. Both papers note that many of
the justices seemed genuinely perplexed during yesterday's arguments.

            Meanwhile, the WP front observes firm differences about gender on display in the Court's 6-3
decision to uphold the law that automatically grants U.S. citizenship to an
out-of-wedlock child if the mother is an American, but not if only the father
is. Justice John Paul Stevens, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist,
presumed that there is a closer connection between a mother and her child than
between a father and his. But Justice Ruth Ginsburg dissented, taking a pure
approach to sexual equality. The Post 's Joan Biskupic, notes that
generational differences seem to be at play in this decision, with the older
justices siding with the maternalistic bias.

            No wonder the Administration's announcement the other day that needle
exchange programs do work but won't be getting federal funds seemed so lame:
according to a front-page story at the WP , until a half-hour before
the press conference, HHS Secretary Donna Shalala was all set to announce
federal funding. That was when White House Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles told
her that President Clinton had decided the exchange position was too
politically risky.

            The WP runs an AP report stating that the first national survey of
physician-assisted suicide found that 6 percent of the front-line doctors
responding have hastened patients' deaths with lethal injections or
prescriptions. The Post story goes on to say that one-third of the
surveyed doctors would write prescriptions for deadly dosages. USAT says
that 11 percent of doctors would do so. The NYT , in the headline over
its survey story, says the finding is that physician-assisted suicide is
"rare." Meanwhile, the LAT reports on its front that Linda McCartney did
not die in Santa Barbara as the family first reported. The family admits now
that this was a diversion which, says the paper, has in turn spurred some talk
that perhaps her death was an assisted suicide.

            The WP front reports that NATO planning last summer to capture
Bosnian Serb leader and wanted war criminal Radovan Karadzic was compromised
when a French military officer met secretly with Karadzic. The NYT runs
the story inside, crediting the Post .

            According to the WSJ, the IRS estimates that in 1996 taxpayers who itemized
gave $84.3 billion to charity, up 12.4% from 1995. Concomitantly, many
charities are having banner years. For instance, the Journal notes
Baylor Healthcare System Foundation has raised $23 million through March,
surpassing the $17 million it raised in all of last year.

            The NYT front reports on a new web page for kids set up by the CIA
(www.odci.gov/cia/ciakids). The site is laced with trivia quizzes on world
geography and history. And it explains the agency's purpose: "Intelligence is
information needed by our nation's leaders, also known as policy makers, to
keep our country safe. Policy makers, like the president, do not have time to
read all the other countries' newspapers. There are just too many of them."
"Today's Papers" has never felt more patriotic.

         
      
   
