
   
   
      
         
            Gone Fission

            USA
Today, the Washington Post, and the New York
Times all lead with India's surprise nuclear tests, which are also the
subject of a lengthy WSJ front-page leader. The Los Angeles Times
puts this development just above the fold, but leads with the California
Supreme Court's ruling upholding the admissibility of DNA evidence, provided
prosecutors show that correct procedures were used.

            The NYT and WP note that Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari
Vajpayee, who announced the tests yesterday, came to power two months ago as
the head of a Hindu nationalist party that has advocated the embrace of nuclear
weaponry as a vehicle for achieving great-power status. The Times
reports that basically, within India the tests met with neither political
dissent nor Gandhian pacifism.

            Most everywhere else was different. The papers report that President Clinton
was "deeply distressed" (but, says USAT , he will still make his planned
trip to India and Pakistan later this year). Japan, Australia and New Zealand
condemned the tests, report the papers, and Japan--India's largest foreign aid
source--and the U.S. are considering suspending aid to the country. Although
the amount of direct U.S. aid is minuscule, the Times and Journal
explain that the Clinton administration is considering invoking a 1994 federal
law that would, besides cutting off aid, also bar billions in American bank
loans and World Bank and IMF aid. The NYT adds Britain and Germany to
the ranks of those not amused.

            And there was Pakistan, whose Foreign Minister Ayub Khan responded, reports
the NYT , by hinting that his country would consider conducting its own
nuclear tests. The papers all note the widespread fear that the tests could
signify heightened tensions between India and Pakistan and even a nuclear arms
race between the two countries. Neither country, the papers note, has signed
the treaties that constrain nuclear tests. Most of the papers observe that many
Indians feel the tests were really designed to send a message to China,
especially, as the Times , the WP , and the Journal report,
since the Indian Defense Minister said just last week that China, not Pakistan,
is India's "potential enemy number one."

            The Times nicely captures the bizarre scene of the Indian
announcement, in which Vajpayee ignored the likely geo-political shockwaves and
spoke instead of measured yields and expected values and offered his warm
congratulations to the scientists and engineers responsible. The NYT and
Post observe that one of the three tests was of a thermonuclear device.
The Post reminds the reader that is a hydrogen bomb. The Times
and WP say that despite spy satellites, the Indian tests seemed to have
caught the U.S. and the other established members of the nuclear club by
surprise.

            Everybody's off-lead is Janet Reno's decision to seek the appointment of an
independent counsel to investigate allegations that Labor Secretary Alexis Herman peddled influence and was
involved in an illegal campaign contribution scheme. This is the seventh time
Reno has asked for an independent counsel. The NYT editorial page wishes
Reno's sensitivity to conflicts of interest and campaign fund-raising
improprieties extended to "the broader and more important matter of the 1996
presidential fund-raising scandals." A Wall Street Journal editorial, "Democrats and Coverups," makes the
same point.

            The LAT front says there's a limit to how big these mega-mergers can
get: $250 billion. That's how much, the paper figures, it would cost for
General Electric, the nation's largest company, to buy Microsoft, the second
largest.

            Buried fairly deep inside the metro edition of the NYT is a very
brief item reporting that a defense contractor was sentenced in a procurement
case. What did he do? He sold defective parts for the cable system used to
catch U.S. Navy planes as they land on aircraft carriers. When these cables
fail, aircrews plunge to watery graves and flight deck personnel quite
literally get cut in half. What was the executive's sentence? Three months in
federal prison (Club Fed, no doubt) and three months of house arrest. Do you
think that punishment fits that crime? Another question: It's bad enough that
the law tends to downplay these cases, but why don't the papers make more of
being willing to kill service members to make a profit? Maybe it's because
they're too into profit and not enough into service members.

            Incidentally that WSJ editorial "Democrats and Coverups" makes the
slyest reference yet to the Monica problem. The piece is ostensibly about
Whitewater and the Web Hubbell tapes and the House Democratic counteroffensive
vs. Rep. Dan Burton. But it includes this: "Now, we don't doubt that it's
possible to wave all this away as partisan tit for tat. Problem is, serious
Democrats know that this scandal is about a lot more than tat."

         
      
   
