
   
   
      
         
            Nuclear Pakistandoff

            Everybody leads with the expected, but still earthshaking, first Pakistani
nuclear blasts. A measure of the event's significance is that the New York Times ,
Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times each go with two front-page bomb stories. The LAT and
WP feature big above-the-fold pictures of jubilant Pakistanis. The
NYT front features instead a shot of Pakistan's Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif walking alongside his army chief, both men grim-faced.

            The Pakistanis claim to have set off five explosions, although USA Today and
WP reports that the U.S. confirmed only one. (The NYT says "as
few as two.") But, according to USAT , the LAT and the
Times , U.S. officials are concerned that there will soon be at least one
more Pakistani atomic blast. And Pakistan announced, says the WP and
NYT , that it is already fitting nuclear warheads on its long-range
missiles. The LAT quotes an expert saying that this missile claim may be
more a statement of intent than fact. And the LAT is likewise consoling
elsewhere in its reporting, quoting three experts to the effect that India and
Pakistan may not henceforth feel the need to match each other weapon for
weapon.

            President Clinton made an eleventh-hour attempt to head all this off with a
phone call to Sharif late Wednesday. (And the WP reports that the
Chinese, the source of most of the Pakistanis' atomic know-how, also tried
getting them to stop the tests.) But Sharif's announcement of the
explosions--"Today, we have settled the score with India"--shows what Clinton
was up against. The LAT says that among Pakistanis there was "intense,
nearly unanimous" support for testing an atomic weapon. The NYT reports that in the hours just prior to conducting the
tests, Pakistan summoned India's diplomatic envoy and accused India of planning
a pre-emptive military strike on Pakistan's atomic testing center.

            In response to the A-blasts, under the same automatic provision of U.S. law
that kicked in on India, Clinton moved to cancel all U.S. aid to Pakistan (only
$4 million) and more significantly, to oppose all international loans. The
Pakistani government, the papers report, made an economic move of its own: to
keep money from fleeing the country, it froze all foreign currency accounts.
But the sanctions will hurt--after all, as the NYT observes, the globe's
newest open nuclear power is also one of its ten poorest countries. The
Wall Street Journal sees the sudden Asian nuke-out
(along with the China satellite flap) as eclipsing the dominant business-driven
foreign policy approach of the nineties, and returning security and moral
considerations to the diplomatic fore.

            Everybody's front has the latest Ken Starr move: his attempt to bypass the federal appeals process and go right to the
Supreme Court for a definitive ruling on executive privilege as it applies to
the Lewinsky case. (The NYT makes the least of the story, merely putting
a "reefer" to it on the bottom right front.) The rare tactic, says USAT ,
caught the White House by surprise. But, the papers note, it was used
successfully by Watergate special prosecutor Leon Jaworksi to pry Nixon's Oval
Office tapes from of his hands.

            The WSJ states that a special government report to be released next
week will criticize the CIA's failure to anticipate India's atomic tests.
According to the report, the oops wasn't primarily technical--it was human.

            The WP brings word that NEC will shortly become the first PC
manufacturer to take advantage of a recent legal settlement between Microsoft
and the DOJ by offering Windows 95 but no desktop icon for Internet Explorer. Instead, IE and
Netscape Navigator will both merely be supplied on a CD-ROM.

            Well, if smoking can reduce breast cancer, it's only fair that, according to
the NYT front, catalytic converters have been found by the EPA to be a
significant cause of global warming. Add this to such eco-perversions (noted by
Gregg Easterbrook) as: logging, acid rain and the hole in the ozone layer all
appear to reduce global warming.

            The WP runs an editorial today calling for a vote against Prop. 226, the
California ballot measure requiring unions to get a member's permission before
political expenditures can be drawn from his or her dues. What's wrong, says
the Post , is that such a restriction does not likewise constrain
corporate political contributions. The NYT comes out against 226 too, and for the same reason. But
the Times is open to a bilateral version in which labor unions must get
permission for political spending from individual workers and corporations must
do so from individual shareholders. Such an "evenhanded approach," says the
Times , "could reduce the amount of special-interest money sluicing into
both parties and help diminish the corroding influence of big
contributions."

         
      
   
