
   
   
      
         
            Bank Shots

            The Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times lead with Monday's big merger announcements, and everybody has
lots of front-page and inside banking stories. The New York Times ,
which led with the mergers yesterday, goes with the looming high costs of the
midterm elections. USA Today goes with the mysterious breakdown experienced by
AT&T's "frame relay" data network, which is used by hundreds of
multinational companies to handle such tasks as central database access and
e-mail. The main effects the paper mentions are a reservations slowdown at
Northwest Airlines and travel agencies' difficulties getting credit card
authorizations.

            The WP lead reports that the company emerging from the
BankAmerica/NationsBank combine will command eight percent of all bank deposits
in the U.S., close to the ten percent limit currently mandated by federal law.
The Post notes however, that unlike last week's Citicorp/Travelers move,
which challenges Depression-era laws barring different types of financial
services from being offered by a single company, this bank merger is within the
boundaries of current law, because in 1994, Congress allowed coast-to-coast
banking. But, mentions the Wall Street Journal , Sen. Arlen Specter is contemplating
legislation that would raise the hurdles to Fed approval of big bank
mergers.

            The WP reports that many bank stocks soared on the merger news, while
the LAT identified more with customers and employees than shareholders,
going high in its story with concerns that the BankAmerica/NationsBank deal
would lead to higher fees and could eliminate 8,000 jobs. The NYT
doesn't get to that latter bit of unpleasantness until the fifteenth paragraph
of its bank story.

            The WP breaks out a separate story about what the deal means to customers, dominated by wiggle-claims
quoted from others like "bigger is not necessarily better when it comes to the
accounts of individual customers" and "bigger banks do tend to charge higher
fees." But USAT 's news section cover story on bank mergers says it
flat-out: "surveys show that big banks charge higher fees," and backs that
assertion up with several data bullets.

            A NYT op-ed makes the point that in light of these big bank
mergers, the government should reconsider the consequences if one of the new
monsters fails. Current law allows the government to completely protect
depositors and creditors of banks considered too big to let fail. This policy
ignores the lesson of the S and L crisis in the 1980s and of the current Asian
imbroglio: the promise of complete protection contributes to bank failures by
encouraging risky bank ventures. So, the piece argues, big account holders
should have to personally bear some of the loss that comes from a failure. That
would encourage them to monitor their banks more closely.

            The NYT lead says that the upcoming midterm elections are apt
to break spending records because candidates are buying television time far
earlier than ever before. The trend is being attributed to Bill Clinton's 1995
decision to mount an early and intense television campaign. Another influence
the paper cites is that of Steve Forbes, who became a major force in early
Republican primaries by spending tons of his own money on TV ads. It's become
obvious that politicians fear not having the campaign money far more than they
fear any scandal caused by raising it. The paper notes that Alfred Checchi, a
candidate for the Democratic nomination for Governor of California, began
buying television ads just before last Thanksgiving for the primary vote this
coming June. Checchi's standard, says the Times , promises to lead to the
most expensive state election in history.

            The WSJ "Work Week" column notes a simple position taken by the
National Association of Manufacturers that could encourage high school students
to take their classes more seriously: use high-school transcripts more in
hiring.

            The WP business section reports that a company that until now has
sold its language-understanding software to the intelligence community for
spy-detection is poised to sell a similar product designed to help the
government and brokerage firms monitor the offers and promises made by brokers
in communications with (potential) clients. The idea is that the program that
once could pick out the needle of a phrase like "covert operative" in a
haystack of e-mails has now been trained, says the paper, to do the same for
"opportunity of a lifetime" and "so safe even my mother has it." Forgive
"Today's Papers" for wondering--but how will this software catch brokers if it
couldn't catch Aldrich Ames?

         
      
   
