
   
   
      
         
            Butt Heads Butt Heads

            The en masse defection of the major tobacco manufacturers from Congress'
efforts at a settlement leads everywhere. The industry promises to immediately
launch a public relations offensive against a "coercive, Big Brother-type
Congress." The Washington Post says the campaign kicks off today with
newspaper ads reading, "We Agreed To Change The Way We Do Business . . . Not To
Go Out Of Business." Everybody quotes President Clinton's determined reaction:
"They can be part of it or they can fight it," although oddly, USA Today
leaves out the most important part of his quote: "We're going to get this
done."

            The tobacco stance became official with a speech against the tough and
expensive Senate bill by the RJR CEO, Steven Goldstone, described by the papers
as "aggressive" and "defiant." Goldstone is widely quoted as saying,
"Washington has rushed to collect more tobacco revenues while playing the
politics of punishment." USAT quotes him describing the process as
"broken beyond repair." The Los Angeles Times adds that Goldstone raised the
specter of a thriving black market in cigarettes if the Senate bill were to
become law.

            The New York Times
and USAT point out that while Congress can proceed unilaterally in many
areas of the proposed legislation, this is problematic with the provisions that
touch on the curtailment of free speech, such as advertising restrictions.
Goldstone is quoted in the Times saying that if Congress imposes these
anyway, the companies "will fight in court." Feelings are running just as high
on the other side. The paper quotes the reaction of Sen. Kent Conrad: "Poor
babies." Both the NYT and WP note that Conrad expressed the idea
that all this tobacco manufacturer stridency is a stratagem designed to get the
current deal accepted without the addition of any harsher conditions.

            The NYT is admirably clear about the context producing such
skepticism: "The tobacco industry has dissembled so often in the past--about
whether cigarettes cause diseases, about whether nicotine is addictive, about
whether they market their product to children--that people are never sure what
to make of the companies' pronouncements." Now, if only the Times had
said "lied" instead of "dissembled"...

            The Wall Street Journal seems a little less surprised by all
this, claiming that "the reality is that tobacco companies for weeks have been
closed out of the legislative process." The Journal also sends along
word that Mississippi Attorney General Michael Moore, an architect of last
summer's original tobacco deal, says he understands the industry position and
calls on President Clinton and Congress to convene new negotiations.

            And lest we forget what this is all about, the WP reports that
a study in today's New England Journal of Medicine
suggests that non-smokers not only live longer, but have less sickness and
dependence on others in their last years.

            The WSJ and WP each run stories describing a new study
purporting to show that the differences between black and white investors are
considerable. Among those with incomes above $50,000, only 57 percent of the
blacks had money in the stock market, compared to 81 percent of the whites. And
while only 13 percent of the whites believed Social Security will provide at
least half their retirement income, 25 percent of blacks thought this.

            The NYT front reports that President Clinton has ordered the Departments of Defense, State, and
Justice to devise plans for the arrest and trial of Pol Pot, the Khmer
Rouge leader responsible for the death of perhaps a million Cambodians in the
1970s. According to the paper, the opportunity presents itself because the
Khmer Rouge, which has Pol Pot under house arrest, is in complete disarray.
Hmmm...wonder if the Khmer Rouge subscribes to the Times ...

            In a NYT op-ed, Andrew Sullivan assesses the career thus far of the
military's "don't ask, don't tell" policy. Sullivan notes that under the
policy, discharges of homosexuals have increased 67 percent (80 percent if you
figure in downsizing). Bill Clinton, Sullivan observes, has now fired more
homosexuals than any other employer in America.

            The front page of the NYT national edition brings word that, buoyed
by the soaring approval ratings of the sex-scandalized Bill Clinton, the
sex-scandalized Bob Packwood wants to get back in the game. He's thinking about
running for the Oregon state legislature. "Today's Papers" has just the
campaign slogan for him: "Still Packing Wood."

         
      
   
