
   
   
      
         
            University Admitting Mistakes?

            The Los
Angeles Times and New York Times
lead with the University of California's disclosure that as a result of
Proposition 209's mandate to abandon affirmative action in admissions, the new
freshman classes at its two most selective schools, Berkeley and UCLA, will
have far fewer minority students than in the recent past. The Washington Post goes with the Supreme Court's decision
allowing states to ban the courtroom use of polygraph results. USA Today
leads with news that might be heartening for many users of the now withdrawn
diet concoction Redux: a new study suggests that short-term use of the drug is
not associated with an increase in heart valve problems. But the paper goes on
to note that the study was sponsored by Redux's manufacturer and does not in
any case address the consequences of long-term use.

            The University of California admissions situation is relayed most
frantically at the LAT , which states that "the number of African Americans
accepted by UC Berkeley has plunged 66% and the number admitted to UCLA dropped
43%," without stating most of the raw numbers behind the percentages. (A common
journalistic mistake/trick.) The WP does use the raw numbers when
reporting on Berkeley, but unaccountably goes back to emphasizing percentages
when discussing UCLA. The NYT also shies away from the actual numbers of
students involved, but at least emphasizes the before-and-after-209 minority
percentages of the total admitted pool, an illuminating datum. Both the
LAT and NYT report that the minority drop occurred despite the
university's decision to give extra consideration to poor applicants, thus
proving that in California at least, class isn't race.

            One university official is quoted by the LAT as seeing in the shift
the message that California's secondary schools must improve, while the paper
has Prop. 209 architect Ward Connerly saying it means some of the burden for
admissions must be put back on black and Latino families and the students
themselves. A more striking Connerly quote somehow doesn't make the cut at
either Times , but is in the WP and USAT : "These numbers
will finally and conclusively put to rest the lie that we've heard for so long
from these campuses that race is only one factor in how they choose
students..It's the decisive factor." (The WP should have, by the way,
changed the present tense in that last sentence to the past, which was clearly
Connerly's meaning. USAT gets this right.)

            Some questions: Why does the NYT headline only mention the drop in
black admissions and relegate the drop for Hispanics to the subhead? Why don't
any of the stories mention the graduation rates for blacks and Hispanics
at the two schools under the old regime?

            The Wall Street Journal spills a lot of ink on tobacco, with
pieces about trial lawyers' pursuit of anti-tobacco cases, the attempt by the
anti-asbestos lobby to tap into any settlement deal, and the political spin on
the pending Senate bill. The "Capitol Journal" column paints a picture of a
bill in "deep peril," and of a sharply divided Senate besieged by an "enraged"
tobacco industry. In the end, says the paper, it may fall to one man to bring
order out of this chaos--Bill Clinton.

            Both the LAT and NYT go front-page with the news that an
eleven-year-old girl, Emily Rosa, did research for a science fair two years ago as a
fourth-grader that is being published today in the prestigious Journal of the
American Medical Association. Her project was a refreshingly simple experiment
that showed "therapeutic touch" practitioners don't have a special ability to
detect an energy field around human bodies. One question: why does the NYT say she showed that the healers detected a human
hand they couldn't see at a rate "no better than chance" would have predicted,
when her results show they scored only 44 percent, which is 6 percent
worse?

         
      
   
