
   
   
      
         
            Prop.-aganda

            A high-fatality, high-injury train wreck in Germany leads at USA Today and
the New York
Times --and pictures of it are on everybody's front. The looming
post-primary fight to reinstate public school bilingual education in California
leads at the Los Angeles Times . The Washington Post goes with the government's decision to
lower what counts as obesity, thereby instantly classifying millions of
Americans as overweight. They won't be able to become thin again by leaving the
country either: the new rules are more in line with those wielded elsewhere.
The Post notes that one of the critics of the move is C. Everett Koop,
who worries that it will discourage people from trying to lose weight.

            There's a lot in the papers about Tuesday's California primaries. The
LAT lead reports that in the wake of the passage of Prop.
227, which ends bilingual education for most students after one year, eight
school districts applied for waivers, but that the state school board will
probably not grant them. Meanwhile, says the LAT , a coalition of civil
rights groups opposing the measure has filed a federal lawsuit. And according
to USAT 's front, the superintendent of San Francisco schools says his
system will not comply with the new law while waiting for the lawsuit to be
resolved. Similarly, the LAT reports that as many as 1,500 L.A. teachers
say they may commit the "equivalent of educational civil disobedience" by not
teaching in English. The story offers a quotation from one teacher saying just
that, but the reader is left mystified as to where the paper came up with the
1,500 figure. Another curiosity: the piece delays until the seventh paragraph
the information that recently, 48 percent of those participating in a L.A.
teachers union election voted for ending bilingual instruction. Statistics
appearing elsewhere on the paper's front also make it clear that this is a more
nuanced issue than the LAT generally makes it seem: 37 percent of
Latinos voted against continued bilingualism, as did 57 percent of Asians.

            A NYT editorial says the defeat in California of several super-rich
candidates "may cause multimillionaires to rethink their plans for midlife
career changes." And a front-page WP piece says this development shows
that with the economy on the rise, the electorate's distaste for professional
politicians is on the wane

            The NYT , WP and the LAT (which carries the WP
story) fronts all report that the FDA has given a company permission to conduct
the world's first full-scale test of an anti-HIV infection
vaccine. The experiment will be conducted with 5,000 uninfected
participants over the next four years. All the pieces mention that such a study
has an inherent conflict: science says don't do anything to cloud the role of
the vaccine, while ethics says do everything. But none give the reader any idea
how this problem can be resolved, and so it's hard to see how the proposed
vaccine tests can avoid coming acropper like the recent controversial AIDS
research in Africa these papers reported on at some length.

            The Wall Street Journal continues to pass along good news for
the auto industry. The latest: sales of cars and light trucks were up 12
percent in May. Special incentive deals have been driving things, so the trend
could cool soon, but in the meantime it's producing some tremendous numbers: GM
minivans, for instance, are up 60.6 percent over a year ago, and for GM sedans,
the surge is 85.7 percent.

            Everybody's inside carries word that President Clinton notified Congress
that he will ask for yet another year of Most Favored Nation status for China,
meaning that China will continue to enjoy the tariff and trade treatment
extended to most other countries trading with the U.S. The WSJ points
out that with the recent ethical and national security controversies
surrounding China, Clinton is now spotlighting Beijing's value as a broker for
peace between India and Pakistan.

            In a WP op-ed titled "I Didn't Get Dumped," former Monica
Lewinsky attorney William Ginsburg settles scores on his way out of town.
Decrying the insular nature of D.C.'s political/legal culture, he observes, "A
person apparently needs a passport to get into Washington." Then comes the
self-praise: "I am.a hell of a trial lawyer, with an innate sense of right and
wrong and up for any fight, even with an anti-constitutional monster." And the
tired excoriation of the press: "To my detractors and the naysayers out there,
otherwise known as "talking heads," or "kibitzers," I say, bah humbug!" And
don't forget the Bulworth reference: "My former client is now represented
by.new counsel, and while I will remain a spirit, not a ghost, they must go
forward and represent her as they know best how to do." All this prose does
nothing so much as convince the reader that Mr. Ginsburg has something in
common with his former client: he probably blew it.

         
      
   
