
   
   
      
         
            Clinton's New Organ Policy

            
               USA
Today leads with a Clinton administration proposal for new rules
governing transplant organ availability. The New York Times
goes with the decision by Switzerland's three biggest banks to negotiate a
global settlement with Holocaust victims by setting up a compensation fund. The
plan does not include the Swiss government, whose central bank received the
vast majority of wealth stolen by Nazis from Jews and other persecuted groups.
The Los
Angeles Times leads with depressing news about California's second-tier
state college system: an overwhelming number of its incoming students lack the
basic math and English skills they should have acquired in high school. The
Washington Post lead headline is a hardy perennial,
relating to one of the worst public education systems in the country: "D.C.
Schools Chief Resigns."

            The new transplant rules, explains the USAT lead (and front-page
pieces in the WP , and the NYT ), aim at providing organs to the
sickest candidates first regardless of where they live, as opposed to the
current ones, which were conceived when organs couldn't be maintained outside
the body for nearly as long as they can now, and hence emphasize getting them
to the closest candidates. The private network that coordinates most organ
distribution opposes the shift, because of a fear that this change will atrophy
local transplant centers by diverting organs to a handful of large regional
ones, and also deny organs to people who can't travel. The papers all point out
that under the status quo, more than 4,000 Americans die annually while waiting
for needed organs.

            The LAT front reports that just two days before the NCAA Final Four
tournament game, a federal grand jury in Chicago has indicted two former Northwestern University players on charges of
attempting to fix the outcome of games for the benefit of bettors during the
1994-1995 college season. This is a "stinging blow" to the sport, says the
paper, because Northwestern has the reputation of placing academics above
athletics. The NYT runs the indictments story inside, adding that a
nationwide survey of Division I basketball and football players showed that 4
percent said they had gambled on a game they had played in.

            The papers note that Bill Clinton appeared in South Africa yesterday
alongside Nelson Mandela, but none could be bothered to put their stories about
the appearance--simply unthinkable as recently as four or five years ago--on
the front page. All the visit gets is front-page pictures with "reefer"
captions pointing to stories inside. This judgment is especially hard to
understand given yesterday's GOP charges that some spots in Clinton's traveling
delegation were in effect sold to mega donors to Democratic Party coffers,
making the trip a sort of flying Lincoln bedroom. By the way, over a
non-descript editorial, the WP serves up the perfect headline for
Clinton's apology-strewn safari: "Guilt Trip."

            Front-page pieces in the NYT and USAT report that one of the
Jonesboro shooting suspects is asking for his pastor and the other is crying
for his mother. And an inside NYT piece addresses the question raised
yesterday by TP about what the rules are nowadays governing identifying juveniles in the
paper. Almost every editor questioned says the crucial fact pushing
disclosure was that the names were already out there, in the local paper and on
the Internet. This is another example, like the tabloidization of the
mainstream press, where the dwarfs have ended up controlling the giants.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that Senate Judiciary Committee
Chairman Orrin Hatch is demanding that Microsoft allow its licensees and
partners to speak with Senate investigators despite nondisclosure rules in MS
contracts. Backing the demand is the committee's ranking Democrat, Sen. Patrick
Leahy, up to now a MS supporter.

            The national conversation on sexual harassment gets curiouser and curiouser.
Now comes Abe Rosenthal, who responds to Gloria Steinem's Times op-ed
from earlier in the week with one of his own. Steinem had argued that if an
uninvited sexual gesture by a man is met with noncompliance by a woman and then
is not followed up by him, no sexual harassment has occurred. Rosenthal
counters with a family secret. Many years ago, his older sister was walking in
the park when a man exposed himself to her. She screamed and ran home, where
she came down with a cold and then pneumonia and then a few days later, died.
Rosenthal's counter to Steinem is that mere uninvited sexual gestures can
be...fatal. This is a sad, sad story, but legally and morally irrelevant. To
think otherwise is to opt for making coming up behind someone and saying "Boo"
a crime, because yes, it just might possibly scare him to death.

         
      
   
