
   
   
      
         
            Emerging Measures

            The Citicorp and Travelers Group deal--the largest corporate merger ever--is
everybody's lead. Associated business and policy and personality stories take
up much of the rest of the day's news hole.

            The resulting insurance, banking and securities company will be called
Citigroup (narrowly edging out Travelerscorp, Groupcorp, Corpgroup,
Corptravelers, and Groupciti, we hear) and will become the fifth largest
American corporation. The newspapers' accounts of the size of the deal vary
somewhat: the New York Times
says it's $70 billion, the Washington Post says $82 billion. USA Today ,
the Los
Angeles Times and Wall Street Journal say it's $83 billion. The NYT
figure apparently doesn't take into account the increase in the companies'
shares during the Wall St. explosion--the Dow closed over 9000 for the first
time ever--the deal touched off.

            The papers report that the new financial services company will offer
"one-stop shopping" for consumers and corporations. The NYT and
WP are somewhat breathless about the possibility, but the LAT
says it's not at all clear that consumers want this, noting that previous
efforts to offer it have "generally failed." The WSJ elaborates, pointing out that previous
high-profile attempts by American Express and Sears to cross-pollinate with
Wall St. partners failed. In addition, notes the Journal , creating a
huge full-service financial edifice flies in the face of the trend toward
discount brokerage firms and cheap on-line trading.

            The dailies emphasize that the most striking part of the deal is that
current laws, in force since the Depression, prevent financial cross-selling on
this scale. The deal boldly challenges all this, says the WP , putting
pressure on Congress and regulators to change the status quo, in the next five
years before the deal goes into full effect. The NYT calls this feature
remarkable "brashness," and the LAT says it is its "most remarkable
aspect." Another pressure factor is that it's widely believed this merger will
inspire other similar ones.

            Another unusual aspect of the deal drawing lots of comment is that
Travelers' Sanford Weill and Citicorp's John Reed have decided to rule their
new kingdom as co-CEOs. A piece on the USAT "Money" front page says
experts are dubious about the arrangement. The WSJ wonders if the two
men can "merge their egos." And the NYT business section piece on the
relationship runs under the header, "The Odd Couple."

            Weill and Reed are quoted as saying the merger will not produce large-scale
layoffs. But, notes the WSJ , layoffs of over 1,000 employees followed
each of Weill's previous big deals.

            As has become common in merger reporting, some of the papers attempt to
cloak the event in intrigue and drama. The Journal and the NYT
try to summon atmosphere with their descriptions of early meetings where the
top dogs sniffed each other. And the WP says "the excitement was
palpable" during Monday's news conference at the Waldorf announcing the merger,
with the arrival of Weill and Reed reminding the paper of nothing so much as
"the arrival of movie stars at the Academy Awards." But the excitement is not
infectious: after all, what you have here basically is suits writing checks to
themselves.

            Indeed, the only real corrective to all the day's money euphoria comes in
the WP front-page piece, "Boom Is Fine--If You Own
Stock," which notes that six of every ten American households still do not
own any shares of anything.

            The LAT front reports that the California Supreme Court handed a
defeat to unwed fathers with its ruling Monday that a man who fathers a child
with a women who is married to someone else may be denied all legal parental
rights. As the paper points out, this is significant in a state where a third
of the children are born to couples who are not married to each other.

            If you missed the two top stories in yesterday's USAT --the
government's first post-deregulation attempt to preserve competitiveness among
airlines and the emergence of a drug that can prevent breast cancer--they are
on the NYT 's front today.

            The WP runs a piece inside reporting that during a church service
last Sunday, Cardinal John O'Connor of New York criticized President
Clinton from the pulpit for taking Catholic communion while in South
Africa. The South African priest who invited Clinton to do so is quoted in the
paper as saying that once Clinton stood up, he was thinking about "how much
embarrassment it would have caused him by my saying, please sit down."

            Novelist Lucian Truscott IV, a former Army officer and son and grandson of
generals, writes a NYT op-ed in support of the Clinton administration's
latest assault weapons ban. Truscott compares the intensive training you get in
the Army with one of these weapons long before you're ever allowed to fire it,
and then only under the supervision of an expert marksman, with the situation
in states like Arkansas, where "it's legal for a 10-year-old to own a
semiautomatic assault weapon without a moment of safety instruction, training
in how to shoot it or adult supervision."

         
      
   
