
   
   
      
         
            Suharto Say Goodbye

            The continuing Indonesia turmoil leads at USA Today and
the New York Times
and is the top non-local story at the Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times . Suharto's surprise announcement that he would step down failed
to ease political tensions, because he described a gradual and vague transition
to a successor, and the thousands of student protesters want him out now. "If
tomorrow Suharto does not step down, there will be a lot of trouble," one
protester tells USAT . The LAT says it now seems likely Suharto
will go.

            The papers say that the nation's top opposition leader had called for a
million demonstrators to take to the streets of Jakarta, and that the military,
primarily via stern television messages, urged them not to. The WP 's
veteran correspondent Keith Richburg says the scene at the Indonesian parliament, where students have
taken over the grounds and buildings, is "eerily reminiscent of Beijing's
Tiananmen Square." Mirroring earlier reporting, the NYT says relations between the students and troops appear
friendly.

            A State Department spokesman is quoted in USAT and the WP
saying that because of the upheaval, the IMF will probably delay delivery of
its next bailout payment. The World Bank has already done this.

            The WP confuses with a front-page piece asking whether comparing
health insurers' reimbursement handling of Viagra to their handling of birth
control pills reveals a bias towards men. The second paragraph of the story says
that more than half of Viagra prescriptions are being subsidized by health
plans, and the sixth paragraph says that slightly more than half of all birth
control pills are. Where's the bias? Why do we need this story?

            The NYT 's front reports on the first hard political consequences of
the China money-for-missile-technology charges it aired last week: Newt
Gingrich announced Tuesday he'll seek to set up a special House panel to look into the allegations. The story also
makes the USAT front, where Gingrich is quoted saying, "This a deeper
question than anything that has arisen before in this administration." Gingrich
also tells the paper that President Clinton should not embark on a planned trip
to China until he answers to Congress.

            A shocking episode reported in a buried wire story in
yesterday's WP moves up to page two in today's Post . Last
Saturday while playing basketball near a hospital emergency room, a fifteen
year-old boy was shot. Emergency room doctors and nurses were notified of the
situation by a police officer, but citing hospital policy, they refused to
leave the emergency room to come to his aid--thirty-five feet away. And refused
to lend the cop a gurney. Ninety minutes later, the boy was dead. "I will be
finishing my thirty-fourth year as an officer," said the policeman, "and I have
never seen anything like this."

            The editorials continue to weigh in on the lawsuits brought against
Microsoft. The LAT lead editorial, "Bill Gates is Wrong," takes exception
to Gates' Coke/Pepsi analogy by saying, "Microsoft's ambition to have Windows
play an integral role in virtually every American lifestyle is more like Coke
telling Americans that from now on it will be their beverage, main course and
dessert." (It seems that the law of beverage monopoly is wondrously
complex--"Today's Papers" recalls not being able to bring its own beer into
Dodger Stadium and not being able to get a Coke at a Taco Bell.) In any case,
warns the LAT , if Microsoft doesn't compromise, it could find itself
being broken up by the Justice Department into "Baby Bills."

            Remember that scene in "Sleeper" where it's revealed that in the future
everybody knows the only really healthy substances are red meat and cigarettes?
Well, today's WP runs a story headlined "Smoking May Protect Some High-Risk Women
from Breast Cancer." Seems that for two types of breast cancer that comprise
about ten percent of all cases, what's lucky is a...Lucky.

            A front-page Wall Street Journal feature visits the mercenary mouths
behind political campaign commercials. A small coterie of voice-over
specialists, it turns out, earn over $500,000 a year narrating the commercials
for hundreds of candidates. New phone technology allows them to do this from
their own houses with assembly-line efficiency and relieves them of the onerous
chore of actually meeting the candidates. One of these elite announcers,
reports the Journal , once inadvertently worked for both sides of a
campaign.

         
      
   
