
   
   
      
         
            McCain Mutiny

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times
lead with the failure in the Senate of the Feingold-McCain campaign reform
bill, which would have barred the national political parties from trafficking
in "soft money." The Los Angeles Times goes with the federal indictment of eight
California corrections officials suspected of conspiracy and cover-up in
connection with various improprieties concerning inmates, including a
suspicious death.

            The Feingold-McCain defeat came Thursday at the hands of a Republican-led
filibuster. This was, in the words of USAT , "nearly a replay" of the
bill's fate last fall. The repetitive outcome, showed, says the paper, that a
year of publicity about the excesses of political fund-raising had "failed to
change a single senator's mind."

            The bills' opponents, led by Sen. Trent Lott and Sen. Mitch McConnell, argue
that new fund-raising limitations amount to an infringement on free speech. But
McConnell gives away the game in telling the NYT that three groups that
provide what he calls "valuable grass-roots support" (=soft money) had strongly
opposed the reform bill. The three: the National Rifle Association, the
Christian Coalition, and the National Right to Life Committee. The Times
goes on to point out that while for the past year, Senate Republicans had put
the spotlight on President Clinton's more unseemly fund-raising efforts, they
have fiercely resisted any legislative fix that would cancel their fund-raising
advantage, which USAT spells out: $40.2 million in soft money, compared
to the Democrats' $33.3 million. The WP and NYT both report that
Democrats intend to run on the issue in the fall congressional elections.
Everybody quotes Sen. John McCain's reason for believing that eventually,
public pressure for change will increase: "There will be more scandals, more
indictments and more people going to jail."

            There's another LAT front-page story about jail abuses: the L.A. City
Sheriff's department is investigating the possibility that beatings of accused
child molesters were allegedly encouraged by deputies working in the men's
central jail and resulted in at least one homicide.

            Meanwhile, the NYT reports that the federal government on Thursday
formally took over the prosecution of police officers implicated in the brutal
attack last summer on Haitian immigrant Abner Louima. Conviction on the federal
civil rights charges could mean sentences of up to life in prison. The five
officers charged pleaded not guilty and remain free on bond.

            The same picture of a jubilant Oprah Winfrey celebrating a federal jury's
finding of no liability in her mad cow trial runs on the fronts of each of the
four dailies that use photos. The caption and headline writers join the fun:
"Jurors: no beef with Oprah" ( USAT ), "Savoring Victory" ( LAT ) and
"Next On Oprah: Freedom Of Speech" ( WP ).

            The lead NYT editorial observes that Washington is now
"enthralled by the idea that James Bond methods can remove Saddam Hussein from
power," and points out that a tonic for that idea is found in the recently
released internal CIA report about the Bay of Pigs failure. Both cases, says
the Times , represent overly optimistic expectations that entrenched
dictators can be toppled by small acts of insurrection.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that HarperCollins, owned by
Rupert Murdoch, was to have published the memoirs of Chris Patten, last British
governor of Hong Kong, but the two have parted company. The paper quotes people
familiar with the situation as saying that Murdoch had balked at printing
passages critical of the Chinese government. The WSJ points out that
Murdoch has a track record of using his media empire to advance his interests
in China. For instance, in 1994, his News Corp. dropped the BBC from the
collection of channels it beams into China because the Chinese didn't like the
BBC program on Mao.

            The WP 's "Reliable Source" column says that yesterday, reporters
covering the Food and Drug Administration received an official e-mail from the
FDA press office that was.a long list of Clinton sex jokes. (We're assuming
about, not by.) The agency is "looking into it."

            According to the USAT "Snapshot," fully 62 percent of members of the
U.S. college class of 2001--which the paper notes, includes Chelsea
Clinton--would not ever consider doing what either of their parents do for a
living.

         
      
   
