
   
   
      
         
            Mergers and Inquisitions

            The New York Times
leads with two new major financial company mergers, with the bigger of the two
deals also flagged by the Wall Street Journal in its front-page news box. The
Washington Post goes with the confusing picture
painted by the welfare statistics collected by the various states. The Los Angeles
Times goes with the paper's poll results indicating that nearly
two-thirds of those queried support California's ballot referendum item calling
for an end to bilingual education in the state's schools. USA Today
leads with concerns that Protestant and Catholic extremists could derail last
Friday's historic peace deal.

            BankAmerica Corp. has agreed to merge with NationsBank Corp. in a transaction valued at
about $60 billion, creating, says the Times , the nation's first
coast-to-coast bank, and the largest in terms of total branches and deposits.
The second deal, the $30 billion combination of Banc One Corp. with First
Chicago NBD Corp., would create the country's fifth-largest bank, which would
dominate the Midwest. The two mergers will, says the NYT , further raise
the standard for how big financial companies feel they need to be.

            The WP lead asserts that eighteen months after federal
welfare reform, "it is becoming clear that the mass of data the government
requires states to collect is in such disarray that it is impossible to
determine whether the law is working." The paper says the feds can't tell
whether or not states are meeting the reform law's targets for gainfully
employing former welfare recipients. State officials respond that they are
finding the federal data requirements overwhelming. The four-part series on
welfare reform the NYT started yesterday also finds the data less than
crystal-clear (no thanks to NYC officials, who, the paper says, gradually
stopped cooperating with its requests for information). Yesterday's series
kick-off says the paper found "scant evidence" that the reforms had moved a
"significant number" of New Yorkers from welfare to full-time work. Today's installment finds more certainty about outcomes, noting
that many workfare recipients have become part of the NYC municipal workforce,
picking up the slack created when Mayor Giuliani reduced the city payroll ten
percent.

            The LAT poll finds that the end-bilingual-education measure was not
opposed by any voter bloc--whether designated by age, income, gender,
geography, or ethnic group. Even among Latino voters, there was 50 percent
support. (The paper didn't mention that a front-page article reporting on an
earlier poll had found the level of Latino support then to be much higher.) The
paper's pollsters found that those surveyed were not that antecedently familiar
with the issue, which the LAT attributes to the low-level, thus far, of
television advertising about it.

            The NYT front, in a piece by the man who broke Whitewater, Jeff Gerth, reveals
that a May 1997 Pentagon report, secret until now, concluded that scientists
from the aerospace firms Hughes and Loral Space and Communications had turned
over expertise to China that significantly improved the reliability of that
country's nuclear missiles. The piece is a thorough and fascinating history of
the two companies' development of their Chinese markets in recent years. That
report, says the Times , prompted a criminal investigation of the
companies, which was undermined this year when Clinton approved Loral's export
to China of information about guidance systems. Loral's chairman, the paper
notes with a straight face, was the largest personal donor to the Democratic
Party last year.

            The WSJ editorial page revisits an argument for privatizing Social Security accounts the
paper has hit before--that doing so would give blacks and married working women
a much better return on their contributions than these groups now enjoy. Blacks
are disadvantaged because of their comparatively short life expectancies,
married women workers because Social Security payouts are presently based
solely on a household's higher earner's contributions. The latter point is also
made in a NYT op-ed.

            A top-of-the-page op-ed piece in yesterday's LAT responds to the
recent decision by the Department of Justice not to prosecute Mark Fuhrman for
any crimes he committed while with the LAPD by calling for the public
disclosure of all of Fuhrman's police records. "The documents in his file,"
explains the writer, "may spur a debate relating to how an officer can have a
file containing numerous complaints of misconduct against minorities and still
be promoted through the ranks." The proposal comes from a man with a proven
penchant for spurring debates--O.J. Simpson. "Today's Papers" says, fair
enough, O.J., provided you disclose the private information from your
files that you have thus far suppressed. You know, like your lie
detector test results.

         
      
   
