
   
   
      
         
            Saddam But True

            The New York Times
leads with a story nobody else is paying much attention to right now--the
continued Iraqi failure to provide U.N. weapons inspectors with adequate
information. USA Today leads with Ken Starr's and Paula Jones' decisions
to press on. The Washington Post goes with a story that the NYT got out in
front on yesterday: the death of Pol Pot. The Los Angeles
Times leads with news that must strike terror deep within the hearts of
its readership: the state's second largest phone company, GTE, mistakenly
leased tens of thousands of unlisted phone numbers to telemarketers.

            The Times lead is spurred by the latest report from the U.N.
chief arms inspector to Kofi Annan concluding that Iraq is no closer now to
meeting U.N. requirements for the lifting of sanctions than it was last fall,
when Saddam Hussein went to the brink to prevent further arms inspections. The
paper sees a further ominous sign in Thursday's new outburst of Iraqi
defiance--a call by the highest levels of the Iraqi government for the
immediate lifting of all embargoes.

            The NYT has some choice tidbits from that as-yet unpublished U.N.
report (and from others as well). Apparently, inspectors found some of the
buildings on their list to have been stripped of all equipment and even
furniture. Indeed, none of the sites visited outside of Baghdad had either
documents or computers. And some inspectors were stunned by the opulence of the
presidential palaces. Some rooms in them must have, according to some on the
U.N. team, cost millions of dollars to furnish.

            The Post reports that Pol Pot died quietly on a flowered mattress. The story goes
on to describe televised footage of the death scene: Pot's body stretched out
on a bed, plastic sandals at his bedside. Or you could turn to the NYT
top front, which has a large color shot of just this scene. The WP
quotes journalist Nate Thayer, who recently did the first interview with Pot in
18 years, saying he had no doubt that the man on the mattress was Pol Pot and
dead.

            The emotional scars left by Pol Pot's terror reign are crystallized in a
remark made by a "Killing Fields" survivor, quoted by both the WP and
NYT : "If he's dead, hand over his body to the people....I want to see
him handcuffed and pushed into a jail, like his cadres did to me 20 years
ago."

            Both the Post and Times note that the U.S. is taking the
position that Pol Pot's death should not end efforts to bring to justice other
Khmer Rouge leaders implicated in the Cambodian slaughter. The WP lead
editorial states that eight to ten members of Pot's extermination committee are
still at large, and the NYT lead editorial says that the current head of
Cambodia, Hun Sen, is also a henchmen.

            The WP reports that the Republican National Committee's reaction to
Al Gore's disclosure of his tax return the other day was to label him "Vice
President Scrooge" for donating just $353 to charity last year out of his income
of $197,729.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that in the months leading up
to recent Judiciary Committee hearings on Microsoft, the Senate Democrats
campaign organization was given $200,000 worth of free software by competitor
Oracle.

            The NYT picks up today on a story first reported by the South
China Morning Post : Apple Computer, in bringing to Hong Kong its "Think
Different" ads featuring pictures of famous independent movers and shakers, has
decided to drop the Dalai Lama's portrait from the campaign. The
company at first tried to claim that this was because the Tibetan leader's face
is not well-known in the region--until confronted with the information that
polls show 80 percent of Hong Kong residents are familiar with him. Now the
line is, "In China, he may not get across the message that Apple is trying to
send." True, since apparently the message is money-grubbing phony
individualism.

            The NYT and LAT fronts report that a Vanderbilt University
study, to be published today in Science , indicates that blacks are far less likely than whites to make use of the
Internet. The racial divide is particularly pronounced on the lower end of
the economic scale. Among households making less than $40,000 a year, whites
were six times as likely as blacks to have used the Web. By the way, the
LAT story cannot just refer to the "World Wide Web"--oh no, it has to
explain that this is "a popular Internet graphical network, encompassing some
62 million Americans, that is revolutionizing business and education." Now
think about this--if a reader doesn't know what the Web is, would he know what
the Internet is, or what a graphical network is?

         
      
   
