
   
   
      
         
            Lethal Weapon II

            Additional Indian atomic tests on Wednesday and U.S. sanctions against India
lead all around. President Clinton justified the economic
countermeasures--stopping all American foreign aid, government credit and most
U.S. bank loans and opposing all international bank loans--by citing the
"dangerous new instability" the blasts have created in the region. To head it
off, Clinton telephoned Pakistan's prime minister to urge him not to test nukes
too. The papers report that Clinton received no assurances. The New York
Times claims that Pakistan is preparing for an underground test as soon as
this Sunday.

            The Washington Post stresses that the second round of Indian
explosions was just as much a surprise to the world as the first. The
NYT emphasizes the defiance of the second round. The

            Post's reporting suggests that Indian motivations are not crystal clear,
with one senior aide to Prime Minister Vajpayee quoted as saying that the tests
were scheduled a month ago and were not intended as a rebuff to international
criticism, while another stated, "The news of the day is: India defies world
opinion." Officially, report the Times , the Post and the Wall Street Journal consider abiding by some of the provisions of
the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and repeated its rejection of Clinton's
demand that it sign the treaty.

            An inside story at the WP describes the U.S. intelligence failure in
the India matter, and editorials at the Los Angeles Times
and NYT decry it. The NYT editorial argues that besides our
spies, the policy folks at State and the White House fell down on the job too,
given that the new Hindu nationalist government of India talked openly of its
interest in nuclear weapons. There is a real problem here, but the newspapers
aren't exempt. Yes, the intelligence agencies and the national security staffs
are too readily distracted by the current crisis, whatever it is, but the
dailies are also too crisis-oriented in their coverage. Today's NYT has
at least nine articles on India. Last Saturday's Times , published on the
eve of trouble, carried exactly zero.

            Characteristically, the WSJ and the NYT include coverage of an
easily overlooked aspect of the world's tensest nuclear crisis since the end of
the Cold War--its impact on the Bombay, New Delhi, and Madras stock
markets.

            A piece deep inside the WP brings news that a Russian missile
specialist has warned that the nuclear ICBMs aboard Russia's older submarines
are wearing out so badly that their continued deployment threatens "hundreds of
Chernobyls." These comments come, says the Post on the heels of an
apparent Russian nuke sub emergency in the Barents Sea just over a week ago.
Despite official reassurances, when the sub was brought back to its base there
was widespread panic in the neighboring cities.

            The WSJ says although only 17% percent of CEOs say they regularly
watch television, 72% plan to watch tonight's "Seinfeld." The WP reports
that yesterday's Boston Herald ran the basic story line for the episode:
Jerry, Elaine, George and Kramer witness a carjacking and are put on trial for
failing to report it. But the paper doesn't claim to know how things turn out.
Is it just "Today's Papers" that wonders how it can be that witness testimony
before just about any federal grand jury is on the front page in twenty-four
hours and yet a sitcom plot remains a state secret?

         
      
   
