
   
   
      
         
            Tangled Web

            
               USA
Today leads with promising new cancer drugs soon to be tested on
humans--a story that got prominent play in Sunday's New York Times .
The Washington Post leads with Democrats' harsh
criticism of Rep. Dan Burton for his release of the Web Hubbell prison tapes.
The New York Times
leads with Washington state's anti-affirmative action ballot initiative. And
the Los
Angeles Times goes with Israel's rejection of an American proposal for
a transfer of more West Bank land to the Palestinians.

            The two new cancer drugs work, explains USAT , by cutting off the
blood supply to tumors, making it impossible for them to grow. Used together,
they have eradicated tumors in mice. Which is why they are scheduled for human
trials. But, says the paper, the leap from mouse to man is a huge one.

            The WP lead details how Rep. Burton was accused on
Sunday by congressional Democrats and White House staffers of doctoring
transcripts of Hubbell's prison phone conversations. The material Burton
released appears to describe Hubbell's decision to continue to protect Bill and
Hillary Clinton out of fears that his wife would lose her government job, but,
notes the Post , does not include Hubbell's statement that Hillary
Clinton had "no idea" of billing irregularities at their law firm, or his
assertion that he was not being paid hush money.

            Another dispute centers on Hubbell's lawyer saying on the tape, "There is
some chance that the day after Election Day they will make a move that moots
everything. And I don't want to discourage it." According to the Post ,
Burton says this was a reference to a presidential pardon, but Hubbell's lawyer
says it was an immunity deal--eventually granted--with Ken Starr. The
NYT hits the pardon issue much higher in its front page Hubbell tape
story, not surprising since it went front page on Saturday with a story saying
congressional investigators took the "Election Day" comment to signify pardon
hopes.

            The Times lead points out that referenda rather than
legislation may increasingly become the main tool of the anti-affirmative
action movement, because while California's Prop. 209 won decisively, the bills
introduced in its wake in 13 states were all defeated. The story also scores
how Washington state business heavyweights line up on the ballot initiative:
Boeing and Nordstrom are against, and Microsoft is expected to stay
neutral.

            The LAT front story on Japan's current economic woes runs under: "Tax
Cut May Not Spur Yen to Spend in Japan." Do we really need to see this "clever"
use of "yen" in a headline ever, ever again?

            The Wall Street Journal reports that Microsoft is warning Wall
Street analysts that federal and state legal anti-trust suits against the
company's introduction of Windows 98 could have "broad, negative consequences"
for the entire personal computer industry if they cause that new software to be
delayed.

            The Journal 's "The Outlook" piece takes note of recent claims that
the Y2K problem will generate a recession of 1974 oil-shock caliber and says
that's not likely: After all, the twenty-two-day-long government shut-down in
1996 didn't do that, nor did last summer's UPS strike.

            A WP editorial calling on Congress to close more
military bases supports the cause with some simple observations: While the
number of Navy ships is down nearly 46 percent, its berthing space is down only
18 percent, and while Army troop strength is down 42 percent, training
facilities for soldiers are down only 7 percent. Since, Congress will probably
keep total military spending flat, the paper notes that not closing bases is
equivalent to passing cuts on readiness, weapons procurement and research.

            According to the WSJ , representatives of some computer companies and
of Microsoft are expected to stage a pro-MS rally Tuesday. All together now:
"Hey, Hey, DOJ, how many browsers did you de-couple today?"

         
      
   
