
   
   
      
         
            Case: Dissed Miss

            The surprising dismissal of Paula Jones' lawsuit leads all around, with the
Los
Angeles Times and Washington Post going with full banner headlines. Federal
judge Susan Webber Wright ruled that although Bill Clinton's conduct may have
been "boorish and offensive," it was brief, and isolated and didn't result in
physical harm. Therefore, it wasn't, she concluded, under even the most
charitable reading of the record, a sexual assault or workplace harassment. The
New York Times
notes that Wright gave no credit to Jones' claim of suffering "sexual aversion"
as a result of her run-in with Clinton. The papers all note that the judge
dismissed as irrelevant in a few sentences all the Jones allegations of a
Clinton pattern of extramarital sex. Jones' lawyers intend to appeal. Ken Starr
responded to the news by promising to soldier on. The ruling, he tells USA Today ,
"has no effect on our authority."

            The WP makes the point that this is not obvious, observing that any
perjury or obstruction of justice charges against Clinton would be based on his
conduct in a now-dead case.

            The reaction of the other principals is widely reported: Clinton asked if
the unexpected good news was an April Fools' joke. Jones got the news on her
car phone and pulled over and cried. The Post says officials at the
White House and with the president in Africa maintained a "consciously subdued
tone," but the LAT reports staff cheers and laughter, and the NYT
finds President Clinton walking around his Dakar, Senegal hotel suite with a
cigar in his mouth and a drum in his hands (to be replaced moments later with a
guitar.)

            The political impact is also generally viewed as pro-Clinton. House
Republicans, says the LAT , may now be wary of moving aggressively
against Clinton. The NYT says it even stronger: "It is now politically inconceivable that Congress will consider
impeachment."

            But, adds the NYT , despite the trial outcome, "the president and the
presidency appear to have been diminished in important and lasting ways." A
front-page WP piece says the Jones lawsuit "has had an indelible impact
on the American political system and on other institutions in American life."
And the LAT lead editorial sees the development as a "bittersweet
victory for the president." Perhaps, the editorial continues, "it is possible
to envision a time when Social Security reform and other urgent issues might
capture the attention of the nation and be at the top of the congressional
agenda. When the debate over health care returns to the spotlight. When the
details of the tobacco settlement become a matter of wide public discussion.
But...the world's suspicions about his truthfulness in many things will dog his
place in history." The scandal, says the LAT has made the president seem
"coated in slime."

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature reports that
the rich have, somewhat surprisingly, not been able to shelter their income
from the higher taxes ushered in by George Bush (1990) and Bill Clinton (1993).
Indeed, says the Journal , upper income tax revenues are a big reason the
federal deficit has vanished. Nowadays the top 5 percent of American families
in earnings are paying about 32 percent of their income in taxes, compared to
about 26.7 percent ten years ago.

            A piece inside the WP (about an article coming out today in the
scientific journal Nature ) reports that a New York scientist, Stuart
Newman, has applied for a patent for a way of mixing human embryo cells
with those from a monkey, ape or other animal. His goal: to set off a
debate about the morality of patenting life forms, which Newman is opposed to.
Currently, explains the Post , patents are not allowed on human beings
(based on the 13th Amendment's proscription of slavery), but the issue of
hybrids is unsettled, because patent law has not addressed "how human" an
animal would have to be before it fell under the ban.

         
      
   
