
  
  
    
      
        A Brief History
        Befitting a lush, tropical island stranded in the middle of
        the ocean, Madeiras origins are shrouded in mystery and fanciful
        legend. Some claim that the archipelago is what remains of Platos lost
        Atlantis, or part of a landmass that once fused the continents of
        Europe and America.
        The Portuguese Step Ashore
        Recorded history of the volcanic archipelago begins in
        relatively recent times: 1418, just as the golden age of Portuguese
        discovery was erupting. Under the leadership of Henry the Navigator,
        caravels set out from the westernmost point of the Algarve, in southern
        Portugal, in search of foreign lands, fame, and wealth. João Gonçalves
        Zarco, sailing in the service of Prince Henry, made the first of many
        famous Portuguese discoveries, which would culminate a century later in
        Magellans historic circumnavigation of the globe. Zarco happened upon
        a small volcanic archipelago 1,000 km from Lisbon.
        Perhaps Zarco knew precisely where he was heading, having
        learned of the existence of Madeira from a Castilian source. After all,
        the waters of the Canary Islands, only 445 km (275 miles) to the south,
        had occupied busy shipping lanes for very nearly a century, and
        Genovese maps from the mid-14th century depict both Madeira and Porto
        Santo.
        More likely, Zarco was heading for Guinea and storms forced
        him onto the beach of Porto Santo. If so, then he was extremely
        fortunate, for he managed to land on the only large, sandy beach for
        hundreds of miles around. Little wonder he subsequently named it Porto
        Santo (Holy Port).
        The following year Zarco returned to claim the larger island
        he had seen from Porto Santo, and with him went Tristão Vaz Teixeira
        and Bartolomeu Perestrelo. They officially became the first men to set
        foot on the heavily forested island, naming it Ilha da Madeira, Island
        of Timber.  The Portuguese Crown, delighted with its first important
        discovery, immediately embarked on a program of colonization. Zarco and
        Teixeira were appointed co-go­vern­ors of Madeira, while Perestrelo was
        awarded Porto Santo.
        Starting from Scratch
        Whoever first stepped ashore on Madeira discovered no signs
        of previous habitation — no Stone-Age natives, as the Spanish found on
        the Canary Islands, and no mysterious monuments to the past, as on the
        Balearics.
        Occupation of Madeira began in the early 1420s as a
        decidedly minimalist project: colonists arrived with only as much as
        they could carry from mainland Portugal. They found plenty of water
        pouring down from the mountains, and more timber than anyone knew what
        to do with. So they set about clearing the land for agriculture,
        setting fire to massive tracts of forest. Legend says that a great fire
        burned for seven years on the island, leveling it of all its trees. The
        fire pro­vided the soil with a rich ash fertilizer, which complemented
        the luxuriant growing conditions of tropical sun and plentiful
        water.
        The Portuguese saw valuable economic opportunity in their
        new possession and ordered Malvasia grapes from Crete and sugar cane
        from Italy in an effort to seed the islands first cash crops. The
        project was not a simple one. Colonists had to locate enough level
        ground to grow crops on and solve the issue of irrigating them. Brute
        strength, without aid of machinery, carved flat surfaces out of the
        mountains, and settlers built the terraces — still seen today — on the
        steep slopes.
        The problem of watering crops was solved by the irrigation
        system known as levadas — simply-designed water channels that wound
        down from water sources on the verdant mountain tops. The levadas were
        largely built by slave laborers from Africa, whose primary employment
        was on sugar plantations. New Madeirans traded sugar, the eras
        dominant luxury item, with Britain and Flanders, and they proved
        skillful in the art of winemaking. The islands burgeoning economic
        significance propelled population growth, and by the middle of the 15th
        century Madeira was home to 800 families. A 1514 census recorded 5,000
        inhabitants.
        In 1478 Madeira welcomed a visitor who would greatly assist
        the islands future wine trade. Christopher Columbus, not yet a sailor
        of any renown, sailed to Madeira on an assignment to buy sugar cane.
        His sojourn was unsuccessful, as money failed to arrive for part of the
        shipment. Yet Columbus (Columbo in Portuguese) returned six years
        later, by which time evidence suggests that he had become an
        experienced sugarcane merchant. His later discovery of the New World
        brought prosperity to the Madeiran economy: the islands strategic
        location on the great East-West trading route meant that ships anchored
        and took on food, water, and the valuable trading commodity of Madeira
        wine.
        Columbus had his eye on more than sugar in Madeira. He
        married Dona Filipa Moniz (Perestrelo), the daughter of Porto Santos
        first governor, and lived on the island for a period, fathering a son
        there. Even today, there are those on Porto Santo who will tell you
        that it was due to his time spent there that Christopher Columbus
        learned navigation techniques and the ways of the ocean, and found the
        inspiration to undertake his voyage of 1492.
        Invaders
        In 1566 Madeira suffered its worst disaster. Well aware of
        the islands burgeoning wealth and repository of supplies, the French
        pirate Bertrand de Montluc sailed into Funchal harbor with his
        11-galleon armada and 1,300 men. He unleashed a 16-day reign of terror
        that left 300 Madeirans dead, stocks of sugar destroyed, and the island
        plundered. By the time Lisbon mounted a rescue mission, the pirates had
        long fled (though Montluc himself had been killed during the raid). As
        a result of the attack, Porto Santo, which had also been scourged by
        these villains of the seas, went on to build castles and early warning
        systems, which allowed the citizens to defend themselves or flee if
        necessary. On the mainland, an invasion of even greater significance
        followed in 1580, when Philip II of Spain proclaimed himself king of
        Portugal and marched his armies across the border. The Spanish remained
        for another 60 years, and Madeira became a Spanish territory.
        In the 16th century, Madeira surrendered its dominance of
        the sugarcane industry to another, much larger, Portuguese colony,
        Brazil. Sugar cane had taken a hefty toll on the Madeiran soil;
        exhausted plantations were supplanted by less-demanding grape vines.
        Although sugarcane continues to be grown today (for molasses and the
        brandy-like aguardente), it has long ceased to be the islands major
        crop.
        The British Are Coming!
        Britains political and economic connections to Madeira can
        be traced to the 17th century. In 1662 Charles II married Portugals
        Catherine of Bragança. A provision written into the brides dowry
        granted special favors to British settlers on Madeira; had Charles been
        more aggressive still, perhaps the Portuguese would have agreed to hand
        over the island to Britain in its entirety.
        Both Madeira and Britain benefited from a new regulation
        that governed the shipment of Madeira wine and made it the only wine
        that could be exported directly to the British possessions in the
        Western hemisphere (providing, of course, it was carried by a British
        vessel). All other wines had to be shipped to the Americas via a
        British harbor. Such trading rights attracted more Britons to the
        island, who founded dynastic families that in some cases still
        constitute the islands economic elite. Wine profits were huge, and by
        1800 exports had reached nine million bottles per year. Many of the
        grand country quintas (villas) that still dot the island today have
        their roots in the early Madeira wine industry.
        British troops arrived on the island in 1801 to protect
        against possible invasion by the French, but they were with­drawn
        following the Treaty of Amiens in 1802. In 1807 the Treaty was put in
        jeopardy and the troops returned, re­main­ing until 1814. Many of the
        garrison remained and settled per­ma­nently on the island.
        War and Pestilence
        The second half of the 19th century on Madeira was plagued
        by natural disaster. In 1852 the islands precious vines were blighted
        by mildew, wiping out an estimated 90 percent of the total crop. Just
        four years later, cholera claimed the lives of up to 7,000 Madeirans,
        and in 1873 the dreaded disease phylloxera destroyed the remainder of
        the vineyards. Potato and sugar crops were also badly affected during
        this period.
        Portugal took up arms during World War I, siding with the
        British and French. Madeiras strategic position for Atlantic shipping
        did not escape the notice of the German High Command, and in December
        of that year a German submarine bombarded the Funchal harbor and sank
        three French ships.
        Modern Times
        As mainland Portugal lurched into a political and economic
        crisis that would bring down the countrys republican government, many
        miles away Madeira was busy looking after distinguished visitors and
        its developing tourist trade. In fact, Madeira had been a sought-after
        destination since the middle of the 19th century, attracting wealthy
        British sun-lovers, minor royalty, and aristocrats from many countries.
        The celebrated Reids Hotel had opened its doors in 1890, and seaplane
        service started operating from Lisbon in 1921. Madeira was awarded
        further cachet when the last of the Austro-Hungarian emperors, Charles
        I of Austria (also Charles IV of Hungary), chose Madeira as his home in
        exile after the war.
        In 1932 Portugal gained a new ruler and dictator,
        ex-Minister of Finance Dr. António Salazar. Following a bloodless coup
        in 1974 called the Carnation Revolution, Salazars successor, Dr.
        Marcelo Caetano, was overthrown and free elections were held. Madeira
        was then granted autonomy, in addition to the right to determine its
        own taxes and send a deputation to the Portuguese government.
        In 1986 Portugal joined the European Economic Com­munity
        (now the European Union, or EU). Funding from the EU has been heavily
        invested in the islands infrastructure and fishing industry. The
        nonstop construction of roads and tunnels and the massive expansion of
        the Funchal airport seem to indicate that Madeira plans to see the tiny
        island accommodate as many people as possible. For several decades
        tourism has dominated the islands economy, but Madeiras enduring
        appeal lies in preserving it as a sublime tropical retreat far removed
        from the rest of the world.
      
    
  
