
  
  
    
      
        ••
        •
        ••
        ••
        •A Brief History
        • A handful of Bronze Age relics has fostered an assumption
        that prehistoric settlers inhabited Ibiza thousands of years ago.
        Greater evidence of such a people is found on Mallorca and Menorca than
        on Ibiza, but one of the Balearics most important sites is actually on
        the island of Formentera, where the megalithic monument/tomb of Ca Na
        Costa has been dated to 2000 b.c.
        •Ibizas key location between Africa and ancient Iberia made
        it a convenient stopover for Mediterranean seafarers, such as the
        Phoenician traders, who called the island Ibosim. The Greeks dubbed it
        Ebysos, the Romans called it Ebusus, and the Moors, Yebisah.
        •The Carthaginians
        •A detailed history of the island doesnt begin until it
        became a colony of Carthage in the 7th century b.c. (see also pages
        14-15). The Carthaginians originally came from the area comprising
        present-day Lebanon, and from their bases in North Africa and whats
        now Spain, they challenged the Roman Empire for domination of the
        Mediterranean region. Their interest in Ibiza lay partly in its vast
        salt flats, which to this day remain the source of a profitable
        industry. They capitalized on the natural resources by using the salt
        to cure fish, which they exported to their home country. The
        Carthaginians also carried out lead mining and continued to be of
        significance up until this century. It is believed that the lead
        pellets which were used by the Carthaginian general Hannibal were made
        on Ibiza.
        •The Carthaginians also considered the island a holy place,
        and here in great splendour they buried thousands of their citizens in
        a huge necropolis on the Puig des Molins (Hill of the Windmills) below
        the Dalt Vila (Old Town) of Ibiza. Under the gnarled olive trees
        archaeologists have uncovered a treasure trove of statues, jewellery,
        pitchers, tools, and coins, which are now displayed in the towns two
        archaeological museums.
        •The Romans
        •The Romans never really infiltrated Ibiza, and even after
        the defeat of Hannibal in 202 b.c. during the Second Punic War their
        influence was restrained. Only with the fall of Carthage in 146 b.c.
        did they manage to make inroads, but, as local historians stress, Ibiza
        was neither conquered nor annexed by Rome, but confederated, retaining
        remarkable autonomy. For centuries to come the old Carthaginian
        traditions were allowed to continue on Ibiza alongside the new Roman
        way of life. Meanwhile on the Iberian peninsula, Rome was leaving a
        decisive imprint on the areas language, culture, and government, and
        particularly in its engineering genius in the construction of roads,
        aqueducts, and monuments.
        •The Romans also exploited Ibizas natural resources. They
        exported salt from the southern end of the island and lead from the
        mines of Sant Carles, and at the same time extracted a purple dye from
        shellfish which was used for imperial cloaks. In addition they found a
        moneymaker in an exotic, aromatic sauce of decomposed fish innards.
        Called garum, it was considered a great delicacy by Romans and Greeks
        alike. (Today it is but a historical footnote; local cooks use nothing
        more pungent than a hint of garlic. )
        •The Moors
        •After centuries of peace and productivity, the year a.d.
        426 marked the beginning of an era of strife, violence, and
        destruction. Ibiza, along with the rest of what is now Spain, was
        invaded and sacked by the Germanic tribe of the Vandals, who occupied
        the island and quickly imposed their culture. Centuries of almost
        constant repressive foreign rule followed, with the Vandals being
        succeeded by the Byzantines, Saracens, and Moors.
        •The Moorish conquest of the Balearics was complete by a.d.
        903, and except during the periodic outbreaks of violence typical of
        that time, the Moors devoted themselves to developing the island
        economy and agri­culture. However, little evidence remains of that
        era — some ceramics in the museum, a few fortifications, a network of
        irrigation ditches. For the most part, the Moorish legacy is manifested
        in a few local place names, some words in the Ibicenco dialect, and an
        indelible influence on the islands folk music. Indeed, perhaps the
        most vivid reminder of the Moors are the dark, brooding eyes of so many
        of the islanders of today.
        •Christian Reconquest
        •The Moors were determined to carry Islam into Europe. To
        this end they invaded Spain itself and even reached up into France
        until they were beaten by the Frankish ruler Charles Martel in 732. But
        after the Crusade of Pisa (see page 19), Islamic power waned, and in
        the early 13th century Ibiza was embraced by the Christian Reconquest.
        King James I of Aragon authorized the occupation of the islands under
        forces commanded by Guillermo de Montgri, a solid Catalonian citizen
        with titular ecclesiastical rank. After a few skirmishes, the
        Catalonian troops were ready to deal the death blow. One pincer
        battered its way through the rebuilt city wall, while the other — so it
        is said — infiltrated through a secret passage revealed to the invaders
        by the brother of the sheik himself. According to legend the embittered
        traitor gave the game away because the passionate sheik had seduced his
        wife.
        •Thus, violently, in August 1235, both Christianity and the
        Catalonian language came to Ibiza to stay. On the mainland, the
        Reconquista (Reconquest) continued for another two and one-half
        centuries. The Moors suffered a major setback in 1212 at the battle of
        Navas de Tolosa in northern Andalusia, but they still clung to the
        kingdom of Granada and were only finally evicted from there in
        1492.
        •Booty and Plunder
        •Elsewhere, great events were changing the shape of the
        world. Under Ferdinand and Isabella, the unity of Spain as the country
        we know today was finally achieved, and it was carrying their flag that
        in 1492 Christopher Columbus sailed westwards and discovered America.
        Soon Spain found itself the recipient of immense wealth in the form of
        gold and silver, and the Spanish rulers, eager for more, turned their
        attention away from the Mediterranean and Ibiza towards both the New
        World and the heart of Europe, where Spanish ambitions rapidly
        expanded. Ibiza became a mere backwater, largely forgotten but for
        shipwreck or plague.
        •The moment that the Spanish monarchs looked the other way,
        the daring pirates of the North African Barbary Coast — and
        elsewhere — moved in. The Ibicencos fortified the bulwarks and built
        additional towers and fortresses throughout to help shield themselves
        against enemy incursions. Despite their efforts, however, Ibiza was
        menaced by so many hostile flotillas that the locals took the
        unprecedented step of forming their own band of privateers. To the
        Berbers amazement the tables were turned, and it wasnt long before
        the Ibicencos were boarding the enemys brigantines on the open seas
        and liberating the pirates booty —   even that of the greatly feared
        Pope (see box). Today an obelisk in Ibizas port honours the daring
        Corsairs.
        •Reminders of the permanent threat posed by pirates can be
        found everywhere on Ibiza. In the towns it is notable that the churches
        and other focal points from that period were built on an elevated site
        to provide lookout posts and early warning systems. In many isolated
        regions, meanwhile, last-ditch defences in the form of round stone
        towers were built, a few of which are still inhabited today. An unusual
        collection of such towers can be seen from the Sant Joan road in a
        hamlet with the Moorish name of Balafi, near the village of Sant
        Lorenç.
        •Political Turmoil
        •In the 19th and early 20th centuries, Spain was both
        economically weak and politically unstable. It lost its empire in
        America and the Pacific, and then in 1923 suffered a humiliating defeat
        in Morocco at the hands of local rebels. Under King Alfonso XIII
        neither dictatorship nor constitutional government was able to create
        and sustain domestic tranquillity, with the result that following
        anti-royalist election results in 1931 the king went into exile.
        •The turbulence continued under the new republic continued
        to be turbulent, however, with bitter ideological divisions between
        parties and factions, involving the church as well. Finally, in 1936, a
        large section of the army under General Francisco Franco rose in
        revolt, claiming the support of the monarchists, conservatives, the
        Church, and the right-wing Falange par­ty, the fascist movement which
        had been founded in 1933 and which Franco subsequently declared to be
        the only legal party in Spain. Opposing him was a collection of
        republicans, liberals, socialists, communists, and anarchists.
        •The Spanish Civil War became one of the causes célèbres of
        the 20th century, with support for both sides being rallied in many
        countries outside Spain. In Ibiza several families were torn in their
        loyalties between the Republican and Nationalist causes. The bloodshed
        lasted three years and cost hundreds of thousands of lives, and almost
        every family on Ibiza — not to mention the mainland — was touched by
        tragedy. Ibiza, Formentera, and Menorca were all captured by loyalist
        forces, who used the islands as a base for their naval operations.
        Hardship was compounded with the advent of World War II, even though
        Spain stayed neutral throughout the war.
        •The shattered Spanish economy inched forward during the
        post-war years. For Ibiza the breakthrough came in the 1960s, with the
        introduction of wide-bodied jets and a significant surge in tourism.
        Following the expansion of the airport, the island entered the big
        league of international holiday resorts.
        •After the death of Franco in 1975, King Juan Carlos I
        restored democracy to Spain. In free elections in June 1977, moderates
        and democratic socialists emerged as the largest parties. Ibizas new
        freedom meant the renaissance of the Ibicenco language and culture
        after decades of suppression, and participation in Catalonias newly
        won autonomy. Free speech and free elections were not the only
        innovations: gambling was legalized and nude bathing was sanctioned.
        Change swept through Ibiza dramatically, irrevocably, almost
        overnight.
        •Modern Times
        •Since then, the development of Ibiza has continued, and
        the islands fortunes are now almost completely derived from tourism.
        Changes on mainland Spain have inevitably been felt on Ibiza also, but
        their effect has been largely beneficial. The Socialist Workers Party
        of Felipe González Márquez was elected in 1982 and his government
        committed itself to Spains integration into the European Union
        (formerly the European Community). As a precondition to admission, the
        border with Gibraltar was reopened in 1985 after a 16-year hiatus, and
        Spain was admitted to the EU in 1986. In spite of high unemployment and
        separatist rumblings, the countrys economic growth rate remained one
        of the highest in all of western Europe throughout the 1980s. Although
        Ibizas popularity as a holiday destination has never waned, the events
        of the past few years — Seville Expo 92, the Barcelona Olympics — have
        ensured its continued success.
      
    
  
