
  
  
    
      
        A Brief History
        The modern Republic of Turkey dates only from 1923, but the
        history of the land within its borders stretches back to the dawn of
        humanity. Widespread finds of Stone Age implements in cave excavations
        show that Anatolia was already inhabited during the Middle of the
        Palaeolithic period (about 200,000 to 40,000 years ago). By Neolithic
        times, organized communities had arisen, such as the one at Çatalhöyük,
        near Konya, Turkeys most important prehistoric site. This town, which
        flourished between 6500 and 5500 b.c. , had flat-roofed houses of mud
        and timber decorated with wall-paintings, some of which show patterns
        that still appear on Anatolian kilims.
        The advent of the Bronze Age (about 3200 b.c. ), and the
        spread of city-states ruled by kings, is marked by the appearance of
        royal tombs containing bronze objects in such places as Troy in the
        west, and Alacahöyük near Ankara. Around this time the Sumerian
        civilization living in Mesopotamia (the region between the Tigris and
        Euphrates rivers in present-day Iraq) founded and developed the
        cuneiform script, the worlds oldest form of writing on record. The
        technique was introduced by Assyrian traders 1,000 years later in­to
        Anatolia, where it was qui­ck­ly adopted by the indigenous Hatti
        people, who, at this point, had already reached an ad­­vanced state of
        civilization.
        The Hittites
        The capital of the Hatti was Kanesh (modern Kültepe, near
        Kayseri). Cuneiform tablets found here record the arrival in Anatolia
        of warlike invaders around the second mill­ennium b.c. Their origins
        remain a my­s­tery (their written language was finally deciphered in
        1915), but they came from the direction of the Caucasus moun­tains,
        spreading destruction and disorder throughout Anatolia. It was two
        hundred years before they were firmly entrenched in their newly
        conquered empire.
        The newcomers were the Hittites, and their domination of
        Anatolia can be divided into three distinct periods: the Old Kingdom
        (c. 1600–1450 b.c. ), then the New or Empire Period (c. 1450–1200 b.c.
        ), and the Late Hittite Period (c. 1200–700 b.c. ). Their first capital
        city was Hattusa (now Boazköy, near Ankara), which dates from the 13th
        century b.c. and has tombs, fortifications, enclosed temples, and a
        citadel containing an impressive library of more than 3,300 cuneiform
        tablets.
        During the Empire Period, an ambitious Hittite king,
        Mutawallis, defeated the forces of the Egyptian pharaoh, Ramses II, at
        Kadesh (Syria) in 1285 b.c. Ramses was too proud to accept defeat,
        commissioning obelisks that celebrated his victory.  But he was
        sufficiently wary of the formidable strength of the Hittite Empire to
        make peace with the next king, Hattusili III. The Treaty of Kadesh,
        recorded on clay tablets on display in the Museum of the Ancient Orient
        in Istanbul (see page 39), is the oldest known example of an
        international treaty.
        The Hittite Empire eventually collapsed following invasion
        from the west by the Achaeans, the Phrygians, and a mysterious force
        known only as the Sea People.  The Hittites were forced to flee south
        into the mountains, where they remained until they were absorbed by the
        Assyrians.
        Troy and the Greeks
        While the Hittite Empire declined, other momentous events
        were taking place on the shores of the Aegean. The ancient Greeks
        traditionally took the fall of Troy, as recounted by Homer, as the
        starting point of their history. Much academic debate surrounds the
        exact date of the Trojan War, if indeed it ever took place. Modern
        archaeologists studying the ruins of Troy have discovered nine
        superimposed cities, ranging from Troy I (3000–2500 b.c. ) to Troy IX
        (350 b.c. –a.d. 400); the city of King Priam, described in the Iliad
        and the Odyssey, is thought to be either Troy VI, which was destroyed
        by an earthquake in 1275 b.c. , or its successor Troy VIIa. Some say
        the Trojan War never took place at all, and that the decline of Troy
        was due to the mysterious Sea People mentioned earlier.
        Whatever really happened, the Mycenaean Greeks who were
        supposed to have conquered King Priams city soon found their own
        civilization in decline. A race known as the Dorians came to power in
        south­­ern Greece, forcing many mainland Greeks to leave their homeland
        and cross the Aegean to settle on the coast of Anatolia. Their
        colonization of the coast took place in successive waves of
        immigration. First came the Aeolians, who settled the region to the
        north of Smyrna (now Izmir), then the Ionians, who settled the coast
        south of Smyrna as far as the River Maeander. The Dorians followed,
        installing themselves south of the Maeander, in the region known as
        Caria.
        Around 1000 b.c. mainland Greece entered a dark age of
        limited achievements, but not so the Ionians, who developed an
        outstanding civilization. By the eighth century b.c. the 12 main
        city-states of Ionia, including Ephesus, Priene, and Miletus, had
        formed what was known as the Pan-Ionic League. Science, philosophy, and
        the arts flourished, and the Ionians founded further colonies.
        Lydians and Persians
        Inland from Ionia lived the wealthy and powerful Lydians,
        with their capital at Sardis. They reached their peak during the reign
        of Croesus (560–546 b.c. ), who owed his fortune to gold panned from
        the River Pactolus. His lasting legacy was the invention of coinage,
        which led to the beginnings of our money-based economy. His
        expansionism brought the bulk of Ionia under Lydian rule, but also
        resulted in conflict with the advancing Persians in the east, where he
        was roundly defeated. Driven back to Sardis, he witnessed the sacking
        of his city by the army of Cyrus the Great, in 546 b.c.
        With Lydia defeated, the Greek coastal cities lay open to
        the Persians, who swiftly incorporated them into their empire. Ionias
        revolt around 499 b.c. , supported by Athens, was easily subdued.
        However, Athenian involvement provoked the Persian king Darius to
        invade the Greek mainland. He was defeated at the famous Battle of
        Marathon in 490 b.c. , and ten years later his son Xerxes lost the
        Persian fleet at the Battle of Salamis. Xerxes suffered a further
        humiliating defeat in 479 b.c. , when his army was beaten at Plataea on
        the same day that his fleet lost to the Greeks at Mycale.
        As a result of the Persian Wars, the Greek cities of
        Anatolia were encouraged to join the Delian Confederacy, paying tribute
        to Athens in return for protection against the Persians. Athens became
        so attached to this source of easy money that dissent soon grew among
        the member cities, and Sparta led the confederacy from Athens after the
        Peloponnesian War (413– 404 b.c. ). The Persians, sensing weakness in
        the ranks, launched another offensive, resulting in the Ae­gean coast
        cities coming under Persian control in 387 b.c.
        Alexander the Great
        Meanwhile, King Philip II of Macedon dreamed of driving out
        the Persians from northern Greece and unifying the entire Greek world.
        His dreams were fulfilled, and even surpassed, by his son Alexander the
        Great, in a brief but action-filled lifetime of only 33 years (356–323
        b.c. ). In 334 b.c. , aged only 22, he led his army across the
        Hellespont (now the Dardanelles), and paused at Troy to make a
        sacrifice at the temple of Athena and pay homage to his hero Achilles,
        before going on to defeat the Persians at the Battle of Granicus and
        liberating the Ionian cities. After conquering the entire Aegean and
        Mediterranean coasts of Anatolia, and subduing Syria and Egypt, he took
        the great prize of Persepolis, the Persian capital, before advancing
        farther still into India. During his 12-year campaign Alexander
        established some 70 cities, and built the greatest empire the world had
        yet seen.
        After Alexander the Greats death, the conquered territory
        was divided among his generals, whose mutual antagonism and
        expansionist ambitions led to weaknesses that exposed western Anatolia
        to the increasing might of Rome.
        Enter the Romans
        One of the most prosperous city-states of the Aegean coast
        was Pergamum, ruled since 264 b.c. by the Attalid dynasty. The last of
        the Attalid kings, Attalus III, is remembered as something of an
        eccentric — one of his hobbies was devising new poisons and testing
        their efficacy on his reluctant slaves. When he died (of natural
        causes) in 133 b.c. , his subjects were dismayed to learn that he had
        bequeathed his entire kingdom to the Romans. Thus Pergamum became the
        capital of the new Roman province of Asia. Mithridates VI, King of
        Pontus (on the Black Sea), resisted Roman occupation, temporarily
        occupied Pergamum, and ordered the massacre of all Romans. But
        eventually Romes power prevailed in this territory.
        In 27 b.c. Julius Caesars nephew Octavian took the name
        Augustus; Rome ceased to be a republic, and became an empire. There
        followed a long period of peace and prosperity known as the Pax Romana.
        All of Asia Minor (the Roman name for Anatolia) was incorporated in­to
        the Ro­man Empire. Greek cities were embellished with Roman
        buildings.
        Soon, news of a new religion that was beginning to cause
        trouble for the Roman authorities spread through the empire.
        Christianity threatened the establishment because it rejected the old
        gods and denied the divinity of the emperor. Paul the Apostle carried
        the word. His voyages (a.d. 40–56) led to the founding of many
        churches, notably the Seven Churches of Asia addressed in the
        Revelation of St. John — Pergamum, Smyrna, Ephesus, Thyatira, Laodicea,
        Sardis, and Phil­­adelphia.
        Byzantium
        Legend claims that the city of Byzantium was founded around
        660 b.c. by a Greek named Byzas, after the Delphic Oracle had bidden
        him to build his city opposite the Land of the Blind.  When he saw
        that earlier settlers had built a town on the eastern shore of the
        Bosphorus, he decided they must have been blind themselves to overlook
        the advantages of an easily defensible point across the water, and
        founded Byzantium there, on the site now occupied by Topkapı
        Palace.
        In the succeeding centuries Byzantium, like the cities of
        the Aegean, fell under the sway of Athens, Sparta, Persia, Alexander,
        and Rome. It tried to regain its independence from Rome, but proved too
        small and weak, and was conquered by Emperor Septimius Severus in a.d.
        196. He had the city razed to the ground, but soon saw the advantages
        of its strategic location, and began a programme of enlarging and
        strengthening the old defensive walls.
        A succession of weak and decadent emperors saw the Roman
        Empire fall gradually into decline and anarchy. In a.d. 286 Diocletian
        sought to reverse the decline by splitting the administration of the
        empire in two — he would govern the east, based in Nicodemia, while his
        friend Maximian ruled the west from Milan — and later to split it
        further into four parts. His policy succeeded for a time, but following
        his abdication in a.d. 305, the empire continued to weaken, harassed by
        invaders and troubled by internal strife. Constantine the Great (who
        was a convert to Christianity) and Licinius ruled east and west
        respectively, until in 324 Constantine overthrew his pagan ally and
        reunited the empire. He chose Byzantium as his new capital to emphasize
        the break with heathen Rome. The city was inaugurated with great
        ceremony in 330 and, in honour of the emperor, was renamed
        Constantinople. Con­stantine added new city walls, following a plan he
        claimed to have been given by Christ in a vision, and commissioned a
        grand central forum decorated with a triumphal column as well as
        several other monuments. The New Rome soon achieved a preeminence in
        the Christian world that it would retain for 1,000 years.
        In 392 the Emperor Theodosius proclaimed Christianity to be
        the official religion of the Roman Empire, and on his death in 395 the
        empire was split once more, between his two sons, and was never again
        to be reunited. The Western Empire, ruled from Rome, fell to the
        Ostrogoths in 476, while its neighbour, the Eastern, or By­zantine
        Empire, became one of the longest-lived empires the world has ever
        known, dating from 395 to 1453.
        The greatest of the Byzantine emperors was Justinian the
        Great (ruler from 527 to 565), who introduced an equitable legal
        system, and also extended the boundaries of the empire into Spain,
        Italy, and Africa. He greatly encouraged the arts, and commissioned the
        building of the magnificent basilica, the Haghia Sophia.
        Following the death of the Prophet Mohammed in 632, Arab
        armies, united under Islam, poured out of their homeland, and soon took
        Egypt, Syria, and Palestine from the Byzantines; Constantinople was
        besieged from 674 to 678, but survived because of its defences. The
        empire was further diminished by the loss of North Africa and Italy,
        and was brought to the brink of civil war by the Iconoclastic Crisis,
        before enjoying another brief golden age under Basil II (976–1025). But
        the empires troubles increased as invaders made further incursions
        into Byzantine territory. Most worrying were the Seljuk Turks, who came
        out of the east in the 11th century to wrest large parts of Asia Minor
        from Constantinoples control. Converted to Islam in the tenth century,
        and fired by religious zeal, the Seljuks overran Anatolia, menacing
        Christian holy places and attacking the pilgrims bound for
        Jerusalem.
        Reluctantly, the Emperor Alexius I sought outside help from
        the Christian West. The First Crusade was organized to help the
        Byzantines recapture the Holy Land from the infidel Muslims, and
        resulted in victory for the Crusaders. The Second and Third Crusades,
        however, were a disaster for the Christians. The Fourth Crusade,
        launched in 1202 and partly inspired by Venetian jealousy of
        Byzantiums trading power, became an excuse to plunder Constantinople
        itself. Thus, the city that had held out against so many attacks by the
        infidel, became subjected to mindless pillaging by fellow
        Christians.
        The Crusaders ruled the city from 1204 to 1261, calling
        their new state Romania, also known as the Latin Empire. A remnant of
        the Byzantine Empire survived in Nicaea (now Iznik), and recaptured
        Constantinople in 1261, but the city had been shattered and its great
        monuments were strip­ped of gold, silver, and precious works of art.
        The place was never the same again.
        The Ottomans
        During the 14th century the Turks in Anatolia rallied under
        the banner of one Osman Gazi, who had won a great victory over the
        Byzantines in 1301. Osman Gazis son, Orhan, captured Bursa in 1326,
        and set up his capital there, then moved it to Adrianople (Edirne),
        which he took in 1361. By the 15th century, the whole of Anatolia and
        Thrace, except for Constantinople, was under the control of these
        Osmanli (or Ottoman) Turks. The Byzantine Emperor at the time, Manuel
        II (1391–1425), tried to appease his enemies by allowing a Turkish
        district, mos­que, and tribunal within his city, and by courting
        Turkish goodwill with gifts of gold, but to no avail. The young Ottoman
        Sultan, Mehmet II, who reign­ed from 1451 to 1481, set about cutting
        off Constantinoples supply lines. The huge fortress of Rumeli Hisarı
        on the Bosphorus was built in just four months in 1452. He then
        withdrew to his capital in Adrian­ople to await the spring.
        The Byzantines tried to protect the Golden Horn from enemy
        ships by stretching a huge chain across its mouth. They repaired and
        strengthened the city walls that had saved them so many times in the
        past, and waited fearfully for the inevitable onslaught. In April 1453
        the Sultans armies massed outside the city walls, outnumbering the
        Byzantines ten to one. The siege and bombardment lasted seven weeks.
        The Ottoman admiral bypassed the defensive chain by having his ships
        dragged overland under cover of darkness, opening a second attack. The
        final ass ault came on 29 May 1453, when the Ottoman army surged
        through a breach in the walls. The last emperor, Constantine XI, fell
        in the fighting, and by noon that day Mehmet and his men had taken
        control of the sought-after city.
        His first act was to ride to Haghia Sophia and order that
        it be converted into a mosque; on the following Friday, he attended the
        first Muslim prayers in what came to be called Ayasofya Camii (Mosque
        of Haghia Sophia). After allowing his soldiers three days of pillaging,
        he restored order, acting with considerable leniency and good sense.
        Henceforth he became known as Fatih (Conqueror), and his newly won
        capital city was renamed Istanbul.
        Fatih Sultan Mehmet laid claim to all the territories
        previously held by the Byzantines, so that his empire incorporated most
        of Greece and the Balkans, as well as Anatolia. Expansion continued
        under his succes­­sors, but it was during the reign of his great
        grandson, Süleyman, that the Ottoman Empire reached its greatest and
        most celebrated heights. Süleyman the Magnificent, aged 25, ascended
        the throne and ruled for 46 years (1520–1566), the longest and most
        glorious reign in the history of the Ottomans. Süleymans army captured
        Belgrade in 1521. Rhodes capitulated in 1523. Six years later he
        besieged Vienna for 24 days (unsuccessfully) before going on to take
        most of Hungary. Turkish corsairs, notably the infamous Barbarossa,
        helped to conquer Algiers and Tunis.
        By the mid-17th century the Ottoman Empire had reached its
        greatest extent, stretching from Batumi at the eastern end of the Black
        Sea to Algeria, taking in Mesopotamia, Palestine, the shores of the Red
        Sea (including Mecca and Medina), Egypt, Anatolia, Greece, the Balkans,
        Hungary, Moldavia, the North African coast, the Crimea, and southern
        Ukraine. With such far-flung territories, dissolution was inevitable,
        and began immediately. Nor­­thern conquests, including Hungary, had
        been lost by the close of the 17th century. The decline of these
        territories was drawn out and painful, leav­ing problems in its wake
        that have been the source of trouble and friction in the Balkans and
        the Middle East ever since.
        Decline and Fall
        The year 1821 marked the beginning of the Greek War of
        Independence, which resulted in victory for the Greeks in 1832, and
        another loss of territory for the Ottomans, whose empire had shrunk
        significantly. A century of decadence and intermittent wars had left
        the Ottoman sultanate in serious, irreversible decline. Attempts at
        reform came too late; by 1876 the government was bankrupt. Sul­­tan
        Abdül Hamid II (1876–1909) tried to apply absolute rule to an empire
        staggering under a crushing foreign debt, with a fragmented population
        of hostile people, and succeeded only in creating ill will and
        dissatisfaction amongst the younger generation of educated Turks.
        Young army officers and the professional classes were
        becoming increasingly interested in West­ern ways of government and
        social organization. European literature was widely studied. Robert
        College, an American school, and the Gal­a­tasaray Lycée, the French
        Aca­demy in the city, were turning out young men imbued with dreams of
        democracy. These intellectuals form­ed an underground group known as
        the Young Turks, centred on Salonica, where revolt broke out. In 1909
        Abdül Hamid was deposed and replaced by his brother, Mehmet V.
        There followed the Balkan Wars, in which Turkey lost
        western Thrace and Macedonia, then World War I, into which Turkey
        entered on Germanys side. In the notorious Gallipoli campaign of 1915,
        the Turks, under the leadership of General Mustafa Kemal, defeated the
        Allied attack on the Dardanelles.
        At the end of the war, the Treaty of Sèvres formally ended
        the existence of the Ottoman Empire. Greece was given large
        concessions, Armenia was to become an independent state in the east,
        and the Middle East was to be divided among the Arab leaders who had
        fought with Colonel Lawrence (under British and French spheres of
        influence).
        The subsequent period of internal strife between the Turks
        and the Greeks and Armenians was dominated by Mustafa Kemal, who had
        risen from the status of war hero to become the lead­­er of the Turkish
        nationalist movement. In 1920, with army support, he was elected
        president of the Grand National Assembly in Ankara in defiance of the
        Sultans government in Constantinople. From 1919 to 1922 he waged war
        with the Greeks, who had invaded at Smyrna, and ultimately managed to
        defeat them and force their withdrawal from Asia Minor.
        He was then faced with the delicate task of abolishing the
        sultanate without antagonizing the religious elements within his party.
        This meant deposing Sultan Mehmet VI, who as caliph (leader of the
        Islamic world) and sultan stood for the old tradition of combined
        secular and religious power. Kemal handled the problem with his usual
        vigour and eloquence in a speech to the Assembly, by linking the power
        of the caliphate with that of the Assembly: … It was by force that the
        sons of Osman seized the sovereignty and Sultanate of the Turkish
        nation… Now the Turkish nation has rebelled and has put a stop to these
        usurpers, and has effectively taken sovereignty and the Sultanate into
        its own hands. This is an accomplished fact. 
        In the early morning of 10 November 1922, Mehmet VI slipped
        quietly away to a waiting British warship, to end his life in exile. He
        was replaced as caliph by his cousin, whose powers were strictly
        limited by secular laws, until that position, too, was abolished in
        1924.
        The Republic of Turkey
        In 1923 the Treaty of Lausanne defined the present borders
        of the Turkish Republic. An exchange between Greece and Turkey of
        expatriate populations resulted in the movement of thousands of people,
        and the wholesale desertion of Greek villages and districts.
        From 1925 to 1935 several wide-ranging reforms were
        introduced by President Ke­mal. He secularized institutions, reformed
        the calendar, adapted the Latin alphabet for the Turkish language,
        emancipated women, and improved agriculture and industry. He introduced
        the Western idea of surnames (until then Turks had a single name) and
        made everyone choose a family name, which they had to hand down to
        their children. For himself he chose Atatürk, or Father of the
        Turks.
        His proved an appropriate choice, as he almost
        single-handedly created the mod­ern Turkish state. He was enormously
        popular with the common Turkish people, and when he died in 1938
        thousands of mourners lined the railway track to salute the white
        presidential train as it carried him from Istanbul for burial in
        Ankara, the new capital.
        Turkey remained neutral during World War II until 1945,
        when it entered the war on the side of the Allies. It joined NATO in
        1952. The Democratic Party was elected in 1950, and remained in control
        until 1960, when, faced with increasing social and economic
        difficulties, it was overthrown by a military coup. A new constitution
        consolidating liberal reforms was drawn up, and approved by a
        referendum held in 1961. However, further unrest led to more coups in
        1971 and 1980, after which yet another, more restrictive, constitution
        was prepared.
        Turgut Özal, leader of the Motherland Party and former
        world banker and economist, was elected as prime minister in 1983, and
        served until his death in 1993. Under his leadership Turkey adopted a
        Western-style economy and in 1987 applied for membership of the
        European Community (now Union).
        He was succeeded by Tan­­su Çiller, Turkeys first woman
        leader. She inherited the countrys rampant inflation and the conflict
        between Kurdish separatists and the security forces in the southeast.
        These political and economic difficulties helped the fundamentalist
        Refah party later win the largest share of the vote in 1995. The Refah
        party was officially outlawed in 1998, though it continues to be widely
        supported. Despite these political tensions, Turkey is becoming an
        increasingly popular tourist destination, offering all the trappings of
        a Mediterranean paradise and a wealth of fascinating history.
      
    
  
