
  
  
    
      
        A Brief History
        In the popular mind, the history of Hong Kong, long the
        entryway to China for Westerners, begins in 1841 with the British
        occupation of the territory. However, it would be wrong to dismiss the
        long history of the region itself. Archaeologists today are working to
        uncover Hong Kongs past, which stretches back thousands of years. You
        can get a glimpse into that past at Lei Cheng Uk Museums
        1,600-year-old burial vault on the mainland just north of Kowloon (see
        page 38). In 1992, when construction of the airport on Chek Lap Kok was
        begun, a 2,000-year-old village, Pak Mong, was discovered, complete
        with artifacts that indicated a sophisticated rural society. An even
        older Stone Age site was discovered on Lamma Island in 1996.
        While Hong Kong remained a relative backwater in early days,
        nearby Guangzhou (Canton) was developing into a great trading city with
        connections in India and the Middle East. By a.d. 900, the Hong Kong
        islands had become a lair for pirates preying on the shipping in the
        Pearl River Delta and causing a major headache for burgeoning
        Guangzhou; small bands of pirates were still operating into the early
        years of the 20th century.
        In the meantime, the mainland area was being settled by
        incomers, the Five Great Clans: Tang, Hau, Pang, Liu, and Man. First
        to arrive was the Tang clan, which established a number of walled
        villages in the New Territories that still exist today. You can visit
        Kat Hing Wai and Lo Wai, villages with their walls still intact.
        Adjacent to Lo Wai is the Tang Chung Ling Ancestral Hall, built in the
        16th century, which is still the center of clan activities.
        The first Europeans to arrive in the Pearl River Delta were
        the Portuguese, who settled in Macau in 1557 and for several centuries
        had a monopoly on trade between Asia, Europe, and South America. As
        Macau developed into the greatest port in the East, it also became a
        base for Jesuit missionaries; it was later a haven for persecuted
        Japanese Christians. While Christianity was not a great success in
        China, it made local headway, evidenced today by the numerous Catholic
        churches in Macaus historic center. Intermarriage with the local
        Chinese created a community of Macanese, whose culture can still be
        seen in Macaus architecture and cuisine.
        The British Arrive
         Albert is so amused, wrote Queen Victoria, at my having
        got the island of Hong Kong.  Her foreign secretary, Lord Palmerston,
        was not so amused; he dismissed Hong Kong as a barren island with
        hardly a house upon it. 
        Hong Kong Island formally became a British possession two
        years later in 1843. The British now had a base for the thriving trade
        they had carried on from Canton. Trading conditions, however, were not
        easy. The attitude expressed by Emperor Qianlong at Britians first
        attempt to open trade with China in 1793 continued to prevail: We
        possess all things, said the emperor, I set no value on objects
        strange or ingenious, and have no use for your countrys manufactures.
        Moreover, China would accept nothing but silver bullion in
        exchange for its goods, so Britian had to look for a more abundant
        commodity to square its accounts. Around the end of the 18th century,
        the traders found a solution: Opium was the wonder drug that would
        solve the problem. Grown in India, it was delivered to Canton, and
        while China outlawed the trade in 1799, local Cantonese officials were
        always willing to look the other way for squeeze money (a term still
        used in Hong Kong).
        In 1839 the emperor appointed the incorruptible
        Commissioner Lin Tse-hsu to stamp out the smuggling of foreign mud. 
        Lins crackdown was indeed severe. He demanded that the British
        merchants in Canton surrender their opium stores, and to back up his
        ultimatum he laid siege to the traders, who, after six tense weeks,
        surrendered over 20,000 chests of opium. To Queen Victoria, Lin
        addressed a famous letter, pointing out the harm the poisonous drug
        did to China, and asking for an end to the opium trade; his arguments
        are unanswerable, but the lofty though heartfelt tone of the letter
        shows how unprepared the Chinese were to negotiate with the West in
        realistic terms.
        A year later, in June 1840, came the British retaliation,
        beginning the first of the so-called Opium Wars. After a few skirmishes
        and much negotiation, a peace agreement was reached. Under the
        Convention of Chuenpi, Britain was given the island of Hong Kong, and
        on 26 January 1841, it was proclaimed a British colony.
        The Opium Wars
        The peace plan achieved at Chuenpi was short-lived. Both
        Peking and London repudiated the agreement, and fighting resumed. This
        time the British forces, less than 3,000 strong but in possession of
        superior weapons and tactics, outfought the Chinese. Shanghai fell and
        Nanking was threatened. In the Treaty of Nanking (1842) China was
        compelled to open five of its ports to foreign economic and political
        penetration, and even to compensate the opium smugglers for their
        losses. Hong Kongs status as a British colony and a free port was
        confirmed.
        In the aftermath of the Opium Wars, trade in foreign mud
        was resumed at a level even higher than before, although the major
        traders, by now respectable and diversified, stopped their trading in
        1907. Opium-smoking continued openly in Hong Kong until 1946; in
        mainland China the Communist government abolished it when they came to
        power in 1949.
        Commerce and Wealth
        The first governor of Hong Kong, Sir Henry Pottinger,
        predicted it would become a vast emporium of commerce and wealth. 
        Under his direction, Hong Kong began its march toward prosperity. It
        was soon flourishing; with its natural harbor that attracted ships,
        Hong Kong leaped to the forefront as a base for trade. Both the
        population and the economy began to grow steadily. A surprise was the
        sizable number of Chinese who chose to move to the colony.
        In the meantime, the opening of Hong Kong was the last blow
        to Macaus prosperity. Inroads had already been made by the arrival of
        the Dutch and Macaus loss to them of the profitable Japanese trade.
        From then on, until its 1970s comeback with electronic and other export
        goods, Macau sank into obscurity.
        Despite the differences between the Chinese majority and
        the European minority, relations were generally cordial. Sir John
        Francis Davis, an early governor, disgusted with the squabbling of the
        English residents, declared: It is a much easier task to govern the
        20,000 Chinese inhabitants of the colony than the few hundreds of
        English.
        There were a few incidents: On 15 January 1857, somebody
        added an extra ingredient to the dough at the colonys main
        bakery — arsenic. While the Chinese continued to enjoy their daily
        rice, the British, eating their daily bread, were dropping like flies.
        At the height of the panic, thousands of Chinese were deported from
        Hong Kong. No one ever discovered the identity or the motive of the
        culprits.
        Conditions in the colony in the 19th century, however, did
        not favor the Chinese population. The British lived along the
        waterfront in Victoria (now Central) and on the cooler slopes of
        Victoria Peak. The Chinese were barred from these areas, and from any
        European neighborhood. They settled in what is now known as the Western
        District. It was not uncommon for several families and their animals to
        share one room in crowded shantytowns. So it is not surprising that
        when bubonic plague struck in 1894, it took nearly 30 years to fully
        eradicate it. Today in the Western District, you can still wander
        narrow streets lined with small traditional shops selling ginseng,
        medicinal herbs, incense, tea, and funeral objects.
        In 1860, a treaty gave Britain a permanent beach-head on
        the Chinese mainland — the Kowloon peninsula, directly across Victoria
        harbor. In 1898, under the Convention of Peking, China leased the New
        Territories and 235 more islands to Britain for what then seemed an
        eternity — 99 years.
        The 20th Century
        The colonys population has always fluctuated according to
        events beyond its borders. In 1911, when the Chinese revolution
        overthrew the Manchus, refugees flocked to the safety of Hong Kong.
        Many arrived with nothing but the shirts on their backs, but they
        brought their philosophy of working hard and seizing opportunity.
        Hundreds of thousands more arrived in the 1930s when Japan invaded
        China. By the eve of World War II, the population was more than one and
        a half million.
        A few hours after Japans attack on the American fleet at
        Pearl Harbor in December 1941, a dozen Japanese battalions began an
        assault on Hong Kong; Hong Kongs minimal air force was destroyed on
        the airfield at Kai Tak within five minutes. Abandoning the New
        Territories and Kowloon, the defenders retreated to Hong Kong island,
        hoping for relief which never came. They finally surrendered on
        Christmas Day in 1941. Survivors recall three and a half years of
        hunger and hardship under the occupation forces, who deported many Hong
        Kong Chinese to the mainland. A number of Hong Kongs monuments were
        damaged during this time: St. Johns Cathedral was turned into a
        military club, the old governors lodge on the Peak was burned down,
        and the commandant of the occupation forces rebuilt the colonial
        governors mansion in Japanese style.
        At the end of World War II, Hong Kong took stock of what
        remained — the population was down to half a million, and there was no
        industry, no fishing fleet, and few houses and public services.
        Hong Kong Comes Back
        Chinas civil war sent distressing echoes to Hong Kong.
        While the Chinese Communist armies drove towards the south, the flow of
        refugees into Hong Kong multiplied, and by the time the Peoples
        Republic of China was proclaimed in 1949, the total population of Hong
        Kong had grown to more than two million people. The fall of Shanghai in
        1950 brought another flood of refugees, among them many wealthy people
        and skilled artisans, including the Shanghai industrialists who became
        the founders of Hong Kongs now famous textile industry. In the late
        1970s Hong Kong became the conduit for Chinas goods, investment, and
        tourism. It also found itself famous as a worldwide bargain shopping
        center.
        Housing was now in desperately short supply. Housing had
        always been scarce for Hong Kongs Chinese. The problem became an
        outright disaster on Christmas Day in 1953. An uncontrollable fire
        devoured a whole city of squatters shacks in Kowloon; 50,000 refugees
        were deprived of shelter. The calamity spurred the government to launch
        an emergency program of public-housing construction; spartan new blocks
        of apartments put cheap and fireproof roofs over hundreds of thousands
        of heads. But this new housing was grimly overcrowded, and even a
        frenzy of construction couldnt keep pace with the demand for living
        space. In 1962 the colonial authorities closed the border with China,
        but even this did not altogether stem the flow of refugees: The next
        arrivals were the Vietnamese boat people.
        Into the 21st Century
        As 1997 drew nearer, it became clear that the Chinese
        government had no intention of renewing the 99-year lease on the New
        Territories. Negotiations began, and in 1984 Prime Minister Margaret
        Thatcher signed the Sino-British Joint Declaration, in which Britain
        confirmed the transfer of the New Territories and all of Hong Kong to
        China in 1997. For its part, China declared Hong Kong a Special
        Administrative Region and guaranteed its civil and social system for
        at least 50 years after 1997. Although Chinas Basic Law promised that
        Hong Kongs existing laws and civil liberties would be upheld, refugees
        began flowing the other way. The British Nationality Act (1981) had in
        effect prevented Hong Kong citizens from acquiring British citizenship,
        and thousands of people, anxious about their future under Chinas rule,
        were prompted to apply for citizenship elsewhere, notably in Canada and
        Australia. The protests in 1989 in Beijings Tiananmen Square sparked
        sympathy marches in Hong Kong, and further increased tension with
        China. Some companies moved their headquarters out of Hong Kong.
        Ironically, as the handover approached, the British granted
        the Hong Kong Chinese more political autonomy than they had done since
        the colony was founded, including such democratic reforms as elections
        to the Legislative Council.
        Since the handover in July 1997, China has generally
        followed a hands-off policy. Many who fled have returned. What controls
        heartbeats in Hong Kong are the fluctuations of the Hang Seng Index,
        foreign currency exchange rates, and skyrocketing property prices. In
        short, the status quo prevails. Everybody hopes Hong Kong will remain
        stable, but everyone also has their doubts. In the meantime, the
        philosophy is to seize present-day opportunities in the thriving
        economy.
      
    
  
