
  
  
    
      
        A BRIEF HISTORY
        Though prehistoric remains from the Paleolithic, Neolithic,
        and Bronze Ages have been unearthed in the Manzanares Valley, prior to
        Madrids sudden elevation to capital city in 1561 its history was
        rather undistinguished.
        Over a period of many centuries crucial in Spanish history,
        Madrids significance was negligible. The Romans built their most
        advanced outpost on the Iberian peninsula, but left nothing of
        consequence in Madrid. Armies of North African nomads, intent on
        disseminating Islam, invaded the peninsula in a.d. 711. Within 10
        years, they had overrun most of Spain. If Madrid played any role in
        these pivotal events, no record of it remains.
        The first solid references to this obscure settlement on the
        Castilian plateau, guarded by the looming Guadarrama mountain range,
        appear in the 9th century. The Arabic name for place of many springs,
        variously recorded as Magerit, Mayrit or Magrit, eventually evolved
        into Madrid. The hamlet entered historical chronicles for its military
        significance; it was located near the main line of resistance to the
        Christian reconquest. Over centuries of struggle, the defending Moorish
        army built a full-scale fort, or Alcázar, on the heights of Madrid
        commanding the Manzanares valley.
        After several unsuccessful skirmishes, the Christian forces
        of Alfonso VI captured Madrid in 1083. The Alcázar became a fort of the
        crown of Castile. During a counter-offensive in 1109, the town was
        overrun by the Moors, but the Christianized fortress held. The Moors
        were expelled from the town, but they remained in control of southern
        Spain for almost four centuries.
        Meanwhile, Madrid enjoyed brief prominence in 1308 when king
        Ferdinand IV and his Cortes, an early version of parliament, held a
        formal meeting in the fledgling town. From then on, the kings of Spain
        began to visit Madrid, where the air was invigorating and the hunting
        excellent.
        Ferdinand and Isabella, the Catholic monarchs that united
        all the provinces of Spain, first visited Madrid in 1477. They
        appreciated the towns loyalty to the crown, but the idea never
        occurred to anyone, let alone the two monarchs, that Madrid might one
        day become the capital. Historically important Toledo seemed secure in
        the role.
        Spains Golden Age
        Under Ferdinand and Isabella, Spain underwent a dramatic
        transformation. In 1492 the royal pair presided over the final conquest
        over the Moors and discovery of the New World, including the great
        wealth that feat brought to Spain. Spain flourished during a Golden
        Age, a century of Spanish economic and political supremacy in
        international affairs, accompanied by marvels of art and
        literature.
        Ferdinand and Isabella were consummate Spaniards, committed
        to the expansion of the crown. By contrast, their grandson, who assumed
        the throne in 1516, was born in Flanders in 1500, and Charles I could
        barely express himself in Spanish. The first of the Habsburgs, he
        packed his retinue with Burgundian and Flemish nobles.
        Soon after his arrival in Spain, the young man inherited
        the title of Holy Roman Emperor, as Charles V. The responsibilities of
        the crown kept him busy away from the royal residences of Toledo,
        Segovia, Valladolid, and Madrid. While the monarch was away on one of
        his many business trips, his increasingly dissatisfied subjects
        protested violently. A revolt of the comuneros, or townsmen, broke out
        in a number of Spanish cities, including Madrid. The rebels occupied
        the alcázar, which had by then been converted to a royal palace. The
        insurrection was quashed and its leaders executed, but the king got the
        message. He tried thereafter to pay more attention to his Spanish
        constituency.
        Madrids Rise to Capital
        In 1556, Charles abdicated in favor of his son, Felipe II,
        good news for Spain and even better for Madrid. Felipe moved the royal
        court from Toledo to Madrid in 1561, converting an unimpressive town of
        less than 15,000 people into the capital of the worlds greatest
        empire. Madrid soared onward and upward, increasing nearly eightfold in
        population; Spains fortunes as a whole were more volatile. Felipe II
        took credit for a rousing naval victory at Lepanto, teaming with
        Venetians against the Turks, but less than two decades later Spain was
        subjected to the humiliating defeat of its invincible armada, at the
        hands of Sir Francis Drake and a small English navy. Felipe IIs
        greatest lasting legacy is El Escorial, a grandiose palace and
        monastery in the foothills of the Sierra de Guadarrama, northwest of
        Madrid.
        Felipes son, Felipe III, was unfaithful to Spains new
        capital. For several years he held court in Valladolid, though
        eventually he returned to Madrid. It was he who ordered the
        construction of the Plaza Mayor, the magnificent main square that still
        dignifies the center of the Viejo Madrid. Other tasteful, 17th-century
        buildings constructed nearby, such as the foreign ministry and town
        hall, reveal that the capital was at last being taken seriously.
        The Habsburgs bowed out in 1700 with the death of Charles
        II. The subsequent war over Spanish succession resulted in the
        enthronement of the Bourbon candidate, Felipe V. When Madrids alcázar
        burned down in 1734, with the loss of many art treasures, Felipe seized
        the opportunity to build a new, incredibly lavish royal palace.
        Madrids Palacio Real is still used on occasion by King Juan Carlos I
        for official ceremonies.
        Madrid owes much to the civic-mindedness of Charles III,
        who ruled from 1759 to 1788. He paved and lighted the streets,
        installed public fountains, built the Prado museum, and laid out vast
        promenades and gardens.
        Francisco de Goya painted a court portrait of the next
        king, Charles IV, in which he looked strangely like George Washington.
        But Charles was considerably less successful politically than his
        transatlantic contemporary. His 20-year reign, weak at best, ended in
        all-round disaster: abdication, arrest, and war.
        Spain again became a battleground in the early 1800s, with
        British forces taking on Napoleons troops in the Peninsular War.
        Napoleon invaded Spain in March 1808 and invested his older, taller,
        and more agreeable brother, Joseph, as King José I. On May 2, 1808,
        Madrid rose up against the interloper. The Peninsular War (called the
        War of Independence by Spaniards) went on murderously but
        inconclusively for six years. Finally, with the help of the British
        under the duke of Wellington, the Spanish expelled the occupying
        forces. In truth, Joseph Bo­na­par­te meant well — he built so many
        pla­zas that Ma­dri­le­ños nicknamed him El Rey Pla­zue­las — but the
        people loathed a government imposed from abroad. Jo­sé I spent 17 years
        of exile in, of all unlikely places, New Jersey.
        Decline and Decadence
        The son of Charles IV, Fernando VII, was seated on his
        rightful throne in the Royal Palace of Madrid in 1814. But the war and
        the repercussions of the French Revolution had helped to create in
        Spain the nucleus of a liberal national party. Power struggles at home
        and rebellion by colonies abroad ensued.
        The spirit of liberalism prevalent in Europe was tardy in
        reaching Spain. After many reverses, a democratic constitution was
        finally proclaimed and constitutional monarchy was instituted in 1874.
        By the time of the Spanish–American War of 1898, the Spanish empire of
        the Golden Age had been whittled to insignificance. King Alfonso XIII,
        who linked the 19th and 20th centuries, inaugurated the Madrid Metro
        (underground railway) and University City. But he was undone by the
        chronic unrest of his subjects. Neither constitutional government nor
        dictatorship proved workable, and in 1931 the king went into exile
        following anti-royalist results in municipal elections.
        The Civil War
        In 1931, general elections brought the Republicans to
        power, and King Alfonso XIII escaped in exile. In the new Republic,
        bitter ideological conflicts divided parties and factions, and the
        church was also involved. For the next several years the pendulum of
        power in Spain swung back and forth between Left and Right.
        Finally, in 1936, a large section of the army under General
        Francisco Franco rose in revolt against the government. On Francos
        side were monarchists, conservatives, the Catholic Church, and the
        right-wing Falangists. United against him was a collection of
        republicans, liberals, socialists, communists, and anarchists. The
        civil war developed into one of the great causes of the 20th century,
        with support for both sides pouring in from outside of Spain. Often
        unaware of the particular Spanish origins of the struggle, many
        Europeans saw the civil war as a crucial conflict between democracy and
        dictatorship, or from the other side, as a conflict between law and
        order and the forces of social revolution and chaos.
        The war was brutal and bloody, and both sides committed
        atrocities. The Civil War ended with some 700,000 combatants dead on
        both sides; another 30,000 were executed or assassinated, including
        many priests and nuns, and perhaps 15,000 civilians were killed in air
        raids. Madrid remained in Republican hands for most of the war, but the
        government was evacuated in the early stages of a nationalist siege
        that lasted until March 1939.
        Even when the war ended, the hardship continued. Despite
        Hitlers efforts at persuasion, Spains new caudillo (strongman),
        Generalísimo Franco, managed to keep Spain out of World War II. Spain
        was admitted to the United Nations in 1955, opening the gates to an
        overwhelming tourist invasion, which would have profound effects on
        both the economy and national mentality.
        When Franco died in 1975, Spain rapidly emerged from its
        isolation. The coronation of his designated successor, Juan Carlos, the
        grandson of Alfonso XIII, brought the restoration of parliamentary
        democracy and a relaxation of customs and laws. The kings commitment
        to democracy brought Spain into line with the rest of Western Europe
        and assured it of membership in the European Union, which was granted
        in 1986. Madrid flourished in the early 1980s, as characterized by la
        movida, a hip cultural explosion that rejected the repression of the
        Franco era through acts of hedonism and creative films, music and
        theater.
        Charismatic Felipe González, a Socialist, was Prime
        Minister of Spain from 1982 to 1986. Spain became a member of the
        European Economic Community (now called European Union, or EU) in 1986,
        hastening the countrys modernization. In a single year, 1992, Spain
        dominated the world stage: Barcelona hosted the Summer Olympic Games,
        Seville the World Expo, and Madrid held the role of European Cultural
        Capital.
        Though González was credited by many as the architect of
        the new Spain, he finally succumbed to incessant charges of corruption
        and incompetence in the highest levels of his government. In 1996, the
        surging Partido Popular, led by a decidely uncharismatic former
        accountant, José María Aznar, was elected, forming the first
        conservative government in Spain since the return of democracy.
      
    
  
