
  
  
    
      
        a brief History
        Humans inhabited the Balearic archipelago as early as 5000
        b.c. , having most likely journeyed to the islands from the coast of
        mainland Spain. Neolithic islanders lived in caves and rock shelters,
        examples of which can still be seen on both Mallorca and Menorca, and
        hunted the only large animal on the islands, a type of mountain goat,
        now extinct. Many of the Balearic Islands are strewn with rocks and
        boulders, and these early peoples built simple stone houses and cleared
        fields by piling the stones into dividing walls.
        Another skill with stones was evident in the islanders
        deadly use of the sling, which brought them onto the world stage and
        into written history. Indeed, the name Balearic may come from the Greek
        ballein, to throw.  The Carthaginians absorbed the islands into their
        trading empire and founded the main ports, but they quickly learned to
        respect the slingers, eventually recruiting thousands into their
        armies. By 123 b.c. the Romans had pacified most of Spain and sent out
        an invading force. Having conquered the islands, they named them
        Balearis Major (Mallorca) and Balearis Minor (Menorca).
        The Romans built roads and established towns, including the
        towns of Palmaria (Palma) and Pollentia (near present-day Alcúdia). In
        the fifth century, as the Empire crumbled, tribes called barbarians by
        the Romans — Goths, Vandals and Visigoths — poured into Spain. The
        Vandals, who destroyed almost all evidence of the Roman occupation,
        settled in North Africa, becoming a sea power. A Byzantine expedition
        from Constantinople ousted the Vandals from the Balearics in 534.
        The Tide of Islam
        Ignited in the Arabian peninsula by the teachings of the
        Prophet Muhammad, Islam spread like wildfire, with its armies reaching
        the Atlantic coast of Morocco by 683. Determined to impose their new
        religion in Europe, a predominantly Moorish army led by the Arab
        general Tarik landed on the Iberian peninsula in 711. In just seven
        years nearly all of Spain was under Moorish rule.
        The Muslim world, which reached from Baghdad to the
        Pyrenees, soon fragmented, with Spain becoming an independent
        caliphate. Under tolerant rulers, the capital city Córdoba was
        transformed into one of Europes greatest centers of scholarship and
        the arts. At first the caliphs were content to accept tribute from the
        Balearics, without imposing Islam. But by 848 disturbances in the
        islands prompted the Moors to deploy their newly expanded navy; the
        Emir of Córdoba conquered both Mallorca and Menorca at the beginning of
        the tenth century. By the 11th century, the caliphate had splintered
        into a mosaic of fractious states — 26 at one point, and the Balearics
        became an independent emirate.
        The Reconquest
        The aim of the Crusades in Spain was the eviction of the
        Muslims. After the recovery of Jerusalem in 1099, it took four hundred
        years of sieges and battles, treaties, betrayals, and yet more battles,
        before Christian kings and warlords succeeded in subduing the
        Moors.
        On 10 September 1229, a Catalan army led by King Jaume I of
        Aragón and Catalunya took the Mallorcan shore near the present-day
        resort of Santa Ponça. The defenders retreated inside the walls of
        Palma, but on the last day of 1229 the city fell, and pockets of
        resistance throughout the island were also defeated. Jaume I proved to
        be an enlightened ruler who profited from the talents of the
        Moors — converted by force to Christianity — as well as of the islands
        large Jewish and Genoese trading communities. Mallorca prospered.
        The Moors on Menorca speedily agreed to pay an annual
        tribute to Aragón and were left in peace. The islands tranquility
        lasted until 1287, when Alfonso III of Aragón, smarting over a series
        of humiliations at the hands of his nobles, found a pretext for
        invasion. The Moors were defeated and expelled or killed. In contrast
        to Mallorca, Menorcas economy was devastated for decades.
        Jaume I died after reigning in Aragón for six decades, but
        he made the cardinal error of dividing between his sons the lands he
        had fought for so long to unite. At first this resulted in an
        Independent Kingdom of Mallorca, under Jaume II, followed by Sanç and
        Jaume III. But family rivalry triggered the overthrow of Jaume III by
        his cousin Pedro IV, who then seized the Balearics for Aragón.
        Attempting a comeback, Jaume was killed in battle near Llucmajor in
        1349.
        A newly unified Christian Spain under the Catholic
        Monarchs, Ferdinand and Isabella, completed the Reconquest, defeating
        the only Moorish enclave left on the Iberian peninsula, Granada, in
        1492. However, the centralized kingdom failed to incorporate the
        Balearics politically or economically.
        The Spanish Empire
        As one tumultuous age ended, one of glory and greed began.
        Christopher Columbus, the seafaring captain from Genoa (whom at least
        three Mallorcan towns claim as their own) believed he could reach the
        East Indies by sailing westwards. In the same year that Granada fell,
        Columbus crossed the Atlantic, landing in the Caribbean islands.
        Spain exported its adventurers, traders, and priests, and
        imposed its language, culture, and religion on the New World, creating
        a vast empire in the Americas. Ruthless, avaricious
        conquistadores extracted and sent back incalculable riches of silver
        and gold. The century and a half after 1492 has been called Spains
        Golden Age.  However, the era carried the seeds of its own decline.
        Plagued by corruption and incompetence, and drained of manpower and
        ships by such adventurism as the dispatch of the ill-fated Armada
        against England in 1588, Spain was unable to defend her expansive
        interests. Burgeoning trade in the Balearics was interrupted by
        marauding pirates based in North Africa as well as by the powerful
        Turkish fleet.
        French and British Ties and Occupation
        The daughter of Ferdinand and Isabella married the son and
        heir of the Holy Roman Emperor, Maximilian of Hapsburg. The Spanish
        crown duly passed to the Hapsburgs, and Spain remained in their hands
        until the feeble-minded Carlos II died in 1700, leaving no heir. France
        seized the chance to install the young grandson of Louis XIV on the
        Spanish throne.
        A rival Hapsburg claimant was supported by Austria and
        Britain, who saw a powerful Spanish-French alliance as a major threat.
        In the subsequent War of the Spanish Succession (1702 –1713) most of
        the old kingdom of Aragón, including the Balearics, backed the
        Hapsburgs. Britain seized Gibraltar — in the name of the Hapsburg
        claimant — and retained it when the war was over. In 1708 Britain
        captured Menorca, and the magnificent harbor of Mahón (Maó), for the
        Royal Navy. England clung to it even when Bourbon forces captured
        Mallorca at the end of the war.
        Menorca changed hands between Britain, France, and Spain
        five more times in less than a century. Britain finally ceded the
        island to Spain in the year 1802, under the terms of the Treaty of
        Amiens.
        By 1805, Spain was once more aligned with France, and
        Spanish ships fought alongside the French against Nelson at Trafalgar.
        Napoleon came to distrust his Spanish ally and forcibly replaced the
        king of Spain with his own brother, Joseph Bonaparte. A French army
        marched in to subdue the country. The Spanish resisted and, aided by
        British troops commanded by the Duke of Wellington, drove the French
        out. What British historians call the Peninsular War (1808–1814) is
        known in Spain as the War of Independence.
        In the 19th century, practically all of Spains possessions
        in the Americas broke away in the wake of the Napoleonic Wars, and the
        few that remained were lost at the end of the 19th century. The
        Balearics, further neglected, were beset with poverty and outbreaks of
        disease. However, toward the 20th century, things began to improve on
        the islands, with Mallorca reaping the rewards of successful
        agricultural crops and Menorca launching an export shoe industry.
        The beginning of the 20th century in Spain was marked by
        still more crises, assassinations, and near anarchy. The colonial war
        in Morocco provided an almost welcome distraction, but a disastrous
        defeat there in 1921 led to a coup in which the general Primo de Rivera
        became dictator. The dictator fell in 1929, and when the elections of
        1931 revealed massive anti-royalist feeling in Spains cities, the king
        followed him into exile.
        The Republic and Civil War
        The new republic was conceived amid an orgy of strikes,
        church-burnings, and uprisings of the right and left. In February 1936
        te left-wing Popular Front won a majority of seats in the Cortes, but
        across Spain new extremes of violence displaced argument.
        In July 1936, most of the army, led by General Francisco
        Franco — with the support of the monarchists, conservatives, the
        clergy, and the right-wing Falange — rose against the government in
        Madrid. Aligned on the governments side were the Republicans,
        including liberals, socialists, Communists, and anarchists. The ensuing
        Spanish Civil War was brutal and bitter, and support for both sides
        poured in from outside Spain. Many saw it as a contest between
        democracy and dictatorship, or, from the other side, between order and
        Red chaos. Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany backed Francos Nationalists,
        while the Soviet Union supported the Republicans (although less and
        less towards the end of the war). Volunteers from Britain and the US
        arrived to fight on the side of the Republicans. The war lasted three
        years; perhaps one million Spaniards lost their lives.
        Mallorca and Menorca found themselves on opposite sides
        during the war. Menorca declared itself for the republic, and stayed
        with it to the bitter end. Mallorcas garrison seized it for Francos
        Nationalists. Early in the war, the Republicans used their one
        battleship to support an invasion of Mallorca, but it ended in failure.
        A decisive factor was the presence in Palma of Italian air squadrons,
        used to bomb republican Barcelona.
        New Horizons
        Exhausted after the Civil War, Spain remained on the
        sidelines during World War II and began to recover economically under
        the oppressive, law-and-order regime of Franco. There had been a
        foretaste of elite foreign tourism in the 1920s, but it was the late
        1950s when the rest of Europe began sun-seeking pilgrimages to Spain.
        Tourism exploded into an annual southern migration, transforming the
        Spanish economy, landscape, and society. Eager to capitalize, the
        country poured its soul into mass tourism, which triggered a rash of
        indiscriminate building on the southern and eastern coastlines, with
        scant regard for tradition or aesthetics. But after so many years
        closed off from the rest of Europe, of equal significance was the
        injection of foreign influences into Francos once hermetically sealed
        Spain. Mallorca and Menorca in particular saw explosive growth in
        tourism; by the 1970s, the Balearics were one of Europes most popular
        holiday destinations.
        Franco named as his successor the grandson of Alfonso XIII,
        who was enthroned as King Juan Carlos I when the dictator died in 1975.
        To the dismay of Franco diehards, the king brilliantly managed the
        transition to democracy, then stood back to allow it full rein, even
        intervening during a brief attempt at a military coup. After many years
        of repression, new freedoms and autonomy were granted to Spanish
        regions, including the Balearics, and their languages and cultures
        enjoyed a long-desired renaissance.
        More a part of Europe than ever before, Spain joined the
        European Community (now European Union) in 1986, giving further boost
        to a booming economy. The tourist industry continued to expand, and
        though it became one of the top two income earners in Spain, a
        realization that unrestricted mass tourism was leading to damaging
        long-term consequences also began to grow. By the late 1990s, a new
        emphasis on quality and, especially in the Balearics, on safeguarding
        the environment had finally taken root—too late for many
        environmentalists, but hopefully still in time to preserve much of the
        natural beauty and unique character of the Las Islas Baleares.
      
    
  
