
  
  
    
      
        A Brief History
        The history of Hawaii reads like the story of a mythical
        kingdom. The first wave of Polynesian settlers crossed the equator and
        arrived from the Marquesas in the South Pacific perhaps as early as
        a.d.   400. These immigrant voyages were breathtaking and treacherous,
        requiring the crossing of 2,500 miles (4,000 km) of open seas aboard
        dugout catamarans and outrigger canoes. Their destination was even more
        resplendent with forests than the paradise we see today, but hoary bats
        and monk seals were the only mammals in residence. The first Polynesian
        settlers brought much of what they needed, however, from pigs and
        chickens to bananas and taro, the root crop that would sustain them.
        Paddies of taro are to this day a signature crop in rural Hawaii.
        A second wave of Polynesian immigrants from Tahiti arrived
        centuries later. By a.d.   1300 they had erased the vestiges of a
        Marquesan outpost and developed a Hawaiian society of their own. Rival
        chiefs ruled each island; fish farms and temples were laid out; and
        tribal and inter-island warfare was common. The chiefs governed their
        feudal domains by force, ritual, and taboo. The system of taboo (kapu)
        gave society its laws and the people a complex moral code. To fend off
        natural and cosmic cata­stro­phes, the rituals of human sacrifice came
        into play, intended to placate the more violent of the local gods, such
        as those of the volcanoes and typhoons. While such island societies
        might seem less than Edenic, the early Hawaiians led a pleasurable
        life, singing their own histories to the beat of gourds, riding the
        waves on long wooden surfboards, and developing an elaborate, graceful
        form of story-dance, the hula.
        Captains and Kings
        The first Westerner to reach Hawaii was Captain James Cook,
        the British commander whose mission was to dis­cover the mythic
        Northwest Passage linking the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. He, too, had
        set out from Tahiti when he came upon the Hawaiian Islands. The year
        was 1778; his landfall was the northerly island of Kauai; and the name
        he gave his new discovery was the Sandwich Islands (after the Lord of
        the Admiralty, the Earl of Sandwich). The name did not stick, and had
        Captain Cook known his fate, he would not have stuck around either. The
        natives seemed friendly enough, rowing out to greet Cooks ships, which
        received much-needed provisions in exchange for fastenings and other
        trinkets. When Cook later tied up on the Big Island of Hawaii, at
        Kealakekua Bay, he was hailed as the god Lono and feasted on a grand
        scale. But returning later to regroup after being slapped by an angry
        storm, a dispute arose over stolen property. Cook took a chief hostage,
        and in turn he was ritualistically hacked to pieces.
        Cooks cohorts had opened fire, to no avail. Among those
        wounded that day was the young man who would soon unite the Hawaiian
        kingdom for the first time in its long history. Known as Kamehameha the
        Great, he considered the unification of Hawaii his divine fate, one
        which he was to fulfill before he turned 30. He did so with the help of
        a foreign navy vessel. After Cooks voyage, a small but steady flow of
        American and European vessels, already engaged in the China trade,
        started to use Hawaii as a convenient, much-needed stopover. The
        warring chiefs demanded guns in exchange for food. Kamehameha, as chief
        of the Big Island, not only got his share of guns, but finally captured
        a cannon and ship. Maui fell first, followed by Oahu, Lanai, and
        Molokai. Kauai, where Cook had begun his fateful voyage of Hawaiian
        discovery, became Kamehamehas vassal in 1810.
        As the first king of all Hawaii, Kamehameha established a
        new empire that preserved the old ways, including the rituals performed
        at the outdoor temples (heiau), while creating an overlay of
        British-style government. A viceroy ruled each island at the Kings
        pleasure. These Western ideas, which seemed to amuse Kamehameha, were
        introduced by a new friend, another famous English explorer, Captain
        George Vancouver, who had once served under Captain Cook. The King
        encouraged the arrival of Westerners, giving land grants to some of his
        favorite foreigner visitors. Vancouver had left scores of cattle and
        sheep on the islands to supply passing ships. To round them up, the
        King brought cowboys from Spain and Mexico, initiating the paniolo
        (Hawaiian cowboy) tradition. Another seafarer, the American John
        Kendrick, launched the sandalwood trade in 1791, when China had run out
        of its own supply. By 1825, Hawaiis sandalwood forests had been
        thoroughly cut away, too, and non-native flora and fauna were imported
        to fill in, altering the landscape of paradise.
        There were other changes, too. Among the commodities
        exchanged when foreign ships called were Hawaiian women, who soon
        gained a measure of economic independence through prostitution and
        other endeavors involving outsiders. Foreign ships carried new diseases
        to the islands as well. Measles, cholera, and syphilis soon riddled the
        population, which was cut in half over just a few decades. By the time
        the first great king of Hawaii died, in 1819, the underpinnings of
        native society were disintegrating.
        Missionaries, Whales, and Sugarcane
        The year of 1820 was a pivotal one in the story of the
        King­dom of Hawaii. It was the year the first missionaries arrived from
        America. But more immediately, it was when the kapu system of taboos
        broke down completely under the leadership of young King Kamehameha II
        (the first kings son, Liholiho) and the regent, Kaahumanu (the
        favorite of the 21 wives of the first king). Hawaiis royalty resisted
        replacing the old religious system with newly-arrived Christianity
        until Kaahumanu was nursed back to health and converted by the wife of
        one of the first missionaries, Hiram Bingham. Madam Regent attended
        church and the mission schools (which you can still visit in Honolulu)
        and burned images of the old Hawaiian gods, while Kamehameha II
        entertained lavishly in the company of his wives. In 1824, the King
        decided to travel abroad, but immediately upon disembarking in England
        he contacted measles, dying in London.
        Many in the church and among the native population viewed
        the Kings overseas death as a judgement. The regent Kaahumanu, ruling
        in the name of her young charge, Kamehameha III, seized the opportunity
        and followed many of the strictures favored by the Calvinist
        Congregationalists, who were modernizing the country through the
        establishment of schools and the printing of books in the Hawaiian
        language (which they formulated in a written form for the first time).
        Among Kaahumanus many reforms was the banning of prostitution, a
        ruling which led to pitched battles in whaling ports such as Lahaina.
        Alcohol sales, gambling, and dancing were banned for a time in
        Honolulu. The Calvinistic reforms were soon reversed when Kaahumanu
        died and Kamehameha III ascended to power in 1824. The new King resumed
        the ways of the two previous monarchs, abolishing laws against adultery
        and prostitution and taking up with his half sister; but powerful
        interests, particularly those of the flourishing foreign business
        community (which would be increasingly dominated by the descendants of
        the first missionaries), were intent on usurping the throne, in effect
        if not in name. The new King was eventually persuaded to issue a decree
        guaranteeing religious freedom, and the next year, 1840, he established
        a constitutional monarchy.
        The most famous Prime Minister under Hawaiis new political
        system was an American missionary and physician, Gerrit P. Judd, who
        served in the post from 1842 to 1854. During this period, foreigners
        were allowed to buy large parcels of land for the first time (much of
        it used for the sugarcane plantations), and ties to America, both
        economic and political, were dramatically tightened, with talk of
        possibly annexing Hawaii reaching the White House. However, many
        Hawaiians were opposed to surrendering their sovereignty. When a new
        king, Kamehameha IV, ascended to the throne in 1854, Judd was tossed
        out. The missionary influence waned, and the royal court asserted its
        power, as well as its love of luxury. The Hawaiian economy was rising,
        sustained in part by whaling. But the demand for whale oil would
        decline steeply after 1859, with the discovery of oil in Pennsylvania
        and the start of the American Civil War in 1860. No matter — Hawaii had
        a great crop in reserve: sugar. The first refinery appeared in 1849 on
        Maui. The cane plantations, increasingly in the hands of American
        tycoons, found a ready market in the US. Duty-free sugar imports from
        Hawaii were eventually granted by the US, in exchange for rights to a
        military base at Pearl Harbor in the future.
        The growth of the sugar market led to waves of immigration
        from China (1852), the Azores (1878), and Japan (1885). Native
        Hawaiians were finding themselves overwhelmed and outnumbered. Disease
        had lowered the Hawaiian population to just 20% of what it was when
        Captain Cook arrived. The Kamehameha line ended with the death of
        Kamehameha V, in 1872, and the election first of William Lunalilo, then
        of David Kalakaua in 1874 as Hawaiis constitutional monarch.
        The Merry Monarch
        The Hawaiian people loved their King, who was soon dubbed
        the Merry Monarch.  In 1881, King David Kalakaua launched a world
        tour, visiting the heads of state in Japan, Thailand, Egypt, and
        England. The next year, he built himself a palace, Iolani, which can
        still be toured in Honolulu. He also legalized the hula, Hawaiis
        traditional dance. But the Kings nationalism upset the vested
        interests of foreigners. Sanford Dole, head of a missionary family, and
        others led a successful movement to curb Kalakauas powers. When the
        King died during a tour of San Francisco, in 1891, he was succeeded by
        his sister, Liliuokalani, who proved to be an expectedly fierce
        defender of Hawaiian ways and the monarchy. Dole and others thought it
        high time for a US coup, and they were able to persuade the US naval
        forces to assist in deposing the Queen in 1893. When the US refused to
        annex Hawaii, and instead demanded the reinstitution of the Queen, the
        sugar industry simply declared Hawaii a Republic, with Sanford B. Dole
        its president. A new US President, McKinley, made annexation official
        in 1898. In 1900, Hawaii became a US Territory; the first territorial
        governor was Dole. Queen Liliuokalani lived out her life near Honolulu,
        quietly and defiantly; she composed songs, including Hawaiis most
        famous, Aloha Oe.
        Pineapples and War
        The mythical kingdom of Hawaii was now a dream of the past.
        Political and economic power resided with non-Hawaiians. Dole and other
        business families were turning vast fields into pineapple plantations
        and importing new workers to plant and cultivate them. Puerto Ricans
        began arriving in 1900, followed by Koreans in 1903 and Filipinos from
        1907 on. Like the Japanese, Chinese, and Portuguese before them, many
        of the new peoples would stay on in Hawaii, adding to the ethnic and
        racial mix that has become a hallmark of the islands. By 1920, the
        Japanese in Hawaii outnumbered Hawaiians two to one.
        Yet Hawaii was still an island paradise in the eyes of
        travelers, if not in those of its original people. Kilauea volcano on
        the Big Island had been attracting tourists since the 1860s, but it
        wasnt until after 1901, with the opening of the Moana Hotel in
        Waikiki, that organized tourism took hold. Steamships of the Matson
        Line soon were arriving regularly at Aloha Tower, bearing tourists from
        San Francisco who had been at sea for five long days. Americas rich
        made up a goodly portion of these early travelers. They arrived with
        maids and trunks, and often stayed for months. In 1936, Pan American
        Airways introduced daily passenger air service from San Francisco. The
        annual number of visitors had increased to over 30,000 by the time
        World War II began.
        The war broke out in Hawaii as nowhere else in America with
        the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor (7 December 1941). The US declared
        war on Japan. Hawaii, as Americas western outpost and major Pacific
        military base, was ruled by martial law. The Waikiki hotels housed
        soldiers; the white sands were strung with barbed wire; and even the
        American currency in local circulation was stamped as HAWAII dollars,
        so that the enemy could not spend it on the world market if the islands
        fell.
        Statehood and Tourism
        After the war, sugarcane and pineapple production remained
        strong for a time, but tourism began its rise to ascendancy. Spurred on
        by the Hawaii Calls live radio program broadcast weekly to the US,
        Canada, and Australia from Waikiki, millions fell under the spell of a
        new island paradise of surf and hula aimed at tourists. Trader Vics
        opened garish Polynesian-themed restaurants; Arthur Godfrey brought the
        ukulele to television; Burt Lancaster and Debra Kerr rolled in the wet
        sands of Oahu; and jet air service brought in vacationers by the
        hundred thousands. The surge was topped off by Hawaiis statehood, on
        21 August 1959, but the vision of a mythical kingdom on Americas
        Pacific frontier was still expanding. Hilton built a resort village
        right on Waikiki Beach; Sheraton and other hotel chains followed. Among
        the millions of visitors lured there in the 1980s were huge waves of
        Japanese vacationers, newly rich and ready to spend big bucks in an
        East-West paradise. By 1990, Hawaii was welcoming nearly 7 million
        visitors annually, seven times its own resident population, which is
        the most ethnically and racially diverse in the US. The same year, the
        University of Hawaii campus at Manoa became the site of the Center for
        Cultural and Technical Interchange Between East and West (popularly
        known as the East West Center), a unique and venerated resource for
        advanced Pacific Rim studies.
        More recently, the overwhelmed native Hawaiian culture
        underwent a renewal as well. The return and preservation of ancient
        traditions was a response, in part, to the increasing demand of savvy
        tourists for a cultural as well as a leisure experience, but a leading
        component was a growing movement by native Hawaiians to restore the
        rights stolen from them when the royal monarchy was overthrown. This
        movement has led to calls for self-determination and increased native
        sovereignty, even full independence as a new nation for the estimated
        250,000 people of Hawaiian ancestry. But perhaps the greatest legacy to
        travelers today who arrive at the worlds premier island beach resort
        is the warmth, friendliness, and sense of family that Hawaiian culture
        has created in the land of its rise, fall, and renewal.
      
    
  
