
  
  
    
      
        A BRIEF HISTORY
        The French have always wanted to know what it means to be
        a French­man. Their history has been a constant quest for national
        identity: a conflict between strong regional loyalties and central
        authority.
        In about 2000 b.c. Celtic tribes — probably from eastern
        Europe — came looking for greener pastures in the areas that are now
        Franche-Comté, Alsace, and Bur­gundy. At the same time, migrants from
        the Mediterranean countries were trickling into the south.
        The first recorded settlement was the trading post set up by
        Phocaean Greeks from Asia Minor at Massalia (Mar­seilles) around
        600 b.c. , followed by other ports at Hyères, Antibes, and Nice. But
        the Greeks developed few contacts with the interior beyond a little
        commerce in olives and wine with the Celts of Burgundy. When their
        position was threatened by Ligurian pirates at sea and warlike tribes
        from inland, the merchants of Marseilles called on Rome for help.
        From Gaul to France
        In 125 b.c. , the Romans came in force, conquered the
        Gallic barbarians, and set up a fortress at Aquae Sextiae
        (Aix-en-Provence). They took advantage of this new stronghold to create
        Provincia (now Provence), stretching from the Alps to the Pyrénées, in
        order to guarantee communications between Italy and Spain. When this
        province was endangered by fresh attacks from the north, Julius Caesar
        himself took charge, conquering practically the whole of Gaul by
        50 b.c. Caesar drew Gauls northeastern frontier at the Rhine, taking
        in present-day Belgium, and warned that the Ger­man­ic tribes across
        the river — the Franks (after whom France is named), Alamans, and
        Saxons — would always threaten the security of the frontier.
        The Romanization of Gaul sent the most energetic warriors to
        defend the outposts of the empire while their families settled down to
        work the land or build towns such as Lyon, Orange, Arles, and Nîmes,
        and the first great highways between them. At the same time, merchants
        built up a thriving trade with the rest of the Roman Empire. The
        pattern for the peasantry and bourgeoisie of France was thus
        established.
        Christianity was introduced into Gaul in the first century
        a.d. , but was not really accepted until the late fourth century, when
        it became the empires official religion. Large-scale conversions were
        led by Martin de Tours, a soldier turned cleric. (Sword and cross were
        to form a regular alliance in French history. ) The new religion soon
        cemented national solidarity in the face of more barbarian invasions,
        this time by the Franks.
        Gallic unity collapsed with the crumbling Roman Empire. King
        Clovis, the leader of the Franks, defeated the Roman armies at
        Sois­sons in 486 and won the allegiance of most Gallo-Romans by
        converting to Christianity ten years later. With Paris as his capital,
        he extended his rule to the Medi­ter­ra­nean. The realm was divided up
        among his heirs and progressively fragmented by the rivalries of the
        Merovingian dynasty that battled for power over the next 300 years.
        Despite this fragmentation, the Franks deeply impacted the
        cultural and linguistic heritage of France. The Germanic traditions and
        language of the north became distinct from the Gallo-Roman traditions
        longer preserved in the Medi­ter­ra­nean basin.
        Spains Arab rulers exploited this disunity to sweep north
        across Gaul, controlling Langue­doc, Dordogne, and a large part of
        Provence, before being defeated at Poitiers in 732 by the army of
        Charles Martel. Even the mighty Charlemagne, king of the Franks from
        768 to 814, did not manage to create an enduring national unity; his
        sons fought for the spoils of his empire. The Normans from
        Scan­di­navia took advantage of the Carolingian dynastys divided
        kingdom, pillaging their way inland along the Loire and the Seine, and
        plundering Paris in 845. In addition, Saracens invaded the Provençal
        coast from North Africa, and Magyar armies attacked Lor­raine and
        Bur­gun­dy. To keep the support of the nobles armies, the kings had to
        give the nobles more and more land. Con­se­quently, the realm broke up
        into the fiefdoms of the feudal Mid­dle Ages, precursors of the
        countrys classical provinces — Provence, Bur­gun­dy, Nor­mandy,
        Brittany, and so forth.
        In the central region, from the Loire Valley to Belgium,
        Hugues Capet succeeded in achieving a precarious ascendancy, and was
        crowned the first king of France in 987. As had happened at the fall of
        the Roman Empire, the Christian Church provided the essential element
        of national unity. Hugues was anointed at Reims with an oil said to
        have been brought to earth by the angels, thus establishing kingship by
        divine right for the French.
        Middle Ages
        The alliance with the Church served as the underpinning of
        regal authority. In exchange for the anointment, the Church was
        enriched with lands and the right of taxation by tithe, a percentage of
        the farmers seasonal produce.
        After the more sober spirituality of the Romanesque
        churches, the soaring Gothic cathedrals of Chartres, Paris
        (Notre-Dame), Bourges, and Amiens were at once monuments to the glory
        of God and testimony to the sheer power, spiritual and temporal, of the
        Roman Catholic Church.
        France, dubbed by the pope eldest daughter of the Church,
        took the lead in the Crusades against the infidels in Palestine,
        stopping off on the way across Europe to massacre heretics and
        infidels. Louis IX of France, the ideal Christian king for the justice
        he handed down to his subjects and for the Crusades he led to the Holy
        Land, was sainted after his death in Tunis in 1270. From 1309 to 1377,
        Avignon was the papal seat.
        Frances other major preoccupation was England. In 1066,
        Duc Guillaume of Normandy crossed the English Channel in a successful
        military campaign and became William the Con­queror. For the next 400
        years, English and French monarchs fought over the sovereignty of
        various parts of France — among them Aquitaine, Touraine, Normandy, and
        Flanders.
        Between France and England ensued tangled marital alliances
        and military clashes more important to national morale than to
        resolving their perennial conflict — such as Bouvines (1214), a victory
        for the French, and Crécy (1346) and Agincourt (1415) for the English.
        Finally, a teenager from Lorraine, Jeanne dArc (Joan of Arc), roused
        the French to resist the English at Orléans. The English captured her
        and burned her at the stake in Rouen in 1431, but her martyrdom stirred
        national pride sufficiently to oust the English from France 20 years
        later.
        The disputes among nobles were not the first concern of
        ordinary French citizens. To the common man, wars were just another
        hardship, taking sons away from the farm to fight, while the armies —
        French as much as foreign — ravaged the land or pillaged the towns.
        During war and peace alike in this feudal age, the Church and the
        aristocracy continued to claim their respective portions of the
        peasants labor, leaving barely enough for subsistence. All too
        frequently a cycle of drought, famine, and plague would decimate the
        population.
        In any case, large portions of France were independently
        controlled by powerful dukes whose allegiance to the king was only
        nominal. The modern unity of France was in the making.
        Ancien Régime
        Absolute power was the dominant feature of what
        post-Revolutionary France called the Ancien Régime. The monarchy made
        noticeable gains under François I (1515–47). He strengthened central
        administration and abandoned an initially tolerant policy toward the
        Protestants. A debonair Renaissance prince and patron of the arts, he
        introduced a grandiose style at court.
        François brought Leonardo da Vinci to work at Blois, and
        Rosso and Primaticcio to decorate Fontainebleau. He also commissioned
        paintings by Raphael and Titian for the royal collections that are now
        the pride of the Louvre. A new opulent architecture blossomed with the
        châteaux of the Loire and around Paris. In foreign affairs, after he
        had crushed the Duke of Milans army at Marignano and formed a showy
        alliance with Henry VIII of England, François Is European ambitions
        were halted by the German Emperor Charles V. François even suffered the
        indignity of a years imprisonment in Madrid, following a resounding
        defeat at Pavia in 1525.
        The bloody 16th-century conflicts between Catholics and
        Prot­es­tants throughout Europe centered more on political and
        financial intrigue than on questions of theology. The French Wars of
        Religion pitted the Catholic forces of the regent Catherine de Médicis
        against the Protestant (Huguenot) camp headed by Henri de Navarre.
        Their crisis came on 24 August 1572 with the infamous Saint
        Bar­thol­o­mews Day Massacre. Two thousand Protestants, in Paris for
        Henris wedding to Catherines daughter Marguerite de Valois, were
        killed. The general massacre of Protestants spread to the countryside,
        and by October another 30,000 had lost their lives.
        The conciliatory policies that painfully emerged after the
        bloodshed brought the Protestant Prince of Navarre to the throne as
        Henri IV (1589–1610), but not before he promised to convert to
        Cathol­icism. The enormous personal popularity of this good-natured but
        tough king from the Pyrénées proved vital for healing the wounds from
        the bitter wars. The Edict of Nantes was signed in 1598 to protect the
        Prot­es­tants, and five years later the Jesuits were allowed back into
        France. Henri maintained a reputation as a worthy and brave leader —
        and at the same time as an incorrigible womanizer — until his
        assassination in 1610 by a religious zealot.
        The country floundered in uncertainty under the regency of
        Marie de Médicis, mother of the young Louis XIII, until Cardinal
        Richelieu took charge as prime minister in 1624. Directing national
        policy until his death in 1642, Richelieu reasserted the authority of
        his king against both the conservative Catholics who surrounded the
        queen mother and the Protestant forces that were fiercely defending the
        privileges granted them by the Edict of Nantes. With his successful
        siege of the Protestant stronghold at La Rochelle, the cardinal
        neutralized the threat of their military strength while guaranteeing
        their freedom of worship.
        Richelieus major achievement was the greater
        centralization of royal power, laying the foundations of the strong
        sense of national identity that has characterized France ever since. He
        tightened the kings control over legislation and taxes, enraging the
        Vatican by daring to impose a new levy on the Church. More powerful
        royal stewards were sent out to diminish the autonomy of the regional
        parlements, councils with judicial rather than legislative functions,
        dominated by the high clergy and the nobles. The cardinal also created
        the Académie Française in 1635 to ensure the purity and clarity of the
        French language through its Dictionnaire and its Grammaire.
        Promoting overseas trade and the founding of a navy,
        Richelieu also launched France on the road to empire with the
        colonization of Guadeloupe and Martinique in the Caribbean. In Europe,
        the Catholic cardinal, master of practical politics, was not above
        supporting the Protestant Swedish, Danish, and German forces in the
        Thirty Years War against the Catholic Austrians, Italians, and
        Spanish. All that mattered was that it served Frances interests.
        Richelieus protégé Mazarin, another cardinal, took over
        the job of prime minister during the minority of Louis XIV. The court
        and regional aristocracy were infuriated by the Italian-born
        churchmans intimate relationship with the kings mother, Anne of
        Austria. Nor did they like his astounding knack for amassing a vast
        personal fortune while managing, very efficiently, the affairs of
        state. But most of all, they despised the way he eroded the nobles
        power and smoothed the path to an increasingly absolutist monarchy.
        The revolts of the Fronde forced Mazarin, Anne, and the
        boy-king to flee from Paris in 1649. However, the royal familys
        triumphant return three years later, with the rebellious nobles
        crushed, saw the monarchy stronger than ever.
        Louis XIV drew his own conclusions from Mazarins careful
        coaching in affairs of state. When he began his personal rule in 1661,
        at the age of 23, there was no question of a new prime minister
        impinging on the royal prerogative. Adopting the unequivocal emblem of
        the sun, Louis was to be outshone by no one. Counselors were wholly
        subservient. Louis never once called upon the parliamentary assembly of
        the Etats généraux. He moved the court to Versailles, impoverished the
        nobility by forcing them to contribute to the incredible luxury of his
        palace, and imposed as their sole function the support of the king in
        time of war.
        Versailles was truly the shining star of Europe by its
        architectural splendor, and most of all by the sheer hypnotic power of
        Louis XIVs cult of self-glorification. In his lifetime, many petty
        Euro­pean princes tried to imitate Louiss style with their own little
        Versailles, complete with court artists and sycophants. But Versailles
        was not without cost. It took French historians a long time to come to
        terms with the less attractive realities of what Louiss style cost the
        nation.
        To enhance his glory, the Sun King turned to foreign
        conquest. The devastating military expedition he launched across the
        Rhineland and Palatinate, and the series of largely fruitless wars with
        Spain, Holland, England, and Sweden did not endear him to the European
        people. Moreover, these ventures left Frances once-thriving economy in
        ruins.
        At home, his authoritarian rule required a brutal police
        force. Taxes soared to pay for his wars, and more and more peasants had
        to abandon their fields when press-ganged into his armies. Influenced
        in later life by the Catholic piety of Madame de Maintenon, his
        mistress and subsequently secret wife, Louis put an end to religious
        freedom for Protestants by revoking the Edict of Nantes. In the face of
        forced conversions, the Protestant Huguenots — many of them the most
        talented bankers, merchants, and artisans of their generation — fled to
        Switzerland, Germany, Holland, England, and Scandinavia.
        Louis died in 1715. Having outlived his children and
        grand­children, he was succeeded by his five-year-old great-grandson,
        Louis XV. But government was in the hands of the late kings cultured,
        libertine, and atheist brother, Philippe dOrléans.
        After the morose twilight years of the Sun King, the
        societal tone changed with the satiric pen of Voltaire and the erotic
        fantasies of Watteaus paintings and Marivauxs comedies. The court
        moved back from Versailles to Paris. The generally lazy regent gave
        incompetent nobles too much of a say in the running of the state.
        Regional parlements obtained the right to make protest, and the
        monarchy gradually weakened.
        The easy-going Louis XV was called the Bien-Aimé (Beloved),
        at least in the first half of his reign. The king seemed more
        interested in his mistresses than in running a tight ship of state.
        Despite this (or perhaps because of it) the economy recovered and the
        middle classes strengthened. The overseas empire expanded in the East
        and West Indies, and arts and letters flourished in this age of
        enlightenment.
        But the new voices were a clear threat to the established
        order. Diderots Encyclopédie championed reason over traditional
        religion, Rousseau discoursed on the origins of inequality, Voltaire
        shot at everything that didnt move.
        Revolution and Napoleon
        Louis XVI, grandson of Louis XV, found himself attacked on
        all sides. The stubborn aristocracy and high clergy were anxious to
        protect their ancient privileges; a burgeoning bourgeoisie longed for
        reforms that would give them greater opportunity; the peasantry was no
        longer prepared to bear the burden of feudal extortion; and a growing
        urban populace of artisans groaned under intolerable hardships.
        The Etats généraux convened for the first time in
        175 years. It was clearly the kings enduring absolutism rather than
        the throne itself that was under fire. For reactionary nobles, the king
        was the guarantor of their hereditary status. Liberal reformers wanted
        a constitutional monarchy similar to Englands, not a republic. Even
        the grievances drawn up by the peasants and townspeople insisted on
        continuing devotion to the king himself.
        Two months later, the blindness of the kings conservative
        advisors and the kings own weakness and vacillation led to the
        explosion of centuries of frustration and rage — which culminated in
        the storming of the Bastille, the regimes prison-fortress in Paris. On
        that fateful day, 14 July 1789, the king went hunting near his château
        at Versailles. At the end of the day, Louis — apparently oblivious to
        events in Paris — wrote in his diary, Rien (Nothing).
        A National Assembly voted a charter for liberty and
        equality, the great Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the
        Citizen. The aristocracys feudal rights were abolished, the Churchs
        massive land-holdings confiscated and sold off.
        Rather than compromise, the king fled Paris in a vain
        effort to join up with armed forces hostile to the Revolution. With
        Austrian and German armies massing on Frances frontiers and the forces
        of counter-revolution gathering inside the country, the militant
        revolutionary Jacobins led by Max­i­milien de Robespierre saw the
        kings flight as the ultimate betrayal. A Republic was declared in
        1792, and Louis XVI was guillotined in 1793. His son Louis XVII died in
        obscure circumstances under the Revolutionary government, probably in
        1795.
        Under pressure from the poorer classes, who did not want
        the Revolution appropriated for the exclusive benefit of the
        bourgeoisie, the Jacobin-led revolutionary committee ordered sweeping
        measures of economic and social reform, which were accompanied by a
        wave of mass executions, the Terror, aimed at moderates as well as
        aristocrats. Despite his attempts to quell the extremists, Robespierre
        was overthrown and guillotined in the counterattack of the propertied
        classes.
        During their Directoire, a new wave of executions — the
        White (royalist) Terror — decimated the Jacobins and their supporters.
        But the bourgeoisie, fearing both the royalists and their foreign
        backers, turned for salvation to a Corsican soldier triumphantly
        campaigning against the Rev­o­lutions foreign enemies — Napoleon
        Bonaparte.
        In between defeating the Aus­trians in Italy and a less
        successful campaign against the Brit­ish in Egypt, in 1795 Bona­parte
        re­turned to Paris to crush the royalists, and four years later he
        staged a coup against the Direc­toire. He was just 30 years old.
        In the first flush of dictatorship as First Consul, he
        established the Banque de France, created state-run lycées (high
        schools), and gave the country its first national set of laws, the Code
        Napoléon. The centralization dear to Richelieu and Louis XIV was
        becoming a reality.
        The supreme self-made man, Bonaparte in 1804 became Emperor
        Napoleon at a coronation ceremony in which he audaciously took the
        crown of golden laurels from the pope and placed it on his own head. He
        managed to simultaneously pursue foreign conquests in Germany and
        Austria and domestic reforms that included a modernized university, a
        police force, and proper supplies of drinking water for Pari­sians.
        During his disastrous campaign in Russia, he found time in Moscow to
        draw up a new statute for the Comédie-Française (the national theater),
        which had been dissolved during the Revolution.
        The nationalism that Napoleon invoked in his conquest of
        Europes Ancien Régime turned against him in Spain, Russia, and
        Germany. The monarchies regrouped to force him from power in 1814.
        Nevertheless, he made a brilliant but brief comeback the following year
        — before an alliance of British, Prussian, Belgian, and Dutch troops
        inflicted the final defeat at Waterloo.
        Toward Democracy
        At the end of the Napoleonic era, the monarchy was
        restored. The new king, Louis XVIII, tried at first to reconcile the
        restored monarchy with the reforms of the Revo­lution and Napoleons
        empire. But his nobles were intent on revenge and imposed a second,
        even more violent, White Terror against Jacobins and Bonapartists,
        including some of Napoleons greatest generals.
        Louiss reactionary successor, his brother Charles X, was
        interested only in renewing the traditions of the Ancien Régime, even
        having himself anointed and crowned at the ancient cathedral of Reims.
        But the middle classes were no longer prepared to tolerate the
        restraints on their freedom, nor the worsening condition of the economy
        in the hands of an incompetent aristocracy. They reasserted their
        rights in the insurrection of July 1830 — the kind of liberal
        revolution they would have preferred back in 1789 — paving the way for
        the bourgeois monarchy of Louis-Philippe.
        This last king of France, heir of the progressive Orléans
        branch of the royal family, encouraged the countrys exploitation of
        the Industrial Revolution and the complementary extension of its
        overseas empire in Asia and Africa (Algeria had been occupied just
        before the 1830 revolution). But the new factories created an urban
        working class clamoring for improvement of its miserable working and
        living conditions. The régimes response of ferocious repression plus
        numerous other ineptitudes led to a third revolution in 1848, with the
        Bonapartists, led by Napoleons nephew, emerging triumphant.
        The Second Republic ended four years later when the man
        whom Victor Hugo called Napoléon le Petit staged a coup to become
        Emperor Napoleon III. Determined to cloak himself in the legend of his
        uncles grandeur, he saw his own role as that of champion of the
        people. But he used harsh anti-press laws and loyalty oaths to quell
        the libertarian spirit that had brought him to power.
        The economy flourished thanks to the expansion of a
        vigorous entrepreneurial capitalism in iron, steel, and railways,
        augmented by overseas ventures such as the Suez Canal. Despite the
        emperors obsession with the new Red Peril — the 1848 Communist
        Mani­festo of Marx and Engels, which was being circulated in Paris — he
        could not prevent such social reforms as the workers right to form
        unions and even to strike.
        With the excessive enthusiasm that characterized the age,
        Baron Haussmanns urban planning redeveloped old Parisian neighborhoods
        to create a more airy and spacious capital. Similarly, architect
        Viollet-le-Duc often went overboard restoring some of the great Gothic
        cathedrals and medieval châteaux in ways their original creators had
        never imagined.
        Victor Hugo, in exile in Guernsey, was writing Les
        Misérables, while Baudelaire was working on Les Fleurs du Mal, and
        Offenbach was composing jolly operettas, such as La Belle Hélène.
        Courbet was painting his vast canvases of provincial life, and Manet
        his Déjeuner sur lHerbe.
        Society was optimistic. The bourgeoisie showed off its new
        prosperity with extravagant furnishings, silks, satins, and baubles,
        and in 1852 Paris opened its first department store, Au Bon Marché.
        France was developing a national identity of optimism, a high level of
        social critique, and constant pressure for improvement.
        But Germany had an account to settle. In 1870, Prussian
        Chan­cellor Bismarck exploited an obscure diplomatic conflict with
        France to unite the various German principalities and kingdoms into a
        fighting force well equipped for war. After a lightning victory over
        the ill-prepared French armies, the Germans marched on Paris and laid
        siege to the city, which finally capitulated in January 1871 in the
        face of dwindling food supplies. As part of the settlement ending the
        war, Alsace and a portion of Lorraine were ceded to Germany.
        The Third Republic
        Defeat shattered the Second Empire. While the new Third
        Repub­lics government under Adolphe Thiers negotiated the terms of
        surrender, the workers communes refused to give in. In March 1871 they
        took over Paris and a few provincial cities, and held out for ten brave
        but desperately disorganized weeks. In the end they were brutally
        crushed by government troops and order was restored.
        France resumed its industrial progress, quickly paid off
        its enormous war-reparations debt to Germany, and expanded its overseas
        empire in North and West Africa and Indochina. Rediscovered national
        pride found its perfect expression in the Eiffel Tower, thrust into the
        Paris skies for the international exhibition of 1889.
        In 1874, the first exhibition of Impressionism had blown
        away the dust and cobwebs of the artistic establishment. Novelist Emile
        Zola poured forth arguments against industrial exploitation. Rodin,
        more restrained, sculpted masterpieces such as Le Penseur (The
        Thinker). Leading the repub­lican hostility to the Churchs
        entrenched position in the schools, in 1882 Jules Ferry enacted the
        legislation that has formed the basis of Frances formidable state
        education system ever since.
        On the right, nationalist forces were motivated by a desire
        to hit back at Germany, seeing all contact with foreigners or any form
        of cosmopolitanism as a threat to national honor and integrity. For
        many, the Jews were the embodiment of this threat — Edouard Drumonts
        vehemently anti-Semitic La France Juive (Jewish France) was a runaway
        national bestseller. It appeared in 1886, eight years before Captain
        Alfred Dreyfus, an Alsatian Jew in the French Army, was arrested on
        what proved to be trumped-up charges of spying for the Germans. In a
        case that pitted the fragile honor of the Army against the very
        survival of French republican democracy, the captain had to wait 12
        years for full rehabilitation.
        The desire for revenge against Germany remained. And as
        Ger­manys own imperial ambitions grew, competition for world markets
        became intense. Most of France went enthusiastically into World War I,
        and came out of it victorious yet bled white. With the 1919 Treaty of
        Versailles, France recovered Alsace and Lorraine; but 1,350,000 men had
        been lost in the four years of fighting. The national economy was
        shattered, and political divisions were more extreme than ever.
        In face of the fears aroused by the Russian Revolution of
        1917, the conservative parties dominated the immediate post-war period,
        while a new French Communist Party, loyal to Moscow, split with the
        Socialists in 1920. France seemed less aware of the threat from Nazi
        Germany, allowing Hitler to remilitarize the Rhineland in 1936 in
        breach of the Versailles Treaty, a step Hitler later said he had never
        dreamt of getting away with.
        In the 1930s, extreme right-wing groups such as Action
        Fran­çaise and Croix-de-Feu (Cross of Fire) provided a strong
        anti­democratic undercurrent to the political turmoil of financial
        scandal and parliamentary corruption. The bloody 1934 riots on the
        Place de la Concorde in Paris offered a disturbing echo to the street
        fighting in Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany.
        The left-wing parties re­spond­ed by banding together in a
        Popular Front, which the Socialists led to power in 1936. Within the
        first few weeks, Léon Blums government nationalized the railways,
        brought in a 40-hour week, and instituted the workers first holidays
        with pay. But the Communists broke the alliance after Blum first failed
        to support the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War and then — faced
        with financial difficulties — put a brake on the reforms.
        War and Peace
        Blums government collapsed in 1938, and the new prime
        minister, Edouard Daladier, found himself negotiating the Munich
        agreements with Hitler, Mussolini, and Britains Neville Chamberlain. A
        year later, France was once again at war with Germany.
        Relying too complacently on the defensive strategy of the
        fortified Maginot Line along the northeast frontier with Germany (but
        not facing Belgium), the French were totally unprepared for the German
        invasion across the Ardennes in May 1940. With fast-moving tanks and
        superior air power, the Germans reached Paris 30 days later. Marshal
        Philippe Pétain, the hero of World War I, capitulated on behalf of the
        French on June 16. Two days later, on BBC radios French service from
        London, General de Gaulle appealed for national resistance.
        Compared with other occupied countries such as Belgium,
        Holland, and Denmark, Frances collaboration with the Germans is an
        inglorious story. Based in the Auvergnat spa town of Vichy, the French
        government often proved more zealous than its masters in suppressing
        civil liberties and drawing up anti-Jewish legislation. It was French
        police who rounded up the deportees for the concentration camps, many
        of them denounced by French civilians seeking to profit from the
        confiscation of property. The fighters of the underground Resistance
        movement were heroic, but they were a tiny minority, a few of them
        conservative patriots like de Gaulle, most of them socialists and
        communists, and also a handful of refugees from Eastern Europe.
        Deliverance came when the Allies landed on the beaches of
        Normandy on D-Day (6 June 1944). De Gaulle, with his canny sense of
        history, took an important step toward rebuilding national
        self-confidence by insisting that French armed forces fight side by
        side with the Americans and British for the liberation of the country,
        but, above all, that the French army be the first to enter Paris
        itself.
        After the high emotion of de Gaulles march down the
        Champs-Elysées, the business of post-war reconstruction, though boosted
        by the generous aid of the Americans Mar­shall Plan, proved arduous,
        and the wartime alliance of de Gaulles conservatives and the Communist
        Party soon broke down. The general could not tolerate the political
        squabbles of the Fourth Republic and withdrew from public life.
        Governments changed repeatedly, but the French muddled
        through. Intellectuals debated the existentialist merit of Albert Camus
        and Jean-Paul Sartre in Pariss Left Bank cafés.
        The French empire was collapsing. After Frances fruitless
        last stand in Vietnam, Pierre Mendès-France wisely negotiated an
        Indochinese peace settlement. He handed Pondicherry over to India and
        in the North African colonies gave Tunisia its independence, but was
        ousted from office as hostilities broke out in Algeria.
        De Gaulle returned from the wilderness in 1958, ostensibly
        to keep Algeria French. But hed seen the writing on the wall and
        brought the war to an end with Algerian independence in 1962. His major
        task was to rescue France from the chaos of the Fourth Republic. The
        new constitution, tailor-made to de Gaulles authoritarian
        requirements, placed the president above parliament, where he could
        pursue his own policies outside the messy arena of party politics.
        However, the colonial struggles in Algeria and Morocco were to have
        significant impact on French national identity in later years. As the
        empire receded, colonized populations from North and Central Africa,
        Indochina, and elsewhere began to move to France and alter the French
        identity once more.
        De Gaulles visions of grandeur, and of a country
        independent of NATO and the Warsaw Pact, gave France a renewed
        self-confidence. One of his great achievements was a close alliance
        with West Germany, overcoming centuries of bloodshed be­tween the two
        peoples.
        But with self-confidence came complacency, and the French
        bourgeoisie was cast again onto shifting ground with the massive
        student rebellions of 1968. The events of May that erupted in Pariss
        Latin Quarter and swiftly spread through the country disturbed
        de Gaulle enough for him to seek reassurance with his troops stationed
        in West Germany.
        In the end, people were reluctant to make a complete change
        until 1981, when the forces for reform gathered sufficient strength to
        elect François Mitterrand as the Fifth Republics first Socialist
        president. Like the Popular Front in 1936, the new government began
        with a quick-fire set of reforms — a broad program of nationalization,
        abolition of the death penalty, raising the minimum wage, and the
        introduction of a fifth week of holiday with pay — until the impact of
        the world economic crisis imposed a necessary brake. Special emphasis
        was placed on cultural programs, with generous subsidies for theater,
        cinema, museums, and libraries, and also for scientific research.
        Probably the most important reform was the least glamorous:
        the decentralization that increased regional autonomy and reversed the
        age-old trend of concentrating political, economic, and administrative
        power in the national capital. By allowing the local pride of such
        historic regions as Provence, Normandy, Brittany, and Langue­doc to
        reassert itself, France demonstrated that it was at last secure in its
        national identity — so secure that French citizens even began carrying
        European passports. As a founding member of the Euro­pean Community,
        France looked to a wider, continental challenge in the 1990s.
        Yet modern France struggles with similar identity issues as
        its European Union neighbors. The number of French citizens with
        non-French heritage is substantial, reviving nationalist sentiment in
        the form of the Front National. As a result, France experiences
        diversity and tension within cultural, social, and political spheres.
        The French team that won the 1998 World Cup was deemed by some
        unsuitable to represent France because of the mixed heritage of the
        players. At the same time, the team accurately reflected the social
        diversity that exists in France today.
        New corporate and fast-food cultures, along with more
        freedom of movement among European Union countries and a more
        international perspective, have further changed the social landscape.
        Today, the onion seller with beret and bicycle is becoming as much an
        anomaly in Frances urban and suburban setting as he would be in
        America.
      
    
  
