
  
  
    
      
        A Brief History
        The earliest signs of people on Jamaica are the remains of
        the Arawak, an Amerindian society that originated on the north coast of
        South America. Arawak peoples migrated to various Caribbean islands,
        arriving in Jamaica by the beginning of the eighth century. They were
        peaceful and lived by slash-and-burn farming. For meat, they bred
        pigs and ate iguana, both native to the island. They were highly
        skilled in such manual activities as thatching and weaving. In fact,
        the hammock was an Amerindian invention that remains with us today; it
        is an object which, more than any other, evokes an image of a warm
        sunny day on a tropical isle. The Arawak left a legacy of paintings in
        places such as Runaway Caves near Discovery Bay, and shards of pottery
        found at their settlements near Nueva Sevilla and Spanish Town have
        added a little to our knowledge about them. Over 200 Arawak sites have
        been identified, and it is said that when the Spanish arrived in
        Jamaica there were approximately 100,000 Arawak living on the island.
        They called Jamaica Xaymaca (land of wood and water).
        Columbus and the Arrival of Europeans
        Columbus first arrived in Jamaica on 5 May 1494 at Discovery
        Bay, where there is now a small park in his honor. He stayed for only a
        few days but returned in 1502, landing here when the ships of his fleet
        became unserviceable; he waited at St. Anns Bay for help to arrive
        from Cuba. After the death of Columbus in 1505, Jamaica became the
        property of his son Diego, who dispatched Don Juan de Esquivel to the
        island as Governor.
        Esquivel arrived in 1510 and created a base called Nueva
        Sevilla near St. Anns Bay, from which he hoped to colonize the rest of
        the island. The Spanish immediately began subjugating the Arawak
        population, many of whom died under the yoke of oppression and of
        diseases carried by the Europeans. A number of them committed suicide
        rather than live the life created for them by the Spanish.
        The site of Nueva Sevilla proved to be unhealthy and
        mosquito-ridden, and in 1534 the Spanish founded Villa de la Vega,
        today known as Spanish Town. Pig breeding was the main occupation of
        these early settlers, but they also planted sugar cane and other crops
        that required large numbers of laborers. The number of Arawak had
        already fallen dramatically, so the Spanish began to import slaves from
        Africa to work the land; the first Africans arrived in 1517.
        The opportunities that the island had to offer were never
        really exploited by the Spanish. They were much more interested in the
        gold and other treasures to be found in South America. However, they
        had to protect the shipping lanes in order to get their treasure home,
        and this meant keeping hold of as much of the Caribbean (or the
        Spanish Main, as it was then known) as possible. They fortified the
        more strategic islands, but Jamaica was deemed less important than Cuba
        or Puerto Rico and, consequently, was poorly protected.
        British Rule
        In 1654 Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of England,
        dispatched a British fleet to the Caribbean to break the stranglehold
        of the Spanish. They were repulsed at Hispaniola by a strong Spanish
        force and decided to take Jamaica as a consolation prize. They sailed
        into what is now Kingston Bay in May 1655 and sent an ultimatum to the
        capital. The small Spanish force considered its position and decided to
        retreat, heading to the north coast and sailing to Cuba. Before they
        left, they freed their slaves, who fled into the interior of the
        island.
        The Spanish attempted to retake the island in 1658 at the
        Battle of Rio Bueno but were defeated; however, this did not alleviate
        Jamaicas problems. Other European powers began to put pressure on the
        defending forces, and British naval power in the area was badly
        stretched. Sir Thomas Modyford, the Governor of Jamaica, offered a deal
        to pirate ships already well established in the area: if the pirates
        protected British assets, then they were free to harass enemy shipping
        with impunity. They agreed; Modyford issued letters of accreditation
        which authorized the pirates to act in the name of the British
        Crown.
        These privateers were welcomed at Port Royal, the English
        settlement on the southern tip of Kingston harbor, and it quickly
        developed a reputation as the wickedest city in the world. Plunder was
        now legitimate business and the city was awash with money and booty
        from the numerous pirate raids. There was little evidence of religion
        or of the rule of law. Henry Morgan was chief among the pirate leaders.
        He and his followers conducted a successful series of bloody raids on
        Spanish settlements in the Caribbean, culminating in the sacking of
        Panama, the major city of the Spanish Main.
        In 1670 the Spanish officially ceded Jamaica to British
        rule as part of the Treaty of Madrid, and the British began a
        systematic process of settlement, offering land and aid to prospective
        settlers. They rescinded their agreement with the privateers and began
        the process of evicting them from Port Royal. Henry Morgan was offered
        the post of Lieutenant Governor of the island and charged with driving
        out his former cohorts. The erstwhile pirate thus became a policeman
        during the last years of his life. Morgan died in 1588 before his task
        was complete, but nature finished what he had started: Jamaica suffered
        a powerful earthquake in 1692, and Port Royal sank into the sea, taking
        with it many of the treasures stolen from the Spanish. The surviving
        pirates took to the sea once again.
        Plantations and Slavery
        As the 18th century began, the British colony of Jamaica
        was putting the disaster at Port Royal behind it. The trade in sugar
        cane and spices was becoming profitable. However, there was a problem.
        Plantation work was labor intensive, but there were very few laborers
        on the island; the Spanish slaves had disappeared into the inhospitable
        interior and the native Arawak had been decimated by disease. The
        decision was made to import a work force from West Africa, resulting in
        some 600,000 slaves being transported to Jamaica over the next few
        decades. One in five slaves died en route, and many more died of
        disease once on the island. However, there seemed to be an
        inexhaustible supply sailing across the Atlantic. On the back of this
        cruel system, Jamaica gradually became the biggest sugar producer in
        the world and a very wealthy island indeed.
        The colony slowly became better organized. Thirteen
        administrative parishes were created, forming the basis of government
        that we still see today. The Governor, official voice of the monarch,
        commissioned a representative (or custos) in each parish. Powerful
        land-owning families organized an Assembly to run the everyday affairs
        of the island, but many landowners continued to live in Britain, where
        they exerted tremendous influence in Parliament. They ensured that the
        interests of Jamaica, or at least their own interests on the island,
        were always at the forefront of decisions made in London.
        However, even in these early days there were slaves who
        fought against the tyranny of the system. The original slaves whom the
        Spanish had released after 1655 became known as Maroons, from the
        Spanish word cimarrón (which means wild or untamed). They made
        their settlements in the hills away from British rule but began to
        attack colonists in a program of raids now remembered as The First
        Maroon War. British forces suffered constant harassment at their hands
        and even named a part of the island The Land of Look Behind in
        recognition of the surprise attacks they suffered. Eventually the
        British began to force the Maroons into more isolated and remote
        pockets of land.
        This war of attrition ended in 1739, when agreement was
        reached between the two sides. The Maroons were allowed self-rule in
        certain designated areas in return for not inciting or helping the
        plantation slaves. This agreement is at the root of Maroon
        self-government today. The slaves themselves also began organizing
        revolts (the first in 1760), but their situation remained the same.
        Treatment of slaves was for the most part cruel and inhumane, with
        family life virtually destroyed as fathers were systematically split
        from mothers and their children.
        During the American War of Independence, Jamaica came under
        threat again from other European powers, which saw Britains problem to
        the north as a chance to capture its colonies in the Caribbean. Some
        islands were taken by the French, but Admiral Rodney saved Jamaica by
        defeating the French fleet at the Battle of Les Saintes in 1782.
        Jamaica thereafter became an island of strategic importance for the
        British, who based a large naval fleet at Fort Charles in Port
        Royal.
        Emancipation
        The French Revolution in 1789 sent ripples of discontent
        through the Caribbean. The French peasants cry for freedom prompted
        another Maroon War on Jamaica, after which many Maroons were deported
        to Nova Scotia. There was, however, a growing movement against slavery
        in Britain. In 1807 Parliament made the trade in slaves illegal, but
        the powerful sugar lobby exerted pressure and slavery continued on the
        plantations. The slaves were angry and dispirited, but nonconformist
        churches broke the monopoly of the Church of England and encouraged the
        slaves to stand up and take action against injustice. This intervention
        guaranteed the popularity of these Christian denominations; today, you
        will find Baptist and Adventist churches in almost every settlement,
        their congregations still as strong today as in the early 1800s.
        The momentum for change was growing, and in 1831 a black
        lay preacher named Daddy Sam Sharpe led a revolt of 20,000 slaves at
        Montego Bay. After a campaign of great destruction, the authorities
        assured them that slavery would be abolished. Sharpe and approximately
        1000 other slaves surrendered peacefully, only to be rounded up and
        publicly executed. This news was met with revulsion in Britain, and
        moves to liberate the slaves culminated in full freedom in 1838. Many
        retreated into the hills to make their own way, the forefathers of
        todays small-scale, self-sufficient farmers.
        Unfortunately, being free solved none of the problems
        suffered by the population. There was no economic infrastructure
        outside the plantation system, and power remained in the hands of a
        small minority of white and mixed-race individuals. Meanwhile, Asian
        laborers were invited to take up the work previously carried out by the
        slaves; their descendants can still be found on the island,
        particularly around Little London in the west. As a further blow to the
        economy, the British Parliament passed the Sugar Equalization Act in
        1846 as part of a new free-trade policy. Jamaicas protected market was
        effectively gone.
        In October 1865 at Morant Bay, there was another uprising,
        led by Baptist minister Paul Bogle and by George Gordon, a mulatto
        (mixed-race) landowner. It brought savage retribution from the
        authorities, and both leaders were executed. But it prompted the
        dissolution of the Jamaica Assembly, which was dominated by plantation
        owners. The island became a Crown Colony ruled directly from London,
        and over the next few years there were several reforms to its political
        and social systems.
        As the sugar trade declined in importance, economic
        disaster loomed. Fortuitously, another crop found favor withthe
        industrial world: Jamaica became the island of bananas. The first
        consignments were exported in 1866 and, within a few years, thousands
        of tons were being shipped to markets in the US and Britain. The boats
        carrying the banana crops also fostered the beginnings of the tourist
        trade. The first visitors arrived as passengers on them, spending time
        around Port Antonio. Charmed by the tropical paradise, they quickly
        spread the word about the beauty of Jamaica.
        Still there was little change in conditions for the black
        majority, who had no economic or political power. The world-wide
        depression of the 1930s brought a new wave of demonstrations in
        Jamaica, and a number of individuals emerged to lead the people and
        pave the way for nationhood. Marcus Garvey called for black
        self-reliance, and Alexander Bustamante formed the Industrial Trade
        Union and later the Jamaica Labour Party (JLP). The Jamaica Trades
        Union Congress and the National Workers Union allied themselves to the
        Peoples National Party (PNP), led by Norman Manley in opposition to
        Bustamante. Together, these organizations fought for local rule, which
        in 1944 resulted in universal voting rights for adults.
        At the same time, the early years of World War II brought
        American tourists who were no longer able to travel to Europe on
        holiday. Jamaicas popularity as a tourist destination was now
        undeniable.
        Independence and Democratic Rule
        In the postwar period there continued to be constitutional
        changes, including self-government for Jamaica in 1959. Britain hoped
        to create a Federation of Caribbean Islands in the region. But the
        Jamaicans voted instead for full independence, which became official on
        6 August 1962. Jamaica is also a nation within the British
        Commonwealth.
        Since independence the political culture of Jamaica, which
        started out with such confidence and optimism, has been fraught with
        problems. Violence and corruption have been constant factors in the
        political process.
        From 1962 until 1972, the JLP held power. The partys broad
        aims were to support capitalist policies and to continue close ties
        with Britain and the rest of the Commonwealth. In 1972, however, the
        left-wing PNP was elected with a massive majority but with little
        change in the economic power of the people. Michael Manley, son of
        Norman, led the party and pushed for policies that brought Jamaica
        closer to independent nonaligned countries. Manley was made out to be a
        second Castro, foreign investment quickly dried up, many wealthy
        Jamaicans left the island, and the economy collapsed. The uncertain and
        volatile situation led to gang violence, and Jamaica seemed to be
        heading for civil war. In 1979 the JLP came back to power following a
        campaign that saw the deaths of several hundred people. Its leader,
        Edward Seaga, reintroduced capitalist policies and foreign investment
        began to trickle back.
        Jamaica in the 1990s
        Since 1993, the PNP has once again been in power, this time
        under the leadership of Prime Minister Percival Patterson. He and his
        party are charged with forging a positive path for the people of
        Jamaica. Energy is being focused initially on using the cultural wealth
        of the island to create a real national identity. But the problem of
        economic and social inequality remains, and violence, which accompanies
        political allegiance, remains a part of everyday life in the ghettos of
        Kingston.
        Notwithstanding its status as a member of the British
        Commonwealth, Jamaica now looks much more toward the US for its future.
        Its proximity to the US — only 90 minutes from Miami by air — means
        that cultural influences for the young are found in American
        entertainment media and sports. Jamaica seeks to combine these
        influences with its own strong identity to create an independent and
        stable society.
      
    
  
