
  
  
    
      
        A Brief History
        The appeal of the French West Indies today is that nothing
        much happens on them. Not so in the bad old days.  Unlikely as it
        seems now, at one time these sugar islands were close to center stage
        as the great powers of Europe warred fiercely for world commercial
        domination. France knew a good thing when she seized one, but then so
        did Britain.
        It all began much more peacefully. Perhaps 2,000 years ago,
        Indians sometimes called Saloides from the Orinoco basin in South
        America began migrating up the Antilles chain, reaching Martinique and
        Guadeloupe before a.d. 200. A volcanic eruption on Martinique prevented
        these early island-hoppers from staying long; they soon vanished from
        history, leaving only the scantiest archaeological traces.
        By a.d. 300, a new and larger wave of Amerindians from the
        Orinoco basin settled on islands throughout the Caribbean. These were
        the Arawaks, who lived from fishing and planting, and produced
        beautiful pottery. For centuries these people had the islands to
        themselves.
        Then came the Caribs, and the tranquility was shattered.
        These Indians, also from South America, swept north in fast
        seagoing canoes, attacking and either eating or driving Arawak men off
        island after island, then appropriating their women. A ritualistic mark
        of bravery for Carib warriors was cannibalism, and its for this that
        history most remembers the Indians who invented the hammock and gave
        their name to the Caribbean. In fact, their staple diet usually
        consisted of fish, crabs, conch, and birds.
        Enter Europe
        On his second voyage to what he evidently thought were the
        islands of the Far East, Christopher Columbus first discovered Dominica
        in 1493. Then he stopped at Marie-Galante, which he named after one of
        his vessels, before crossing over to the large neighboring island. This
        he called Guadeloupe after a monastery in Spain.
        The Caribs here, expert with bow and arrow, were
        demonstrably displeased to see the explorer. But he stayed long enough
        to see his first parrots and to marvel at the fact that the Indians
        spoke three languages — one strictly between the warriors, another for
        the mostly Arawak women, and a third for ordinary communication between
        men and women.
        Sailing north to find and claim islands for the Spanish
        crown, Columbus named one Saint-Barthélemy after his brother and
        another Saint-Martin, probably after the saint on whose feast day he
        had spotted it. Not until his fourth transatlantic journey in 1502 did
        Columbus reach Martinique.
        Spain in the 16th century wasnt very excited about the
        Lesser Antilles. The big prize was gold, particularly in South America,
        so for a while Madrid regarded the Caribbean chain as islands of Peru
        where the galleons could stop for fresh water. Two rather half-hearted
        Spanish attempts to establish footholds on Guadeloupe were repulsed by
        the Caribs.
        But as the years went by, the conquistadors rounded up even
        more Indians to work in gold mines elsewhere. They also introduced
        sugarcane, some European vegetables, and the pig to the islands, but
        never founded any significant settlements. That situation, plus the
        gradual decline of Spanish naval power, proved very tempting to
        others.
        Cardinal Richelieu (the powerful 17th-century French
        statesman) for one dreamed of conquest in the New World. At his
        bidding, French buccaneers and adventurers, some of them noblemen,
        started planting the flag on Caribbean real estate in 1625. At first
        they shared a base with Englishmen on St. Kitts (then called
        Saint-Christophe). Their leader was the Norman gentleman Pierre Belain
        dEsnambuc, whose statue you can see in the main square of
        Fort-de-France.
        Some years later, French colonizers moved south to both
        Guadeloupe and Martinique. Lienard de lOlive and Jean Duplessis
        dOssonville put ashore at Pointe-Allegre in northern Guadeloupe on 28
        June 1635. But it took until 1640 for the French settlers to prevail
        against the Caribs, who were fighting to retain the island they
        loved.
        In September 1635, dEsnambuc led a party to Martinique and
        constructed Fort Saint-Pierre, where a town of that name stands today.
        Here too, the Caribs resisted savagely, with the result that for some
        20 years they were left the eastern section of the island. It wasnt
        all warfare — the Indians taught the settlers fishing and weaving
        techniques still in use today. Finally, the Caribs were expelled from
        the French domain, remaining for a period on Dominica and St. Vincent.
        In 1648, the French staked claim to their part of Saint-Martin and to
        nearby Saint-Barthélemy.
        Sugar and Slaves
        Sugar cropping, destined to change the face and fate of the
        Caribbean, began booming as early as the 1640s. To work plantations on
        the French islands as well as those belonging to other European
        nations, slaves were shipped in from Africa. The traffic soared
        incredibly: by 1745 Martinique had 60,000 slaves and only 16,000
        whites, while Guadeloupe had even more slaves and fewer whites. Some of
        the slaves were able to gain freedom in return for special services
        rendered. The children of colons and slaves were free citizens.
        By 1674, when Louis XIV took formal control of the islands
        from the debt-ridden commercial administrators, Martinique had become
        Frances colonial capital in the Lesser Antilles. Royal rule was to
        last for more than a century, with West Indian sugar helping to
        catapult France to economic supremacy in Europe.
        Britain versus France
        This was the period when nautical marauders variously
        called buccaneers, corsairs, privateers, and pirates stalked the
        shipways and bays of the Caribbean. For undermanned Guadeloupe and
        Martinique, the French pirates were critically important: in return for
        a safe haven, they carried in supplies, raided enemy merchant vessels,
        and joined battles against invading forces.
        Frances enemy number one in the Caribbean, as elsewhere,
        was the British. The first naval attacks by the redcoats were against
        Guadeloupe in 1691 and 1703. Half a century of fighting followed, with
        blockades, slave-raiding forays against the major islands, and three
        short seizures of Saint-Martin.
        During the Seven Years War (1756–1763), the British
        conquered Guadeloupe and held it for four years. Ironically, the
        British occupation gave Guadeloupes economy a big boost: between
        20,000 and 30,000 more slaves were transported in and new cane-grinding
        windmills built, all of which spurred the sugar trade to unprecedented
        prosperity. British engineers also set a port in operation at
        Pointe-à-Pitre, thus establishing the importance of this advantageously
        located town.
        If there was any doubt that sugar was king in those days,
        the Treaty of Paris (1763) dispelled it: France elected to take back
        her little West Indian islands and leave the few snowy acres of
        Canada to the British.
        During the American War of Independence, Frances
        sympathies were undisguised: American ships were granted safe anchorage
        in the FWI, privateers raiding from Saint-Barthélemys coves sank many
        a British merchantman, and a Martinique regiment fought the British at
        Savannah, Georgia. On 12 April 1782, in the sea channel near
        Guadeloupes little off-shore islands of Les Saintes, a British fleet
        gained historic revenge against French Admiral de Grasse, of Yorktown
        fame, in a battle that is still talked about today.
        De Grasses fleet of 34 warships was escorting a convoy of
        150 cargo vessels to Santo Domingo (todays Dominican Republic and
        Haiti) planning to join a Spanish naval venture against Britains base
        on Jamaica. British Admiral Rodney, with 37 ships and a crucial
        superiority in cannon (3,012 to 2,246 French), struck off Les Saintes.
        As the islanders watched from their hills, the more mobile British
        mercilessly chopped up the French convoy until finally de Grasse
        surrendered. This disastrous French naval defeat is known as the Battle
        of Les Saintes.
        Slavery Declines
        When, during the French Revolution, the Convention
        ambitiously declared slavery abolished, Martiniques wealthy plantation
        owners frantically objected. Opting, as a dubious second best, for
        eight years of British occupation in 1794, the island managed to retain
        slavery and avoid the revolutionary terror that Guadeloupe
        underwent.
        After Britain seized Guadeloupe, Victor Hugues, commissaire
        of the Convention, wrenched the island back, proclaimed slavery
        abolished, and set about guillotining the old-guard colons. His
        corsairs became the scourge of the sea, the indiscriminate attacks
        leading to a diplomatic blow-up with the new American government.
        Hugues reign on Guadeloupe didnt last long, but it was bloodthirsty
        enough to be recalled vividly even today.
        In 1802 France reclaimed Martinique from Britain through
        the Treaty of Amiens. Bonaparte, as First Consul of France, reinstated
        slavery in the FWI, and historians still argue over the role played in
        that decision by his Creole wife Josephine, a native of Martinique (see
        page 55).
        Sugarcane was revered by the planters and government
        conservatives as white gold (lor blanc) for the immense wealth it
        brought. But in 1799 doom was signaled for the cane monopoly with the
        appearance of the cheaper sugar beet. The end also became inevitable
        for the slave system upon which the sugar industry was based: the
        example of Santo Domingos slave revolt, which led to the independence
        of a new republic named Haiti, was electrifying, causing an entirely
        new attitude to the whole problem of the slave trade. Liberal ideas
        began mushrooming in France itself, and after Nelson destroyed
        Napoleons fleet at the Battle of Trafalgar, the French West Indian
        planters lifeline with France was all but destroyed as well. In
        addition, the Congress of Vienna formally banned the trade in
        slaves.
        Abolition and Beyond
        The stage was now set for the French West Indies greatest
        hero, Victor Schoelcher. The son of a Parisian porcelain merchant,
        Schoelcher was inspired to wage a 15-year struggle to free the slaves
        by what he saw on three trips to the Caribbean.
        When the Republic was proclaimed in Paris in 1848,
        Schoelcher drafted the emancipation decree that freed 87,500 slaves in
        Guadeloupe and 72,000 in Martinique. Today the smallest hamlets on both
        islands honor Schoelcher with busts, full statues, and street names.
        Martinique has a town named after him.
        No slaves meant almost no sugar production, until the first
        of some 80,000 Hindus from India and 16,000 free Africans began
        arriving as contract workers for Guadeloupe and Martinique plantations.
        Many Indians remained and established small farms in the FWI, their
        descendants becoming an important and colorful segment of the
        population (see box, page 42).
        To help stimulate the economy, the islands were finally
        relieved of the long-standing and controversial requirement that, as
        colonial appendages of France, they could trade only with the French
        and usually only in French ships. Rum now began bringing in
        considerable legal (as opposed to contraband) revenue.
        In 1871 under the Third Republic, Martinique and Guadeloupe
        were granted representation in the National Assembly in Paris, which
        they have retained ever since. Gradually, metropolitan institutions and
        the benefits of French citizenship were extended to the FWI.
        In 1877, France bought back Saint-Barthélemy from Sweden
        for 320,000 gold francs (Louis XVI having ceded the little island 93
        years earlier to his friend King Gustav III in return for duty-free
        trading rights in Gothenburg).
        The 20th Century
        The FWIs worst modern tragedy came in 1902 when the
        sophisticated city of Saint-Pierre was totally destroyed by the
        eruption of Mount Pelée. The victims — over 30,000 — included most of
        Martiniques social and managerial elite. Henceforth Fort-de-France
        would be the islands only significant center and the largest city in
        the French Antilles.
        When France fell in World War II, the FWIs administrator,
        Admiral Georges Robert, decreed allegiance to the Vichy regime,
        although most of the islanders were against the move. Fearing German
        occupation and submarine use of the islands, the Allies imposed a
        painful blockade and threatened to use military force. In 1943 Robert
        resigned and the islands swung immediately to de Gaulles Free French.
        With the war monopolizing shipping, the FWI suffered great economic
        privation.
        Guadeloupe and Martinique became full départements of
        France in 1946 — a source of great pride to many. More importantly, it
        meant much needed, larger financial contributions from Paris. The
        smaller islands, French Saint-Martin and Saint-Barthélemy, are
        administrative sub-prefectures (sous-préfectures) of Guadeloupe.
        While sugar, rum, and banana exports resumed to a degree
        after the war, the islands economies have not kept satisfactory pace
        with their burgeoning populations. The recent surge of tourism has
        helped, but not enough. Unrest and some political extremism have
        surfaced from time to time, but since aid from France is so vital, and
        French customs so ingrained, it seems almost inconceivable that the FWI
        will seek total independence as other Caribbean islands have done.
      
    
  
