
  
  
    
      
        The Country and ITS People
        As Malaysia has moved resolutely into the modern age, it has
        also remained, culturally and historically, a rich, multi-layered blend
        of traditions wrapped up within a modern, busy economy. From sandy
        beaches, broad brown rivers, and deep forests, to rising skyscrapers
        and wide expressways, Malaysia is set to exceed visitors
        expectations.
        Visitors see the traditional juxtaposed with the modern
        among Chinatown shophouses, among the vibrancy and aromas of popular
        night markets, and even in the modern shopping centers. They see
        architectural splendor among the many mosques, the incense-rich Chinese
        and Hindu shrines, and even the Petronas Twin Towers of Kuala Lumpur.
        History can be lived and felt amid the longhouses of Sabah and Sawarak,
        in the kite-flying and top-spinning traditions of northeastern
        Kelantan, in the many graceful and beautiful dance and story-telling
        traditions, and in the vibrant colors of batik art.
        Your gateway to Malaysia will probably be through its
        capital, Kuala Lumpur, a modern city of broad expressways, skyscrapers,
        and green parks to balance the urban sprawl. Prosperous and colorful,
        it is well prepared to take the country into the next millennium.
        Malaysia is divided into two major regions: the peninsula,
        bordered by Thailand, the Straits of Melaka, and the South China Sea;
        and East Malaysia, whose two provinces, Sabah and Sawarak, are located
        on the island of Borneo about 800 km (500 miles) across the South China
        Sea. These latter vast regions of forests, rivers, and mountains border
        the Indonesian state of Kalimantan and the oil-rich sultanate of
        Brunei. Industry and urban society are concentrated on the peninsula,
        especially on the West coast, while East Malaysia is dominated by the
        countrys characteristic impenetrable jungle. Malaysias two parts
        share a hot, humid climate, but differ greatly in population density
        and urban development.
        Malaysias relative wealth is reflected in the excellent
        network of roads and a good railway system along the peninsulas west
        coast. Its per capita income is one of the highest in Southeast Asia,
        bettered only by that of neighboring Singapore. Some 40 percent of
        Malaysians live in townships of more than 5,000 inhabitants, an
        exceptional proportion for the region. Its mortality rate for children
        under five of 13 per 1,000 places it on a par with major industrial
        countries.
        Natures Supremacy
        Whether you are staying at beach resorts or visiting the
        cities, you will always find the jungle ready to reassert its rights.
        Water is also a constant presence, sometimes as waves lapping on white
        sandy beaches, or as beautiful cascading waterfalls, or as majestic,
        wide rivers running snake-like across the land, forcing apart forest
        cover before reaching the sea.
        Even in Kuala Lumpur — as modern an urban sprawl as you
        could imagine, criss-crossed by expressways and bristling with
        skyscrapers — a construction site abandoned a moment too long to the
        tropical sun and rain will soon sprout a luxuriant growth of lallang
        ferns and wild creepers.
        Over the centuries, the countrys prosperity has come from
        its coastal plains, wider on the west than the east side of the
        peninsula. Malaysia rose first as a trading point for Asia and Europe,
        with the ports of Melaka (Malacca in colonial times) and later
        Singapore, now sovereign and independent. Then came tin mining and
        rubber plantations, and, more recently, palm oil, hardwood timber, and
        offshore petroleum and gas. Rice paddies in the northwest towards the
        Thai border and around river deltas on the east coast serve only
        domestic consumption.
        Mangrove swamps along the coast and squat nipa palms give
        rise to mangrove jungle. The worlds oldest rainforests engulf low but
        steeply rising mountain chains that cross the peninsula from east to
        west like ribs, with one long north–south Main Range as their backbone.
        Until the highway construction in the modern era, access to the jungle
        interior had been — and in some cases, still is — only by river. The
        river-beds are mostly too shallow for anything but flat-bottomed
        boats.
        On the great island of Borneo, East Malaysias states of
        Sarawak and Sabah surround the enclave of the oil-rich sultanate of
        Brunei. Plantations alternate with marshland on the coastal plain
        before giving way to the all-powerful jungle of the interior.
        Navigation is hindered by sandbars at the mouth and rapids upriver,
        though small, sea-going vessels can make fair headway up the Rejang in
        Sarawak and up the Kinabatangan in Sabah. To the south, a natural
        barrier of mountain ranges comprises the border with Indonesian
        Kalimantan. Near the coast at the northern end of the Crocker Range is
        Mount Kinabalu, at 4,100 m (13,450 ft) the highest peak in Southeast
        Asia and a favorite with climbers, both professional and amateur.
        With the growth of tourism as a major industry, resort
        facilities have burgeoned in smaller islands such as Penang, Pangkor,
        and Langkawi on the west coast of the peninsula, Tioman on the east
        coast, and around Sabahs offshore nature reserve near Kota
        Kinabalu.
        Top of a Quiet World
        In an era of seemingly perpetual ethnic hostilities,
        Malaysia can be proud of a unique achievement — the coexistence of the
        three most prominent peoples of Asia: Malays (mostly Muslim), Chinese
        (mostly Buddhist), and Indians (many Hindu). Despite occasional
        conflicts, they live in a remarkable state of harmony. It is not
        unusual to find, as in old Melaka, Buddhist and Hindu temples on the
        same street as a mosque. Not least of all, it makes for a marvellous
        diversity in the national cuisines, with food centers often serving
        Malay, Chinese, and Indian dishes at adjacent stalls (see page
        160).
        With Islam as the national religion and Malay — Bahasa
        Malaysia — as the national language, Malays enjoy practically exclusive
        access to the principal positions of government at federal and state
        level. They share a common ancestry with inhabitants of the Indonesian
        archipelago. At the upper end of the social scale, Malays make up the
        royal courts of the sultanates — country gentry enjoying an occasional
        game of polo and the other good things in life. Farther down, urban
        Malays form a modern bourgeoisie, cultivating contacts with the Arab
        Middle East and keeping only a remote eye on their country estates. The
        more prosperous send their children to British and other overseas
        schools.
        The bulk of Malays in the country at large are humbler
        town- and village-dwelling people — tending goats and buffaloes,
        growing rice, and working in the coconut, rubber, timber, rattan, and
        bamboo industries. Just as court ritual is still colored by the ancient
        customs of pre-Muslim Malaya, so a mild-mannered Sunnite version of the
        Muslim religion is often seasoned, amid this all-pervasive nature, with
        a generous spoonful of the more ancient beliefs of animist
        medicine-men.
        Economic development has given younger Malaysians wider
        choices than in previous generations. Access to these choices will
        prove a necessity as the younger generation of business and community
        leaders prepare to lead the country into the 21st century.
        The Malays have a perfect understanding of their tropical
        climate. They know how important it is to keep cool and calm and move
        around slowly. Their relaxed attitude and their constant smiles are
        delightfully infectious to the newcomer, who soon learns to shrug off
        the stresses of modern life.
      
    
  
