
  
  
    
      
        Los Angeles and Its People
        Los Angeles, perhaps more than any other place on earth,
        is preceded by its reputation. Here is a city teeming with movie stars,
        exorbitant wealth, sunny beaches, palm trees, and beautiful people. But
        L.A. is also linked with adventure and maybe even danger, complete with
        earthquakes, floods, crime, and scandals of O. J. Simpson proportions.
        Because the world is watching, its a town eternally destined to make a
        spectacle of itself, whether on-screen or in real life. The result is a
        modern-day wild West meshed with everyday life, where image is
        reality, poverty clashes with wealth, and fame is acquired
        overnight — all publicized to the hilt around the globe.
        The worlds perception, however, hardly reflects the real
        Los Angeles. The city is not merely beautiful coastlines, hit TV shows,
        opulent mansions in the hills, and the latest in celebrity gossip. Los
        Angeles County is a collection of 88 separate, incorporated cities
        packed between the Pacific Ocean and Orange and San Bernardino
        counties. Many of these towns have their own city halls, police forces,
        and fire brigades.
        The result is that L.A. is a place without a geographic
        heart, but with lots of soul. If its soul is superficial, flighty, and
        playful — well, this is the entertainment capital of the world!
        Los Angeles encompasses a huge variety of American life
        within its borders. In fact, the cultural and economic lifestyles of
        more than 91⁄2 million county residents vary so enormously from area to
        area that visiting Los Angeles is like visiting half a dozen
        destinations at once. You can go casual and carefree with the beach
        scene, blow the bank on a ritzy Beverly Hills shopping excursion,
        retreat to nature on a mountain hike, opt for the global by touring
        the ethnic neighborhoods, flee to fantasy at any number of amusement
        parks, or simply entertain yourself with an exploration into the
        entertainment world and Hollywood exotica. Whatever you do, youll
        experience in-your-face L.A., because its eccentricities are abundant
        wherever you go.
        The one attribute that suffuses everything in Los Angeles is
        its lively energy. Even on your first visit theres no denying the
        feeling that something — somewhere — is about to happen. It might be
        catching the eye of your favorite celebrity scurrying into a movie
        theater, watching a production company shoot a scene from the next big
        blockbuster movie, attempting to keep up with the freeways
        pedal-to-the-metal drivers, or simply scanning the twinkling evening
        skyline from the heights of the Griffith Observatory. In a town where
        the fast lane is the norm and Hollywood isnt a place but a state of
        being, you cant help feeling part of something exciting and
        unpredictable.
        Much of this energy can be attributed to the residents
        themselves. Nowhere on earth is there a place that attracts such a
        diverse population. The fertile basin edged by mountains and sea and
        blessed with year-round sunshine attracts all kinds with its ideal
        combination of urban and beach living. Then theres the enormous
        international community surrounding the entertainment industry. Youll
        also discover L.A.s large groups of Americans of Chinese, African,
        Korean, Middle Eastern, and Japanese descent. Hispanic Americans
        comprise the largest ethnic group of all, with numbers fast approaching
        40 percent of the population.
        With so many people packed into such a condensed area,
        Angelenos are constantly struggling to create unique identities for
        themselves, which would be more of a challenge if the town didnt have
        such an anything goes attitude. The results are often amusing, if not
        outrageous, and can be seen in everything from clothing styles and
        choice of car to how Angelenos spend their time and money.
        No matter what they expect to see in Los Angeles, visitors
        invariably discover sites and experiences that surprise, amuse, shock,
        or excite them. And isnt that the reason to come here?
        With the regions size and never-ending maze of freeways,
        its no surprise that the car is king in L.A. You must join the masses
        traveling the streets and freeways to get the feel of the place. Leave
        it to Angelenos to make driving an experience in itself. Here, you are
        what you drive, which explains the number of expensive cars beside you
        on the road. You will also notice that people dont let traffic time
        stop their productivity — many drivers have their cellular phone
        attached to their ear.
        Finding your way from one place to another is a major part
        of being here; there are attractions scattered from Malibu to
        Disneyland. Fortunately, much of what youll want to see is accessible
        through your car window, because youll likely be spending a lot of
        time driving from one site to another.
        The nations ten busiest freeways are all in the L.A.
        vicinity. Highway 101, the busiest of all, handles over half a million
        cars every day. Strict emission controls for cars and industry have
        considerably reduced L.A.s notorious smog, but air quality can still
        be poor. To combat highway congestion and pollution, L.A. is now
        building a much-needed light rail network.
        Whatever improvements have been made to the countys
        transportation system, they are not going to make you feel any better
        when youre stuck in that unavoidable traffic jam. The good news,
        however, is that freeway exits and visitor sites are well marked, and
        youre bound to discover an unexpected attraction to get you off the
        road and back to the excitement that is Los Angeles.
      
    
  
