
  
  
    
      
        Edinburgh and Its People
        Every day except Sunday, at one oclock in the afternoon, a
        loud boom splits the air, shattering the calm of visitors yet prompting
        locals merely to glance at their wristwatches. A twenty-five pound gun
        set on a battery of the imposing castle above the town has fired a
        single shell. The sound fades into the distance as the smoke from its
        muzzle dissipates into the clear air. This is Edinburgh, a city which,
        since 1846, has marked time in its own distinctive style and to which,
        in return, time has bequeathed a rich legacy of monuments, myths,
        martyrs, and memories that make it a magnet for visitors.
        The city of Edinburgh is the capital of the nation of
        Scotland. It sits in the east of the country, 5-km (3-miles) south of
        the estuary of the River Forth and 605-km (378-miles) north of London,
        the capital of the United Kingdom. It was founded in an amazing
        geological area on hills created by ancient volcanic activity — ideal
        vantage points for building strong defenses and spying an approaching
        enemy.
        The allure of Edinburgh is its complexity: Its like a jewel
        with several facets. Look at it from different angles and you will
        discover something new each time.
        The town became the principal burgh of the kingdom during
        the reign of James III (1460­–1488), and in the following years it
        blossomed. Complete districts from that time are still in place,
        replete with multi-story houses (called tenements or lands),
        churches, taverns, and tollhouses. These are crisscrossed by numerous
        narrow alleys called wynds and separated by open spaces where markets
        were held, royal decrees were heard, and criminals were hanged in front
        of large and enthusiastic crowds.
        Take a stroll through these wynds today, especially at dusk
        when the pale glow of the streetlamps softens the shadows. It is
        possible to imagine the activities of the population five centuries
        ago: officials going about the kings business or off to the tavern,
        children playing noisy street games, or fishwives on the street
        corners selling shucked oysters from the town of Leith (on the coast
        three miles away). Fortunately, it is less easy to conjure up the
        smells of that time. Sewage was thrown into the streets from upstairs
        windows, accompanied by shouts of Gardeyloo!  (derived from the
        French Guarde de leau!  or Beware of the water!  ). Strolling
        would not have been as pleasant an experience as it is today.
        Three hundred years later, in the 1760s, this medieval city
        spawned a sibling. The New Town, which was planned by architect James
        Craig and embellished by Robert Adam, became one of the most beautiful
        Georgian cities of the world. Today it is still very much complete,
        rivaled only in size and grandeur by Russias St. Petersburg. One can
        easily imagine ladies in crinolines and bonnets walking along the
        thoroughfares, with carriages riding noisily over the cobbled
        streets.
        The spirit engendered by the creation of the New Town
        brought about the new Age of Enlightenment for Edinburgh. Although it
        ceased to be a political capital in 1707 (when Scotland joined with
        England to create the United Kingdom), Edinburgh was at the forefront
        of intellectual debate. The Scottish arts were in the ascendant, with
        novelist Sir Walter Scott creating such works as Rob Roy and Ivanhoe
        and poet Robert Burns composing his epic poetry.
        In modern times the handsome Georgian New Town and noble
        medieval Old Town live happily side by side. Their very different
        characters offer visitors two cities for the price of one. 
        Edinburgh watches over many of Scotlands national
        treasures with great pride. Edinburgh Castle is a treasure in
        itself — and with more than one million visitors each year also
        Scotlands most popular attraction. Its strong walls guard not only
        jewels and royal artifacts but also the memories of thousands of
        historic events. There are three national art galleries featuring the
        work of masters from around the world. Youll find a Royal Palace
        dating back to the 15th century and two Parliament buildings, one left
        powerless in 1707 and the other newly empowered in 1999. Three major
        museums illustrate Edinburghs fascinating history, with one holding a
        collection revealing the annals of Scotlands past and the lives of her
        most illustrious sons and daughters.
        Yet one of the delights of the city is that it is not
        simply a collection of heartless historic façades. It is instead a
        living, thriving community. The tenements of the Old Town and Georgian
        buildings of the New Town are still in residential use, with a range of
        stores, restaurants, pubs, and theaters sustaining the population.
        Edinburgh is compact, a city where you can walk to appointments or to
        your evening entertainment. It has few tall buildings. With its
        proximity to the countryside — only ten minutes in any direction to the
        seashore or unbroken green hills — it comes as no surprise to learn
        that it has been confirmed as one of the most congenial places to live
        in the UK.
        The people of Edinburgh are often accused by their fellow
        Scots of lacking passion and have been labeled prim and proper.  One
        reason for this could be that they have traditionally pursued such
        conservative, respectable vocations as banking, medicine, law, and
        academia. But this wealth of earnest achievement doesnt mean that the
        people lack verve or the ability to enjoy themselves. It is simply that
        the serious aspects of life are given their proper due before the fun
        can begin.
        Edinburghs people are some of the most friendly and
        welcoming you could hope to meet: they are quite genuine and
        unaffected. The citys urbane residents enjoy their galleries,
        theaters, and exhibitions as much as visitors do. Their restaurants
        feature internationally renowned chefs who create dishes using some of
        the finest meat, game, and fish in the world. People here love to
        socialize, and they get together in hundreds of pubs, each with its own
        character. Old Town pubs hark back to the days of Burns and Scott, with
        small, smoky rooms and low lighting. In the New Town, chic wine bars
        welcome the banking and insurance set for after-office rendezvous.
        In 1947 the opera impresario Sir Rudolf Bing undertook the
        task of organizing the first annual arts festival, which aimed to
        attract major names in the fields of music, drama, and dance. By 1987,
        the Edinburgh International Festival had grown into the largest annual
        arts event in the world, with hundreds of performances in numerous
        venues across the city during August and early September. Today,
        however, the main arts festival is only part of a veritable circus of
        summer activities that seem to turn the city upside down.
        Regiments of soldiers in full dress regalia march precisely
        to the sound of pipe and drum in the Military Tattoo, and connoisseurs
        of the silver screen gather for an extravaganza of offerings on
        celluloid. The Festival Fringe, perhaps Dr. Jekyll to the International
        Festivals Mr. Hyde, is an umbrella title given to thousands of
        performances ranging from the avant-garde to the downright irreverent.
        And each year at festival time, Edinburgh willingly gives its streets
        over to stilt walkers, automatons, satirists, and barbershop quartets
        along with 500,000 visitors — belying its reputation for being sober
        and staid.
        Another wonderful time to visit Edinburgh is at the turn of
        the year, when the city hosts the biggest New Years Eve party in the
        world, called Hogmanay. The whole population comes out into the
        streets to watch a huge display of fireworks illuminate the historic
        skyline. Where better to sing your year-end rendition of Auld Lang
        Syne?
        At the start of the new millennium, Edinburgh is once again
        wielding true political power on behalf of its fellow countrymen: The
        Scotland Act, passed in November 1998, transferred control of
        domestic policy from London back to the Scots for the first time since
        1707. The sense of an impending new era can be discerned in the pride,
        confidence, and energy of people on the city streets. It is also taking
        concrete form in the new Scottish Parliament building at the bottom of
        the Royal Mile. Edinburgh is a city with firm foundations in the past,
        but it also has designs on the future.
      
    
  
