
  
  
    
      
        The Region And Its People
        Tucked away in the northwest corner of England, 240 km (150
        miles) from London, the Lake District nestles just below the Scottish
        border and backs up on the Irish Sea. At just 2,300 sq km (3,710 sq
        miles), the area is small enough that it can be covered by car, north
        to south, in just a few hours. This little corner of England is such a
        beautiful and valued region, however, that policy makers and
        conservationists have worked tirelessly over the last hundred years to
        protect it. The label the Lake District is actually a little
        misleading. Although there are in fact many bodies of water, much of
        the charm of the region lies in the landscapes produced by the high
        peaks, majestic valleys, swathes of forest, and rugged fells (highland
        plateaus or pastures) that surround the lakes. It is an English
        landscape that has enchanted many, from hardworking farmers and
        sheepherders to vacationing naturalists to resident poets. The areas
        natural beauty continues to inspire writers and artists. Visitors come
        not only to view the mountains and the lakes but also to hear the words
        of poets who lived here and to learn about their lives.
        After considerable study and touring in the Lake District,
        German scientist Rainer Bramer declared that the region had the best
        views in the world. He asserted that the area was blessed with the
        highest concentration of exactly those natural features that, when
        combined, create the most pleasing and relaxing vistas
        possible — landscapes composed of lakes representing the source of
        life in water, trees offering the promise of shelter, smooth areas
        providing easy walking and a curved shoreline or path in the distance
        to stimulate curiosity.  Native Lakelanders and visitors alike know
        exactly what Bramer was talking about.
        For such a small tract of land, the geology of the Lake
        District is actually very complex. The oldest rocks are 500
        million-year-old slates found around the northern peak of Skiddaw,
        where the mountains have smooth and rounded profiles. Only a little
        farther south, around Langdale Pikes, for example, the terrain is
        formed of volcanic rock; much younger and more dramatic in appearance,
        these mountains have rough crags and sharper peaks. At the southern
        extremities of the National Park are areas of limestone with so-called
        clint and grike patterns, caused when rainfall erodes weaker
        fissures, leaving high narrow ridges or overhangs of stronger rock.
        Ancient glaciers eroded many of the valleys, creating space for the
        lakes as they melted at the end of the last Ice Age, approximately
        8,000 b.c. Even today wind and water are still hard at work, gradually
        but continually changing the landscape.
        These various types of geological formations and activities
        have created a multitude of environments. There are bare volcanic crags
        soaring from deep valley bottoms, spectacular waterfalls, high
        plateaus, and ridged fells with bracken (thickets of ferns and shrubs)
        and heather. Throughout the entire region, high ground breaks up areas
        of rolling meadows and verdant pasture. Deep valleys with babbling
        brooks and wooded copses give shelter to the small Lakeland
        communities. Today, thousands of kilometers of public footpaths and
        bridle ways extend to almost every valley and reach to every peak,
        offering new delights at every turn in the road.
        The Lake District is rich in mineral deposits that have been
        put to good use since ancient times, and throughout much of the
        regions history, mining was a major industry. The iron-ore mine at
        Millom, on the coast southwest of Broughton-in-Furness, was once one of
        the biggest in the world. Farming has been another mainstay of the Lake
        District economy for centuries. To provide grazing land for sheep,
        which were raised for both wool and meat, large tracts of the forest
        that originally blanketed the whole area were cleared. Today, the sheep
        on the hillsides and in the vales define the region as much as do the
        fells and the lakes. The herds give a sense of proportion to the vast
        openness, just as the scattered farmhouses and characteristic drystone
        walls add reassuring warmth to even the loneliest valley. This is not
        an artificial landscape supported solely by tourism; todays working
        farms help keep the Lake District vital and distinctive.
        Throughout history, the natives of this region carried on
        life in relative isolation from the rest of the country. The steep
        fells protected the population but also made transportation of any kind
        difficult; many of todays footpaths follow ancient pack-horse trails,
        which for centuries were the principal method of transport. Even today
        it is easy to see why major roads bypass the area; the only routes that
        traverse the region are smaller roads that twist and turn along the
        river dales and up through the craggy mountain passes. For many locals,
        a trip to the nearest market town would have been the farthest they
        would travel in a lifetime.
        Not surprisingly, this self-contained region engendered a
        stalwart sense of self-reliance and independence in its inhabitants.
        When families live together for generations in the same town and
        valley, especially when these communities have been forced to pull
        together in times of hardship, a strong feeling of community is
        created, as has been the case throughout the history of this rugged
        territory. The traditional celebrations of rural life and the village
        sports days still give all members of local communities the chance to
        put their skills to the test and to enjoy each others company.
        Favorite Lake District competitions range from wrestling and sheep dog
        trials to jam and cake making.
        Life in the Lakes is still organized by the seasons and the
        activities of lambing, shearing, taking goods to market, and
        overwintering (the local farmers term for surviving the winter).
        Seasons of plenty alternate with leaner periods when the people prepare
        to mend and make do.  Even today, when agricultural policies provide
        significant aid and resources, farming is still a tough life. Theres
        little time for recreation in this sometimes harsh environment, and
        though local residents may come across as pragmatic and single-minded,
        youll find them in a more relaxed mood at the end of a hard days
        work, enjoying a pint of beer and game of dominoes at the local pub.
        The farmer you see standing over his crook at the side of the road may
        not give you a wide smile of welcome, but that short nod of his head
        and tip of his cap is equivalent to a heartfelt hug or handshake in
        other places.
        Much of the farmland and many of the peaks and lakes are
        protected. This happened in response to attempts on the part of
        19th-century industrialists and businessmen to exploit the areas
        natural resources. One plan in particular — a proposal to send a
        railway line through the heart of the region — galvanized a small group
        of influential local men, including poet William Wordsworth, into
        action. They succeeded in stopping the rail line at Windermere. Since
        its founding in 1895, the National Trust has preserved nearly 100
        farmhouses and the surrounding land as well as many other historic
        structures throughout the region. In 1951, the Lake District National
        Park was created, which extended this protection to a much wider area
        while imposing planning regulations and environmental guidelines and
        allowing further public access to the land.
        Reacting in part to the effects of the Industrial
        Revolution, a group of 19th-century writers, known collectively as the
        Lake Poets, did much to raise Englands national consciousness about
        the landscape and natural beauties of the Lake District. City dwellers
        from northern England began to spend their free time here, walking on
        the fells or enjoying boat trips on the lakes. Their numbers have grown
        steadily ever since, and today many thousands of visitors come to enjoy
        the countryside and to visit the sites first made famous by Romantic
        poets. Tourism is now the biggest industry in the Lake District.
        Hotels, restaurants, and shops have proliferated, extending a warm
        welcome and the best of Lakeland hospitality to ever-growing numbers of
        visitors.
        This popularity is also a source of considerable concern to
        many residents of the Lake District. Traffic jams, overflowing car
        parks, and eroded footpaths are all difficulties that need to be
        addressed. The challenge is how to stop the landscape from being
        changed by the very people who come to marvel at it. The National Trust
        and the National Park Authority both work on conservation projects and
        these, along with innovative transportation policies devised by local
        councils, are all designed to help minimize the potential negative
        impact of tourism.
        Aside from these difficulties, which are suffered by
        National Parks all over the world, there is one other matter that cant
        be overlooked: rain. It rains regularly, whatever the season, so be
        prepared to experience some inclement weather during your visit. The
        rain irrigates the forests and fills the streams, waterfalls, and
        rivers that feed the lakes, so without it, of course, the magnificent
        landscapes would be altered forever. Fortunately, the Lake District
        retains its beauty in all types of weather, and in all seasons. Spring
        offers the fresh green of grasses in the valley and bracken on the
        hills. Woodland floors are blanketed with swathes of bluebells, and
        Gowbarrow Park, immortalized by Wordsworth, has its host of golden
        daffodils.  At lambing time, the frolicking youngsters are enchanting.
        Summer boasts long, warm days with strong sunlight and hazy views.
        Butterflies play among the blooms as day-trippers enjoy a picnic or a
        lakeside walk. Autumn brings the finest hues to the landscape, when the
        leaves turn shades of apricot and copper, the bracken changes to a
        burnt umber, and the hillsides glow in the low sunlight, reflecting
        perfectly in the glassy stillness of the lakes. After the first
        snowfall of winter, the fell tops turn white, complementing the walls
        of the rugged farmhouses and the gentle plumes of smoke that rise from
        log fires into the crisp cold air.
        Recognized by a few individuals as a very precious
        resource, the Lake District has been praised in prose and verse and
        protected by wise policies so that the rest of the world can come and
        enjoy its particular beauty. No one who comes here can fail to be awed
        by the landscape and charmed by the lifestyle of this small yet
        spectacular corner of England.
      
    
  
