
  
  
    
      
        Madrid and its People, the Madrileños
        For a half millennium or more, Madrid idled as a provincial
        backwater, rarely noticed on the arid central plains of Castile, until
        Felipe II plucked it from his royal cap in 1561 and proclaimed it the
        capital of Spain. Man-made Madrid, which quickly assumed the reigns of
        Spains Golden Age, hasnt stopped growing and asserting itself since.
        Though one of Europes youngest capitals, its had plenty of time to
        catch up to Spains more historic cities, including Seville, Toledo and
        Granada, and today it is their political, administrative and economic
        superior. Only Barcelona rivals it in economic importance.
        Felipe IIs royal decree was based entirely on geography:
        the idea being that Madrid, smack in the center of Iberia, would
        promote centralized authority over regional power bases in a newly
        unified Spain. Today Madrid is that cohesive center and more. It is a
        city to which people migrate from all over Spain in search of new
        opportunities; a place where few people can claim any deep roots.
        Madrid is a bustling, sprawling, mostly modern metropolis.
        This capital city of four million is constantly rattled by noise and
        stifled by dense traffic. As Spain has solidified its place in the
        European Union, Madrid has become larger, more important, and yes,
        somewhat less characteristically Iberian. Once, its immigrants were
        from the surrounding regions of Spain; today, its newcomers are from
        across Europe and beyond, bringing with them new languages and
        customs.
        Among other parts of Spain, Andalucía is more folkloric,
        Catalonia and the Basque country more proudly independent. Barcelona
        and Granada possess greater architecture, and many Spanish cities have
        finer natural attributes. But Madrileños dont begrudge those places
        anything. Madrid may be a planned bureaucrats town (like Brasilia or
        Washington), but its far richer in color and tone. Madrid is the next
        rung down from heaven, so the boastful local saying goes, and the
        citys residents claim their superiority in other terms.
        Madrid reigns in cultural life and vida
        nocturna — night­life. Few cities have so perfected the art of
        socializing — eating and drinking — in public. A collective and
        gregarious lot who seem to carry on much of their lives in the streets,
        Madrileños are stars when night falls, hopping in and out of tabernas
        and tascas (cave-like taverns and bars), for repeated rituals of tapas
        (bar finger-foods), jugs of Spanish wine, and hyper-animated
        conversation. The night goes late — very late — in Madrid, and theres
        not a day of the week that the streets arent flooded by hordes of
        after-hours diners and bar-hoppers. A lack of sleep can always be
        remedied later, a Madrileño might tell you, as he tops off a late night
        with early-morning chocolate con curros (a fried-dough and chocolate
        snack ideal for absorbing alcohol) on the way home for a shower and
        then continues on to work.
        The nights rowdy revelers get most of the
        attention — surely Madrid must pack in more bars, discos and live-music
        venues per capita than any other sizeable European city. Yet the city
        also makes plenty of room for more elevated pursuits including Spains
        most sophisticated cultural life: opera, theater, zarzuela (an
        indigenous form of light comic opera), and dance. These entertainments
        flourish, as does flamenco, a popular art form with spiritual callings,
        for both the purist and the tourist.
        Madrids cultural output reaches its apogee, though, in its
        superb concentration of art museums. On one grand boulevard, the Paseo
        del Prado, are three of Europes finest museums: the world-class Prado
        museum, the Thyssen-Bornemisza collection, and the Centro de Arte Reina
        Sofía (Queen Sofía Art Center), whose claim to fame is the 20th
        centurys most famous painting, Pablo Picassos Guernica. Madrids
        collection of Spanish Old Masters — Ve­lázquez, El Gre­co, Goya,
        Zur­barán, and more — is un­rivalled in the world.
        Though a city of immigrants, the city clings to castizo
        (working-class Ma­dri­le­ño) traditions. Madrid is the focus of that
        fiercest of Span­­ish customs, the bullfight, and local ferias and
        fiestas like San Isidro, a celebration of the citys patron saint, are
        prepared and attended with the same zeal that they are in small Spanish
        towns. In fact, in the relatively small area that most visitors are
        likely to cover, Madrid doesnt really feel like an overgrown,
        Europeanized capital. With its friendly taverns, street booksellers,
        and mom-and-pop shops, it frequently seems like a small — albeit
        densely populated-Spanish town, and it is easily covered on foot.
        The heart of the city is Viejo Madrid, Old Madrid, a
        largely 16th-century city built upon the layout of narrow, winding
        streets of an old Moorish settlement.  Madrid de los As­tu­rias is
        named for the Hapsburgs instrumental in the citys rapid growth during
        the 1600s. Old Madrids centerpiece is its splendid, porticoed and
        sun-glazed Plaza Mayor. Little remains of medieval Madrid, but there
        are glimpses of the oldest parts of the city in the Arab walls and
        several attractive small plazas, as well as many other discoveries to
        be made in this area that extends from the River Manzanares and Palacio
        Real (Royal Palace, actually the legacy of the later Bourbon rulers) to
        the lively, congested Puerta del Sol, still the nerve center of
        Madrid.
        The Bourbon monarchs of the 18th century fostered Madrids
        expansion east. They built monumental Madrid, a city of grand avenues
        and boulevards, fountains, gateways, and parks. Bourbon Madrid is best
        symbolized by the handsome Paseo del Prado and Parque del Buen Retiro,
        once the royal familys private park and hunting grounds.
        Modern Madrid grew unrelentingly in all directions
        beginning in the 19th century. Its most attractive nucleus is the
        neighborhood of Salamanca, an elite barrio of tony apartment buildings
        and sophisticated designer shops. La Castellana and Paseo de Recoletos
        are continuations north of the Prado boulevard of the Bourbons. Both
        are lined with sidewalk cafes and strollers on sunny days and summer
        nights. Madrid spilled outward from there, and, especially in the last
        two decades, has pushed farther and farther out, leaving little
        distinction between city and suburb.
        Madrids diverse architecture, while not the equal of a
        Paris or London, traces the citys stages of expansion and prevailing
        styles of the different eras. Moving outward from the center, one
        passes from stately, ornamental 16th-century apartment buildings with
        shuttered windows, wrought-iron balconies, and brick facades to the
        Baroque palaces of the Bourbons, and later Neo-classical buildings
        meant to convey authority. The elegant (and today traffic-choked) Gran
        Vía, Madrids central shopping artery, is a turn-of-the century
        showcase of Art Nouveau and Art Deco styles.
        Madrid is at the forefront of a new, dynamic Spain. After
        tossing off the shackles of Francos long dictatorship that isolated
        Spain from the rest of Europe, Madrid erupted from the closet,
        embracing a frenetic arts and nightlife scene called la movida in the
        early 1980s. Homosexuality, drugs, all-night partying, and living life
        on the edge (the credo of films by Pedro Almodóvar, the boy wonder of
        la movida), were the shocking symbols of the new Spain. Once
        unshakingly traditional, conservative, and Catholic, a country where
        official awards used to be given for fecundity, Spain today has the
        fewest children in Europe. Its population is actually dwindling, as
        women assert themselves in careers and couples contemplate the economic
        challenges of raising a family in a congested and competitive city like
        Madrid.
        Still, the Spain of yesteryear flourishes in many corners
        of the city. At the hour of the paseo (stroll), when offices empty,
        Madrileños spill onto promenades and swamp outdoor cafés, plunging into
        conversation. Conservatively dressed businessmen escort impeccably
        coiffed women, while retired gentlemen in cardigans, jackets and ties
        play chess or petanca (a game resembling marbles, but played with heavy
        shot-puts) in the park. Locals of all ages, from senior citizens to
        high-school kids donning Metallica T-shirts, crowd into 18th-century
        taverns to sip sherry or vino tinto drawn from old wooden barrels, and
        to munch on morsels of tortilla española.
        Madrids easy embrace of extremes — it is both the capital
        of a technology-dependent country that exploded since becoming part of
        the European Union just 15 years ago and at heart a small town that
        revels in its castizo traditions — is part of life here. Even nature
        imposes extremes. At an altitude of more than 640 meters (2,100 feet),
        this city on the Castilian plateau, Europes highest capital, is
        scorching in summer, when wilting residents flee for the coast or
        cooler northern climes, and freezing in winter, when many Madrileños
        bolt for the Sierra Nevada, just a couple hours south, to ski.
        Escaping after a few days in the capital is the plan of
        most visitors as well; for most, a trip to Madrid is as much about what
        the plains of Castile just beyond the city contain as what the capital
        itself offers. Madrid is the perfect base for explorations into the
        heart and soul of Spain, with a wealth of fascinating day trips and a
        trio of UNESCO-honored cities just an hour or so from the city. Toledo,
        Spains former capital set on a crag above a river moat, is a living
        museum of El Greco and the legacy of a great capital city of
        Christians, Jews, and Muslims. Segovia is a picture postcard of central
        Spain, a royal stronghold with a fairy-tale castle and astounding
        2,000-year-old Roman aqueduct. The walled city of Ávila is the
        birthplace of the mystic St. Theresa, who still commands intense
        devotion among her followers.
        Closer to Madrid are other sights that reveal pivotal
        periods of Spanish history. El Escorial is a dramatic monastery,
        mausoleum, and palace built by Felipe II, and one of the most-visited
        places in Spain; and nearby is El Valle de los Caídos (Valley of the
        Fallen), Francos memorial to his reign and soldiers killed in the
        Civil War of 1936–1939.
      
    
  
