
  
  
    
      
        Madeira and the Madeirans
        A mere speck in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean, Madeira
        has all the elements of a mysterious dream world. The volcanic island
        is thickly draped with vegetation, a colorful riot of flowers and fruit
        trees. Rugged mountains peek through the clouds, and microclimates
        hover over isolated villages. Spectacular cliffs crash hundreds of feet
        below to the deep blue surf.
        Even though foreign invaders stormed Portugal around 2000
        b.c. , Madeira was discovered only a few decades before Columbus made
        his way to America. Though part of the Portuguese empire since the
        great expedition teams of the 15th century claimed it for King João I,
        Madeira is nearer to Africa than Lisbon. It lies 600 km (375 miles) off
        the coast of Morocco and nearly 1,000 km (600 miles) southwest of the
        Portuguese capital.
        Formed from volcanic eruptions many millions of years ago,
        Madeira, like the Canary Islands, is an archipelago. The land is like
        an iceberg; massive mountains poke through the clouds, forming the mere
        tip of a submerged mass. Only one other island in the small group is
        inhabited — the little known, arid, and much flatter holiday hideaway
        of Porto Santo. Christopher Columbus visited Porto Santo in the second
        half of the 15th century, marrying the local governors daughter.
        Few places on earth can rival Madeiras wealth of natural
        gifts, especially in so small an area. The island is blanketed with
        flowers: birds of paradise, their beak-like flowers bright orange,
        blossom in open fields. Fragrant hydrangeas line walking paths skirting
        the edges of mountain terraces. Private and public gardens burst with
        orchids, bougainvillea, and jacarandas, while orchards heave with
        mangoes, passion fruit, watermelons, and avocados.
        In the mountains, water streams down from unseen springs: a
        one-hour walk might take you past half a dozen waterfalls. The cold
        waters around the island, once prime whaling territory, are today a
        marine sanctuary for whales, dolphins, and seals. And all of this in
        year-round sub-tropical spring weather with a southerly breeze and
        temperatures averaging 22º C in summer and 17º C in winter.
        Madeira seems much larger than its diminutive size, just 57
        km (35 miles) long and 22 km (13 miles) wide. The terrain is so
        mountainous, and its roads so tortuous, that distances are magnified in
        terms of both time and effort. This can breed insularity; some
        villagers have never been as far as Funchal and the thought of making
        the long trip to the mainland is even more remote. Yet young and
        upwardly mobile islanders do go off in search of fortune, and the most
        successful return from Brazil, Venezuela, or South Africa to build
        sumptuous villas overlooking the Bay of Funchal.
        Madeira, alas, is no simple portrait of a Gauguin-like
        tropical paradise. With a history of emigration and return, of
        welcoming visiting merchants and seafarers, and, during a brief period
        of occupation, a garrison of British troops, islanders are a
        cosmopolitan mix. The populace is an engaging stew of dark North
        African complexions and blonde, blue-eyed northern Europeans.
        Funchal, the islands capital, major harbor, and only city
        of any note, merely hints at Madeiras riches. The capitals white
        houses and tile roofs are clustered on picturesque hills sloping down
        to a steep bay, which makes for a pretty picture. The city is
        undeniably pleasant, but its noise and traffic dont seem so far
        removed from the more conveniently located places most people come here
        to avoid. Almost half of Madeiras 270,000 people live in Funchal
        (pronounced foon-shawl), and cruise-ship passengers stride ashore
        daily for a frenzied flurry of sightseeing and shopping. Other visitors
        kick back in luxury hotels crowding the citys western seafront. In
        recent years a gleaming new high-rise zona turista has sprung up to
        confront the old-world hotels and distinguished quintas (rural estates)
        of Madeiras more peaceful past.
        Funchal is less the sum of Ma­deira, though, than a gateway
        to the rest of the island, whose real charms begin in the hillsides
        just a few minutes outside of town. Spectac­ular gardens, like the
        Botanic Garden and Quinta do Palheiro, are only a short bus or taxi
        ride from the capital.
        Small-scale agriculture dominates the islands land­scape,
        employing about a fifth of the people. ­De­pend­ing on the altitude and
        wheth­er you happen to be on the warm south coast or the marginally
        cooler north coast, you will see terraces of bananas and vines that
        produce the grapes for fortified Madeira wine. There are windswept
        mountain peaks, craggy cliffs that plummet to the sea, and emerald
        valleys that could be stand-ins for Ireland or Scotland. From
        strategically situated lookout points (mira­douros) you can take in
        these magical panoramas and look down upon villages carved out of the
        mountains, at least one so isolated it only began to receive TV signals
        in the late 1980s.
        Driving a car along the hairpin curves on mountain roads
        and coastal lanes, getting sprayed by waterfalls and constantly
        rewarded with spectacular vistas can be an exhilarating experience, but
        Madeira is best viewed by getting out of the car or bus and exploring
        on two feet. The island is heaven for anyone who enjoys being outside,
        whether your taste runs to gentle walks or hardcore hiking. Madeiras
        system of irrigation channels, known as levadas, carries water down
        from the mountains on gentle gradients and provides a ready-made system
        of trails. The canals — more than 1,300 miles of them crisscross the
        island — have level footpaths running along their entire length.
        Walkers of all ages and abilities need only find a levada to take in
        some of the finest countryside anywhere. Several of these walks, which
        will be discussed in this book, are among the highlights of
        Madeira.
        With such rapturous scenery and a climate that is
        consistently delightful, perhaps it would be unfair to expect nature to
        have bestowed the island with miles of perfect sands as well. Madeira
        has no beaches to speak of — though the day when an enterprising hotel
        builds its own man-made beach cant be too far off. In the meantime, if
        a lounge chair by the pool just cant compare, youll have to follow in
        the wake of Columbus and dock on the neighboring island of Porto Santo,
        a popular day trip.
        The only other inhabited island in the archipelago, Porto
        Santo has a 9-km-long beach running the length of its south coast, but
        few other attractions. While some surely would find the notion of an
        island vacation with no beach time an unusual prospect indeed, perhaps
        it isnt at all a tragedy that Madeiras shoreline crashes so violently
        into the ocean. A Madeira with sandy beaches and direct flights from
        Great Britain and other points in Europe (and beginning in late 2000,
        North America) would surely not have been capable of staving off the
        mass-tourist market as it has thus far. Lack of sand has kept Madeira
        from modeling itself after Mallorca.
        For decades, Madeira has instead attracted a genteel, even
        anachronistic form of island tourism. Afternoon tea and black-tie
        dinners are still served at the most elegant hotels. The typical
        visitor is still older and wealthier than in most holiday destinations,
        but times are beginning to change — as they are across Portugal, no
        longer the forgotten backwater of Europe. Funchals new tourist zone
        testifies to local travel industry ambitions. Today Madeira is being
        discovered by younger travelers who might also indulge in the spas and
        dining that world-class hotels offer, but are just as likely to seek
        out the modest inns up in the mountains and strap on their boots for
        serious hiking.
        Madeirans, like most Portuguese, are a generally quiet and
        reserved people. Add to this geographical isolation and the
        difficulties for most of a harsh agricultural existence (where few have
        the machinery to help in the tiny terraced fields), and you might
        forgive the islanders if they seemed less than welcoming.
        Instead you will find friendly people who, in spite of a
        12-month season that for decades has deposited tourists from wealthier
        nations on their shores, are refreshingly hospitable. They are proud of
        the scenic beauty, delectable wines, and exquisite hand embroidery that
        their tiny island has become rightly famous for.
        The tourism ante is being upped by hoteliers,
        entre­pren­eurs, and government officials eager to broaden Madeiras
        offerings and appeal. But the allure of Madeira remains its absence of
        man-made attractions and abundance of natural ones. Some people still
        suggest that Madeira is part of the lost continent of Atlantis, and
        though it has become easier and easier to get there, the island still
        seems otherworldly.
      
    
  
