
  
  
    
      
        THE ISLANDS AND THEIR PEOPLE
        The Balearic Islands dont have to work too hard to embody
        the perfect island vacation. Mallorca and Menorca are blessed with the
        sort of natural and man-made attributes that entice countless millions
        of foreign visitors to descend upon them and to keep returning year
        after year: the perfect deep blue and transparent turquoise of the
        Mediterranean Sea, 300-plus days of brilliant annual sunshine, hundreds
        of miles of coastline, secluded coves and wide bays, and a vast choice
        of cheap flights and accommodations.
        Since the 1960s, Mallorca has shone in its role as Spains
        tourism juggernaut, defining the extremes of a Mediterranean holiday:
        the unbridled hedonism of topless beaches and singles bars, and the
        lethargic, point A (hotel) to point B (beach) vacation. Wealthy
        visitors to the island enjoy privileged holidays revolving around
        second homes, boating and sailing. The image was established early, and
        the cash registers have been ringing ever since.
        But tourism pulls islanders in opposite directions on the
        Balearics. Income derived from a well-orchestrated travel industry has
        made this region Spains wealthiest per capita, but the environmental
        and psychological effects of being Europes playground have left locals
        a bit desperate. Four decades after it exploded, tourism on the islands
        overheated, leaving in its ashes a forest of massive, block-booked
        hotels and beach-hugging villa communities with few discernible ties to
        Spain—places lined with German bier halls, English fish n chips
        joints, and low-rent bars and discos.
        At a time when countries are going to new extremes battling
        for their share of the world tourism pie, Mallorca and Menorca are
        reassessing their enduring popularity. Fearing that overdevelopment, as
        well as new trends and tastes in international tourism, would leave the
        Balearics behind, authorities have moved to protect remaining
        undeveloped areas as nature preserves, proclaiming them off-limits to
        all construction, and have even blown up some of the more unsightly
        hotel blemishes on the coasts.
        The people and governments of Mallorca and Menorca have
        recognized a need to choose between surrendering the natural beauty and
        easygoing lifestyle of their islands to the ravenous consumption of
        foreign vacationers and homebuyers, and protecting whats left of each.
        Happily, theres still a lot that hasnt yet been adulterated on the
        two islands—meaning that visitors also have a choice. They can join
        hordes of their sun-deprived brethren from Great Britain, Germany, and
        other countries, and enjoy an island vacation with a cheap place to
        stay, familiar food, glorious beaches, and a few day excursions thrown
        in for variety. The summer season grows longer every year, and
        significant stretches of both islands are still packed with merrymakers
        and families delighting in the traditional Mediterranean island
        vacation.
        Or if that thought is less appealing to you, though, as it
        is to increasing numbers of travelers, youll find another side to the
        Balearics. It is more chic than cheap, a place where ecologically
        sensitive hotels are built in restored 16th-century manor and farm
        houses, where hiking, cycling, and golf complement or replace entirely
        the long days at the beach. It is place to eat fine Mallorcan,
        Menorcan, and Spanish cuisine rather than pizza and French fries.
        This other Balearics may not be as inexpensive or as
        accessible as the one sold by travel operators, but if visitors venture
        beyond the well-trodden tracks of their packaged predecessors, theyll
        discover a spectacularly beautiful part of the world. If you come
        expecting a nightmarish land of charter flights, tour buses, and
        beer-stained beach hangouts, you may be shocked at how remote and
        undeveloped many parts of these small islands remain. From medieval
        mountain villages and the dramatic lunar landscape of Mallorcas
        Formentor promontory to mysterious prehistoric settlements and isolated
        beaches accessible only by foot on Menorca, the islands abound with
        sights that are anything but blandly international.
        Slowly but surely, visitors are graduating from sterile
        hotels and apartment blocks to home rentals, time shares, and casas
        rurales—country house hotels that form part of the governments
        agrotourism initiatives. No longer the sole habitat of sun worshippers,
        the islands welcome thousands of cyclists in early spring; April and
        May bring hikers to exclaim over wildflowers; and bird-watchers with
        binoculars and zoom lenses record rarities and migrants on their way
        north.
        Previous generations moved inland to get out of range of
        marauding pirates. Islanders who stayed put, and didnt flee to the
        coast to work the tourism industry, can live almost unmolested by
        beach-bound modern invaders. Against the odds, much of the islands
        traditional life and values has been preserved, and while agriculture
        is no longer the dominant income source, plenty of people still have
        little connection to tourism. This is especially true on Menorca, where
        cold winter winds limit the seasons length.
        Mallorca, the largest of the four Balearics, is also the
        most geographically varied. The dramatic cliffs of the Serra de
        Tramuntana mountain range hug the coastline of the entire northwest and
        north, from Andratx all the way to the Cape of Formentor. The north
        coast boasts some of Spains most stunning scenery: miniscule coves,
        dizzying drops to the sea, picturesque medieval villages, and a single
        port, at Sóller. The interior of Mallorca is a vast plain of small
        industrial towns, farmlands, and ancient, gnarly olive and almond
        trees, all protected from Mediterranean winds by the rugged mountains.
        The south is dominated by the cosmopolitan island capital, Palma de
        Mallorca, its handsome bay, and the crowded beaches that splay outward
        from it. The east coast is an enticing mix of bays, long sweeps of
        beach, small coves, spectacular caves, and myriad tourist villas.
        Menorca is the second largest of the Balearic archipelago,
        but its tiny just the same: only 50 km (31 miles) long and 17 km (10
        miles) across at its widest point. Predominantly rural and flat,
        Menorca has always been a quieter place than Mallorca (or the craziest
        of the Balearics, party-mad Ibiza). Still, its hidden coves, remarkable
        natural harbors, and more than 1,000 Megalithic monuments — inscrutable
        remnants of the islands prehistoric origins — are dazzling. Menorca
        gets big-time package holidaymakers, especially from Great Britain, and
        beaches and roads get awfully crowded in the height of the summer
        season, but the island seldom feels frenetic.
        With all these things going for them, including a friendly,
        easygoing population conversant in several languages, its not
        surprising that the Balearics continue to reel in short- and long-term
        visitors by the millions. Many northern Europeans, especially Germans,
        have purchased summer and retirement homes here; during the months of
        July and August, Spaniards are flatly outnumbered, when the dominant
        languages are German and English. In parts of Mallorca, Germans own
        about 80 percent of all homes; along traditionally British vacation
        spots on Menorca, three-quarters of the homes are first or second
        residences belonging to the English. Understandably, locals patience
        can get a bit frayed by the end of summer. It is being tested further
        as more visitors buy into the old towns and villages, instead of just
        coastal resorts.
        But foreign invasions are nothing new to these islanders.
        They were conquered successively by Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals,
        Christians, and Moors. Slightly less possessive but equally curious
        visitors arrived, including the lovers George Sand and Frédéric Chopin,
        Archduke Louis Salvator of Austria, Anaïs Nin, and the poet Robert
        Graves. The islands are now invaded by modern royalty like Claudia
        Schiffer, Michael Douglas, as well as princes and their paramours who
        anchor their yachts in the ports and evade the paparazzi. Many
        islanders have learned to regard the latest occupations with a sense of
        dry humor. All the previous occupiers have come and eventually gone,
        they say, and these too will one day leave.
      
    
  
