
  
  
    
      
        INDIA AND ITS PEOPLE
        This land is a constant challenge to mind and body, a
        glorious shock to the system. It is no place for the faint-hearted.
        India is exhilarating, exhausting, and infuriating — a land where,
        youll find, the practicalities of daily life overlay the mysteries
        that popular myth attaches to India. In place of the much-publicized,
        and much-misunderstood, mysticism of its ancient religions, India in
        reality has quite another miracle to offer in the sheer profusion of
        its peoples and landscapes.
        India comprises a diamond-shaped subcontinent that stretches
        over 3,000 km (1,800 miles) from the Kashmir mountains in the north
        right down to Kanyakumari, or Cape Comorin, on the Indian Ocean. From
        east to west India also covers about 3,000 km, from Arunachal Pradesh
        and Assam on the border with its neighbors China and Burma to the
        Gujarat coast on the Arabian Sea. Only in more recent post-colonial
        times did its natural geography exclude the countries of Pakistan and
        Bangladesh. Even there, for all the hostilities, theres an undeniable
        cultural affinity with India — feuding brothers rather than unrelated
        strangers. In fact, when you look at its 4,000 years of history — or
        any of todays newspapers, for that matter — its countless feuds seem
        to be a perpetual but necessary dynamic of Indian civilization.
        India is a massive family, with a lot of different and
        inevitably conflicting regional and sectarian interests. Rupee
        banknotes are printed in Indias 15 official languages: Hindi, Urdu,
        Sanskrit, Sindhi, Bengali, Marathi, Gujurati, Oriya, Punjabi, Assamese,
        Kashmiri, and Malayalam, as well as Kannada, Tamil, and Telugu. A count
        of the languages spoken all over India, leaving out the dialects, comes
        to 1,652, written in 13 different alphabets.
        The national language of Hindi is spoken by less than the
        majority, and English, for which the government has a permanent program
        of modernization, is spoken by just 3 percent of the people, mostly in
        the largest cities. Everybody speaks cricket, though, with its
        innings, wickets, and boundaries present in every dialect.
        One of the first impressions youll get at the airport in
        Delhi or Mumbai (Bombay) is the diversity of ethnic types. From
        blue-eyed and sometimes red-haired Kashmiris and the Chinese-Tibetans
        from Sikkim or Darjeeling, through all the shades of coffee of the
        heartland, right down to dark-skinned, often curly-haired, Dravidians
        from southern India, you soon realize theres no such thing as a
        typical Indian.
        Indias prehistoric settlers were probably what
        anthropologists call Proto-Australoids. Theyve since been joined by
        Mongols, Aryans, Greeks, Arabs, Turks, Persians, and Afghans, while
        Dutch, British, Portuguese, and French have also left their traces.
        The landscape is alternately rich and arid, lush and
        desolate. The majestic Himalayas in the north make an appropriate home
        for Shiva, one of the most-revered Hindu gods. Kashmir is a serenely
        beautiful and coveted land of green forest, alpine meadows, and lakes,
        while the Punjab in the northwest is the fertile center of the
        countrys Green Revolution, supporting the nations self-sufficiency in
        wheat, barley, and millet. On the doorstep of this wealth, the Thar
        Desert of noble Rajasthan heralds the vast Deccan plateau of parched,
        ruddy granite that dominates the peninsula of southern India.
        Delhi stands at the western end of the Ganga (Ganges) river
        basin in which India grows much of its rice. Flanked with patches of
        forest leading up into the foothills of the Himalayas, the flat plain
        stretches right across to the Bay of Bengal 1,600 km (1,000 miles)
        away, but some areas are kept as nature reserves for the countrys
        wildlife, notably its tigers, leopards, and elephants. Bengals
        greenery is the threshold to the tea plantations of Darjeeling and
        Assam.
        The rugged southern peninsula is hemmed in by low-lying
        mountains — the Vindhya and Satpura to the north and the Western and
        Eastern Ghats running parallel to the coasts. The forested Malabar
        coast in the west is sown with crops of coconut, betel-nut, pepper,
        rubber, and cashew nut, which today still tempt ships across the
        Arabian Sea. Some of the palm trees in the area provide shade for beach
        resorts in Goa and Kerala.
        Indias landscape also features man-made architectural
        treasures, bearing witness to the many great religions and
        civilizations which have enriched the country — monuments now, after
        centuries of neglect, preserved by the restoration program started by
        the Archaeological Survey of India. The sights are endless: the Hindu
        gopuram tower-gates of the south, the temples of Varanasi (Benares),
        the cave monasteries of Ajanta and Ellora, the beautiful and erotic
        sculptures of Khajuraho, the splendid marble palaces, fortresses, and
        mausoleums of the emperors and maharajas in Delhi, Agra, and Rajasthan,
        the colonial government buildings in New Delhi, or the unusual style of
        the Gothic-Oriental railway station in Mumbai (known until 1995 as
        Bombay).
        The cities shanty-town districts are often directly in the
        shadow of the shining skyscrapers, built by the shanty-town residents
        themselves. Here women carry bricks on their heads as gracefully as a
        pitcher of water. The women are also responsible for one other
        characteristic of Indian architecture — cow-dung patties which are
        preserved and kept for fuel and artfully shaped into mounds with shapes
        that differ from region to region, some of them resembling a Buddhist
        stupa, a Hindu gopuram, or even a Moslem minaret.
        The only constant in this huge landscape is the people
        themselves. Even in the vast open spaces of the Rajasthan desert or the
        Deccan plateau of central India, people appear everywhere, a tribesman
        on camel-back or lone woman holding her headdress in her teeth to keep
        out the dust as she carries a huge pitcher of water or a bundle of
        firewood on her head. If, as the road stretches before you empty and
        clear right up to the horizon, and you can see only one tree, its a
        pretty safe bet youll find at least one sadhu (holy man) resting in
        its shade.
        The teeming millions living in Calcutta and Mumbai have
        become legendary. They crowd each other into the roadway, bulge out of
        tiny auto-rickshaws, and perch on top of buses and trains; a family of
        four or five clings onto a motor-scooter, and a whole school class on
        one bullock-cart. Its hazardous; buses do topple over, rooftop
        passengers on trains do occasionally get swept off the top by an
        overhanging steel rod, but they accept the risk for the free
        ride — rooftoppers arent in the habit of buying tickets.
        Its important to remember not to apply Western values to
        everything you see here. The poverty, for instance, does not create the
        sense of shame as it does for people who live in Western countries. In
        India poverty is borne with considerable dignity and even with a
        cheerfulness that some may find difficult to understand. The same form
        applies to jostling, which is a whole way of life in this country.
        Everyone makes way for the cow, sacred to the Hindus. The
        cow has right of way everywhere, whether walking nonchalantly through
        the center of a city, or reclining across a new expressway. After a
        while you may begin to detect something a bit uncanny in the way a cow
        seems to look around and beyond her immediate surroundings — its as if
        she knows that shes sacred.
        You cant get around it: India is a country where religion
        is ever-present. Although the constitution of today describes India as
        a secular State, religion still plays a vital part in everyday
        life — in its streets as well as in the architecture, sculpture, and
        painting of its great monuments. A little background information on the
        major forms of faith may help.
        Religions of India
        Hinduism
        If Hinduism is more or less Indias national belief system,
        this may be because it offers something for everyone: mysticism and
        metaphysics for scholars, ceremony for ordinary people, austerity,
        sensuality, tranquillity, and frenzy.
        Building on the ancient cults and Vedic teachings of the
        Indo-Aryans dating from 1300 b.c. , Hinduism began to take its present
        form in the fourth century a.d. , under considerable pressure for a
        more accessible religion. Popular devotional worship, with its appeal
        to the common people, replaced the sacrifices practiced exclusively by
        the Brahmins.
        It is said there are 330 million gods in the Hindu
        pantheon, but they might be seen as 330 million facets of a single
        divinity. The three most important manifestations of the Brahman, or
        godhead, are Vishnu, Brahma, and Shiva, which are often presented to
        Westerners as a trinity, though this is not really comparable to the
        Christian concept.
        The big three are by no means accorded equal status.
        Vishnu, the preserver, is regarded by his worshippers as a god from
        whose navel a lotus grew bearing Brahma whose task it was to create the
        world. Vishnu, a four-armed god with mace, conch, discus, and lotus,
        has many incarnations, of which the most famous is Krishna, who appears
        as conquering hero, flute-playing lover, or mischievous baby. Vishnus
        wife Lakshmi is goddess of good fortune.
        Shiva is the dancing destroyer-god, wearing a garland of
        skulls and snakes around both neck and arms. As the god of time and
        ascetics, he decides the fate of the world. As Lord of beasts and king
        of dance, Shiva is as passionate as Vishnu is serene. Just in case you
        think you have got it all clear in your mind, remember that Vishnu
        destroys by not preserving and Shiva preserves through the renewal
        arising from destruction.
        Hindu ethics say that the path to salvation has three
        principles: righteousness, prosperity honestly achieved, and, not
        least, pleasure. At the center of the confrontation with the harsh
        reality of daily life is the concept of karma; that is work or
        deed, and the implication that the sum total of ones acts in a
        previous life will determine ones present station in life. A better
        reincarnation is promised those whose deeds and actions are good in
        this station. The ultimate goal is spiritual salvation, or moksha, a
        freeing from the cycle of rebirth.
        While this teaching has served to sustain the rigid
        hierarchy of the caste system, it is not so fatalistic as some would
        have it. The Hindus say we cannot escape our karma, but that with good
        judgment and foresight we can use it to our advantage.
        By the 19th century, reformers such as the Bengali Brahman
        Ram Mohan Roy tried to rid Hinduism of primitive idolatry. The
        self-immolation of widows, known as sati — a widow becomes sati, a
        virtuous woman, by climbing onto her husbands funeral pyre — has
        disappeared, but the monkey-god Hanuman and elephant-headed Ganesh are
        still idolized, and nobody will dare to deny the sanctity of the cow
        and all her products: milk, curd, butter, and dung, the last of which
        is used for fuel.
        More than 83 percent of the population embraces Hinduism,
        which is more a way of life than a religion; its sacred rituals and
        observances are only a small part of what good Hindus believe makes
        them good Hindus. Much more than the mystical elements which fascinate
        and draw so many Westerners here, Hinduism is concerned with the basics
        of everyday life: birth, work, health, relationships, and death, all of
        this helped along by regular consultations with a local astrologer.
        Even today, the intricate Hindu caste system can play a
        role in the Indians choice of job, spouse, and political party,
        despite the numerous anti-discrimination statutes passed since
        Independence. Brahmins, the priestly caste, fill many of the top posts
        in the universities and administration; many Indian Army officers can
        trace their ancestry to the proud Kshatriya warrior caste; business is
        dominated by the merchant or Vaishya caste; and Shudras till the land.
        The so-called Untouchables have greater opportunities now to rise on
        the social scale, a few of them becoming captains of industry or
        cabinet ministers, but its still their brethren who sweep the
        streets.
        Most marriages in India are still arranged traditionally
        with carefully negotiated dowries. While ever more matrimonial
        advertisements in the weekend editions of The Times of India and other
        newspapers mention caste no bar, just as many specify the required
        caste or insist on a fair-complexioned bride while touting a
        university diploma or an American work permit.
        Islam
        Following a conflict in India almost as old as Islam
        itself, a peaceful coexistence between Hinduism and Islam seems hard to
        achieve. Its hard to imagine a faith more hostile to all idolatry,
        fierce in its uncompromising monotheism, and opposed to the caste
        system as Islam When sufi mystics or the emperor Akbar tried to create
        a synthesis between the two faiths, the orthodox on both sides
        resisted.
        Hindu conversions to Islamic faith were more often
        performed out of hope of social advancement under a Muslim government
        than out of conviction. Muslims in India today, as fervent as their
        brethren in Pakistan or the Middle East, are mostly descendants of
        those converts.
        Over 80 million Muslims form the second-largest religious
        group in India — almost as many as the population of Pakistan — most of
        them descendants from Hindu converts of the Mughals empire, who bore
        the brunt of Hindu retaliation for long years full of subjection and an
        often unfair identification with British rule. Left behind by the
        exodus to Pakistan at the 1947 partition, they make up the peasantry in
        the north. While they mostly keep a low profile, you may hear of
        communal incidents in the cities between the Hindus and Muslims.
        Followers of Islam in India are divided into two primary
        groups: Sunnis (adherents of the Sunna law expounded by Mohammeds own
        words and deeds) and Shiites (followers of those interpretations
        proposed by Mohammeds cousin Ali). Every day, the devout face Mecca,
        bow their foreheads to the ground, and proclaim: There is no god but
        Allah; and Mohammed is His Prophet. 
        Sikhs
        The one attempt to merge the principles of Hinduism and
        Islam is that of the Sikhs (disciples). Nanak, their guru (teacher),
        was born a Hindu in 1469 and reared on the egalitarian principles of
        Islam. He opposed idolatry and the caste system (which was subsequently
        too strong to resist). From Islam he took the idea of one God, but
        refused any such specific conception as Allah. He saw Gods
        manifestation, like Hinduism, as being everywhere in the world He
        created. Nanaks teachings were written in the Adi Granth, which
        acquired for Sikhs the sanctity of the Koran. According to this faith,
        alcohol and tobacco are forbidden.
        The militancy of the Sikhs came about only as Nanaks
        successors got embroiled in politics — with dire results for the
        Sikhs — when their leaders challenged the Mughals. After the execution
        of Guru Tegh Bahadur, his son, Guru Gobind Singh, exalted the faithful
        to be ever ready for armed defense. They all took the surname Singh,
        meaning Lion (all Sikhs are named Singh, but not all Singhs are
        Sikhs), and wore a turban and kept the five Ks: kesha (uncut hair and
        beard), kanga (comb for their hair), kara (steel bracelet), kachha
        (soldiers shorts), and kirpan (dagger). Their distinctive appearance
        made them highly visible and so inspired an unflinching courage.
        Sikhs make up just 2 percent of the population. With the
        consistent militant need to defend their faith, they make up a fiercely
        competent élite in the Indian Army, but they are also skilled farmers
        at the spearhead of the Green Revolution in the Punjab, where most of
        them live. Their rights have been the source of conflicts in the
        central government.
        Buddhism
        Bu ddhism was founded over 2,500 years ago in reaction to
        Brahmanic orthodoxy, but it practically vanished as an organized
        religion from the Indian scene by persecution and absorption into the
        Hindu mainstream. It continues, however, to exert influence on Indias
        spiritual and artistic life to the present day.
        Buddhas own life explains his teachings, but the truth is
        buried in both legend and historical fact. He was born Siddhartha
        Gautama in a grove of sal trees at Lumbini (just across the Nepalese
        border) around the year 566 b.c. His mother, who was queen of the
        Sakyas, is said to have conceived him after dreaming that a magnificent
        white elephant holding a lotus flower in his trunk had entered her
        side.
        Siddhartha grew up in princely luxury, but when he was
        taken out one day to the edge of the royal parks, he saw the poor, the
        sick, and the aged. Then he saw a religious beggar who seemed serene,
        and he realized the path his life must take.
        Abandoning his riches, Siddhartha went off into the
        kingdoms of the Ganga valley. For six years he begged for his food,
        learned to meditate, and practiced severe self-mortification, but still
        felt no nearer to understanding lifes suffering. Then, aged 35,
        sitting under a tree at the place now known as Bodh Gaya (south of
        Patna), he vowed to stay there until his goal was achieved.
        For 49 days he resisted demons and temptresses, and became
        truly Enlightened — Buddha as he is called today. He preached his new
        wisdom at Sarnath (near Varanasi) and with ever more disciples went out
        to spread his word. Buddha himself converted ruthless bandits and whole
        armies from the path of violence. In Kushinagar, between Bodh Gaya and
        his birthplace, he died at age 80 of dysentery, it is said, from eating
        pork.
        Preaching that suffering came from the pursuit of personal
        desire, Buddha had advocated the Middle Way of the Eightfold Path:
        right views, right resolve, right speech, right conduct, right
        livelihood, right effort, right recollection, and right meditation.
        Only thus could the enlightenment of Nirvana be achieved.
        This original doctrine, without any sense of Buddhas
        divinity, was embraced by the Hinayana (Lesser Vehicle) school which
        spread to Sri Lanka, Burma, and Thailand, as well as Cambodia and Laos.
        The Mahayana (Great Vehicle) school added the concept of Bodhisattva as
        divine savior, and was then the most dominant form of Buddhism,
        spreading to China and Japan.
        After centuries of almost total eclipse, Buddhism today has
        been able to achieve a revival in India, in part by offering its
        egalitarian philosophy to Hindu Untouchables as an escape from
        discrimination. There are now more than 5 million Buddhists in India,
        many of them in Maharashtra.
        Jainism
        As old as Buddhism, Jainism has made its mark with its
        concept of ahimsa (non-violence) and is much more pacifist than its
        name, which means religion of the conquerors.
        Vardhamana Mahavira was its founder. He was born in 540
        b.c. in Bihar and, like Buddha, was the son of a chief. He, too,
        abandoned riches to become an ascetic. But Mahavira (the Great Hero)
        pursued self-mortification to the end of his life, stripping off his
        clothes to take his word from kingdom to kingdom. He died of
        self-inflicted starvation at the age of 72 in Para, near Rajgir. His
        followers were later to divide into the Digambaras (space-clad, i.e.
        , naked) and the Svetambaras (white-clad) you see today.
        The religion, in which Mahavira is seen as the
        manifestation of 24 Tirthankaras (teachers), attributes souls to all
        living creatures, as well as other natural objects. Agriculture was
        therefore abandoned for its destruction of plant and animal life. The
        doctrines survive in vegetarianism, with Jain monks carrying dusters to
        sweep insects away from where they tread and wearing a gauze veil over
        their mouth to avoid breathing in flies.
        Jainism, which never spread beyond India, claims 2 million
        followers, including many businessmen in Gujarat and the Deccan, with a
        few in Bengal. It had considerable influence on Mahatma Gandhis
        non-violence movement; he used its fasting-unto-death as a potent moral
        and political weapon. The Jains non-violent religion excludes them
        from agriculture as a profession, but they dominate the electronics
        industry in Bangalore.
        Parsis, Jews, and Christians
        The tiny but powerful community of Parsis brought
        Zoroastrianism from Iran, and its people shine in business today. The
        Parsis, as their name suggests, originate from ancient Persia and today
        form only a minute community in the world of religions, with barely
        100,000 living in India, mostly in and around the city of Mumbai. They
        have been and are still enormously influential in this countrys
        economic life, often serving as all-important go-betweens in the
        sometimes immensely difficult relations between Hindus and Muslims, and
        between India and Pakistan.
        Their religion dates as far back as the seventh century
        b.c. , when their prophet Zoroaster contrasted his peaceful and
        sedentary People of Righteousness with the polytheistic nomadic People
        of Evil. His was an attitude that probably determined not only their
        general ethics, but also their occupational destiny as highly
        sophisticated businessmen.
        The Parsis base their elaborate code of ethics on the
        concept of a constant struggle existing between the forces of
        creation — that is, light and good — and those of darkness and evil.
        Its teachings puts great emphasis on the very purity of the worlds
        natural elements, fire, earth, and water. For instance, to avoid
        polluting the elements, Parsis do not bury or cremate their dead, but
        lay them exposed and naked on their famous Towers of Silence for the
        vultures to devour.
        Indias Jewish community is ancient indeed. Some texts
        claim that the first Jews arrived in India at the time of the
        Babylonian exile, in 587 b.c. ; others bring them to Cranganur, on the
        Malabar coast, in a.d. 72, about the time that the disciple Thomas is
        thought to have brought his Christian mission to India. The oldest
        Jewish community still in existence is situated down the coast at
        Cochin (see page 182), dating back at least to the fourth century a.d.
        Some others, less orthodox, can be found in Mumbai, but most emigrated
        to Israel when it was founded in the year 1948.
        The earliest Christians other than St. Thomas (see page
        197), were the so-called Nestorian heretics of the Syrian Orthodox
        Church, also living on the Malabar coast since the first centuries of
        the Christian era. Modern Indian Christians, some descended from the
        Syrians, others from those converted by British and Portuguese
        missionaries, number about 19 million. They are mainly Catholics,
        living in Goa, and elsewhere you will find all the British variations
        on Protestantism, all with a certain Hindu tinge to them.
        The new religion of India is of course modernization, and
        young, upwardly mobile professionals are everywhere. Growing
        involvement in electronics, telecommunications, nuclear power, and
        space satellites is intended to take the country, as one official said,
        directly from the 19th into the 21st century.  To achieve this
        transition, the government is cutting through bureaucracy to break with
        political corruption and find some kind of peaceful modus vivendi for
        communal and regional interests. Former US ambassador John Kenneth
        Galbraith called it a functioning anarchy.  The miracle of how it
        functions is well worth observing.
      
    
  
