
  
  
    
      
        Israel and the Israelis
        Israel is many things to many people: a land of hope,
        wonder, faith, salvation, contradiction, and sometimes despair.
        Although Israel is only now 50 years old, the roots of its three prime
        religious faiths (Juda­ism, Islam, and Christianity) stretch back over
        many millennia, and some of its ancient settlements are amongst the
        oldest on earth.
        Abraham, the first Jewish Patriarch, led his people here in
        search of the land of milk and honey; Jesus Christ was born, lived,
        ministered, and died here; and Mohammed, the founder of Islam, visited
        Jerusalem during his heavenly Night Journey.  Each religion and
        sect — Jews, Muslims (including Druse), Christians (including Armenian
        and Eastern Orthodox, Catholics, Protestants, Samaritans, and Copts),
        Bahai, and several more — claims some piece of this sacred earth. Each
        faith worships a single god and recognizes elements of the others
        beliefs. Sometimes more than one denomination shares one church. The
        church may then be marked out to designate where worshippers of the
        various denominations take their place.
        This giddying confluence of distinct religions is matched
        only by the diversity of the population. As a largely immigrant
        society, the State of Israel provides home to people from over 80
        countries around the world. Nearly half the Jewish inhabitants hail
        from overseas, and they have brought with them many of the accumulated
        customs and cultural traditions of their former homes.
        In the face of such plurality its hard to characterize
        Israel. This is a land where different and sometimes conflicting
        traditions continue to matter despite heavy odds. Not so much a
        melting-pot as a land of unlimited impossibilities, Israel compresses
        a host of sights and lifestyles into a small area, offering a
        cornucopia of experiences for visitors.
        Preeminent among the attractions is Jerusalem. The Temple
        Mount area is the geographical heart of Judaism. The city has drawn
        Christian visitors, sometimes heavily armed, ever since the
        proclamation of the Holy Land and development of the first Christian
        sites for pilgrims in the fifth century. Youll find that the Old
        Citys myriad colours, sounds, smells, and tastes stir the senses; the
        Temple Mounts architecture can take your breath away; pilgrims tracing
        Christs journey to Calvary along the Via Dolorosa remain a deeply
        moving sight; and the views from the Mount of Olives are stunning. For
        Christians seeking spiritual refreshment, there are countless churches
        to visit, including the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, the Basilica of
        the Annunciation (in Nazareth), and the Church of the Nativity (in
        Bethlehem), just to mention the most famous. Muslims revere the sites
        on the Temple Mount: the Dome of the Rock and El-Aksa Mosque. Even when
        these sights are bustling with visitors youre likely to find them
        compelling.
        However, Jerusalem is only a starting point — beyond the
        capital lie more visitor attractions per square mile than in any other
        country in the world, beckoning not only pilgrims, historians, and
        archaeologists, but also hikers, ornithologists, scuba-divers,
        windsurfers, and many others. Israel is so compact you can cram enough
        variety of activities into a week to satisfy almost every taste.
        Indeed, should you decide to go slow on culture, youll find
        Israel a splendid place for leisurely sun-worshipping. In recent years
        the country has begun to realise its considerable potential for
        beach-style tourism. The fast-paced metropolis of Tel Aviv boasts
        beautiful white sands, while other parts of the country have their own
        unique features. It is perfectly feasible to spend a fortnight in
        Eilat, exploring the Red Sea, lying on the beaches, journeying into the
        Negev Desert — and never see a religious building or an archaeological
        site.
        After an exhausting day on the go or at the beach, you can
        rest assured that youll be able to relax in comfortable hotels,
        hospices, and restaurants. Israelis are delighted that people from
        everywhere visit their country, and welcome you with genuine warmth.
        Nor are you likely to encounter a language problem, as English is
        taught in all schools and is widely spoken.
        It has been suggested that its impossible for any
        foreigner to understand the Israeli psyche. Possibly no other country
        has had such a turbulent history. Visits to Masada and Yad Vashem (the
        Holocaust Museum) may give you an inkling of the capacity for tragedy
        and heroism embodied in both that history and the modern State of
        Israel. Yet, despite all the displacement and suffering, the settlers
        of this land continue to be friendly and welcoming.
      
    
  
