
  
  
    
      
        Jamaica and Its People
        T he island of Jamaica will be near the top of the list for
        anyone planning an idyllic holiday getaway. With warm sunshine,
        beautiful beaches, lush tropical scenery, and fine hotels, it is
        guaranteed to provide a little rest and relaxation. However, with a
        vibrant grassroots culture and the growing confidence of an independent
        nation, it defies the advertising stereotype of the deserted island. 
        Jamaica is not just a destination — it is an experience.
        The third-largest island in the Caribbean, just south of
        Cuba, Jamaica is 233 km (145 miles) in length and 83 km (52 miles)
        across at its widest point. The island is aligned almost east-to-west
        in the water so that sunrise wakes the eastern tip, proceeds to caress
        the length of the island, and kisses the western tip good night. 
        Geographically it is extremely diverse, with a central backbone of high
        mountains and hills blanketed with tropical rain-forest. These are
        surrounded by areas of limestone formations, scrub and grassland, coral
        cliffs, and fine sand beaches. Fresh water from tropical storms feeds
        120 rivers and some of the most celebrated waterfalls and cascades on
        earth.
        On land, there is a wealth of animal and bird life. Rare
        species of butterflies and delicate hummingbirds take to the air, and
        crocodiles and manatees still live in and around vast tracts of
        mangrove swamp in the south. The island is surrounded by coral reefs
        and reef walls, which provide shelter to hundreds of species of sea
        creatures and recreation to divers and snorkelers.
        Temperatures here vary only a few degrees from about 27°C
        (80°F), although the heat is tempered by the nearly continuous trade
        winds that blow across the Atlantic. In the mountains and hills of the
        interior, the temperature drops with altitude and with the clouds that
        wrap around the highest peaks.
        Much of the land is extremely fertile and produces a range
        of tropical fruit and vegetable crops, providing ample food for the
        people and such lucrative cash crops as sugar and coffee. Four hundred
        years ago these crops brought British colonists to rule the land and
        African slaves to work it. The bitter taste of slavery is always in the
        background.
        Todays Jamaican population is a mixture of African and
        English, with Spanish, Indian, and a smattering of Portuguese Jews,
        Germans, Welsh, and Scots. They have been melded together, giving rise
        to a fascinating national identity.  Since independence in 1962, the
        black majority has worked to create a country based on confidence from
        within, working on a principle of pride in oneself and in ones roots.
        This is so important for the future of the country that the national
        motto is Out of many — one people. 
        It says much about the character of the Jamaican people that
        they have slightly changed the story of Columbus and his trip to the
        island in 1493. He is not held in the same high esteem here as he is in
        other islands. As someone has said, Columbus only thought that he had
        discovered Jamaica. In actuality, it was the population of Jamaica who
        discovered him — Columbus was really lost, thinking that he had found
        another route to Asia.
        Vestiges of the British colonial legacy can still be found,
        not least in the fact that English is Jamaicas official language: the
        popularity of cricket is another example. The thirteen regional
        parishes and numerous towns were originally named after British
        settlements. You can find Manchester, Sheffield, and Cambridge in
        Jamaica, to name but three. However, these British influences have,
        even from the earliest days of colonial rule, always been tempered and
        molded to the Jamaican style. Jamaica has always had a second,
        unofficial language developed from the early days of slavery. This
        creole, a mixture of English, African, and Spanish words and phrases,
        is still evolving and often indecipherable to the outsider. Next to
        town names derived from England, youll also find names such as Wait
        Awhile and Fruitful Vale, derived from the function and activity of
        the everyday lives of ordinary Jamaicans. And as far as cricket is
        concerned, Caribbean players have turned the tables on their colonial
        mentors and now produce some of the best players in the world, easily
        capable of soundly outplaying the Brits.
        In recent years the influence of the United States has been
        much stronger than that of Britain. Many Jamaicans head to the States
        for further education, and the American economic influence on areas
        such as business investment and planning is growing. Its no surprise
        that the US dollar is accepted as readily as the Jamaican dollar to pay
        for goods.
        But Jamaica is not simply turning blindly into a small
        version of its bigger brother. It still revels in its own identity,
        which is now internationally recognized through such influential
        cultural products as the Rastafarian religion and reggae music. The
        followers of Rastafarianism (with their characteristic mane of
        dreadlocks) originated in Jamaica in the 1930s and are still
        predominantly found here. Jamaican music — ska and, especially,
        reggae — has since the 1970s been exported and enjoyed around the
        world. The strong beat and earthy lyrics seem to symbolize and
        celebrate the character of this young and lively country.
        Jamaicans are sociable people, living their lives out in
        the open and knowing everything about their neighbors business.
        Theres nothing they like better than having a good chat about the
        latest bit of gossip: who is doing what, where, and why. They are very
        direct in their dealings with each other, as you might discover if you
        come across a friendly conversation among a group of friends. The loud,
        raucous Jamaican English dialect and the waving hands reflect the joy
        with which social relations are conducted here. They are equally direct
        in their dealings with visitors, too, so dont expect a shy Jamaican
        smile as you walk by. Instead, be prepared for a barrage of questions
        about your life, offers to supply anything you need, a host of jokes at
        your expense, and some serious flirting if youre single. Jamaicans can
        definitely be in your face.  But dont feel intimidated, as their
        attitude is not personal. Having some lines ready to throw back at them
        induces guffaws of laughter and an appreciative slap on the back.
        The recreational pleasures that ordinary islanders enjoy
        have become synonymous with the name Jamaica: dancing to the heavily
        rhythmic musical beat; taking a little marijuana (or ganja, as its
        known here), which many Jamaicans view as a kind of medicinal herb; or
        simply sitting back and chatting with friends on a bench or street
        corner, where the situation is described as Irie — the equivalent of
        Everythings just fine! 
        Jamaicans appear to worry little about the future;
        sometimes it seems that they worry little even about what happens in
        the next few minutes. The popular phrase Soon come indicates an
        apparent lack of concern about time and an unhurried attitude to daily
        tasks. Occasional hurricanes can spoil the idyllic climate and
        contribute to this laid back attitude: Jamaicans are aware that
        circumstances can suddenly alter dramatically and yet life will always
        carry on. To have to wait a while for something is not the worst
        problem in the world.
        Since independence in 1962, tourism has been Jamaicas
        primary industry and the island has become renowned as one of the prime
        destinations in the Caribbean. The best beaches have become home to the
        finest hotels, which supply almost everything needed for the perfect
        vacation. All-inclusive packages and large resort hotels offer
        restaurants, sporting activities, entertainment, wide-screen sports
        channels in the bars, shopping, and a guaranteed suntan. There is
        frequently a temptation never to tear oneself away from the hotel. Yet
        to do this is to miss the very essence of what the island is all about.
        Step out of the hotel and your senses will be bombarded by a range of
        sights, sounds, smells, tastes, and textures that let you know that you
        could only be in Jamaica.
        Such sights include the colorful tams (knitted hats worn
        by Jamaican men to cover their mane of dreadlocks) and the red ackee
        fruit that ripens at the beginning of the year. Sample the taste of
        ackee cooked with saltfish, Jamaicas national dish, and the smell of
        hot jerk pork cooked in a pit barbecue. Hear the songs of Bob Marley
        booming from a hundred cranked-up car stereos or the chorus of frogs
        that begin to call as evening descends. Feel the texture of a hand
        offered in greeting and try to fathom the Jamaican handshake, a
        ritual whose rules seem to be more complex than those of the game of
        cricket.
        Of course Jamaica has its palm-lined beaches and almost
        endless rum drinks, and you can enjoy a wonderful resort-based break.
        But once you begin to look underneath this initial veneer of a
        do-nothing-in-the-tropics holiday, its like peeling the layers of an
        onion. Theres an abundance of nature, history, art, and modern culture
        to be explored and enjoyed. Jamaica is an island with a strong
        personality that doesnt simply wait in the wings. It comes out to meet
        you.
      
    
  
