
  
  
    
      
        Las Vegas and Its People
        It is hard to believe that Las Vegas — a city of mythic
        proportion — started out as little more than a dusty railroad stop in
        the middle of a barren and unforgiving desert valley. It is harder
        still to understand the dramatic changes that would occur in the valley
        over the course of the 20th century, which created the city known today
        as the Entertainment Capital of the World. 
        Though initially settled in the mid 1800s, Las Vegas
        struggled as a Mormon outpost for much of its early existence. It was
        not recognized as an official town until 1905. On 15 May of that year,
        railroad officials from the San Pedro, Los Angeles, and Salt Lake
        Railroad stood at the intersection of Main and Fremont streets (where
        the Plaza Hotel now stands) and auctioned 1200 lots of railroad land
        mapped from 40 square blocks of desert dust. Within a year, the citys
        population had grown to 1500 brave pioneers, though the only visitors
        were train passengers on their way to a real city.
        Nine decades later, todays cascade of visitors is
        surrounded by the fastest growing, most rapidly changing metropolis the
        American West has ever known. They stroll wide-eyed in the shadows of
        the landmarks of the worlds greatest cities; around them, within
        walking distance of one another, loom replicas of the Eiffel Tower, a
        massive pyramid of Egypt, and the palaces of ancient Rome.
        In a testament to Las Vegass relentless pursuit of
        illusion,its modern visitors never recognize the landmarks that
        originally offered the city its shot at history: its natural springs,
        most of which have long since run empty. Though water flows freely
        through the citys multitude of artificial lakes, lush resort swimming
        areas, and sprinklers quenching the famous golf courses, it now arrives
        via a giant pipeline connected to the Colorado River. Without that
        pipeline, the city would most certainly dry up and crumble back into
        the desert.
        Notable as the only major American city built in the
        twentieth century, Las Vegas is particularly unfettered by any burden
        of history or preservation. As old — some would say historically
        significant — buildings or resorts succumb to the pressures of age,
        design, or simple decline of attendance (and therefore value), the law
        of the city takes over. The buildings are completely remodeled, or, at
        the extreme, reinvented as the sites of grand implosions accompanied by
        fireworks, parties, and general street-wide celebration. Few will
        remember, or perhaps even care, thatthe Italian-themed Venetian
        (complete with Colorado-fed canals) is built upon the site of the Rat
        Packs most famous haunt, the Sands Hotel-Casino. Today, Italy;
        tomorrow, who knows?
        Las Vegas, like every good gambler, has worked hard to
        reinvent and renegotiate its future. After more than a decade of
        conversion from an insider Mob town to a family-friendly attraction for
        Middle America, Las Vegas is again on the verge of its next phase — top
        notch resort city. Todays Las Vegas reigns as one of the worlds most
        popular travel and vacation destinations. World class accommodations,
        five-star dining, and shopping opportunities that rival every major
        city have added immeasurably to the citys reputation for all-night
        gambling, drinking, and adult-oriented temptations. Hotel-casinos have
        repositioned themselves as complete resorts, offering full-service day
        spas, huge shopping malls, and attraction-filled theme parks — all in
        addition to the gambling, golf courses, and showrooms of the past.
        New resorts, such as the Bellagio, are aimed at travelers
        attempting to recapture the glamour of the Rat Pack era, while many
        others are following the lead of Caesars Palace, which offers
        world-class shopping facilities. This trend toward building complete
        resorts is perhaps the best approach attempted in recent years, since
        it offers something for everyone. Always betting on the side of growth,
        expansion, and the power of positive cash flow, Las Vegas has again
        transformed itself and emerged as much more than a water stop for
        thirsty pioneers.
        Such rapid change and reinvention results in what many call
        a city without a soul. But for its over one million residents and 30
        million annual visitors, it is this very characteristic — namely the
        citys uncanny ability to sense the next big thing, or failing that, to
        create one — that makes Las Vegas the city of their dreams. In fact,
        many of the 30 million annual visitors choose to stay. For nearly a
        decade, new residents have numbered almost four thousand per month,
        pushing the recent population of the valley up near 1.3 million — a
        nearly 1000 percent increase since that fateful railroad auction of
        1905.
        Outside the resort corridors, new suburban residential
        developments have swallowed the surrounding desert, eagerly edging to
        the bases of the easterly and westerly mountain ranges. Unlike the
        original American suburbs, new master-planned communities like
        Summerlin and Green Valley are cities within themselves; in fact, they
        boast more square miles and more amenities than Las Vegas itself. New
        businesses spring up almost immediately, built into the plan and ready
        to serve an already-waiting group of customers. Driving through these
        areas feels like traversing a movie set — the homes sparkling and new,
        the roadways smooth and wide, the landscaping young and fragile.
        There are those who leave the city as well. For the four
        thousand a month who come to stay, approximately two thousand others
        pack up their belongings and head elsewhere, still searching for what
        brought them to Las Vegas in the first place. The American Dream is
        alive and well here, but it has little patience for losers. This is
        part of the unrelenting psyche of the place. Although the motto of Las
        Vegas is that everyone is a winner, for the most part, it is a city
        unforgiving of failure.
        Still, despite all this rapid growth, incessant change, and
        unsettling population turnover, there certainly is a core city, and
        there certainly are long-time residents, many who proudly call
        themselves natives.
        Driving in the central city, within a few miles of
        Downtown, one passes the neighborhoods of Charleston Heights and the
        Huntridge, where plaster-walled and wood-floored houses reign, often
        still occupied by the original residents. Not far from these modest
        areas are the citys first upscale developments, Rancho Circle and the
        Scotch 80s. Here, just a short mile or so from Fremont Street and
        Glitter Gulch, are quiet, ranch-style homes spread out over parcels of
        an acre (about 1⁄2 hectare) or more, complete with swimming pools,
        tennis courts, horse corrals, and lush, mature landscaping. These
        neighborhoods, often overlooked as too Downtown by newcomers, are
        what longer established cities would consider treasures.
        It is here, in neighborhoods like these, that a sense of
        the need for continuity and community is emerging. In many core
        neighborhoods of all income classes, voices are being raised about the
        necessity of neighborhood preservation, about community service, and
        about offering broad-based opportunities and experiences for children
        growing up in Sin City. 
        These concerns are not really new to Las Vegas; they had
        simply been overshadowed by growth in recent years. Today, many
        long-time residents as well as newcomers are seeking to regain a sense
        of security in the rapidly changing landscape, a city in which one
        could leave the doors unlocked at night just thirty years ago. Through
        civic organizations and neighborhood preservation groups, they are
        working hard toward a renewal of that sense of community lost in the
        hustle.
        Also beyond the Strip and Downtown lie other signs of a
        real living and breathing metropolis. The University of Nevada-Las
        Vegas boasts a student population over 23,000 (though, like most of the
        people in Las Vegas, they are commuters). Before its recent rapid
        expansion, the city claimed to have more churches per capita than any
        other in the United States. (Apparently spiritual guidance was a
        necessity for those who dwelt among an excess of temptation. )
        And though todays Las Vegas is still dominated by the
        gambling industry, non-gaming business has flourished here as well,
        thanks to the countys and states favorable tax structure. Much of the
        non-gaming business resides in suburban business parks and
        master-planned communities, part of the citys effort to reinvent the
        nature of urban and suburban existence by offering multiple industrial
        and retail centers throughout the valley. Credit card companies and
        banks, mail order firms, health care subsidiaries, and high-tech
        software developers all contribute to a healthy local economy, helping
        to diversify Las Vegas in the face of an ever-changing national
        gambling landscape.
        Moreover, Las Vegas has recently started to show signs of
        maturity in its cultural status as well. Long dismissed as a gaudy
        playground of excess, Las Vegas has seen recent spurts of cultural
        growth. Local theater is healthy, a first-class public art museum
        recently opened, and there are encouraging signs that a centrally
        located arts and retail district known as The Gateway will soon erupt
        from its upstart beginnings into a major draw for residents and
        tourists alike.
        Likewise, Las Vegas remains one of the few cities in the
        nation with two competing daily newspapers. There are also dozens of
        smaller newspapers serving a variety of specific interests, including
        two dueling alternative weeklies.
        As Las Vegas embarks on the new millennium, one can sense
        an attempt by the city to accept its disparities, to come to grips with
        the nature of its own existence and place in America, and to
        thoughtfully wrestle with the challenges of its future. While it
        confronts the issues that all growing cities face — crime, growth,
        challenges to its industry — Las Vegas seems to know that it has within
        its grasp the chance to rank among the worlds great cities, to show
        what Americas only 20th-century metropolis can accomplish.
        Las Vegass transformation from a lowly watering hole to a
        gambling and prostitution stop, to a desert retreat for Hollywood
        heavyweights, and finally to an international resort city is part of an
        eternal metamorphosis. A city living with one eye open to the future
        prevents life here from ever being boring, and also attracts tourists
        by the millions to experience the Las Vegas life, if only for a few
        glittering moments.
      
    
  
