
  
  
    
      
        The Islands and the People
        Theyre French, indisputably spiced with an intriguing
        Caribbean flavor. These perpetually sunny islands are also very
        beautiful in the best tropical manner: a riot of flowers, tangled green
        forests, mountain waterfalls, dramatic rocky headlands, beaches of
        white, tan, or black volcanic sand. And the sunsets are
        breathtaking.
        Each of the islands has an Atlantic and a Caribbean shore
        with the waters hues spanning a mini-spectrum from pale green to
        midnight blue. In the sparkling, unpolluted sea, fishing techniques
        havent changed much since Columbus claimed these remote outposts for
        Spain almost 500 years ago.
        Ashore, fields of sugarcane and banana plantations drape
        steep hills and rolling plains. Volcanoes, hummingbirds, mangroves,
        mongooses, and palm trees complete the picture. The heat is year-round
        (average 25º C/77º F), but so are the trade winds that temper it.
         Our little corner in the Caribbean crows the publicity
        from Paris. Actually, the French West Indies (FWI), or Antilles
        Françaises as theyre called in France, are not at all a neat
        geographical cluster. The few dozen islands and rocks are widely
        scattered along the great curving chain of the Lesser Antilles.
        Guadeloupe and Martinique, much the largest of the islands
        and about 160 km (100 miles) apart, are becoming internationally known
        resorts. To the north, little Saint-Barthélemy and the French side of
        Saint-Martin (the other side is Dutch) have as much charm — without the
        bustle. Though some 256 km (160 miles) away, theyre dependencies of
        Guadeloupe. So are the tiny eastern and southern satellites of La
        Désirade, Marie-Galante, and Les Saintes.
        All of the islands are now officially and proudly part of
        France, not colonies as they were for some three centuries. Martinique
        and Guadeloupe, formal départements since 1946, have recently become
        régions in an administrative reshuffle. Each has a préfet named in
        Paris, and sends three deputies and two senators more than 6,400 km
        (4,000 miles) to sit in the national legislature. To New York, about
        3,000 km (1,900 miles) away, they send back streams of contented
        tourists.
        French Antilles citizens enjoy the same state benefits as
        all French citizens, drink the same famous wines, and eat the same
        cheeses and patés on baguettes just as crustily delicious as those
        turned out by every bakery in the métropole. And yet, despite the
        flocks of familiar French automobiles with yellow headlights, the
        francs and centimes, the gendarmes, cafés, and just-like-Paris little
        shops, youll sense immediately that this is not, nor could it ever be,
        metropolitan France.
        The atmosphere is richer, more exotic: Africans, Asians,
        Indians, and whites of various origins have become absorbed and
        transformed into the fascinating culture known as Creole. By world
        standards, this racially varied society is a model of harmony.
        What will strike you first is the marvelous range of subtly
        different skin tones and facial features. The famous FWI women,
        inevitably wearing bright earrings and flashing colors, manage to be
        both graceful and sensuous as they walk. This is true even when they
        glide along country roads with large bundles balanced on their heads.
        Little girls learn this sure-fire posture-improver very early in
        life.
        In these already overpopulated islands, where Roman
        Catholicism is the predominant religion, the government provides an
        initial lump sum for each birth and a monthly support grant, allocation
        familiale, for each child. Because of the male exodus to France and
        elsewhere in search of jobs, women continue to outnumber men. More than
        half of 800,000 native islanders are children, and the mother is
        traditionally responsible for bringing them up, handling the money, and
        making key domestic decisions.
        Everyone agrees theres a special magic to the Creole soul.
        Smiling readily but somewhat shy about making the first approach, the
        islanders will often overwhelm you with kindness once contact is made.
        Honesty is taken for granted. Youll find a simplicity, a lack of
        complication, about many local people, yet something, too, of the
        sophistication associated with the French.
        Away from tourist resorts and shopping areas, rarely will
        any language be spoken except French and the mystifying Creole patois,
        which, though based on French, is almost incomprehensible to anyone not
        used to it — even non-initiated French-speakers. But people of all ages
        will invariably go out of their way to help a foreigner. The biggest
        marque dattention a tourist can receive is to be invited to a Creole
        home.
        Youll soon notice how easy it is to get a cheerful early
        start on these islands. Punch, the ubiquitous drink of local rum,
        sugarcane syrup, and lime, is popular from dawn to dusk. And along with
        punch, gossiping is a favorite pastime in the FWI. The women and girls
        washing clothes along the river banks are probably doing so if theyre
        not singing. And its a safe bet that in the open-air markets, the
        sales-ladies under the big straw hats are gossiping too — between
        transactions involving such prized local items as guavas, tamarinds,
        red pimentos, and plantains.
        While tropical fruits and vegetables abound, along with a
        satisfying variety of fresh fish, much food in the FWI is imported,
        primarily from France. Nowhere else in the Caribbean can you eat as
        imaginatively or as well. Traditional French dishes are as highly
        esteemed as the spicy specialties of Creole cuisine.
        As on most tropical islands, the pace of life tends to be
        lazy. During the hottest hours, things come to a virtual standstill,
        though the Caribbean siesta is an hour or two shorter than its
        Mediterranean counterpart. It would be folly for a visitor to expect
        American-style efficiency or speedy service; it would be wisest to slip
        into the casual drift of things West Indian. Whether eating, touring,
        or shopping, taking your time will always be rewarding.
        But when the sun goes down and the music starts up, theres
        nothing lazy about the dancing. This is where the biguine began and
        still belongs, along with all manner of other Caribbean rhythms just as
        popular and even more frenzied. They say that if you can understand
        their dancing, youll have begun to understand the Creole soul. Its
        certainly worth trying.
        Not fully discovered and certainly unspoiled, the FWI are
        relative newcomers on the world tourist scene. Though their economic
        well-being is about the most precarious of any part of France, these
        basically agricultural islands can and do provide the scenery, the sun,
        the sea, and the sand in sufficient quantity to attract rapidly growing
        numbers of vacationers looking for fun, relaxation, and... something
        different.
      
    
  
