
  
  
    
      
        The Jungle
        To go to Malaysia without setting foot in the jungle would
        be to miss an essential beauty of the country. A walk in the jungle can
        be a rare sensual pleasure. Sounds flood in from all sides: the buzz
        and whine of crickets, the chatter of squirrels, the poop-poop-poop of
        hornbills, the cries of gibbon apes. You are likely to see everything
        from the deep gloom of the densest forest to the sudden brilliant burst
        of sun in a clearing, playing endless variations on the textures and
        myriad shades of green in the surrounding vegetation.
        Five Kinds of Jungle
        Variations in soil, slope, and altitude give rise to five
        different types of forest:
        Mangrove forest. Mangrove trees and shrubs grow on coastal
        marshland in the brackish zone between the sea and fresh water. The
        dense undergrowth of their aerial prop roots perform natural land
        reclamation. The fruit and leaves feed crabs whose waste products in
        turn feed fish, prawns, and mollusks. The mangroves distinctive
        companion is the low, trunkless nipa palm, whose curtain of fronds has
        traditionally provided roofing material for coastal huts.
        Freshwater swamp. Abundant fruit trees in the fertile
        alluvium of river plains attract prolific wildlife. Peat swamp, found
        in the southern half of the peninsula and in Sarawak on Borneo, is less
        fertile but rich in hardwood timber. Where swamp gives way to dry land,
        you will see the fascinating, monstrous strangler-figs.
        Dipterocarp forest. The botanical term refers to the
        two-winged fruit (similar to the key of the common sycamore) borne by
        a large number of the forests tallest trees. This dry-land rainforest
        is what you will see most frequently from just above sea level up to an
        altitude of 900 m (3,000 ft). Its wealth of trees is remarkable,
        including the tualang, found both in the northern half of the peninsula
        and in Sabah and Sarawak. The Borneo ironwood or belian produces the
        worlds densest, hardest timber after the South African ironwood. But
        Sabah boasts the fastest-growing tree in the world: an acacia-like
        Albizzia falcataria, which was clocked from germinated seed to almost
        11 m (over 35 ft) in just 13 months.
        Heath forest. Poor soil on the flat terrain leading to
        foothills or on sandy mountain-ridges produces only low, stunted trees
        with thick leaves. The heath forest is remarkable for its profound
        silence compared with the jungles incessant din.
        Montane forest. At 1,200 m (4,000 ft) and above in large
        mountain ranges, or as low as 600 m (2,000 ft) on small isolated
        mountains, the large trees and liana creepers give way to myrtle,
        laurel, and oak trees. Wild raspberries appear along with magnolias,
        rhododendrons, orchids, and other epiphytes (plants that grow on other
        plants but are not parasites, since they procure their own food
        supply). One of the most intriguing specimens of montane flora (also
        found in the heath forest) is the pitcher plant (see page 125).
        Animal Life
        Unlike the wildlife of the African plain, most of the
        animals of the Malaysian jungle are not very conspicuous. Tigers and
        leopards remain rare. Plus, the elephants, rhinos, tigers, and bears of
        Malaysia are the smallest of their kind.
        Elephant. There are about 1,000 elephants on the peninsula,
        and twice that number in eastern Sabah. A few have been domesticated
        for plantation work. They are daintier beasts than their African
        cousins.
        Rhinoceros. Scarcely a hundred Sumatran Rhino remain; the
        best place to see them is at the Sepilok sanctuary, where controlled
        breeding may combat the ravages of poaching. To see it in its wild or
        semi-wild state, try the Sungai Dusun Wildlife Reserve northwest of KL,
        or in the Tabin reserve in eastern Sabah.
        Tapir. This animal is remarkable for two features: its
        short, overlapping snout that resembles the sawed-off trunk of an
        elephant, and its unique body coloring — black up front, white in the
        middle and back, black rear legs. It is found only on the peninsula.
        Your best chance to see it is at the Ampang reserve near Kuala Lumpur
        or at Taman Negara.
        Deer. Most common are the tiny mouse-deer. These timid
        nocturnal beasts sport a brown coat speckled with white. The largest
        Malaysian deer is the brown antlered sambar. Another shy creature, you
        might spot it at the edge of the forest or on river banks. The barking
        deer, so-called because it bays like a dog when threatened by
        predators, wears a shiny reddish-brown coat.
        Tiger. The few Malaysian tigers left roaming the peninsula
        are the smallest of the breed, weighing only 200 kg (440 lb), 100 kg
        (220 lb) less than the Indian or Chinese tiger.
        Leopard. The classic spotted yellow or black coat of the
        leopard may be seen not only in the jungle but also around plantations
        and farms. The smaller clouded leopard hunts up in the trees, enjoying
        a varied diet of monkeys, baby orang-utans, birds, and squirrels. The
        leopard-cat is not a lot bigger than a domestic cat and may nip in and
        out of villages.
        Proboscis monkey. Unique to Borneo, the male sports the
        splendid pendulous nose that gives this species its name. It is also
        the male who emits a formidable honk through its nose at times of great
        excitement or alarm. The females nose is an unremarkable little snub,
        but zoologists say that she appreciates, and is even aroused by, the
        males proboscis. They can best be seen on the lower Kinabatangan river
        in eastern Sabah and the Bako and Samunsan nature reserves in
        Sarawak.
        Orang-utan. In Malay, orang-utan means forest person — an
        appropriate mark of respect for the mammal biologically closest to man.
        These highly intelligent, russet-colored apes live in the swamp forests
        of Sabah and Sarawak, and are best seen in eastern Sabahs Sepilok
        wildlife reserve. They are very individualistic nomads, meeting
        occasionally to share a fruit supper before going their own way. Some
        visitors to Sepilok confuse them with the similarly colored red-leaf
        monkeys — but unlike monkeys, orang-utans have no tails.
      
    
  
