
  
  
    
      
        Where to Go
        Dublin is a compact city, and many of its important sites
        are within easy walking distance of one another. There is also an
        excellent bus service that will take you to attractions away from the
        city center. You can get bus information from the Dublin Bus Office in
        Upper OConnell Street or from the Dublin Tourism Centre in Suffolk
        Street. The DART (railway) travels north and south along the coast, a
        pleasant scenic ride. Car rental is quite expensive, and, with
        congested traffic and parking problems, is not a good choice within the
        city, though you may wish to use a car to explore places in the
        environs (see Day Trips from Dublin on pages 66–78). There are,
        however, many bus tours to outlying destinations.
        A good orientation exercise is to start with an organized
        sightseeing tour with Dublin Bus from Upper OConnell Street or Bus
        Éireann from the Travel Centre at Busáras in Store Street. Your first
        port of call should be Dublin Tourism in Suffolk Street in the former
        St. Andrews Church (Monday–Saturday 9am–5:30pm); there is also an
        office in OConnell Street. Youll find maps, leaflets, and other
        useful information there; you can also arrange accommodation and book
        tours, theater tickets, and other entertainment. In addition, Dublin
        Tourism has devised and signposted three self-guided walking tours of
        the city, which you can follow using the booklets provided.
        Around Grafton Street
        Grafton Street, south of the river, is Dublins main
        shopping street. Youll probably often find yourself on this central
        pedestrian thoroughfare, crowded with shoppers, visitors, sightseers,
        and street entertainers. Its lined with stores like Brown Thomas,
        Laura Ashley, and Marks and Spencer. The original Bewleys Oriental
        Café is here; after 100 years, it has become something of an
        institution, and is the most interesting of the eight branches in the
        city. The windows to the rear of its faded Art Deco ground floor were
        designed by the stained-glass artist Harry Clarke. It also has a museum
        and theater. Down the narrow alley beside Bewleys is St. Teresas
        Church, with stained-glass windows by Phyllis Burke, and a fine
        sculpture by John Hogan. Catherine McAuley, who founded the Sisters of
        Mercy to help the poor of Dublin, attended mass here — its her face
        you see on the Irish five pound note.
        A number of more recent shopping complexes are set around
        the Grafton Street area (see page 21). The upscale Powerscourt
        Townhouse Centre is probably the most interesting (a sign points the
        way just beyond Bewleys to the Clarendon Street entrance). This 1770s
        mansion was formerly the residence of viscount Powerscourt and still
        possesses some magnificent plasterwork, particularly in the rear exit
        hall. The building has been tastefully converted, with a pleasant
        glass-roofed central courtyard surrounded with balconies. There are
        many cafés and restaurants, and you can shop on the various levels for
        antiques, crafts, and clothes. At the top is an art gallery with
        changing exhibitions. In the summer months there is a program of
        lunchtime recitals.
        Next to the shopping center, in South William Street, is the
        small and eclectic Dublin Civic Museum (see page 58), an unassuming
        record of Dublin life over the years.
        At the top of Grafton Street, where it meets busy Nassau
        Street, you will see Jean Rynharts statue of Molly Malone, subject of
        the well-known 18th-century ballad, with her barrow and a very low
        décolletage. Erected in 1988 to celebrate Dublins millennium as a
        city, it has become known to irreverent Dubliners as the Tart with the
        Cart. 
        Down the street from the statue is the Bank of Ireland (see
        page 57), built in 1729 to house the Irish parliament. The building is
        really a series of additions to an original structure, although the
        overall effect is one of elegance and superb proportion. The Corinthian
        portico was designed by James Gandon, who was also responsible for the
        Custom House on the north bank of the Liffey. Plans to house parliament
        here after Independence came to nothing; Leinster House (in Kildare
        Street) was chosen instead. Behind the bank in Foster Place is the
        intimate Bank of Ireland Arts Centre, which hosts a variety of
        exhibitions, plays, and concerts.
        Trinity College
        Across College Street is Trinity College. Founded in 1592
        to educate the Protestant Anglo-Irish ascendancy, it was formerly
        regarded as a place somewhat apart from Irish affairs. All that has
        changed, however, and today the university is one of the geographical
        and social hubs of the city, attracting students of all creeds and
        nationalities from around the world. Famous graduates include Jonathan
        Swift, Oliver Goldsmith, Bram Stoker, Oscar Wilde, and Samuel Beckett;
        resistance heroes Robert Emmet and Wolf Tone also studied here.
        The university sits on College Green, an island of
        magnificent buildings, open squares, and green spaces, surrounded by a
        sea of traffic. Walk through the gates of the 100-m- (300-ft-) high
        west front, designed by Theodore Jacobsen and built in 1752. The
        statues on either side are of Edmund Burke and Oliver Goldsmith. You
        are welcome to explore or take a tour around College Green, but some of
        the buildings may be closed, depending on the time of year.
        Front Square and Parliament Square, dating from the 18th
        century, are surrounded by the Chapel, Dining Hall, Examination Hall,
        Reading Room, and anchored by the splendid Campanile. On your left the
        Dining Hall, designed by Richard Castle, has been falling down ever
        since it was finished in the 1740s and has undergone frequent
        rebuilding. It was beautifully restored after a damaging fire in 1984.
        The late 18th-century Chapel displays some fine plasterwork and
        dazzling stained-glass windows, together with a 20th-century organ in
        an 18th-century case.
        Opposite, and from the same era, is the Examination Hall,
        where concerts are given occasionally when no examinations are in
        progress, but is otherwise rarely open to the public (look through the
        spy hole in the door! ). The beautiful stucco ceiling is by Michael
        Stapleton (who is also responsible for the ceilings in the Dublin
        Writers Museum).
        Among the paintings is a portrait of Archbishop James
        Usher, who donated the Book of Kells (see below) to the University
        Library. Both the Chapel and Examination Hall were designed by Sir
        William Chambers, the architect responsible for Marino Casino (see page
        74).
        The 30-m- (100-ft-) high Campanile, built in 1853 by Sir
        Charles Lanyon, houses the universitys bells. It is impossible to miss
        the huge Reclining Connected Forms by Henry Moore in Library Square, or
        Alexander Calders Cactus behind the Old Library in Fellows Square.
        Architect Paul Koraleks 1967 Berkeley Library, fronted by Arnaldo
        Pomodoros Sphere Within Sphere, fits seamlessly into the earlier
        buildings. The eastern side of the square once housed Oliver
        Goldsmiths rooms (renovated in Victorian times, little of the
        18th-century building remains).
        Trinitys most important possession is the ninth-century
        Book of Kells. The new exhibition, Turning Darkness into Light is in
        the Colonnades beneath the Old Library. It begins with a series of
        lighted panels illustrating the manuscript. The book itself is
        displayed along with the Book of Durrow, the Book of Armagh, or another
        illuminated manuscript; pages of the books are turned every six weeks.
        The exhibition is tremendously popular, so be prepared for some long
        lines at the entrance. Upstairs is the impressive Long Room, or Old
        Library, opened in 1732. A barrel-ceilinged chamber 64 m(209 ft ) long,
        with windows along both sides, it holds Trinitys oldest books,
        including a Shakespeare folio. There is an elaborate gift shop at the
        entrance to the exhibition. (Open Monday–Saturday 9:30am–4:30pm, Sunday
        noon–4:30pm; adults IR£4.50, students IR£3, children free; IR£6 with
        Dublin Experience — see below. )
        Across Fellows Square in the modern Arts Building is a
        wide-screen audio-visual show about the history of Dublin, the Dublin
        Experience, a good introduction for those unfamiliar with Irish culture
        or Dublins history. (Hourly shows daily, from 10am–5pm, also available
        in French, German, and Italian; Sunday noon–5pm; adults IR£3, children
        IR£2.50; IR£6 combined with the Book of Kells).
        Also in the Arts Building is the Douglas Hyde Gallery, a
        modern two-level exhibition space — its the place to go for the
        cutting edge in Irish and international art (open Monday–Friday
        11am–6pm; Thursday until 7pm, Saturday 11am–4:45pm; lectures Wednesday
        1:15pm, tours noon Saturday; free).
        Dawson and Kildare Streets
        The Provosts House on the southwest corner of College
        Green was built in the late 18th century and is one of the finest
        houses in the city. The rooms inside are beautiful, but the building is
        not open to visitors.
        From College Green head down Nassau Street (site of many
        interesting crafts and other shops), then turn right into Dawson
        Street. Here youll find bookshops, boutiques, and another shopping
        complex, this one built on the site of the Royal Hibernian Hotel and
        naturally called the Royal Hibernian Way.
        St. Annes Church (facing Anne Street South) has some
        colorful 19th-century stained glass, and provides the setting for
        lunchtime concerts (look for the notices in the vestibule). A few doors
        down is the charming Mansion House, official residence of the mayor of
        Dublin since 1715. The house was built in 1710 for an 18th-century
        property speculator, one Joshua Dawson, for whom the street was named.
        Right behind it is the Round Room, where in 1919 the Irish parliament
        adopted the Declaration of Independence.
        Turn down Molesworth Street to reach Kildare Street, where
        you will see the entrance to Leinster House, once home of the earls of
        Kildare, and now home to the Irish parliament. This building is
        believed by some to have provided the basis for the design of
        Washingtons White House in the United States, which was the work of
        Irish architect James Hoban in 1870. On the west side of the street is
        the entrance to the National Library and next to it is the National
        Museum (see page 64). Tickets and advance notice are required for the
        reading rooms of the library; the more than half-million items here are
        a vast archive of the nation. Exhibitions are often held in the
        splendid entrance hall.
        Deane & Woodward, the architects responsible for the
        library and museum, also built the Kildare Street Club, in 1861. This
        marvelous Victorian-Gothic building is famous for the fanciful stone
        carvings around the base of its pillars (one pillar, reputedly
        depicting the club members, shows monkeys playing billiards). The club
        itself was a bastion of Ascendancy establishment. The building now
        houses the Heraldic Museum and Genealogical Office, with exhibits on
        the history of heraldry. The consulting service of the office of
        Irelands Chief Herald will help you trace your own ancestry, and if
        you have a couple of thousand pounds to spare, you can apply for a
        grant of arms. (Open Monday–Wednesday 10am–5:30pm, and Thursday–Friday
        10:30–4pm, Saturday 10:30am–12:30pm. )
        Walk to the bottom of Kildare Street and you will reach St.
        Stephens Green, formerly an open common, but enclosed in 1663 and now
        a 9-hectare (22-acre) park in the heart of the city surrounded by some
        beautiful buildings. It is the oldest green in Dublin, dating back to
        medieval times, although formally laid out as a public park only in
        1880. Its a popular and often crowded place. The Green contains large
        formal lawns with ornate gardens, a lake, duck ponds, a bandstand, and
        a childrens playground.
        Entering the park from St. Stephens Green North you will
        come across the Wolfe Tone memorial opposite the famous Shelbourne
        Hotel (1824), and behind it a work entitled Famine, both by sculptor
        Edward Delaney. Facing St. Stephens Green South is Marjorie
        Fitzgibbons bust of James Joyce. Working your way around the park, you
        will see the 1907 Fusiliers Arch at the Grafton Street corner.
        The St. Stephens Green Shopping Complex at the south end
        of Grafton Street, a pseudo-Victorian iron-and-glass structure, was
        built in the 1980s, and has been christened The Wedding Cake by
        Dubliners. It houses a wide selection of shops and stalls as well as a
        pub and restaurant on the top floor.
        Halfway down the west side of the green is the massive
        Georgian Royal College of Surgeons, built in 1806. Those chips in the
        stonework are bullet holes from the 1916 Easter Rising — the building
        was occupied by independence fighters led by Countess Markievicz; you
        may have seen a bust of the countess in the Green.
        One of Dublins best-kept secrets is the lovely Iveagh
        Gardens, accessible from Clonmel Street via Harcourt Street or from
        behind the National Concert Hall off Earlsfort Terrace. Designed as a
        series of pleasure gardens in the Italianate style in 1865, with
        cascades, spectacular fountains, and rustic grottoes, an ongoing
        restoration hopes to bring them back to the original plan. The gardens
        were opened to the public in 1991.
        The Georgian curve of Harcourt Street (constructed in 1775)
        was once home to George Bernard Shaw (numbers 60–61). The Shaw
        Birthplace Museum (see page 66), 33 Synge Street, is marked by a plaque
        written by the great man himself. From here it is a short walk,
        following the signs, to the Irish-Jewish Museum in Walworth Road (see
        page 60).
        Back along the south side of St. Stephens Green there
        begins a fine array of buildings. The first is the University Church,
        built in 1853 by Cardinal Henry Newman, then rector of University
        College. The interior is decorated in Byzantine style and is strangely
        compelling. It is a very popular venue for weddings.
        Next door, numbers 85 and 86 comprise the exquisite Newman
        House, part of University College (guided tours June–August
        Tuesday–Friday noon–5pm, Saturday 2–5pm, Sunday 11am–2pm; other times
        by arrangement; closed Monday; entrance IR£2, children IR£1). Number 85
        dates from 1740 and contains the famous Apollo Room, with panels
        depicting Apollo and the muses, and the magnificent Rococo salon, both
        by the La Francini brothers, who also worked on Russborough House (see
        page 72). Number 86 next door, largely the work of Robert West, has
        even more elaborate ornamentation.
        James Joyce was a student here, and, towards the end of his
        life, the poet Gerard Manley Hopkins lectured here. One of the
        classrooms Joyce attended can be seen on the guided tour, and Hopkinss
        room has been restored. There is a very pleasant terrace and in the
        basement is The Commons, which ranks among the best restaurants in
        Dublin.
        Just beyond Newman House is Iveagh House, home to the Irish
        governments Department of Foreign Affairs, but closed to the public.
        Both Newman House and Iveagh House were designed by Richard Castle.
        Beyond Iveagh House in Earlsfort Terrace (turn south) is
        the National Concert Hall, of impressive proportions and uncertain
        acoustics — its a conversion of an old Examination Hall of University
        College.
        Back at the northeast corner of St. Stephens Green, near
        the Shelbourne Hotel, you can turn right into Merrion Row to peer
        through the railings at the small Huguenot Cemetery (no entry to
        visitors). The cemetery dates back to 1693, when French Protestants,
        fleeing persecution in their native land, settled in Dublin, bringing
        with them their architectural and weaving skills, which greatly
        enriched their adopted city.
        Old Dublin
        Temple Bar
        Between the river and Dame Street, is the Temple Bar area,
        which has become famous for its nightlife andstreetlife. Here you will
        find narrow cobbled lanes dating from the 18th century — partly
        pedestrianized and fairl y free of traffic — some original
        architecture, and many lively pubs, clubs, cafés, and restaurants.
        Temple Bar is also home to a wealth of artists and
        musicians, and there are crafts and art workshops, galleries, and music
        centers. It has mercifully escaped urban renewal, although a new
        housing project does loom at its far west end.
        You can enter Temple Bar from Dame Street, or from Fleet
        Street (off Westmoreland), or you can walk through Merchants Arch,
        opposite the picturesque Hapenny Bridge, into Temple Bar Square.
        Continuing along Temple Bar, youll come to Eustace Street and Meeting
        House Square. Most of the cultural centers that make Temple Bar
        interesting are located in this area. The first of these to open was
        the Irish Film Centre (see page 92) in Eustace Street, with its popular
        café/bar. Also in Eustace Street is an information office and a
        cultural center for children, The Ark (see page 95). On Meeting House
        Square is the Gallery of Photography (see page 59) and the recently
        opened National Photo Archive (open Monday–Friday 10am–5pm), both with
        exhibition spaces. On Curved Street, the Arthouse Multimedia Centre for
        the Arts brings art and multimedia together, hosting changing
        exhibitions and offering courses and workshops (open Monday–Saturday,
        9:30am–6:30pm, closed Sunday; café open 10am–10:30pm). Across the
        street, the Temple Bar Music Centre is a resource center for music,
        media, and stage production (see page 92). In its new building, the
        Project Arts Center, 39 East Essex Street, displays the most
        avant-garde in painting and sculpture; it has a performance space
        upstairs. If you want to see whats happening tomorrow, this is
        definitely the place to come.
        On Temple Bars southern boundary, Dame Street, is a gem of
        Victorian architecture, the Olympia Theatre (see page 92). Built in
        1870, its canopy of stained glass and cast iron is the oldest in
        Dublin; its enthusiastic interior decoration is also typical of the
        era. Happily, the restored theater leads a bustling, active life, with
        a regular schedule of plays and concerts. Just across the way is
        Dublins City Hall, built originally as the Royal Exchange in
        1769–1777. This fine building with its Corinthian portico was designed
        by Thomas Cooley. The building was undergoing restoration at press
        time. Just west of City Hall is one of Dublins most important historic
        sites, Dublin Castle.
        Dublin Castle
        Today, as you walk through the Great Gate into the spacious
        Georgian yard, Dublin Castle (see page 79 for hours and admissions)
        looks serene and imposing. For seven centuries the real and symbolic
        center of British military and social power, it is a monument that
        still has resonance for Dubliners. The castle has been built and
        rebuilt, and little remains of the original Anglo-Norman structure.
        Supposedly it sits on the site of the Dubh Linn (Black Pool) that gave
        Dublin its name.
        The guided tour commences with the State Apartments on the
        south side of the building. Lavishly furnished and decorated, with much
        original period furniture, the rooms are used for ceremonial events,
        visits from foreign dignitaries, and EU meetings. The Connolly Room is
        so called because it was here that the wounded James Connolly spent his
        last night before being executed for his part in the Easter Rising.
        Note the beautiful ceiling in the Granard Room. It was moved here from
        Mespil House and is called the Hibernia Ceiling.  The Drawing Room
        was partially destroyed by fire in 1941, and its furnishings are
        faithful reproductions; the huge (repaired) Ming punch bowl is
        striking.
        A magnificent carpet, with a design based on a page from
        the Book of Kells, (see page 25), covers the floor of the Throne Room.
        The rather large throne was last used in 1911 by George V. In the
        lovely Picture Gallery, convex wall mirrors made it possible for the
        host at table to keep his eye on everyone, particularly the servants.
        The Wedgewood Room contains a Phoenix carpet given by De Valera, and
        plaques by English sculptor John Flaxman and Danish sculptor Berthel
        Thorwaldsen. The enormous Saint Patricks Hall with its painted ceiling
        by Vincenzo Valdre contains the banners and coats of arms of the now
        defunct Knights of St. Patrick. It is used for the inauguration of the
        Irish president.
        Perhaps the most interesting part of the tour is the
        underground excavation of the Viking and Norman Defenses. Visitors can
        stand in the dry bed of the old moat, traverse imaginative gangways
        over the encroaching river (the Poddle, not the Liffey), and view the
        stairs where boats once brought provisions to the castle. In the
        restored Treasury (built in 1715 and located in the Lower Yard), browse
        in the bookshop or relax in the pleasant self-service Castle Vaults
        Bistro and Patisserie.
        The oldest remaining part of the castle is the Record Tower
        (1258), visible as you leave the upper yard. The Gothic-revival
        19th-century Church of the Most Holy Trinity, adjacent to the tower,
        has stone work by Edward Smyth and a fan-vaulted ceiling. The newest
        addition to the castle precinct is the Chester Beatty Library, which
        moved here from Ballsbridge (see page 58).
        Christ Church Cathedral and Environs
        Farther up the hill on Castle Street from the Great Gate is
        the first of Dublins two major cathedrals, Christ Church Cathedral in
        Christchurch Place (see page 79 for hours and admissions). Standing,
        like the castle, on an eminence, the cathedral rises on the site of
        King Sitrics 11th-century wooden church. The foundations date back to
        the 1170s when Strongbow, the earl of Pembroke, had it rebuilt as a
        stone structure. By 1558, after Henry VIIIs break with the Roman
        Catholic Church, all the existing foundations in Dublin had become
        Anglican (see page 14).
        Unfortunately, the church building was massively and
        unsympathetically restored in 1871–1878, when most of the original
        interior was ripped out. However, there is still much to appreciate in
        Christ Church, including the impressive stonework, soaring nave, and
        the handsome 19th-century encaustic floor tiles based on a 13th-century
        pattern. Strongbows tomb is in the church; and in the Chapel of St.
        Loo is a somewhat macabre artifact, the embalmed heart of Saint
        Lawrence OToole, the influential 12th-century archbishop of Dublin,
        which is kept in a cage suspended on the wall near the altar.
        The large, vaulted medieval crypt is the oldest structure
        in Dublin. In the crypt you can see a forest of heavy, rough stone
        pillars supporting the upper church, and displays that include stocks
        dating from 1670, medieval carved stones, and an odd exhibit — a
        mummified cat and a rat, found in the organ pipes.
        In the old Synod Hall just across the road from the
        cathedral (linked to it by a bridge) you will find Dublinia, a rather
        touristy sight-and-sound re-creation (in five languages) of Dublin in
        medieval times; tableaux of medieval craftsmen and characters cover
        events in the city from the Anglo-Norman invasion (1170) to the
        dissolution of the monasteries (1540). (Open April–September daily
        10am–5pm, October–March 11am–4pm [Sunday 10am–4:30pm]; entrance fee:
        adults IR£4, children IR£2.90. ) Upstairs is a gift shop and the
        entrance to the connecting walkway to the cathedral; you can climb the
        tower, which has an interesting view of the surroundings.
        In Fishamble Street, leading downhill to the river, a
        plaque commemorates the first performance of Handels Messiah, which
        took place in the Music Hall (now an old steelworks) on 13 April 1742.
        Wood Quay, on the south bank of the river (downhill from the arch and
        dominated by the featureless offices of the Dublin Corporation), is the
        site of the original Viking settlement and its clever recreation, The
        Viking Adventure (Tuesday–Saturday 10am–4:30pm, closed Sunday and
        Monday; adults IR£4.95, children IR£2.50, family IR£13). Construction
        of the offices obliterated much of the archaeological dig which had
        unearthed the original layout of the ninth-century quay, but the Viking
        artifacts that were found are on view in the National Museum (see page
        64) and in the Viking Adventure exhibit.
        A short distance from the cathedral on High Street are the
        two St. Audoens Churches. The restored Church of Ireland St. Audoens
        is the older of the two (c. 1190) and is the only truly medieval church
        in the city. (Tours July–September, daily 9:30am–4:30pm, weekends only
        May and June, closed October–April; IR£1.50. ) Next door is the narrow,
        lofty Neoclassical façade of Catholic St. Audoens, built in 1847. Both
        churches stand beside what remains of the old city walls, and St.
        Audoens is the only surviving gate. In medieval times the High Cross
        of the Norman city, where decrees and notices of excommunication were
        read out, stood on the High Street. Granite markers erected in 1991
        indicate the line of the old city walls.
        West from here in Thomas Street, a plaque on the
        decommissioned and rather sad St. Catherines Church (built in 1769)
        marks the spot where famed Irish resistance hero Robert Emmet was
        hanged in 1803. Thomas Street West turns into Jamess Street, where the
        Guinness Brewery has been situated since 1759, and nearby in Crane
        Street is the Guinness Hopstore (see page 60).
        The Liberties
        The area known as the Liberties was so named because it was
        situated outside the medieval city walls and was run by local courts,
        free of city regulations on trade. Across from the two St. Audoens,
        two interesting streets run off High Street. Francis Street is lined
        with antiques stores, and in Back Lane is a large covered market,
        Mother Redcaps Market (see page 85).
        Also in Back Lane are the headquarters of An Taisce, an
        organization dedicated to the preservation of historic buildings and
        gardens. Appropriately, its home is the delightful Tailors Hall, the
        oldest guild hall in Ireland, once used by hosier and barber-surgeons
        guilds as well as by the tailors. It dates from 1706, and is one of the
        few remaining original Queen Anne buildings in Dublin.
        The Liberties area, once a slum, is rapidly gentrifying,
        with new housing and restoration of the original small red-brick
        houses.
        St. Patricks Cathedral
        At the eastern end of Back Lane and turning right, Nicholas
        Street becomes Patrick Street, and in St. Patricks Close is St.
        Patricks Cathedral (see page 42). This is the oldest Christian site in
        Dublin — St. Patrick himself is reputed to have baptized converts on
        this spot (marked by a Celtic cross in the nave), suggesting that there
        has been a church here from around a.d. 450. In the adjoining St.
        Patricks Park is a marker showing the site of St. Patricks Well.
        The height and space of the cathedral are impressive. Note
        the carved helmets and swords set above the choir stalls and the
        19th-century tiled floor, similar to the one in Christ Church. The 90-m
        (300-ft) interior makes it the longest church in the country. The 43-m
        (141-ft) tower holds the largest ringing peal of bells in Ireland. Not
        much is left of the original construction of 1191: Destroyed in a fire
        in the 14th century, it was later rebuilt, and even includes some
        Victorian restoration work, though not as extensive as that in Christ
        Church. The cathedral has had a varied and interesting history, and
        enjoys a lively, friendly rivalry with Christ Church, only a few
        hundred yards away (St. Patricks is the national cathedral of the
        Church of Ireland). From 1320, until it was closed by Henry VIII, St.
        Patricks was the seat of Irelands first university. Cromwellian
        troops stabled their horses in the aisles.
        The great Jonathan Swift was dean here from 1713 to 1745.
        He was much revered for his charity and his championship of the Irish
        cause. You can see his grave and that of his great love, Esther
        Johnson, as well as the pulpit from which he preached. On the wall is
        his epitaph, written by himself.
        An interesting artifact from the medieval chapter house is
        a door with a hole in it. The hole was cut in 1492 by Lord Kildare so
        he could reassure his archenemy Lord Ormonde, who was under siege in
        the chapter house, of his friendly intentions. Kildare put his arm
        through the hole, thus giving rise to the common expression to chance
        your arm. 
        Also in the close (left from the cathedral exit) is Marshs
        Library, the first public library in Ireland, founded in 1701 and
        holding more than 25,000 books. (Open Monday and Wednesday–Friday
        10am–12:45pm and 2–5pm, Saturday 10:30am–12:45pm; free, but a voluntary
        contribution is appreciated; ring bell for entrance). The oak shelving
        is original, as are the metal cages in which scholars were locked so as
        to prevent thefts. The on-premises bindery repairs and restores old
        books and manuscripts. Even if you arent a scholar, do come here — the
        atmosphere and beauty of the place is entrancing.
        Georgian Dublin
        Much of the rich history and surviving architecture of
        Dublin comes from the Georgian period. It may seem somewhat arbitrary
        to designate one area of the city as Georgian — Georgian architecture
        is found all over; however, the harmonious streets and squares lying to
        the southeast of Nassau Street truly deserve the title. In addition to
        the superb buildings, there are several important museums and galleries
        to visit, and the banks of the Grand Canal provide leafy, shaded
        walks.
        Merrion Square
        Clare Street, at the eastern end of Nassau Street, runs
        into Merrion Square North, where youll find some of the finest houses.
        The square dates from 1762; houses here were the homes of high society,
        including many members of parliament and famous artists and writers.
        Look for individual details on the houses — the painted doors, the
        fanlights, and the door knockers, some in the form of a fish or a human
        hand.
        Number 8 belongs to Irelands Royal Institute of
        Architects. The Institute displays a permanent exhibition of the best
        work of Irish architects, as well as holding frequent temporary
        exhibitions on all aspects of architecture (open Monday–Friday
        9:30am–5pm, closed Sat­urday and Sunday). The Irish Architectural
        Archive, a library of architectural materials, is at number 73 on the
        south side of the square.
        On Merrion Square West is the National Gallery of Ireland
        (see page 63), which provides tickets for free 40-minute tours of the
        restored Government Buildings in Upper Merrion Street (tours Saturday
        only from 10:30am–3:30pm; no pre-booking required). Refurbished in
        1990–1991 and housing the offices and meeting rooms of the Taoiseach
        (prime minister) and his cabinet, the interior rooms of the buildings
        are a fascinating and tasteful combination of the old and the new.
        Along with the latest technology, the prime ministers office has a
        superb Bossi marble fireplace, as well as a fine display of art and
        crafts.
        A magnificent Evie Hone stained-glass window adorns the
        landing in the main entrance; it is beautifully complemented by the
        carpet and balustrade designed by Mary Fitzgerald. There is some
        excellent contemporary furniture and a miniature of Oisín Kellys
        sculpture The Children of Lir. Outside, the courtyard is paved in
        limestone tram-setts from the streets of Old Dublin.
        Also in Merrion Street, next to the front garden of
        Leinster House, is the Victorian collection of the Natural History
        Museum (see page 64).
        Enter one of the many gates of Merrion Square Park and walk
        along some of the secret, wooded paths to the immaculately groomed
        gardens. Dont miss Danny Osbornes statue of Oscar Wilde, wearing a
        smoking jacket with red lapels and reclining on a rock in the northeast
        corner of the park. At the height of the Great Famine in 1845– 1847, a
        soup kitchen was set up here to feed the starving. Youll want to
        return here to browse the Boulevard Galleries of art set up around
        the square on summer weekends.
        Fitzwilliam Square and Ballsbridge
        Take time to stroll down the streets around Merrion Square,
        which were laid out at the same time as the square. At the eastern end
        of Upper Mount Street youll notice the distinctive shape of the
        Greek-revival St. Stephens Church, which dates back to 1824. For
        obvious reasons it is known universally as the Peppercanister Church;
        occasional events and concerts are held here. Lower Fitzwilliam Street,
        at the southeast corner of Merrion Square, houses the offices of the
        Electricity Supply Board. They tried to make up for the ugliness of
        their new building by restoring Number Twenty Nine as a museum
        representing a typical bourgeois house of the period (see page 65).
        The street crosses Lower Baggot Street and leads on to
        Fitzwilliam Square, which has a park open to residents only. The last
        of Dublins Georgian squares to be built, it was completed by 1830,
        although the older houses date back to 1714. Here, as elsewhere in
        Georgian Dublin, note the doorways and fanlights, and the ironwork of
        the balconies.
        Back in Baggot Street is the main office of the Bank of
        Ireland. The road was named after Baggotrath Castle, which stood here
        until the early 19th century. At Baggot Street Bridge you will find the
        headquarters of Bord Fáilte (Irish Tourist Board). If you turn right
        along the towpath of the canal, you can chat to Patrick Kavanagh,
        sitting on a bench: Actually, its a life-size bronze commemorating the
        Irish poet, who died in 1967.
        The Grand Canal was begun in 1755. The pleasant towpath
        walk, under a canopy of leaves, goes past the gardens of terraced
        houses, offices, and apartment buildings. There are plenty of ducks,
        moorhens, and swans and the canal is spanned by the very distinctive
        curves of the 18th-century bridges. This is a good place to rest and
        recuperate, and gain a different slant on life in the city; you may
        come upon the Barge Café, which travels up and down the canal, and
        serves breakfast and brown-bag lunches. If you want more information
        about the canals, you can visit the Waterways Visitor Center, on Grand
        Canal Quay (see page 66).
        Beyond Baggot Street Bridge to the east is the suburb of
        Ballsbridge, at the heart of which are the grounds of the Royal Dublin
        Society where the famous Dublin (Kerrygold) Horse Show takes place. The
        society was founded in 1731, and established among other things, the
        National Gallery and the National Library. All sorts of events and
        concerts are held at the showground. On the corner of Elgin and
        Pembroke Road is the American Embassy, a curious round building,
        conceived by an American and Irish architect in 1964.
        North of the River
        Dublin north of the Liffey has its own atmosphere and, like
        the southern part of the city, some magnificent buildings, museums, and
        Dublins two most important theaters, the Abbey and the Gate.
        Crossing OConnell Bridge, there are fine views along the
        river: The Custom House is on the right and to the left is the equally
        splendid Four Courts. The bridge was built in 1790 and widened until it
        was almost square in 1880. It is difficult to know which direction to
        follow from here.
        Turning left along the quays of the north bank towards the
        Four Courts (about11⁄2 km/1 mile), you will come to the delightful
        cast-iron footbridge, the Hapenny Bridge, that connects Merchants
        Arch to Liffey Street. It was built in 1816, and its name refers to the
        toll once levied for crossing. Looking up river from here, you can see
        the green-topped column of the smock windmill (the largest in Europe)
        in the Guinness Brewery, and the spire and green roof of St. Patricks
        Cathedral. Christ Church will also come into view, as will the Catholic
        St. Audoens; and no, youre not having a vision — that really is a
        statue of a blue- and white-robed Jesus blessing you from a rooftop
        corner.
        On the corner of Liffey Street is the sculpture locally
        known as the hags with the bags.  Two doors down from the bridge is
        The Winding Stair bookshop and café, which is worth a browse.
        The Four Courts was designed by James Gandon in 1785 after
        the death of the original architect. With its magnificent Corinthian
        portico crowned with statues and its columned dome, the building is a
        majestic sight. It holds the various courts of the city, together with
        a library of law and a basement restaurant. The Four Courts was damaged
        in the fighting of the 1920s and a terrific fire destroyed all the
        official archives, but restoration work (in 1932) has removed nearly
        all traces of the destruction. You can step inside when the courts are
        in session. At the far end of Inns Quay is the site of the first bridge
        across the Liffey, which was built in 1214.
        Just beyond the Four Courts, turn north into Church Street,
        where youll find the fascinating St. Michans Church. One of the
        oldest churches in Dublin, it was built in the 17th century on the site
        of a Danish chapel, but heavily restored in the 19th century. Handel is
        believed to have practiced on the 1724 organ here while composing The
        Messiah. The churchs chief claim to fame, however, is its vaults,
        which, because of their limestone composition, preserve bodies buried
        there in a mummified state. A few of the bodies are on display (tours
        Monday–Friday 9:45am–12:45pm and 2–4:45pm, Saturday 10am– 12:45pm;
        entrance fee, adults IR£1.20, children 50p; go early to avoid group
        tours). Robert Emmet is thought to be buried in the graveyard of the
        church, and Parnells funeral service was held here. Afterwards, you
        may well want to drop in at the The Old Jameson Distillery (see page
        62) in cobbled Bow Street.
        If you turn right instead of left from OConnell bridge,
        you will come to one of Dublins great architectural masterpieces, the
        Custom House (Visitor Centre open mid-March–mid-November, Monday–Friday
        10am–5pm, Saturday and Sunday 2pm–5pm; winter, Wednesday–Friday only).
        Built in 1791 and designed by James Gandon as his first Dublin
        masterpiece, it has undergone thorough renovation and can perhaps be
        best appreciated from the south bank of the river, though more detail
        can be seen from the closer vantage point on the north bank.
        The elegance and grace of this building have something to
        do with its human dimensions, for although it stands 114 m (375 ft)
        high and 61 m (200 ft) wide, its height does not in the least
        overwhelm. The sculpture on the dome (a personification of Commerce)
        and the river gods (including Anna Livia, set over the main door) are
        by Edward Smyth, who was also responsible for the statues on the GPO
        (see page 51). The original wax models of the river gods are on display
        in the Civic Museum. The north side of the building has statues by
        Joseph Banks depicting Africa, America, Asia, and Europe.
        Across the street and east along the quay is the Irish
        Famine Memorial, a series of striking life-size bronze figures by Rowan
        Gillespie.
        OConnell Street
        OConnell Street is a grand boulevard with a wide central
        island, studded with monuments and statues. It runs in a straight line
        north from OConnell Bridge, and the best way to view it is to walk
        down the central island, making excursions to the left and right at the
        zebra crossings.
        The road was largely destroyed in the Rising (see page 17),
        but was restored by the end of the 1920s (plans for a new restoration
        are under way). At the foot of the bridge is John Foleys monument to
        Daniel OConnell, surrounded by four victory figures and peppered with
        bullet holes from 1922. The Anna Livia Fountain (nicknamed the Floozie
        in the Jacuzzi) was unveiled in 1988 as part of Dublins millennial
        celebrations; it refers to James Joyces personification of the Liffey
        in Finnegans Wake, and across the way, in Earl Street, his statue by
        Marjorie Fitzgibbon jauntily regards it. The memorial to working-class
        hero, orator, and socialist Jim Larkin by Oisín Kelly is opposite the
        famous chiming clock of Clerys, the largest department store in
        Ireland. Farther up on the right is one of Dublins legendary hotels,
        the Gresham Hotel which was built in 1817, seven years before the
        Shelbourne. The Georgian interior of the ground floor is worth a
        look.
        Perhaps the most memorable monument in Dublin is the
        General Post Office in the center of OConnell Street (open
        Monday–Saturday 8am– 8pm). Built in 1815–1818 and one of the last great
        buildings of Dublins Georgian architecture, the GPO is justly renowned
        for its imposing Ionic portico (look for the bullet holes) with six
        fluted columns and figures sculpted by Edward Smyth. It was here, in
        1916, that James Connolly and Padráig Pearse barricaded themselves
        inside and proclaimed the Irish Republic. The post office was virtually
        destroyed in the fighting but has since been fully restored. The Rising
        is commemorated in the main hall by a beautiful bronze statue of the
        mythic folk hero Cuchulainn.
        Just off Lower OConnell Street in Lower Abbey Street is
        the Abbey Theatre (see page 88). Founded in 1904 by W.B. Yeats, Lady
        Augusta Gregory, and Edward Martyn, the theater has been a showcase for
        great Irish writing. The early works of Sean OCasey and John Synge
        were written for the Abbey. The present Abbey Theatre dates from from
        1966, since a fire in 1951 destroyed the original building.
        North of the Abbey Theatre and parallel with OConnell
        Street in Marlborough Street is the Catholic St. Marys Pro-Cathedral,
        the main Catholic parish church of the city center, built in 1816-1825.
        Its somewhat forbidding classical Doric exterior seems to dwarf the
        street (it was designed originally for OConnell Street). The domed
        Renaissance interior is in restrained blues and grays, and is curiously
        unadorned. However, the Palestrina choir that sings mass on Sundays is
        excellent, and attracts numbers of visitors.
        Opposite the cathedral is Tyrone House (not open to the
        public), home to the Department of Education. Built in 1742 by Richard
        Castle, the interior features work by the Francini brothers (also
        responsible for Newman House). Outside is a gift to the people of
        Ireland from the Italian government in gratitude for relief supplies
        during World War II: a marble Pietà entitled La Deposizione, by
        Ermenegildo Luppi.
        It is worth making a detour on the pedestrianized areas of
        Henry Street and Moore Street, to see their famous markets and hear the
        cries of the stallholders (see page 83). Expect some ribald remarks in
        broad Dublin accents.
        At the northern end of the street is the 1911 monument to
        Parnell by Augustus Saint-Gaudens. Notice anything odd? Yes, he is
        wearing two overcoats (apparently he always did).
        Parnell Square
        Compared to the Georgian squares south of the Liffey, the
        area around Parnell Square looks rather shabby, but once it was just as
        fashionable and affluent. On the south side of Parnell Square are the
        Rotunda Hospital and the Gate Theatre. The Palladian-style Rotunda was
        built by Richard Castle in 1751–1755; its Europes oldest maternity
        hospital. The chapel on the first floor, with stained-glass windows and
        Rococo plasterwork, has had a varied career as an Assembly Room and a
        cinema; Charles Dickens also gave readings here. What is now the Gate
        Theatre (see page 88) was built in 1784 and is probably the most
        beautiful stage in Dublin. The theater company was founded in 1930 by
        Michaél MacLiammóir and Hilton Edwards, and is still going strong
        today, with an excellent reputation for international and innovative
        work. James Mason and Orson Welles began their acting careers here.
        The Garden of Remembrance on the north side of Parnell
        Square is dedicated to those who lost their lives in the cause of Irish
        freedom and features a cruciform lake and Oisín Kellys beautiful
        Children of Lir.
        Across the road from the Garden of Remembrance are the
        Hugh Lane Municipal Gallery of Modern Art (see page 60) and the Dublin
        Writers Museum (see page 59). The gallery is set in the 18th-century
        Charlemont House, built for Lord Charlemont by Sir William Chambers.
        Restored in 1991, this hand­some building is worth seeing for itself
        alone, as well as for the splendid art collection. The Writers Museum
        next door (also restored in 1991) is an intriguing combination of
        Georgian exterior with Victorian interior. Both museum and gallery have
        good cafés and restaurants.
        East of Parnell Square, in Great Georges Street, is the
        James Joyce Cultural Center (see page 62), housed in a mansion dating
        from 1784 and run by Joyces nephew. It has a full program of events,
        including lectures.
        Phoenix Park
        On the banks of the Liffey, just 3 km (2 miles) from the
        bustle of OConnell Street, lies the biggest urban park in Europe,
        comprising some 709 hectares (1,750 acres) of landscaped gardens,
        woods, pastures, and playing fields for all sorts of sports. The park
        is a graceful and elegant expanse with fine views of the mountains,
        much loved by Dubliners since it was first opened to the public in
        1747. Self-guided heritage walks and several nature trails are marked
        by black information plaques.
        The oldest building in the park is Ashtown Castle, a
        former papal residence which has been renovated to house the splendid
        Phoenix Park Visitor Centre (open 9:30am– 6:30pm; adults IR£2, children
        IR£1; concessions; disabled access), which presents a video and an
        excellent two-floor exhibition on the history and wildlife of the park.
        The castle itself comprises an early 17th-century tower house, restored
        with Irish oak from the park which is held together without a single
        nail. Outside there is a young garden maze, marking the outline of the
        original foundations, and a restful café.
        The park also boasts the tallest obelisk in Europe in the
        67-m (220-ft) Wellington Monument, erected in 1861 after the victory of
        Waterloo. The Wicklow granite is faced with plaques cast from captured
        and melted-down cannon. Not quite as large is the Papal Cross,
        commemorating Pope John Paul IIs visit in 1979, when more than one
        million people gathered to celebrate mass.
        The Phoenix Column, dating from 1747, stands near the
        natural spring from which the name of the park is derived (the result
        of an English corruption of the Gaelic fionn uisce, meaning clear
        water).
        Occupying more than 12 hectares (30 acres), the Dublin Zoo
        (see page 79) was founded in 1831, and has greatly improved in recent
        years; there are plans for a complete renovation. The landscaped
        grounds (designed by Decimus Burton, who was also responsible for the
        park lodges) provide a safe home to more than 700 species, including
        such endangered species as snow leopards and golden lion tamarinds. The
        new Discovery Centre is worth a visit.
        Also within the sprawling grounds of the park are the
        official residence of the president of the Republic, which dates from
        1751 (guided tours from the Visitor Centre Saturday at 9:40am and
        4:20pm), and the US ambassadors residence, an 18th-century house which
        was formerly the official residence of the Viceroys chief secretary
        (not open to the public).
        Museums and Galleries
        Dublin has so many museums and galleries that it is
        virtually impossible to list them all. Here, we are covering the most
        important — see also the Book of Kells (page 25) and other attractions
        at Trinity College.
        Some museums are closed on Monday, and opening hours tend
        to be restricted during the winter months. The national museums have
        free admission, but the SuperSaver Card, available at any Tourism
        Centre or participating attraction, will admit you to a number of
        others at a reduced price with priority entry.
        Bank of Ireland Arts Centre and House of Lords
        2 College Green, Dublin 2
        Built in 1729 to house the Irish Parliament, the striking
        Bank of Ireland building preserves the impressive chamber of the Irish
        House of Lords with its 18th-century tapestries, and coffered ceiling.
        There are guided tours on Tuesday at 10:30am, 11:30am, and 1:45pm, and
        the chamber is open Monday–Friday during banking hours. Behind the
        building on Foster Place is the Bank of Ireland Arts Centre. Upstairs
        is an exhibit on the history of banking and the short-lived Irish
        Parliament. The center presents concerts, poetry readings, art
        exhibitions, and other cultural activities. Open Tuesday–Friday
        10am–4pm, admission IR£1.50.
        Ceol Traditional Irish Music Centre
        Smithfield Village, Smithfield, Dublin 7
        This museum explores the relationship of Irish music to
        Irish history. The exhibits illustrate the important co nnection
        between music and Irish culture, and are well worth seeing.
        Monday–Saturday 9:30am–6pm, Sunday 10:30am–6pm; admission IR£3.95; take
        bus 134.
        Chester Beatty Library and Gallery of Oriental Art
        Dublin Castle, Dublin 2
        A treasure house of manuscripts and paintings, books and
        furniture from Western and Eastern cultures. The library itself
        includes copies of the Koran and codices dating from the second century
        b.c. The library was closed at presstime; call for tour schedules when
        the library reopens.
        Civic Museum
        58 South William Street, Dublin 2.
        This small museum offers a sidelong glance at the history
        of Dublin, with an emphasis on the hidden life of the city and the
        lesser known people who shaped the life of Dublin. Youll come across
        such things as old prints, old street signs, wooden water mains,
        coal-hole covers, and the original wax models of the river gods on the
        Custom House. Tuesday– Saturday 10am–6:pm. , Sunday 11am–2pm; closed
        Monday; free admission.
        Collins Barracks
        Benburb Street, Dublin 7
        This branch of the National Museum of Ireland, opened in
        1997, contains the museums collection of decorative arts. Silver,
        ceramics, furniture, and folk life artifacts trace Irelands social and
        political history. There is a café and bookshop, and parking. Open
        Tuesday–Saturday, 10am–5pm and Sunday 2pm–5pm; closed Monday; free
        admission.
        Dublin Writers Museum
        18/19 Parnell Square North, Dublin 1.
        No one interested in Irish writing and theater should miss
        this light and elegant museum, housed in an 18th-century Georgian
        mansion. The museum covers the long Irish literary tradition,
        displaying first editions, theater programs, correspondence, and other
        memorabilia (including clothing). The collection begins with medieval
        Irish writing and ends with Brendan Behan, Liam OFlaherty, and Sean
        OFaoláin (theres no information about writers of the last 30 years).
        Upstairs is a portrait gallery. There is a childrens room and a
        bookshop, and a good café and restaurant.
        There are frequent exhibitions and events, and the Writers
        Center provides a place for talk and work. See page 79 for hours and
        admissions.
        Gallery of Photography
        Meeting House Square, Sycamore Street, Temple Bar.
        Photographs of Dublin past and present are displayed, and
        changing exhibitions are held of Irish and international photography.
        There are also books and posters for sale. Open 11am–6pm, Sunday
        noon–6pm; free.
        Guinness Hopstore
        Crane Street, Dublin 8.
        Tours of the brewery itself are not offered, but the
        Guinness Visitor Centre, in a four-story converted 19th-century
        building, presents a wonderful history of the world of Guinness. There
        is an advertising gallery, an audio-visual show, a Cooperage and
        Transport Museum, souvenir shop, coffee shop, and a bar where you can
        sample the brew. Plans are being made for an enlarged interpretive
        center, to open in 2001. See page 79 for hours and admissions.
        Hugh Lane Gallery
        (Municipal Gallery of Modern Art)
        Charlemont House, Parnell Square North, Dublin 1.
        Sir Hugh Lane, who died in 1915, bequeathed his collection
        of paintings to the Irish government and the National Gallery in
        London. The collection includes works by Manet, Degas, and other French
        impressionists as well as their Irish counterparts. The
        post-impressionist paintings of Jack B. Yeats (brother of the famous
        poet) are particularly noteworthy. Recent acquisitions include the work
        of such contemporary artists as Vivienne Roche and Patrick OReilly.
        The building itself is highly interesting, and there is an excellent
        café in the basement. The gallery offers a popular free concert series,
        the Sundays at Noon concerts (not held in July and August). See page 79
        for hours and admissions.
        Irish-Jewish Museum
        3/4 Walworth Road, Dublin 8.
        This former synagogue, set in the heart of what was the
        citys Jewish quarter in the last century, tells the story of the Jews
        in Ireland by means of documents, various memorabilia, and old
        photographs (look for a Guinness bottle with a Hebrew label). This is a
        small museum revealing a little-known part of Dublins community. Open
        May–September Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday 11am–3:30pm; October– April
        Sunday 10:30am–2:30pm.
        Irish Museum of Modern Art
        Royal Hospital, Military Road, Kilmainham, Dublin 8.
        The restored Royal Hospital housing this museum is
        Dublins most important 17th-century building (1684), and is itself
        worth a visit. With its wonderful light and space, it makes a
        tremendous exhibition area. The museums holdings include the Gordon
        Lambert Collection, with more than 100 works from the 1960s–1970s. The
        museum hosts and mounts temporary exhibits of contemporary artists.
        There is also an international residency program for artists, and
        visitors may meet the artists in their studios (depending on their
        schedules). There are events and concerts, plus a museum bookshop and a
        café in the vaults. See page 80 for hours and admissions.
        The Old Jameson Distillery
        Old Jameson Distillery, Bow Street, Dublin 7.
        Discover the fascinating craft of whiskey making and
        relive the history of The Old Jameson Distillery in Smithfield, the
        heart of Old Dublin, with this award-winning attraction. On the
        original site of the Jameson Distillery, follow the story of Irish
        Whiskey through a tour, hosted by professional mult-lingual guides.
        Open seven days a week, year round.
        James Joyce Cultural Centre
        35 North Great Georges Street, Dublin 1.
        This interesting museum and cultural center is in a lovely
        Georgian mansion built in 1784. The center contains a library,
        exhibition rooms, and a study center devoted to the great novelist.
        There are conducted tours of the house and a walking tour of Joycean
        North Dublin. Joyce himself must have known the house as the residence
        of Mr. Denis J. Maginni, professor of dancing, who appears several
        times in Ulysses. See page 79 for hours and admissions.
        Kilmainham Gaol
        Inchicore Road, Kilmainham, Dublin 8.
        This is a powerful and evocative museum. Kilmainham was
        the major Irish prison for well over a century; De Valera was the last
        prisoner (in 1924). An extremely interesting and well-mounted
        exhibition traces the history of the prison (including a section on
        Victorian theories about prisons and the treatment of prisoners) and
        the political and social events that brought many of the prisoners
        here. A 25-minute audio-visual presentation in the prison chapel is
        followed by a fascinating guided tour through the dark and narrow
        corridors of the 18th-century part of the building, where you can see
        the cells occupied by those who took part in the Easter Rising — they
        were executed in the prison yard. See page 79 for hours and
        admissions.
        Nearby, on the south bank of the Liffey, is the
        Island­bridge Memorial Park, built in the thirties to designs by Edwin
        Lutyens (who designed Londons Cenotaph). The gardens are a powerful
        tribute to the thousands of Irish soldiers who died in World War I
        while serving in the British Army. The somber design incorporates the
        War Stone and four granite pavilions, one of which contains Celtic and
        Art Deco illuminated manuscripts by Harry Clarke (who designed the
        windows in Bewleys) listing the names of those killed.
        National Gallery of Ireland
        Merrion Square West, Dublin 2.
        The National Gallery houses a fine collection of works
        from the 14th to the 20th century — from Brueghel, Titian, Velasquez,
        Rembrandt, Goya, and Gainsborough to Monet, Degas, and Picasso. One of
        the most important paintings, on permanent loan from the Jesuit
        Brothers in whose house it was discovered in 1993, is Caravaggios
        long-lost The Taking of Christ.
        There is a notable collection of Irish art, including a
        roomful of Jack Yeatss paintings. There are also watercolors,
        drawings, prints, sculpture, and a multimedia gallery where a
        computerized system offers information about 100 of the gallerys best
        works. With a good bookshop and the excellent Fitzers café you could
        easily spend a day here. The Millennium Wing, a new 44,000-sq-ft
        (13,411-sq-m) extension of the museum, is slated to open in the year
        2000. See page 80 for museum hours and admissions.
        National Museum of Ireland
        Kildare Street, Dublin 2.
        This is Dublins most important museum, containing Bronze
        Age Irish gold and other archaeological finds. Opened in 1890, it is
        one of the most interesting museums of its kind in Europe. The building
        itself is noteworthy with its entrance hall and Rotunda, mosaic floors,
        and the elaborate blue-and-yellow majolica decoration on the pediments
        and jambs of the doors. The exhibits are state-of-the art. Or:
        Irelands Gold displays the astonishing accomplishments of goldsmiths
        from 3000 to 700 b.c. Medieval treasures include the famous Ardagh
        Chalice, Tara Brooch, and Cross of Cong. There is metalwork from the
        Viking period and a small Egyptian gallery. Theres also an exhibit
        focusing on the history of Irish independence. The museum has a good,
        but crowded café and a small gift shop. Frequent free bus service
        connects with the section of the museum housed in the Collins Barracks
        (see page 58). See page 80 for hours and admissions.
        Natural History Museum
        Merrion Street, Dublin 2.
        This Victorian museum, opened in 1857, holds a
        comprehensive collection of Irelands and the worlds zoology. Cabinets
        are stuffed with mammals, birds, fish, butterflies, and insects — its
        popularly known as the Dead Zoo.  A great favorite with children, it
        gives a fascinating glimpse into the late-Victorian obsession with
        traveling and collecting. Closed Monday; free admission.
        Number Twenty Nine
        29 Lower Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin 2.
        This lovely Georgian townhouse, typical of the area, has
        been restored and superbly fitted out to reflect middle-class life in
        the late 18th to early 19th century. An audio-visual display, cozily
        narrated by the ghost of the former owner and her much put-upon
        maidservant, is followed by a half-hour guided tour for a maximum of
        ten people. The staff are friendly and helpful, and there is a small
        tearoom. The place can get very busy, so arrive early. Closed Monday;
        admission IR£2.50.
        Projects Arts Centre
        39 East Essex Street, Dublin2.
        In its new building, the ground floor gallery of the
        Project Arts Center displays the most avant-garde in painting and
        sculpture. It also has a performance space for dance, drama, and other
        programs upstairs. If you want to see whats happening tomorrow, this
        is definitely the place to come. Call for hours and schedules (not
        available at presstime).
        Shaw Birthplace Museum
        33 Synge Street, Dublin 8.
        The great mans birthplace, where he spent his early
        years, has exhibits on Shaw and the Dublin he knew. The Victorian house
        is furnished as a typical charming, small Dublin household of the
        period. Tours and booklets are available in a number of languages, and
        the staff is very friendly. See page 80 for hours and admissions.
        Waterways Visitor Centre
        Grand Canal Basin, Ringsend, off Pearse Street, Dublin
        4.
        Opened in the summer of 1993, this exciting and
        imaginative small center is built on piers over the waters of the
        canal. The exhibition includes working models and displays devoted to
        the history and ecology of Irelands canals. Open June– September daily
        9:30am–6:30pm; October–May 12:30–5pm; adults IR£2, children IR£1.50;
        concessions.
        Opposite the center and set in a restored sugar mill is
        the Tower Crafts Design Centre, which comprises shops, workshops, and a
        first-floor restaurant.
        Day Trips from Dublin
        As if the city itself did not provide enough options, the
        countryside around Dublin offers a wealth of possible excursions and
        day trips. The DART railway, running north and south to nearby seaside
        towns and villages offers a scenic trip along the coast, and even
        operates a guided tour (see page 115).
        To the north, the DART will take you to the Howth
        peninsula, which affords splendid views along a cliff-top coastal walk.
        In spring and summer this area is rich in nesting sea birds, and the
        moorland terrain of the cliff-top also attracts interesting land birds
        and butterflies. In July and August there is a wonderful color
        combination of purple heather and yellow gorse. Walking up to Howth
        lighthouse, it is difficult to believe that Dublin is just a few miles
        away — until you see Dublin Bay spread out before you. Also in Howth is
        the National Transport Museum at Howth Castle (open June–August
        Monday–Saturday 10am–5pm, Sunday 2–5pm; week­ends only the rest of the
        year).
        If you take the DART south, youll find the best sandy
        beaches. Dun Laoghaire is the major port on the south coast. Here,
        ferries across the Irish Channel leave from two state-of-the-art piers.
        West of the harbor is the National Maritime Museum. The last stop on
        the DART is Bray, a seaside resort with a beach and amusement arcades.
        There are splendid views from Bray Head of the harbor and the
        mountains.
        County Wicklow, also to the south of Dublin, rightly
        deserves the title Garden of Ireland.  There youll find some of the
        most spectacular scenery in the country, with rugged mountains, steep,
        wooded river valleys, and deep lakes as well as charming villages and
        some notable mansions and gardens.
        Many bus tours will take you to the various destinations
        (see page 114), and some are accessible by city bus. Dublin Tourism at
        Suffolk Street has all the information, and can arrange tours. Car
        rentals are available at the same site (see page 108). It is worthwhile
        to rent a car so you can go at your own pace. Below are some
        suggestions for excursions; all can be done in a day or a half day from
        the city. The list is not exhaustive, but it does include the main
        attractions. At the end of each entry is information about how the
        destination can be reached. Note that some attractions can be seen only
        by guided tour, and the last admission to these may be 30 to 45 minutes
        earlier the official closing time.
        South of the City
        James Joyce Museum
        Sandycove, County Dublin.
        This is possibly one of the most unusual small museums in
        or around Dublin. It is housed in a Martello Tower: A series of such
        towers, some 12 m (40 ft) high and 2.5 m (8 ft) thick, were constructed
        along the coast at the beginning of the 19th century to guard against
        invasion by Napoleon. Joyce actually lived in the tower very briefly,
        and it is the location for the first chapter of Ulysses. Full of
        Joycean memorabilia (including his guitar and waistcoat),
        correspondence, and rare editions of books and manuscripts, it is a
        shrine for Joyce enthusiasts. DART and bus no. 8. See page 79 for hours
        and admissions.
        Avoca and the Avoca Handweavers
        Avoca Village, County Wicklow
        (also at Kilmacanogue, Bray).
        The picturesque village of Avoca has become famous as the
        setting for the BBC TV program Ballykissangel. A company of handweavers
        has been working here since at least 1723, and visitors are able to
        watch them at work, but their products have become less distinctive
        since they expanded into a popular tourist attraction. Theres a shop
        and a decent café in the small complex of traditional buildings.
        Monday– Friday 9:30am–5:30pm,Saturday–Sunday 10am– 6pm; car or bus
        tour.
        Glendalough
        County Wicklow.
        The sacred site of Glendalough in the Wicklow Mountains is
        still highly evocative, and should not be missed. It was the place
        chosen by St. Kevin for a monastery which, over the centuries, became a
        great spiritual center of learning, attracting pilgrims from all over
        Europe. It is set in a beautiful landscape, with clear lakes and
        streams surrounded by steep wooded hills.
        Despite Viking raids, a great fire at the end of the 14th
        century, and long years of neglect, many of the original buildings
        still stand: the 11th-century round tower (more than 30 m/100 ft high
        and 15 m/50 ft around the ba se), a ninth-century barrel-vaulted church
        known as St. Kevins Kitchen, and the roofless cathedral. There are
        also scores of Celtic crosses.
        The visitor center, designed so that it fits into the
        landscape, provides a 20-minute audio-visual presentation of the
        history of Irish monasticism, an exhibition on the geology and wildlife
        of the area, and conducts guided tours — but you can also (preferably)
        wander about on your own. Glendaloughs three nature trails take less
        than an hours relaxed walking and are well worth doing. The site can
        be visited by car or bus tour, or by taking St. Kevins bus from the
        Royal College of Surgeons on St. Stephens Green (leave 11:30am, arrive
        1pm, return 4:15pm; IR£10).
        Glendalough is part of the Wicklow Mountains National
        Park, an area of about 20,000 hectares (49,421 acres), which includes
        most of upland Wicklow, with spectacular scenery, wildlife, and rare
        flora. The 137-km (85-mile) Wicklow Way long-distance footpath wends
        its peaceful course through the park, much of it above 1,600 ft (bring
        rain gear and wear sturdy shoes). Call the Education Centre at Tel. 404
        45338 for more information.
        Mount Usher Gardens
        Ashford, County Wicklow.
        The spectacular Mount Usher Gardens were first established
        in 1868 by the Walpole family. The climate and soil are such that
        plants and trees that would not normally survive this far north are
        capable of flourishing, which explains the enormous variety of 4,000 to
        5,000 plants, trees, and shrubs from all over the world. The 8-hectare
        (20-acre) paradise is near Ashford, along the River Vartry. It attracts
        a wide variety of birds and wildfowl. Open mid-March–November 2, daily
        10:30am–6pm; adults IR£3.50, children IR£2.50; car or bus tour. There
        is a tearoom on the premises.
        Powerscourt Estate
        Enniskerry, County Wicklow.
        This estate outside the pretty village of Enniskerry in
        the foothills of the Wicklow Mountains, is about 18 km (12 miles) from
        Dublin. It consists of 5,665 hectares (14,000 acres), hugging the River
        Dargle. The gardens are among the greatest in Europe, and take in a
        view of the Sugar Loaf Mountain as part of their design. The enormous
        Palladian house regrettably was destroyed by fire in 1974. The house
        now incorporates the restored ballrooom, a restaurant overlooking the
        gardens, an exhibition on the history of the estate, a crafts shop, and
        a garden center.
        The formal splendor of the grounds testify to the
        18th-century desire to tame nature, but it is done with such
        superlative results that one can only be thankful that the work was
        undertaken. The broad, sweeping terraces offer magnificent views;
        statuary rears up out of ornamental lakes; deer roam the parklands; and
        the Dargle obligingly throws itself over 122 m (400 ft) of rock to form
        the highest waterfall in Ireland (4 km/21⁄2 miles from the main
        estate). Children like the pets cemetery. Guided tours available. Open
        daily; admission adults IR£5.00, children IR£3.00.
        Russborough House
        Blessington, County Wicklow.
        This magnificent Georgian-Palladian house, built in
        1740–1750 and designed by Richard Castle, is one of the earliest Irish
        great houses. It is constructed on a monumental scale, with a 213-m
        (700-ft) façade of Wicklow granite, Doric arcades, and wonderful
        ornamentation, all set against a terraced landscape.
        The interiors feature superb plasterwork by the Francini
        brothers, identifiable, as elsewhere, by their trademark of eagles
        heads. The plasterwork on the staircase, with its lavish swags of
        flowers gently held in the mouths of some very patient-looking dogs is
        extraordinary. The inlaid floors are particularly lovely, and there are
        extensive collections of furniture, silver, tapestries, and
        carpets.
        In the house is the Beit Collection of paintings (shared
        with the National Gallery); it includes celebrated works by
        Gainsborough, Goya, Guardi, Hals, Reynolds, Rubens, Velasquez, Vermeer,
        and others, and a series of eight paintings by Murillo depicting the
        story of the prodigal son.
        Outside, the grounds cover some 80 hectares (200 acres).
        Visits are by guided tour only; car or bus tour (summer only). See page
        80 for hours and admissions.
        West of the City
        Castletown House
        Celbridge, County Kildare.
        When William Conolly, then speaker of the Irish House of
        Commons, set his heart on a palatial country home, he turned to Italian
        architect Alessandro Galilei, who designed the façade of the main house
        in 1722. This Palladian masterpiece, however, was finished by Irishman
        Edward Lovett Pearce who is responsible for the colonnades and side
        pavilions. The result is one of the most graceful and distinctive
        houses of the period in Ireland. The houses famous Long Gallery has
        Pompeian fresco–inspired designs and Venetian chandeliers; the great
        staircase is the work of Simon Vierpyl; and the plasterwork is by the
        Francinis. The grounds (now sadly encroached upon) are adorned by a
        48-m- (140-ft-) high obelisk. Open late April–September, Monday–Friday
        10am–6pm, Saturday and Sunday 1–6pm; October– November daily 1–5pm,
        closed December–March; admission adults IR£2.50, children IR£1, family
        IR£6; car or bus 67/67A followed by a 1⁄2-mile walk.
        Irish National Stud and Japanese Gardens
        Tully, County Kildare.
        All Ireland loves a horse, and County Kildare can claim to
        be at the heart of horse country. The Curragh and Punchestown
        racecourses are here, and the National Stud, home to breeding
        stallions, has produced some of the most successful horses in the
        country. Visitors see horses being trained and exercised. There is also
        a museum illustrating the history of the horse in Ireland (including
        the skeleton of the legendary racehorse Arkle).
        Adjacent to the stud are the Japanese Gardens, created by
        the studs founder in the early part of the century, and well worth a
        visit, and the new Saint Fiachras Garden, created to celebrate the
        millennium.
        Open all year Monday–Friday 10am–5pm, Saturday 10am–6pm,
        Sunday 2–6pm; admission adults IR£6, children IR£3; combined ticket
        covers Irish Stud, Irish Horse Museum, and Japanese Gardens.
        North of the City
        North of the city flows the River Boyne. The Valley of the
        Boyne has played an important part in the nations history (see page
        14).
        National Botanic Gardens
        Glasnevin, Dublin 9
        Originally modeled on Londons gardens at Kew, Irelands
        premier horticultural attraction was established by the Royal Dublin
        Society in 1795. With over 20,000 species in more than 20 hectares (50
        acres) of grounds, there is plenty to see and enjoy. The four
        glasshouse groups, built between 1843 and 1868, have been magnificently
        restored. They include an alpine house, a palm and orchid house, and
        the Curvilinear Range, a spectacular curving glasshouse of cast iron.
        There are all sorts of different gardens and landscapes to explore,
        including a riverside walk. See page 80 for hours and admissions; buses
        13, 19, 34.
        Marino Casino
        Malahide Road, Dublin 3.
        Lord Charlemonts marine villa, built in 1762–1777, is
        one of Irelands finest Neoclassical buildings, and certainly one of
        the most intriguing. Designed by William Chambers (who is responsible
        for Somerset House in London), it is generally regarded as his
        masterpiece. It is a building of great ingenuity — from the outside it
        looks like a small Greek-style temple, but is in fact two stories high
        and contains eight rooms. Sculpture and stone carving are perfectly
        modified to the harmonies of the design; the four columns at the
        corners are hollow to carry water off the roof, and the urns on roof
        are disguised chimneys. The interior has exquisite floors and
        plasterwork. After years of neglect it was restored, beginning in the
        mid-1970s, and opened to the public in 1984.
        Though it is surrounded on all sides by ill-planned
        encroachments, the Casino still stands in perfect splendor on a gentle
        rise. Down the road is Spite Crescent built by an enemy of Lord
        Charlemont to spoil his view from the Casino (it was here that Bram
        Stoker wrote Dracula in 1897).
        Guided tours only; see page 80 for hours and admissions.
        Multilingual guidebooks available; buses 20A, 20B, 27, 27A, 27B, 42, or
        42C, DART to Contarf Road Station.
        Malahide Castle and Estate
        Malahide, County Dublin.
        Parts of this crenellated, picture-postcard castle date
        back to the 12th century. It was the home of the Talbot family for 800
        years, and consequently, it has an authentic atmosphere all its own.
        Part of the National Portrait Collection from the National Gallery is
        displayed here. The house is hugely enjoyable, with its intricate
        layout, 18th-century furniture, chinoiserie, childrens toys, and and
        views of the grounds and distant mountains, particularly from the airy
        turret rooms.
        James Boswell, biographer of Samuel Johnson, was married
        to a Talbot, and many of his papers were discovered in the 20th century
        at the castle. Audio tapes in each room narrate the houses history.
        There is a craft shop on the grounds, and an excellent restaurant and
        imaginative café and a bookshop on the ground floor of the castle. The
        surrounding park includes the Talbot Botanic Gardens, 8 hectares (20
        acres) of walled gardens and glasshouses with thousands of plant
        species. Guided tours on Wednesdays; car, tour bus, or bus 42 (about a
        half-hours walk; also stops at the Marino Casino). See page 79 for
        hours and admissions to castle and gardens.
        Also here is the Fry Model Railway Museum, Irelands
        largest O-gauge model railway, with miniature models of Dublins
        landmarks and railway stations. The museum is open late
        April–September, Monday–Friday 10am–6pm, Saturday and Sunday 1–6pm;
        October–November daily 1–5pm; admission adults IR£2.50, children IR£1,
        family IR£6; combined ticket adults IR£4.75, children IR£2.35, family
        ticket IR£12.50.
        Newbridge House and Victorian Farm
        Donabate, County Dublin.
        Newbridge House and its estate of 142 hectares (350 acres)
        belonged to the Cobbe family from 1736. The beautifully restored house
        contains some interesting furniture and plasterwork, and there is also
        a museum of rural life incorporating artisans cottages with period
        furniture and tools.
        Open April–September Tuesday–Friday 10am–5pm, Saturday
        11am–6pm, Sunday 2–6pm; winter weekends only 2–5pm; admission to house:
        adults IR£2.95, children IR£1.60, family ticket IR£7.95; farm IR£1.80;
        combined family ticket IR£9.00. concessions; car.
        Newgrange
        Slane, County Meath.
        Newgrange is the most important of the prehistoric sites
        around Dublin, located about 3 km (2 miles) east of Slane. It is the
        best preserved passage tomb in Europe, and is 500 years older than the
        Pyramids (3000 b.c. ). Its a huge stone mound (nearly 12 m/40 ft high
        and almost 90 m/300 ft wide) constructed from 200,000 tons of stone,
        much of which was somehow hauled from the Wicklow Mountains and the
        Mountains of Mourne. Newgrange may be the worlds oldest solar
        observatory — the whole edifice is aligned in such a way that during
        several days of the winter solstice, light from the sun floods the
        inner chamber for approximately 17 minutes, a spectacular effect (the
        guide on the tour attempts to give an idea of this effect by plunging
        the chamber into darkness and slowly bringing up the light). Visitors
        who dislike enclosed spaces should be warned that the passage into the
        barrow is very low and narrow. Newgrange can get very crowded, so try
        to get there early or take a Bus Éireann tour which secures you
        privileged access. Admission for adults IR£3, children IR£1.25, family
        ticket IR£7.50.
        Nearby is Knowth an even larger and older complex which
        dates back to earliest neolithic times. Knowth has two passage graves.
        The site is still being excavated, and only part of it is open.
        The nearby Brú na Bóinne Centre has interesting exhibits.
        Tours originate from the center. Open daily June–mid-September 9am–
        7pm; October–April 9:30am– 5pm; May, late September 9:30am–6:30pm;
        guided tours: adults IR£2.50, family ticket for 5 IR£11; concessions;
        car or bus tour.
        Tara
        County Meath.
        Tara is a magic name in Irish history. The cultural,
        political, and religious center of early Celtic civilization, seat of
        the High Kings, its importance waned after the arrival of Christianity.
        Theres really not much to see except the hill itself and the view over
        the central Irish plain. Remains of an Iron Age fort can be traced, and
        there are some pillar stones. In a nearby 19th-century Anglican church
        is the visitor center, with exhibits and an audio-visual show. Guided
        tours are also conducted of the site. Open daily,
        mid-June–mid-September 9:30am–6:30pm; May–mid-June and
        mid-September–October 10am–5:30pm. Adults IR£1.50, children 60p, family
        IR£4.00; concessions; car or bus tour.
      
    
  
