
  
  
    
      
        Where To Go
        A city of several different ages, Edinburgh has distinct
        districts that are all eminently walkable. You can divide your visit
        into three or four separate tours, each of which could fill either an
        afternoon or an entire day. There are also bus tours around the city to
        help you get your bearings before you visit special attractions. The
        buses stand in line on Waverley Street near the main railway
        station.
        The Old Town
        Edinburghs Old Town occupies an amazing site where the
        geology has its own fascinating story to tell. The Castle Rock and
        Arthurs Seat are the remains of lava streams that hardened after the
        two volcanoes around them became dormant and cold. During the last Ice
        Age, huge glaciers covered the region, moving west to east across the
        land and gouging trenches on either side of the volcanic mounds. They
        resisted the great power of the ice and caused a long stream of
        sediment to collect. At the end of the Ice Age (some 13,000 years ago),
        the glaciers melted, leaving a long ridge of sediment sloping gradually
        from the top of the volcanic hills.
        When the castle was built atop the hill, the original city
        of Edinburgh grew on this ridge, reaching down in a ribbon of
        development toward the Abbey of Holyrood, at the foot of the hill in
        the east. In the 16th century, a strong city wall — now almost
        completely destroyed — protected the population. Combined with the
        geological setting of the city, this stifled development. Instead of
        expanding outward, the city had no choice but to grow upward.
        The famous tenements (or lands) began to be built. At
        least 6 stories high, they were reached through narrow alleys called
        closes or wynds that became the focus of city life. A constant
        cycle of building, decay, collapse, and rebuilding — plus the
        occasional catastrophic fire — gave the Old Town its characteristic
        irregular layout and chimney-strewn skyline.
        Edinburgh Castle
        The castle has always been considered the heart of
        Edinburgh, but its site is older than the city itself: Excavations show
        evidence of settlement in the Bronze Age (ca. 900 b.c. ). It dominates
        the skyline, sitting atop Castle Rock. The dramatically rising cliff of
        black basalt stone made the castle impregnable to all but the most wily
        commander. It was the seat of power for anyone who ruled the region,
        control of which passed from Scotland to England many times over the
        centuries.
        Following the Act of Union with England in 1707, the
        castle lost its strategic importance but later, in Victorian times,
        experienced a rebirth. The Victorians reworked the history and legends
        of Scotland to add romantic, neo-Gothic touches. They also greatly
        expanded the castle, for decorative purposes rather than for defense.
        Today Edinburgh Castle is the most-visited attraction in Scotland, with
        more than one million people passing through the entrance gate each
        year.
        A visit to the castle will take at least two hours, but
        many people spend far longer there. There is an informative recorded
        tape in several languages (you listen on headphones as you tour the
        attractions) to help you make the most of your visit. The extremely
        helpful and knowledgeable staff is more than happy to answer any
        questions that you have.
        Your first view of the castle will be the Gate House, which
        you pass through to reach the inner wards.  Built between 1886 and
        1888, the Gate House was a Victorian attempt to recapture the medieval
        castle style, but it was more a cosmetic addition than a defensive
        structure. The dry ditches in front, however, date from the 1650s. In
        the 1920s bronze statues of two Scottish heroes — William Wallace and
        Robert the Bruce — were added to the façade. In summer you will find an
        honor guard of kilted soldiers standing sentry on the walkway over the
        ditches.
        Once inside, you will find yourself in the lower ward, the
        area of the castle that has been most heavily bombarded in many
        military campaigns. The Old Guard House now houses one of four gift
        shops in the castle grounds. The walkway here once had a ditch and
        drawbridge to protect the inner gate, called Portcullis Gate, which was
        reconstructed in the late 16th century on 14th-century foundations. It
        was the main entrance to the castle, and a formidable obstacle to the
        enemy.
        Passing through Portcullis Gate, you enter the middle ward
        of the castle. To your right is the Argyll Battery, with a line of
        muzzle-loading eighteen-pound guns pointing out over the skyline of the
        New Town (a prime spot for spectacular photography shots). To your
        right are the Lang Stairs, which lead up to the medieval castle. Walk
        along past the battery to the Cart Shed, built in the aftermath of the
        Jacobian uprising in 1746. It now houses the castle café — with a good
        selection of snacks and hot meals — but was originally used to store
        the provisions carts. Beside the café is Mills Mount Battery, the
        location of the One OClock Gun, fired daily except Sunday at — you
        guessed it — 1pm. Be prepared, for it is indeed noisy.
        The cobbled street leads inexorably upward, past the
        Governors House and the New Barracks, neither of which is open to
        visitors. Eventually you will reach Foogs Gate, but take a right
        before you travel through the gate and follow the path around to the
        Castle Vaults. These were cut into the Castle Rock in the 15th century
        to create an extra floor of space; they offer a fascinating insight
        into the lives of the ordinary soldiers in days gone by. The vaults
        were used for a variety of mundane activities (bakery and storehouse)
        but also functioned as a prison and barracks. Prisoners, soldiers, and
        the soldiers families endured the same harsh conditions. Youll see
        messages on the walls of the vaults carved by French prisoners during
        their captivity.
        In the very bowels of the building is one of the most
        famous attractions in the castle. Mons Meg, a gun weighing 6040 kg (6.6
        tons), was a gift to James II in 1457 from his wifes uncle, Philip the
        Good, Duke of Burgundy. Manufactured in Mons (now in Belgium), the gun
        was state-of-the-art for the times, firing cannonballs weighing up to
        150-kg (331-lbs). It was a formidable weapon but weighed so much that
        it could be transported only 5-kms (3-miles) per day; often the
        fighting had finished before it could be brought into play. It was
        fired to celebrate the first wedding of Mary, Queen of Scots, to
        François II in 1558. In 1681, when fired as a birthday salute in honor
        of the Duke of Albany, Mons Meg burst her barrel and was retired from
        active duty.
        Return to Foogs Gate — the name and age of the gate remain
        a source of debate — to enter the upper ward and the oldest parts of
        the castle. Directly ahead is tiny St. Margarets Chapel, said to have
        been built by David I in the early 12th century in honor of his mother,
        Queen Margaret, who died in 1093. It is the oldest building in
        Edinburgh and is still the site of weddings and baptisms. Although the
        chapel has been renovated since its construction, you will find a
        wonderful example of a Romanesque arch in the interior. The
        stained-glass windows, one featuring a likeness of Margaret, were
        inserted into the existing openings in the 1920s.
        Another set of batteries can be found in an open area south
        of the chapel. They are built on the site of Davids Tower, once the
        largest and most formidable structure in the castle. Begun in 1368, it
        was the main royal lodging for centuries until it was battered and left
        a wreck during the Lang Siege of 1571–73. The remains of the
        tower — the rooms in its foundations — are currently being
        restored.
        Crown Square
        At the very pinnacle of the upper ward is Crown Square, a
        beautiful collection of buildings housing the treasures of Scotland. On
        your right as you enter the square is the Scottish National War
        Memorial, the highest building in the city. The building was originally
        a barracks building but was suitably refurbished by Sir Robert Lorimer
        in 1923 to commemorate the Scots who fell in World War I; the halls of
        remembrance now also commemorate those who died in World War II and all
        other conflicts. Inside are leather-bound regimental books with each
        servicepersons name duly inscribed. Splendidly ornate stone friezes
        realistically depict battle scenes of World War I, with each branch of
        the forces represented. There is also a chapel dedicated to women who
        sacrificed their lives for their country.
        Opposite the memorial is the Great Hall, built in 1503 for
        the wedding reception of James IV and the English Mary Tudor. It was
        later used as the ceremonial and legislative chamber. The original
        hammer-beam wooden roof is the highlight of the design, with thick
        beams and painted decorations. Be sure to see the monogram of
        James — IR4 — on some of the stone brackets, along with the red rose
        and the thistle signifying the new alliance of Scotland and England.
        The hall was used as a barracks through much of its later history
        before being renovated in 1887. The interior décor now says much more
        about the Victorians romantic image of Scotland than it does about how
        the room would have really looked: The walls are lined with suits of
        armor and swords.
        Along the east side of Crown Square is the Royal Palace,
        home to the most precious of the countrys treasures: the Royal Regalia
        of Scotland. The palace, much altered over the generations, was
        generally used as a residence only at times of dynastic importance or
        danger, when Holyrood, down in the lowland, was difficult to defend. On
        19 June 1566 Mary Stuart gave birth to her son James (the future James
        VI of Scotland and James I of England) in the small antechamber off a
        larger room known as Queen Marys Room. The last monarch to spend a
        night in the palace was Charles I, in 1633.
        On the upper floors (once the royal chambers) there is an
        exhibition telling the story of the royal regalia. Called the Honours
        of Scotland, these are said to be the oldest complete set — crown,
        scepter, and sword — in Europe, unchanged since 1640. There are
        displays of artisans creating the jewels — look for models with an
        uncanny resemblance to John Lennon and Paul McCartney. The highlights
        of the tour are the honours themselves, lying on blue velvet in a
        secure glass cabinet in the Crown Room. The Scottish crown was
        fashioned of gold mined in Scotland, greatly embellished during the
        reign of Scotlands James III (1460–1488). The scepter and sword were
        each papal gifts, the former in 1494 and the latter in 1507; these
        reinforced the links between Scotland and Rome. Following union with
        England in 1707, however, there was little use for the Scottish
        regalia. They were locked in a trunk in a sealed room in Edinburgh
        Castle for 111 years before Sir Walter Scott received permission to
        open the room in 1818.
        Next to the regalia sits the Stone of Destiny, or Stone of
        Scone, which historically served as the seat on which Scottish kings
        were crowned, a symbol of the land over which they would rule. In 1296
        the stone was captured by the English from its resting place in Scone
        Abbey and taken to London. It has been used during crowning ceremonies
        for all English (then British) monarchs since that time, sitting under
        the coronation throne throughout the ceremony. In 1996 the stone was
        returned to Scotland amid great pomp, though it will make the journey
        to Westminster Abbey in London when the next coronation of a British
        monarch takes place.
        On the lower floor of the Royal Palace, Laich Hall has been
        restored as closely as possible to its 1617 décor, using traditional
        techniques and colors. This was where the monarch met advisers and
        diplomats.
        Leaving the castle, you will walk across the Esplanade, a
        broad open area originally created for regimental drill practice. Today
        it is usually used as the castle parking lot, but it offers superb
        views of both Princes Street to the north and the Old Town to the
        south. In August each year, the Esplanade is filled by a temporary
        arena erected for performances of the Military Tattoo.
        The Royal Mile
        The town of Edinburgh eventually spread out below the
        castle, with a main street leading out the entrance and down to
        Holyrood Palace. In the 16th century this thoroughfare became known as
        the Royal Mile because it was the route used by royalty to make their
        way from the castle to Holyrood. Although a mile long, its name is
        misleading because it is not one street but several different streets.
        In former times it even crossed the old outer boundary of Edinburgh
        before it reached the palace.
        Since the route has never seen any major redevelopment, it
        has grown haphazardly but organically over the centuries. Some of the
        buildings date from the 16th century, but it is also lined with
        buildings of almost every era, including numerous 17th- and
        18th-century tenements called lands, sometimes 13 stories high. These
        were the residential areas of the city, considered desirable when they
        were first built. Later they were often home to many large families,
        rife with overcrowding and unsanitary conditions. A stroll along the
        Royal Mile will take around 30-minutes, but stop and explore the
        various attractions on its path and you might find that this one-mile
        journey will last a whole day.
        Before you leave the castles Esplanade, be sure to see the
        small bronze fountain on the wall to the left of the entrance. This is
        the Witches Well, marking the spot where women condemned for black
        magic were burned at the stake.
        Beyond the Esplanade you enter the first section of the
        Royal Mile, a narrow, cobbled street called Castlehill. On your left
        you will find the Edinburgh Old Town Weaving Company, where you can
        follow the journey of wool from the sheep to the finished product. You
        can watch a tartan pattern being woven by machine and then choose from
        over 150 tartans in the shop. There is an exhibition of highland dress,
        showing how it developed through the centuries. There are also gift
        shops selling quality Scottish products. The building itself was at one
        time the major water storage facility for the wealthy residents of the
        New Town. Built in 1850, it had a capacity of 1.5 million-gallons of
        water.
        Next to the weaving center, across narrow Ramsey Street,
        are the Outlook Tower and its camera obscura, set high above the
        tenement chimneystacks. A series of lenses and prisms projects a live
        image of the city onto a concave viewing screen inside the camera. It
        was built in the 1850s, when cameras were the height of fashion.
        Several people at one time can sit inside and watch the city at work.
        The experience is best when the weather is bright. There is a viewing
        platform around the camera, allowing first-hand viewing of the
        cityscape; there are also helpful explanatory maps pointing out the
        highlights on the horizon.
        Across Castlehill is the Scottish Whisky Heritage Centre,
        which tells the story of the development of Scottish whisky with
        interesting displays. You can also explore the various tastes of this
        complex drink, comparing over 100 single malts. Bottles of your
        favorites are available in the gift shop on the first floor.
        At the bottom of Castlehill, where the road meets Johnston
        Terrace, is the old Tolbooth Kirk (kirk means church), which has the
        highest steeple in the city at 73 m (239 ft). In the late 1990s the
        church underwent a massive renovation and now acts as the permanent
        center and offices for the Edinburgh International Festival. It has
        been re-christened the Hub.
        Lawnmarket
        Beyond the Hub, the Royal Mile is known as Lawnmarket. This
        was once the commercial center of the Old Town, including a weekly
        fabric market. There are several old lands found down the narrow wynds
        leading off the main street. Gladstones Land, built in 1620, still has
        its period shopfronts at the roadside.
        Behind Gladstones Land is Lady Stairs Close, which leads
        to Lady Stairs House, now home to the Writers Museum. The house
        (dating from 1622) has been beautifully renovated, and contains
        artifacts from the life of three important Scottish authors: Robert
        Burns, Sir Walter Scott, and Robert Louis Stevenson. You will find
        portraits, manuscripts, and personal effects from all three. The
        Stevenson exhibition on the lower floor is particularly interesting,
        with photographs of the author traveling around the world before his
        untimely death at the age of 44 in Samoa.
        Next to the Writers Museum is James Court, built in the
        1720s. The philosopher David Hume lived here and was regularly visited
        by the economist Adam Smith and by Dr. Samuel Johnson. The court must
        have been a hotbed of social reform at the time. At the corner of
        Lawnmarket and Bank Street is Deacon Brodies Tavern. Named after the
        city gentleman and infamous burglar, it is one of the best-known pubs
        in the city. Look left down Bank Street to see the ornate façade of the
        Bank of Scotland headquarters, a symbol of the citys continuing
        important position in the financial world.
        High Street
        As you approach St. Giles Cathedral, the Royal Mile becomes
        High Street. On the left you will find a bronze statue of David Hume,
        depicted in calm, thoughtful pose.
        St. Giles Cathedral, on your right, was the original parish
        church for the city and has been at the center of many of its most
        important developments. There has been a Christian place of worship on
        the site since the 9th century. Parts of the interior date back to 1100
        and its crown spire is 500 years old; much of the exterior, however, is
        from the early 19th century.
        St. Giles was a cathedral for only five years of its long
        history. A more accurate title for the edifice is the High Kirk of
        Edinburgh. Yet its not only the building itself that is fascinating;
        it is also its place in Scottish history. St. Giles was the church of
        John Knox, the great Protestant reformer. From 1559 to 1572 his fiery
        Calvinist sermons influenced worshippers far beyond the cathedral walls
        and fueled the religious discontent that split the population.
        Visit the small chapel dedicated to the Most Ancient and
        Most Noble Order of the Thistle, the highest order of chivalry in
        Scotland. The order was founded by James VII (James II of England) and
        continues today. There are a maximum of 16 knights at any one time,
        headed by the reigning monarch.
        Outside the cathedral you will find a statue of John Knox
        with Bible in hand. It was erected in 1906 not far from the reformers
        supposed burial site. Nearby is a statue of Charles II on a steed.
        Completed in 1688, it is the oldest equestrian statue made of lead in
        Britain. Look also for the heart-shaped stone mosaic on the pavement
        here, marking the site of the Edinburgh Tolbooth. The building
        collected city taxes during the 14th century but fulfilled several
        additional functions in later centuries. It was the prison and place of
        execution immortalized in the novel Heart of Midlothian, by Sir Walter
        Scott. It was demolished in 1817.
        Parliament Square, adjacent to the cathedral, is home to
        Parliament House. After its construction in 1639, it held sessions of
        the Scottish Parliament until the Act of Union in 1707, but since the
        19th century it has been an integral part of the Scottish Law Courts.
        Youll see solicitors (lawyers) walking the alleyways and streets
        around the building, carrying briefs in hand and adorned by wigs and
        capes.
        Between the cathedral and the High Street entrance to the
        courts is the Mercat Cross. The first cross erected here, in the 14th
        century, marked the heart of the marketplace and provided a place for
        royal proclamations to be given a public hearing. It was also a place
        of execution. The present cross, erected in 1756, is the starting point
        for many walking tours of the Old Town.
        Across High Street you will find the old Royal Exchange,
        built in the 1750s, which was taken over by the town council for
        Edinburghs City Chambers in 1811. The chambers stand on the site of
        St. Marys Close, an old tenement abandoned in the mid-17th century
        after the entire population had been wiped out by bubonic plague. The
        close can still be seen beneath the present buildings, and guided tours
        are available despite the areas reputation as a spot haunted by
        victims of the disease. If you take an evening tour, be prepared! Next
        to the chambers, Anchor Close was once home to the printing works of
        William Smellie, editor and printer of the first edition of the
        Encyclopaedia Britannica, which appeared in 1768.
        Continuing down High Street, you will walk past several
        stores selling highland dress and cashmere before you reach John Knox
        House, on the left side of the road. Said to be the oldest dwelling
        house in the city, it dates from 1490. John Knox was a tenant here from
        1651 to 1672, but the house was owned by James Mosman, a royal
        goldsmith, and his wife Mariota Arres; a plaque bearing their initials
        can be seen on the outer wall. Opened as a museum in 1853, the small
        rooms display Knox memorabilia and the influential manuscripts from
        which he preached his Calvinist texts.
        Directly across High Street from Knox House is the Museum
        of Childhood, said to be the noisiest museum in the world. Dedicated to
        games and toys of yesteryear, it is perhaps more suited to adults than
        children. Youll find many amusing exhibits of street games, clockwork
        figures, dolls, and teddy bears to bring back memories of your own
        youth. The museum also has an interesting gift shop featuring toys of
        all types.
        Canongate
        The Royal Mile becomes Canongate where it intersects St.
        Marys Street. This is the former boundary of the town of Edinburgh and
        the neighboring town, called Canongate, which was a community of
        aristocrats and members of the royal court serving Holyrood Palace. The
        two towns were united in 1856. Canongate derived its name from an edict
        by David I (1124–1157), founder of the Abbey of Holyrood, who granted a
        right to raise a gate between the abbey and the Royal burgh of
        Edinburgh.
        Several historical buildings lead off Canongate, and a
        number have interesting stories to tell. Chessels Land, on the left,
        was the place where Deacon Brodie was finally caught in 1788. Old
        Playhouse Close was the site of a theater where performances resulted
        in so many riots that it was closed in 1767, after only 20 years.
        Dating from around 1625, Moray House saw a visit from Oliver Cromwell,
        Lord Protector of England; the house stayed in the Moray family until
        the mid-19th century.
        On the left as you walk, you will see the Canongate
        Tolbooth, with its distinctive clocktower overhanging the pavement. The
        building on the site dates from 1591 and served as a council chamber
        and courthouse for the town in addition to collecting tolls. Today the
        Tolbooth houses The Peoples Story, a museum charting the history of
        the ordinary folk of the city from the 18th century to the present day.
        Reconstructions of workshops, pubs, and family rooms show how people
        lived in previous eras, augmented by written and oral testimonies from
        townsfolk and a 20-minute introductory video.
        Facing the Tolbooth is Huntly House Museum, the local
        history museum for the city, presenting exhibits dating from
        prehistoric times to the present. The house itself dates from the 16th
        century. Inside you can find a model of the city as it appeared at that
        time, as well as the National Covenant document signed by leading
        Scottish churchmen to protest the attempt by Charles I to introduce
        Episcopacy (Church of England doctrine) to Scotland. On a more mundane
        but equally fascinating level, you will see the collar and bowl of
        Greyfriars Bobby (see page 57). Behind Huntly House is Acheson House,
        home to the Scottish Craft Centre.
        Nearby Canongate Church was built in 1688, and the
        churchyard has a number of famous residents.  Buried here are the
        economist Adam Smith, the poet Robert Ferguson, and Mrs. Agnes McLehose
        (the Clarinda of Burnss love poems).
        As the gates of Holyrood Palace come into view, Whitehorse
        Close can be seen on the left. This was the site of the White Horse
        Inn, the main coaching house at the end of the London–Edinburgh route.
        On the right you will see the new Scottish Parliament Building,
        construction of which began in 1999, and beyond the museum Our Dynamic
        Earth.
        Holyrood
        Cross the busy road at the bottom of Canongate to enter the
        Holyrood area, Edinburghs current royal quarter. It comprises the
        palace, abbey, and park along with their historic attractions. The
        easternmost stretch of the Royal Mile — only 50 m- (55 yards-)
        long — is called Abbey Strand. It is flanked by a building that
        protected aristocratic debtors (known as the Abbey Lairds) from arrest
        and certain imprisonment; civil authorities had no jurisdiction within
        the Abbey grounds and could not enter to arrest them.
        Palace of Holyroodhouse
        The Palace of Holyroodhouse is the official residence in
        Scotland of the reigning British monarch. However, it began life with a
        totally different purpose. In 1128 the king, David I, ceded land to the
        Augustinian order for the creation of the Abbey of Holyrood. The name
        Holyrood means holy cross (the Scottish word for cross is rood),
        and it is suggested that it is derived from the fact that David gave
        the abbey a cross that had been owned by his mother, Queen Margaret
        (later St. Margaret).
        Legend gives us a different account: When David was hunting
        in the woods, he was about to be attacked by a stag when the figure of
        a cross appeared between the antlers of the beast, which backed away
        from the king. David gave funds to build an abbey on this site in the
        depths of the forest in gratitude for his survival.
        With its detailed carvings, the beautiful abbey was an
        important center of worship but continued to have royal connections
        because of the surrounding hunting grounds. The royal entourage needed
        some form of lodging, and a guesthouse was built adjoining the abbey to
        be used as a base for hunting parties.
        Scottish kings came to favor the site, and it was James IV
        who decided to transform the simple lodgings into a true royal palace.
        In 1501 he had plans drawn up, which his son James V expanded after his
        death in 1513. In 1529 work started on a tower and royal apartments for
        James and his wife, Mary of Guise, which now constitute the western
        section and tower of the current palace. Mary, Queen of Scots, later
        occupied apartments here, and there are decorative friezes in the rooms
        from that time.
        In 1544 the English invaded, set fire to the palace, and
        sacked the abbey. The great tower, however, survived. It was
        refurbished and the whole palace greatly extended in the following
        years. Early in 1650 Oliver Cromwell stationed his garrison here while
        attempting to subdue the rebellious Scottish monarchists; he was
        victorious at the Battle of Dunbar. Later that year another devastating
        fire destroyed much of the structure — though not the tower — and
        Cromwell made funds available to rebuild the structure. But both the
        design and workmanship were considered poor.
        Following the return of the British monarchy in 1660,
        Cromwells work was redone and the buildings extended. Charles II never
        saw the palace on which he lavished so much money (the royal coffers
        expended £57,000, a fortune at the time), but he created the foundation
        of what we see today, with its amazing ornamental plaster work and
        carved wood paneling. His heir James VI lived at the castle in the
        1680s, when the paint was barely dry.
        During the 18th century Holyrood was neglected by
        succeeding British monarchs, who preferred to stay in their London
        residence, though Scottish noble families lived within the compound. It
        was not until 1822, when George IV made a state visit, that the
        fortunes of the palace revived. Since then, almost every reigning
        monarch has spent time (or held soirées) at Holyrood. The palace has
        been carefully tended throughout the 20th century.
        Visitors can tour the palace only when the monarch is not
        in residence. Queen Elizabeth will usually spend time in early August,
        but you should check with tourist authorities if Holyrood is a must-see
        for you. Helpful guides take you down the long corridors and through
        the most interesting rooms.
        The Great Stair is the formal approach to the royal
        apartments in the southwestern tower. The plaster ceilings here date
        from 1678 and depict angels carrying the symbols of royal power: crown,
        scepter, sword, and wreath of laurel leaves. The Royal Dining Room is
        situated at the top of the Great Stair. This majestic room is used for
        modern-day entertaining when the queen hosts dinners and banquets. On
        the walls are portraits of Bonnie Prince Charlie and his brother,
        Prince Henry.
        The Throne Room is one of a series of apartments built
        during the reign of Charles II, though it was originally designed as a
        guard room that screened entrants to the private chambers beyond. The
        thrones on view here date from a visit by George V and Queen Mary in
        1927.
        Two magnificent state rooms follow, both designed by Sir
        William Bruce as part of the extensions and refurbishment in the 1660s.
        The Evening and Morning Drawing Rooms (originally the Presence Chamber
        and the Privy Chamber) were designed to meet visiting dignitaries and
        are splendid in their detail; the oak-paneled ceiling is superbly
        decorated. Be sure to take a look at the painting above the mantle. The
        scene, depicting Cupid and Psyche, was considered too risqué for the
        eyes of Queen Victoria, and during her reign it was covered by a
        mirror. The Kings Antechamber was where he entertained his more
        favored guests.
        Next is the Kings Bedchamber, perhaps the most richly
        decorated room in the royal apartments. Seventeenth-century tapestries
        depicting heroic scenes from the life of Alexander the Great adorn the
        walls. Although the bed dates from the 1680s, it has never been slept
        in by royalty. It belongs to the Hamilton family, who have served as
        hereditary keepers of the palace. Beyond this is the Kings Closet,
        where only his intimate entourage would be admitted for evenings of
        drinking and card games.
        From the kings apartments you will enter the Great
        Gallery, a long room that is home to 89 portraits of Scottish rules
        dating back to antiquity. Commissioned by Charles II, the paintings
        were all the work of one man, Dutch artist Jacob de Wit. De Wit worked
        from likenesses of actual monarchs to produce his portraits. For
        ancient or legendary kings such as Fergus — who was said to have been
        related to the Pharaohs of Egypt — fashionable imagery of the time
        helped to create the finished figures. De Wit was paid a reasonable
        stipend of £120 per year to produce the works, examples of which can
        also be seen in other rooms of the palace.
        The oldest part of the palace, the James V Tower (once
        called the Great Tower), is for many the highlight of the tour. Its
        strong stone walls, which survived both fires in the 16th century,
        sheltered rooms that were occupied by Mary Stuart and her second
        husband, Lord Darnley, in the 1560s. On the third floor is the Bed
        Chamber of Mary, Queen of Scots, with her antechambers surrounding it.
        A set of stairs connects her room to that occupied by her husband.
        Nearby is the Outer Chamber of Mary, Queen of Scots, where
        she socialized with her favorites and debated religion with John Knox.
        It is also where her secretary, David Rizzio, was left to bleed to
        death after being stabbed by Lord Darnley and his cronies; a bronze
        plaque marks the spot. You will find a number of Marys personal
        effects on display. The chambers were totally refurbished by Charles
        II, including larger windows to balance the design of the new
        extensions. However, the original ceiling of Marys bedchamber is still
        in place.
        Abbey of Holyrood and the Park
        Outside, set in manicured gardens, are the remains of the
        Abbey of Holyrood. Today it comprises little more than the walls of the
        church nave. The rest of the abbey was raised to the ground in 1570,
        but the church was saved because it was a parish church and therefore
        served the local community. Ornate carvings on the stone façade can
        still just be discerned, though they have suffered greatly through
        weathering and pollution. A small stone tomb in the southeast corner
        houses the bones of several members of the royal family. Originally,
        these all had separate burial sites, but they were sacked by religious
        protesters. Queen Victoria arranged for the bones of David II, James
        II, James V, and Lord Darnley to be re-interred in a common tomb.
        To the south of the palace are the green landscapes of
        Holyrood Park, including the volcanic peak known as Arthurs Seat. Once
        royal hunting grounds, today these areas are used for open-air events,
        concerts, and fireworks displays; the parks trees are almost
        completely gone. On sunny summer days, people picnic and families spend
        time in the fresh air. The rugged peak of Arthurs Seat, 251 m (823 ft)
        in height, can be reached by footpaths all around its base. The path
        nearest the palace takes walkers along the base of Salisbury Crags, a
        volcanic ridge. The views from the summit of Arthurs Seat — nobody is
        quite sure which Arthur gave his name to the hill — offer wonderful
        views of the city and across the Firth of Forth to the north.
        On the far side of Arthurs Seat is Duddingston Loch, which
        operates as a bird sanctuary. Duddingston Kirk, near the banks of the
        loch, is one of the oldest Scottish churches still in regular use,
        founded in the 12th century. Extensions date from the 17th century,
        including a watchtower erected in the early 1800s to deter body
        snatchers. On the causeway leading off Old Church Lane is Prince
        Charlies Cottage, where the Young Pretender stayed in 1745 while
        planning his strategy to defeat the English and retake the British
        throne.
        Back in the city, the Scottish Parliament Building
        overlooks the palace, the park, and Arthurs Seat. The design for the
        new building was the subject of a competition won by Spanish architect
        and designer Enric Miralles. Construction began in 1999.
        Directly in front of Parliament, on Holyrood Road, is Our
        Dynamic Earth, which opened in July 1999 in a futuristic building under
        a brilliant white-tented roof. This interactive journey through the
        history of the earth takes you back to the moment of the Big Bang. 
        Experience the formation of the continental plates and the development
        of different climatic regions, then explore the complex and dynamic
        interactions that make our planet work. The exhibits are entertaining
        and educational for all age groups, posing questions about our roles as
        managers of the earths resources and the future of the planet. The fun
        parts include getting to touch an iceberg, experiencing the effects of
        an earthquake in total safety, and lying on the floor of the Showdome
        to watch exciting weather phenomena flashing above.
        Grassmarket and Greyfriars
        In the shadows of the southern walls of Edinburgh Castle
        lies the rectangular space of Grassmarket. Starting in 1477 this was a
        marketplace for local farmers as well as one of the main sites for
        executions in the city. Huge crowds would gather for the gory
        events — as they did for the markets — and a series of hostelries and
        pubs set up business to cater to them. Some of these still operate,
        putting out tables in summer so you can enjoy alfresco drinks and food.
        Grassmarket has a memorial to the Covenanters (Scottish Protestant
        clergymen) martyred by Catholic Stuart kings in the 17th century.
        From Grassmarket, a road runs parallel to the Royal Mile to
        Holyrood on a lower level. It has a number of bridges spanning its
        route, creating a shadowy, dark, and almost somber appearance. The
        alleyways and passages leading off this main thoroughfare are some of
        the oldest in the city.
        Below Grassmarket is Cowgate, known for generations as the
        Irish Quarter because many families came here to escape the potato
        famine in their own country. At the western end of Cowgate (where it
        meets Holyrood Road), you will see one of the few remaining sections of
        Edinburghs old city wall (Flodden Wall), built following the Lang
        Siege of the 1570s. In some ways the wall itself was responsible for
        subsequent overcrowding and disease because people were too frightened
        to live outside it.
        West Bow (said to be so named because it was within a bows
        length of the castle walls) and Candlemakers Row are streets leading
        away from Cowgate Head, at the end of Grassmarket. Here youll find
        interesting shops for antiques, collectibles, and antiquarian books.
        Both these streets lead to the upper level of the George IV Bridge.
        From Candlemakers Row, enter the Greyfriars Churchyard
        through a gate on the right. The Greyfriars Church was closely linked
        with the Protestant Covenanters, and many of those hanged in the
        Grassmarket are buried here. The church was opened in 1620 — the first
        one after the Reformation — and the National Covenant was signed here
        in 1638. The church became a barracks during Oliver Cromwells
        occupation of the city in the 1650; in 1718 there was an explosion of
        gunpowder that had been stored by city fathers in the tower. Fire did
        further damage in 1845. Greyfriars Church was restored in 1938 to
        produce the building you see now.
        The graveyard has some extremely ornate and fascinating
        tombs, replete with skulls and crossbones and other symbols of death.
        Gravestones rest along the tenement walls marking the outer perimeter.
        Some of the eminent citizens buried here are George Buchanan, tutor to
        Mary Queen of Scots; James Craig, architect of Edinburghs New Town;
        and Joseph Black, physicist and chemist. You will also find the grave
        of Greyfriars Bobby, just beside the main entrance. From here you can
        see some of the most impressive views of the complex layout of the Old
        Town, with layer upon layer of crenulated rooftops and hundreds of
        chimneystacks.
        The main gate of the churchyard leads out to Greyfriars
        Place, and across the street you will find an excellent view of one of
        Scotlands newest museums.
        The Museum of Scotland, with its main entrance on Chambers
        Street, is housed in a remarkable new museum building (opened in 1998)
        designed by architects Benson and Forsyth. It charts the history of
        Scotland, bringing under one roof a number of important collections of
        artifacts. The story begins 3.4 billion years ago with displays of
        fossils and rock, marking the geological changes that forged the
        landscape. It continues through the turbulent eras of Scottish history
        for both church and state, and on to the industrial developments of
        modern times.
        Fascinating details such as Bonnie Prince Charlies
        traveling canteen of cutlery, along with his sword and targe (a small
        bag), bring history to life. Exhibits are devoted to Scottish pioneers
        Sir Alexander Fleming and Alexander Graham Bell, among others. A fine
        collection of medieval church artifacts and Celtic carvings can be
        found on the first floor. A roof terrace offers panoramic views over
        the city skyline, and there is an excellent restaurant on the third
        floor.
        This new museum was built as an annex to the existing Royal
        Museum, a beautiful Victorian edifice with a large glass roof — much
        like a glass house. The Royal Museum has displays devoted to
        anthropology, archaeology, natural sciences, and technology.
        Collections such as Asian art and Egyptian artifacts are on terraced
        balconies, allowing a full view of the roof from the ground floor.
        There are always several temporary exhibits to explore, along with a
        café and gift shop. Tickets for the Museum of Scotland allow entrance
        also to the main collections of the Royal Museum, fulfilling the stated
        aim of the curators of bringing Scotland to the world, and the world
        to Scotland. 
        The two museums are at the heart of the old University of
        Edinburgh quarter, with students still attending lectures in the
        sandstone buildings. Although the campus has grown and now occupies
        sites all around the city, the streets here have cheap eateries, stores
        selling eclectic clothing, and bookstores; James Thin, on South Bridge,
        is the largest bookstore in the city.
        South of the museum, a short walk down Forest Road brings
        you to the Edinburgh Royal Infirmary. The city has a long-standing
        international reputation for research and development, which began in
        1681 with the founding of the Royal College of Physicians. The School
        of Medicine followed only a few years later. The first infirmary was
        founded in 1737; in 1805 the Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal was
        the first in the world published to promote discussion and knowledge of
        medicine. Joseph Lister pioneered the use of carbolic acid to keep
        wounds clean, and James Young Simpson experimented with chloroform as
        an anesthetic.
        Opposite the infirmary, with an entrance on Lauriston
        Place, is the ornate George Heriot School. Although not open to the
        public, its towers and beautifully carved stone walls can be seen from
        various vantage points in the city. It has an interesting story to
        tell. George Heriot was banker, goldsmith, and jeweler to James IV.
        When he died in 1624, he bequeathed his fortune to the education and
        upkeep of orphans, and the school was subsequently built for this
        purpose.
        The New Town
        By the beginning of the 18th century, life in the city of
        Edinburgh (todays Old Town) was overcrowded and unsanitary. The city
        had grown very little since the 14th century, yet its population was
        said to be over 50,000. Large families lived in high tenements, sharing
        a well with hundreds of other families. Sewage and dirty water were
        thrown from upper floors to the streets below and left to fester.
        In 1725 the provost of the city, George Drummond, first
        raised the possibility of expansion to the northeast, across what was
        called Barefoots Parks to the green fields beyond. His ideas were not
        made official until 1752, and it was another 14 years before plans were
        put into place for a competition to create a design for this new
        development, to be called the New Town.
        There were logistical problems to be overcome. At the foot
        of the castle was Nor Loch, a large expanse of water that required
        draining. There would also have to be adequate access between the older
        and newer parts of town, including a bridge over the valley between
        Barefoots Parks and the Royal Mile. The prize for the competition
        winner was a gold medal — along with world fame.
        The winner, announced in 1766, was James Craig, an unknown
        23-year-old architect and native of the city. His plan was a simple
        grid: a symmetrical design with straight streets and grand squares. The
        recent union with England was the inspiration for street names such as
        Rose and Thistle.  Craig also praised the royal family with George
        Street, Queen Street, and Princes Street. Surprisingly, the plan
        contained little detail for the buildings that would line the streets
        and frame the squares. Instead, Craig concentrated on the overall
        design.
        In 1763 construction had already begun on North Bridge,
        which would provide access from the Old Town. Nor Loch was drained
        (creating land for todays Princes Street Gardens), and the Mound was
        constructed to provide a second, westerly access between the two
        settlements. Initial demand for land in the New Town was not
        spectacular; in fact, incentives had to be offered to entice
        buyers.
        The first houses built here did not adhere to any set
        design. In 1782, after only a few years, the city decided to impose
        planning guidelines. At the same time, an architect named Robert Adam
        became popular in the fashionable circles of the well-to-do, having
        made a name for himself in England. It was he who would add the flesh
        of handsome buildings to the bones of Craigs design.
        By the beginning of the 19th century, the New Town had
        become so popular that plans were made for a second stage. This would
        be a largely residential area extending north from Queen Street,
        incorporating a number of traffic circles (circuses) as well as
        straight roads. Most influential at this stage was architect William
        Playfair, and his flair can be seen in many of the streets and public
        buildings of the time. These streets are still largely residential and
        make an interesting area to stroll, displaying a wealth of original
        detail. Edinburgh became known as the Athens of the North for both
        its aesthetic beauty and its wealth of talented individuals. Notable
        artists, writers, philosophers, and scientists seemed to flock to the
        city.
        Today the streets of the New Town have perhaps the
        greatest collection of Georgian architecture in the world. Many areas
        enjoy protected status to save them for future generations to enjoy.
        Because so many buildings are still residences, however, there are
        relatively few attractions to visit compared with the Old Town.
        Princes Street
        Looking north from the high ground of the Old Town, the
        first street you can see is Princes Street. It was once regarded as the
        most beautiful street in Europe, a claim that is difficult to
        understand today since so many of the original buildings have been
        replaced. Princes Street is to Scots what Oxford Street is to the
        English — the premier shopping street of the land. Wide walkways have
        plenty of room for shoppers, and there are splendid views of the castle
        all along its length.
        On the south side of the street — in the open ground below
        the castle and on the site of the formerly marshy Nor Loch — are
        Princes Street Gardens, a welcome place to relax in a sunny day. The
        West Gardens have a number of interesting memorial statues and
        sculptures, including the Scottish American War Memorial and the Royal
        Scots Memorial.
        An the center of the gardens is Ross Open Air Bandstand,
        which plays host to free concerts throughout the year, particularly
        during the festival season. During the summer, beside the flight of
        steps carrying people up to the Mound, you will find the Floral Clock.
        Planted with hundreds of pretty blooms, all in pristine condition, it
        has kept accurate time since its creation in 1903.
        The West and East Gardens are split by the Mound, an
        artificial slope of rock and soil that carries a road connecting the
        New Town with the Old. Here you will find two of the most important
        galleries in the city, housed in classical buildings designed by
        Playfair. Set back from Princes Street is the National Gallery of
        Scotland, opened in 1858, which houses a collection of works by native
        Scottish artists and international masters. The collection — and indeed
        the building itself — is not huge or overbearing, allowing visitors to
        relax and enjoy the art perhaps more than is possible in such massive
        galleries as the Louvre or Rijksmuseum. Initially known as the Royal
        Institute in the 1830s, the National Gallery benefited from a number of
        bequests, not least that of the Duke of Sutherland in 1946. In 1995 the
        gallery and Londons Victoria and Albert Museum jointly purchased The
        Three Graces, a sculpture by Antonio Canova that was in danger of being
        sold abroad.
        What it lacks in size, the gallery makes up for in
        quality. Works such as Raphaels Bridgewater Madonna, a Rembrandt
        Self-Portrait, and Velázquezs Old Woman Cooking Eggs are only three
        from a collection that includes pieces by Titian, Van Dyck, Rubens,
        Constable, Turner, and Vermeer. Scottish artists include Allan Ramsey,
        Sir Henry Raeburn, and Sir David Wilkie.
        In front of the National Gallery is the Royal Scottish
        Academy building, designed as almost its twin. It holds regular
        exhibits and displays by academy members.
        Between the two buildings, East Princes Gardens are
        smaller than the West Gardens. In winter a large ice rink covers the
        lawns, where you can enjoy outdoor skating in a picturesque setting.
        Rising above the flower beds is the solemn Scott Monument, complete
        with a resident flock of pigeons that badger people on surrounding park
        benches for crumbs. The Scott Monument is a huge, stone Gothic
        structure with four buttresses supporting a spire. The whole edifice is
        61 m (200 ft) high. In its shadow sits the statue of no velist Sir
        Walter Scott (and his faithful dog, Maida) carved from Cararra marble.
        Designed by George Meikle Kemp, an unknown draftsman of humble birth,
        the monument took its inspiration from the design of Melrose Abbey.
        Sixty-four additional statuettes carved into the structure represent
        characters from Scotts books. Steps inside the outer columns lead up
        to galleries at four levels, and the view from the top gallery is
        spectacular.
        A small garden to the west of the Scott Monument has a
        memorial to David Livingstone, the explorer and missionary. Created by
        Amelia Hill, it is the only statue in the garden to have been sculpted
        by a woman. When it was unveiled, it received much criticism because
        many thought it too small to occupy an open space.
        Beyond the two monuments is Waverley Bridge. Here you can
        pick up buses for a tour of city attractions. This is also the site of
        Waverley Station, and the sound of arriving trains can be heard as
        background noise throughout the day. The lines take a dramatic route
        through ditches cut through Princes Street Gardens and under the Mound
        (in the National Gallery you can feel a faint movement as the trains
        travel underneath). Waverley Street Shopping Centre, which sits on the
        corner of Princes Street, is where you will find the main Tourist
        Information Office.
        On the south side of the station is Market Street, which
        was one of the principle market sites during the Victorian era. Market
        Street is home to the Edinburgh City Art Gallery, showcasing the work
        of up-and-coming artists. On the same street you will also find the
        ticket office for the Military Tattoo (see pages 35), with an
        accompanying gallery and souvenir shop.
        At the eastern end of Princes Street is Register House,
        completed in 1788 from a design by Robert Adam and built for the
        Scottish public records office. Today it stores land-registry papers
        and is the haunt of solicitors and professional researchers. In front
        of the building is a statue of the Duke of Wellington, resplendent in
        battle dress and cloak astride his trusty steed, Copenhagen.
        George Street
        George Street was the centerpiece of Craigs original
        design for the New Town. The grand thoroughfare, anchored at each end
        by a large square, had a symmetrical pattern of streets on both its
        flanks.
        George Street was the traditional center of Edinburghs
        financial district. Behind the strong, plain, painted doors, many
        successful bankers increased the wealth of their trusting investors.
        Scottish banking has long been held in high regard, and it still plays
        an important part in the world of finance. However, the
        buildings — beautiful though they are — have not been able to
        accommodate modern computerized banking equipment; increasingly, the
        institutions have moved to modern buildings around the city. This
        doesnt make George Street an empty shell. Where banks have moved out,
        fashionable wine bars and restaurants have moved in, making it a great
        place to come for drinks or dinner.
        The western end of George Street begins at Charlotte
        Square, originally named St. Georges Square after the patron saint of
        England (mirroring St. Andrews Square at the streets eastern end,
        which was named for the patron saint of Scotland). The name was changed
        to honor Queen Charlotte — George IIIs wife — who felt a little upset
        at having been left out of the original plans. After all, her husband
        and two sons had roads named after them: George Street and Princes
        Street.
        Charlotte Square is arguably the jewel of the New Town.
        The façades of elegant houses on the north side were designed by Adam
        and have changed little since they were finished in 1805. In the center
        of the terrace is Georgian House, owned by the National Trust and
        restored in period style to show the workings of a typical Georgian
        household. All of the many pieces in the house are authentic, including
        a huge array of kitchen utensils, crockery, cutlery, furniture,
        carpets, and curtains. Most surprising is the fact that the bedchamber
        is on the first floor rather than on the second; upper-floor bedrooms
        became fashionable only at a later date.
        On the western flank of the square, West Register House,
        designed originally as a church (St. Georges), was taken over by the
        government in 1960 and is now part of the Public Records Office. The
        building at the corner of Charlotte Square and South Charlotte Street
        was the birthplace of Alexander Graham Bell, inventor of the telephone.
        Plans are in place to turn the house into a museum charting the life
        and works of this extraordinary man.
        Four streets to the east on George Street, the most
        stunning building on St. Andrews Square is that belonging to the Royal
        Bank of Scotland. Originally a house, it was designed by Sir William
        Chambers and completed in 1772; the dome was added in 1858.
        Scottish National Portrait Gallery
        From St. Andrews Square, it is only a short walk north to
        Queen Street, where you will find the Scottish National Portrait
        Gallery on the corner. More than 200 paintings of famous — and
        infamous — Scots can be found in the collection, which was initiated by
        David, 11th Earl of Buchan. Following the earls death, Scottish
        historian Thomas Carlyle decided to inspire his fellow countrymen
        through a national gallery devoted to their heroes. He obtained private
        backing for the creation of the gallery, which opened in 1889.
        Designed by Sir Robert Rowand Anderson, the building was
        constructed in neo-Gothic style, and statues on the outer façade depict
        Scottish poets, artists, and statesmen. The entrance hall also portrays
        famous Scots in a beautifully detailed frieze just below the cornice;
        its a veritable Whos Who of the Scottish establishment. The
        entrance is also home to several sculptures, including one of Carlyle,
        the gallerys founding father.
        The galleries are arranged chronologically, which helps
        put the figures into context. Youll of course see Mary Stuart (Mary,
        Queen of Scots) and Bonnie Prince Charlie — as himself and also as
        Betty Burke, his disguise to escape the English forces. Sir Walter
        Scott and Robert Adam are here, but you will also find individuals such
        as Neil Gow, a virtuoso fiddler of great renown in his own lifetime
        (1727–1807). Likenesses can be found on canvas, on bronze or plaster
        medals, or as sculptures. There is an interesting section devoted to
        20th-century Scots, including Queen Elizabeth (the Queen Mother), who
        was born at Glamis Castle in 1900. The gallery also has a strong policy
        of both acquiring and commissioning works depicting modern Scots in the
        public eye (including actors Sean Connery and Robbie Coltrane and
        Manchester United football manager Sir Alex Ferguson), which keeps its
        exhibitions fresh and fulfills Carlyles original aims.
        Calton Hill
        From the eastern end of Princes Street, the eye is drawn
        to a hill topped with a series of interesting albeit disparate
        buildings. This is Calton Hill, built around 100 m (328 ft) of hard
        volcanic rock, and its monuments and architecture are said to have been
        responsible for Edinburghs epithet Athens of the North.  You will be
        met by a flight of steep steps, but the superb views across the city
        make the climb worthwhile.
        At the very crest of the hill, you will find the Old
        Observatory, the only building designed by James Craig left in the
        city; it was completed in 1792. An additional observatory was added in
        the 1820s, but the smoky skies and train steam over the city at that
        time made it an unsuitable location for watching the stars. The Royal
        Observatory was relocated to Blackford Hill, farther south, in 1895.
        Today the old building hosts the Edinburgh Experience, a 20-minute, 3-D
        slide show charting the history of the city and bringing to life the
        Edinburgh of today (April–October only).
        The nearby Nelson Monument, an elegant tower 30 m (98 ft)
        high, commemorates the famous naval victory at Trafalgar in 1805. You
        can climb the column for magnificent views of the city and the Firth of
        Forth to the north. At the top of the tower is a white ball on a metal
        stake. As one oclock approaches, the ball rises to the top of the
        stake and then drops exactly on the stroke of one. This device is a
        visual counterpart to the firing of the One OClock Gun at the Castle.
        It could easily be seen by ships in the Firth of Forth and was a useful
        safeguard if prevailing winds carried the sound of the gunfire the
        wrong way.
        A colonnaded circular monument to the right was raised in
        the memory of Dugald Stewart, professor of moral philosophy at the
        University of Edinburgh in the 1780s. The classical design was taken
        from examples in Athens.
        The most fascinating structure on Calton Hill is the
        National Monument. What looks from a distance like a huge Greek temple
        with many Ionic columns turns out to be only a single façade with 12
        columns. It was planned in the 1820s as a symbol of Scottish national
        pride and designed as a mini-Parthenon, in deference to the
        neoclassical style popular at the time. Unfortunately, the public was
        not enthusiastic, the funding ran out, and the project was abandoned,
        giving the monument its other name: Scotlands Disgrace. 
        Edinburghs Villages
        Edinburgh has throughout most of its history been a very
        compact city. Even the New Town had very set boundaries. The entire
        city was surrounded by open countryside with a scattering of small
        villages. But massive growth during the 20th century saw Edinburgh
        absorb many of these formerly independent communities into its
        ever-enlarging limits. Surprisingly — and happily — the villages did
        not allow their character to be diluted and swallowed up into one
        homogenous suburb. They still maintain their own individual charms and
        are certainly an important element in Edinburghs continuing
        appeal.
        Dean Village
        Less than one kilometer (half a mile) from the western end
        of Princes Street is Dean Village. It is set on the ribbon-thin Water
        of Leith, whose narrow valley drops steeply here. Dean Bridge carries
        the main road over the Water; it was designed and built by Thomas
        Telford, one of Scotlands greatest civil engineers.
        Dean was an industrial village, its economy depending on
        numerous small mills that have now completely disappeared. A walk
        beside the Water offers the most interesting views, so dont cross the
        bridge. Instead, take the cobbled alley of Bells Brae to Hawthornbank
        Road, down in the valley. Youll see fascinating views of the rear of
        the Georgian houses of the New Town as well as the small cottages of
        Dean Village itself.
        A ten-minute walk east on Belford Road brings you to two
        important art galleries. The Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art,
        founded in 1959, occupies the site of the former John Watsons School,
        a neoclassical building dating from the 1820s. The gallery rooms
        display some of the best in 20th-century art. Cubists are represented
        by Picasso (including Mother and Child, from his Blue Period) and
        Braque. There are pieces by Matisse, Magritte, Miró, and Hockney.
        Sculptures inside the gallery include works by Giacometti, and there
        are several large sculptures by Henry Moore displayed in the
        surrounding grounds.
        Opposite the modern art gallery is the Dean Gallery,
        occupying a fine Victorian mansion that was once an orphanage. The
        gallery brings together a number of excellent private collections,
        including works by local Scottish artist Eduardo Paolozzi.
        Inverleith
        Immediately north of Edinburghs New Town is Inverleith,
        an area full of green sites. Large schools with acres of grounds,
        playing fields, and recreation areas are interspersed with sumptuous
        houses set in leafy lanes. It was here that the Royal Botanic Garden
        was moved in 1823 from a location not far from the Abbey of Holyrood.
        The garden had been founded as early as 1670 as a resource for medical
        research, affiliated for many years with the Royal College of
        Physicians.
        The present site covers 28 hectares (70 acres) of ground
        divided into several different natural environments. The huge Victorian
        greenhouse, New Palm House, is impressive and packed with ferns and
        palms that thrive in the warm, damp environment. A large 1960s
        greenhouse sits beside it and, though lacking the elegance of its
        neighbor, still boasts an impressive collection. The surrounding
        landscaped grounds are kept in pristine condition. Mature trees shade
        lawns and flower beds that are home to numerous birds species and
        cheeky gray squirrels. You can also wander through the soothing Chinese
        garden, with its waterfalls and pretty red pergola.
        Corstorphine
        About 5 km (3 miles) west of Edinburghs center, past the
        rugby ground at Murrayfield, you will find Corstorphine. For centuries
        this was a farming village, separated from the city by the green
        expanse of Corstorphine Hill. On the slopes of the hill you will find
        Edinburgh Zoo, located just behind Corstorphine Hospital.
        The zoo opened in 1913 and was designed with enclosures
        rather than cages, an idea that was new at the time. This offered a
        more natural habitat for animals and a clearer view for visitors. When
        the zoo celebrated the first successful hatching in captivity of a king
        penguin in 1919, it gained world renown: no other zoo had examples of
        this penguin species.
        Today Edinburgh Zoo continues work on the conservation of
        animal species and acts as an educational resource. The penguins still
        take pride of place — the zoo has the worlds largest group in
        captivity — and they take a stroll around the zoo in the Penguin
        Parade every day during the summer (April–October).
        There are over 156 species of animals on view here, with
        notable successes in the breeding of endangered rhinos and Rothschild
        giraffes. There are also beautiful big cats and a large Plains of
        Africa exhibit, where herds of antelope and zebra graze peacefully in
        the Scottish sunshine. The zoo lies on a hillside, with visitors
        needing to climb some inclines to the upper enclosures (wheelchairs and
        strollers are available).
        Leith
        Situated on the coast, Leith is only 5 km (3 miles) from
        the city center. It has been an important settlement since the 14th
        century and was the largest port in Scotland for many years, handling
        Edinburghs cargo. It was a fiercely independent settlement with its
        own fishing fleet and shipbuilding industry. In 1920 Leith was
        incorporated into the city of Edinburgh.
        After a brief 20th-century decline, Leiths fortunes have
        revived. The old warehouses have been transformed into upscale
        apartments and fashionable office buildings, and there is a buzz of
        chic commercial activity that has spawned smart restaurants and wine
        bars. Older locals — trawler men or dockworkers — might lament the loss
        of Leiths gritty, salt-of-the-earth reputation, but the town has an
        air of excitement about it. Buses from the city center will carry you
        here in minutes.
        In 1997 the Royal Yacht Britannia, the vessel that carried
        the queen and her official representatives on 968 royal and diplomatic
        visits to venues around the world, was decommissioned. The fate of the
        ship was undecided, and at one time it was thought that it might be
        scrapped, but eventually it became a tourist attraction. Several cities
        made bids to host the ship, and Edinburghs was successful; her new
        home would be at Leith. After some work to make her visitor-friendly,
        she lowered her gangplank to the public in October 1998.
        The ship was launched in April 1953, when Elizabeth II was
        in the first few months of her reign. She and her husband, Prince
        Philip, were very much involved in the interior decoration of the ship,
        choosing the furnishings for what would be their floating home. The
        royal quarters have changed little since that time. Britannia was the
        place where the queen said she could truly relax, and it is very much a
        reflection of her personal taste — surprising for its lack of the
        ornate trappings that fill her official palaces.
        The ship entertained presidents, princes, and diplomats,
        but most people perhaps remember Britannia as the royal honeymoon boat.
        Princess Margaret began the tradition, to be follo wed by three of the
        queens children: Anne, Andrew, and of course Charles, who journeyed
        with the newly designated Diana, Princess of Wales, around the
        Mediterranean in 1981.
        The most attractive part of Leith is the Shore, a few
        minutes walk east of Britannia. The Shore formed around the mouth of
        the Waters of Leith, the narrow river running through Edinburgh. Even
        here the Waters are really little more than a large stream, but they
        flow into the Firth of Forth and beyond into the North Sea. The Shore
        comprises a quayside and several cobbled lanes with restaurants where
        you can have a pleasant lunch. The surrounding warehouse districts have
        interesting stores for souvenir browsing. A little way to the south are
        Leith Links, said to be the birthplace of golf, where the Honourable
        Company of Edinburgh Golfers built a clubhouse in 1767 and where you
        can still enjoy a bracing round in the sea air.
        Cramond
        At present-day Cramond, located at the mouth of the River
        Almond, the Romans constructed a fort in the second century a.d. , at
        the eastern end of a defensive structure called the Antonine Wall. The
        foundations of the fort can still be seen, but artifacts from the site
        are displayed in the Huntly House Museum in Edinburgh.
        Sailboats and small pleasure craft dock at Cramond, where
        the tidal river exits into the Firth of Firth. Much of the village is
        from the 18th century, and the whitewashed cottages are very
        picturesque. There are pleasant walks along the coastline and stops for
        refreshment at the Cramond Inn, which is believed to be a setting
        described in Robert Louis Stevensons St. Ives.
        Portobello
        With its wide, sandy beach, Portobello is a quintessential
        British seaside town. When bathing in the sea became popular at the end
        of the 18th century, wealthy families from Edinburgh began to spend
        days here taking the waters in state-of-the art bathing machines. 
        In summer you can come to dip your feet in the sea and treat yourself
        to an ice cream or cotton candy; in spring or fall, enjoy a bracing
        stroll in the sea air.
        Excursions
        If you have a few days to explore the region, youll find
        a wealth of things to see nearby. The Edinburgh and Lothians Tourist
        Board produces automobile tours for East Lothian, West Lothian, and
        Midlothian, with suggested itineraries, opening times, and prices for
        various sights and attractions.
        Queensferry and the Forth Bridge
        Approximately 13 kilometers (8 miles) west of the city is
        Queensferry, a town that developed as a crossing point of the Firth of
        Forth for routes to the north of Scotland. It is said that Queen
        Margaret, later Saint Margaret, traveled this route regularly in the
        late 11th century and that the town took its name from her journeys. A
        plaque on the waters edge at the Binks (a natural jetty formed by a
        rocky outcrop) marks her landing site.
        The old water ferry no longer runs, but Queensferry
        remains the crossing point for modern-day travelers in their motorized
        machines. The logistical problems of spanning the Firth were numerous,
        but their solution resulted in one of the greatest engineering
        achievements of the Victorian era, the Forth Railway Bridge. Completed
        in 1890, the bridge comprises three huge cantilevers joined by two
        suspended spans, for a total length of 1,447 m (4,746 ft). For many
        years it was the longest bridge in the world, and the huge structure
        seems to overshadow the town, which sits on the banks of the river
        below. Maintenance is a mammoth task, and it is said that painters work
        constantly on the structure, completing one end and immediately
        starting again at the other.
        In 1964 a sister structure, the Forth Road Bridge, was
        completed to take vehicular traffic across the Firth. The bridge is a
        single, unsupported span 1,006 m (3,300 ft) in length. Fascinating
        pictures of the construction of both bridges can be found in the town
        museum on Queensferrys High Street.
        Take a stroll around the picture-perfect little fishing
        harbor, where the boats become stranded like beached whales at low
        tide. From a small jetty below the railway bridge, you can take a ferry
        out into the Firth of Forth to tiny Inchcolm Island. Here youll find
        the ruined Abbey of St. Colm, founded in the 12th century and named for
        St. Columba, who had brought Christianity to western Scotland 600 years
        earlier. You can also watch the playful antics of the small colony of
        seals that call the island home.
        Edinburgh Crystal
        Twenty minutes southwest of the city by car is the small
        town of Penicuik. It is an unremarkable place save for its most
        important product. This is the home of fine Edinburgh crystal, one of
        the most recognizable and beautiful souvenirs of a stay in the
        city.
        The Edinburgh Crystal Factory has guided tours that show
        every aspect of the production of cut lead glassware. Youll see the
        hot furnaces where the glass mixture (the batch) is melted and blown,
        and youll watch the cutting that is done by hand and eye as well as
        the polishing or engraving. Edinburgh Crystal has an excellent retail
        store on site and a factory shop where second-quality goods are sold.
        They sell tax-free goods for travelers from outside the EU, with
        shipping arranged on site. If you dont have transportation, Edinburgh
        Crystal operates a shuttle bus service to and from the center of
        Edinburgh.
      
    
  
