
  
  
    
      
        Where to go
        Whether youre in Palma, a coastal resort, or an inland
        village, you can reach any point on Mallorca in half a day, and Menorca
        is even smaller and more concentrated. On both islands, tour companies
        offer excursions by road or in combinations with boat trips, to see the
        mountain and coastal scenery, famed beaches, spectacular caves, and
        various purpose-built attractions. At these sights, though, youll
        invariably be part of a crowd, especially in high season (which grows
        every year). Accommodations are also at a premium from July through
        September. Charter flights and package deals (hotel and airfare) become
        considerably more economical if youre willing to visit in the shoulder
        or off season.
        Hiring a car (see page 104) is the ideal way to see Mallorca
        and Menorca, allowing you to go where you like — some of the
        least-known places are the most delightful. You can get around by
        public bus, with a couple of trains thrown in, but those options wont
        allow you to see as much in a short time.
        The great majority of visitors enter the Balearics through
        its capital, Palma de Mallorca (and in fact, most stay within 20 km (13
        miles) or so of the city, ensconced in seaside hotels and villas). Any
        thought you might have had that you would be vacationing in a sleepy
        Mediterranean island backwater will quickly be dashed upon arrival at
        sprawling Son Sant Joan, Palma de Mallorcas international airport.
        As islands go, Mallorca is quite large: it has more than 550
        km (325 miles) of coastline and is, at its widest, 100 km (60 miles)
        across. Visiting all the major regions of Mallorca with any degree of
        seriousness would require several weeks, while most of much-smaller
        Menorca can be seen in a weeks time. On a short holiday, its best to
        choose a couple of regions and take them in at a relaxed pace. See the
        list of beach highlights on pages 82 and 85.
        PALMA DE MALLORCA
        Palma is a large, cosmopolitan, working city, with a
        population that accounts for two-thirds of the permanent population of
        Mallorca. Yet the city feels undeniably tropical and sensual. This has
        something to do with the palm trees, relentless sunshine, yachts
        bobbing in the bay, and fishermen laying out their nets on the
        waterfront, to be sure, but its also a product of the way locals talk,
        walk, dress, and sip wine and coffee at outdoor cafés. Their leisurely
        manner tells you this is no mainland capital.
        Palma dominates the island — a glance at the map shows how
        the islands road system radiates from the city — but it is a world far
        removed from the mountain villages of the northwest, the small towns of
        the interior, and the tourist-ruled coastal villas. The area of
        greatest interest to visitors is the small old quarter that surrounds
        the cathedral, which sits on a small hill overlooking the bay. Historic
        Palma can be seen in a day or two, though the plazas, cafés,
        restaurants, and bars may cause you to linger.
        From the harbor the great Gothic cathedral rises on a small
        hill and dominates the center of the city, with the ancient Almudaina
        Palace immediately below it. To the east is Platja de Palma, a long
        line of excellent sandy beaches that have been defaced by a sad stretch
        of concrete from Can Pastilla to SArenal; to the west is the elegant
        seaside promenade, Passeig Marítim, of modern Palma, where luxury
        hotels look out over a forest of masts in the yacht harbor. Crowning
        the wooded slopes above it are the stone towers of Bellver Castle.
        The Romans established a strategic post near where Palma
        now stands so gracefully, but the Moors were primarily responsible for
        transforming the site into a real city. Few Arab buildings remain,
        having been razed during the Reconquest, but the old quarter (Centre
        Historic on direction signs) still abounds with buildings of historic
        interest, preserved when Palma fell into decline in the 16th and 17th
        centuries. The old citys narrow, atmospheric streets are full of
        pleasant surprises, best seen on foot.
        The focus of any visit to Palma is, justifiably, its
        massive Gothic Cathedral — one of the finest churches in Spain. Called
        La Seu by locals, it was begun in 1230, after the Christians recaptured
        the island from the Moors. King Jaume made an emphatic political point
        by ordering it built on the site of the Great Mosque. Building was slow
        and sporadic, affected by wars and finance, and the great work took
        nearly four centuries to complete. Densely packed buttresses facing
        seaward create an extraordinary effect of power and beauty, especially
        when they blaze like gold in the setting sun and cast their reflection
        in the pool below. Before entering, have a look at the remarkable
        Portal del Mirador entrance, overlooking Palmas bay. The 14th-century
        door is a feast of carved stone figurines, including a depiction of the
        Last Supper by Guillem Sagrera. The north door of the cathedral, near
        the 13th-century bell tower, is reserved for those attending religious
        services in the early morning and early evening. Tourists are
        encouraged to visit the cathedral in conjunction with the Cathedral
        Museum next door, a treasure-trove of silver monstrances and
        candelabra, saintly relics, Gothic paintings, and Baroque altars. A
        colossal and ornate early Renaissance doorway in carved stone leads on
        to the oval New Chapter House. From the museum, one enters the
        cathedral.
        The wrought-iron Crown of Thorns canopy over the high altar
        (called the Baldachino) was added by the Catalan modernista architect
        Antoni Gaudí at the beginning of the 20th century. Gaudí, who worked
        some 10 years on the cathedral, also moved the choir stalls from the
        central nave.
        On the west side of the cathedral is the Palau de
        lAlmudaina, once the royal residence of the Moorish rulers. Part of
        the palace is open to visitors, and a short tour takes in a
        stone-vaulted 13th-century throne room, divided into two stories in the
        16th century — youll see that the window was cut off in the process.
        In the heavily restored royal offices, which are used by the present
        king and queen, traces of early paintwork survive on ceilings and
        frescoed walls. There are also several impressive 15th- and
        16th-century Flemish tapestries.
        Leafy Passeig des Born, the elongated plaza that runs
        inland, is where locals love to take their early evening promenade.
        Once the site of jousting tournaments, its now lined with park benches
        and cafés. At no. 27 is an 18th-century Italianate mansion, Casa
        Solleric, which today houses a cultural foundation and hosts art
        exhibitions.
        In the narrow streets behind the cathedral are tall houses,
        several of which are baronial mansions dating from the 15th and 16th
        centuries, with dark walls and great wooden doors. Their forbidding
        exteriors hide some of Palmas most inviting courtyards, which can be
        glimpsed through the heavy metal grilles. The Can Bordils on carrer
        Almudaina retains its Gothic architecture; Can Oms, at number 7, is an
        18th-century noble house with one of Palmas finest patios. Crossing
        over carrer Almudaina is the ancient Arab arch, Arc de LAlmudaina.
        Many courtyards were remodeled in the 17th and 18th centuries,
        including Casa Olesa (carrer Morey, 9), with its cool, wide-arched
        patios, balconies and stately staircases. Other spectacular mansions
        are nearby on carrer Can Savellà; look for the the Baroque Can Vivot
        (sometimes called Can Sureda) at number 4 and Can Catlar del Llorer,
        with its Gothic patio built in the 13th century, at number 15.
        On carrer de la Portella, a palatial Renaissance mansion
        has been restored as the somewhat sleepy Museu de Mallorca.
        Descriptions are only in Catalan, but the relics of the Muslim period
        and fine 13th- to 15th-century paintings and carvings, originally from
        Palmas churches, antique tiles and ceramics, and a display of
        modernista furniture on the top floor make the museum worth a visit.
        The top floor also houses exhibitions by present-day Mallorcan artists.
        Old photographs show some of the Arab gateways that were destroyed when
        the city walls were razed in 1902. The Banys Àrabs (Arab Baths), behind
        the museum on carrer de Can Serra, 7, are miraculously still standing
        after 1,000 years.
        The 13th-century Basílica de Sant Francesc (Basílica of St.
        Francis), on the Plaça Sant Francesc, is one of Palmas treasures. A
        statue of Junípero Serra, the 18th-century founder of the first
        Franciscan missions in California, is erected in front of the
        Plateresque carved portal. Inside the church lies the sarcophagus of
        the 13th-century sage and scholar Ramón Llull. He and Serra are two of
        Mallorcas greatest sons and heroes — they have both been beatified,
        and sainthood seems sure to follow. The church is rather dark and
        heavy, a real contrast with the enchanting cloisters, whose slender
        double columns and stone tracery are light and delicate.
        The Plaça Cort is the site of the fine wooden-eaved
        17th-century Renaissance Ajuntament (Town Hall) and from there its a
        short way by smart shopping streets to the yellow façades and green
        shutters of the Plaça Major, the former marketplace. On the west side
        of the Plaça Major is Plaça de Marqués Palmer; sandwiched among chic
        leather and footwear shops are two excellent examples of modernista
        (Catalan Art Nouveau) architecture: Can Forteza Rei and LÀguila, whose
        iron grill work and broken-tile flourishes are similar to better-known
        modernista buildings found in Barcelona.
        Down the steps that lead to the Plaça Major is Plaça Weyler
        (off of carrer Unió), where there are two more fine examples of
        modernisme. One is the imposing and ornate former Gran Hotel. The first
        modern hotel in Mallorca, it was built in 1903 by Lluís Doménech i
        Muntaner, the architect responsible for Barcelonas wondrous Palau de
        la Música concert hall. Across from the Gran Hotel is a small bakery,
        the Forn des Teatre, whose modernista decoration graces many a postcard
        in Palma. Down the street, next to Plaça Mercat, is Can Casayas, two
        more gently undulating modernista buildings.
        Back near the waterfront, the turreted Sa Llotja (La Lonja
        in Spanish) was built in the mid-15th century by local architect
        Guillem Sagrera (the seafront promenade is named after him). Once the
        city merchants stock exchange (now used to house art exhibitions — the
        only time it can be visited), it is one of Spains finest civic Gothic
        buildings. Slim columns twist through its light and airy interior to
        the vaulted roof. Next to Sa Llotja, a cannon and an anchor surround
        the 17th-century Consolat de Mar, the former maritime law court — now
        the seat of the Balearic Islands autonomous government.
        When the evening promenade disperses, the streets of the
        old city are usually quiet, dark, and practically deserted, though the
        small streets between Plaça de La Llotja and Plaça la Reina teem with
        restaurants and bars. There is still more action if you head west to Es
        Jonquet, once the fishermens quarter, now full of bars, cafés, and
        clubs clustering under the old windmills which used to grind the citys
        flour.
        A few hundred meters inland from Es Jonquet, the Poble
        Espanyol is a rather kitschy walled town of scaled-down replicas of
        Spanish architectural treasures from across Spain, including Granadas
        famed Alhambra palace. The buildings house shops, craft studios, bars,
        and cafés.
        Just south of the Poble Espanyol, perched on a hilltop amid
        pine trees and parkland, is the fine Castell de Bellver (Bellver
        Castle). A magnificent example of Gothic military architecture, the
        castle has commanded the sea and land approaches to the city since its
        construction in the early 14th century by order of King Jaume II. The
        view from the circular battlements of the city and Bay of Palma is
        stunning. Notice how the sloping roof funneled rainwater into the
        castles cisterns. Inside, theres a small, well-laid-out museum of the
        archaeology of the area.
        THE BAY OF PALMA
        Two magnificent sweeps of white sand almost 30 km (19
        miles) long made Palmas bay a summertime people-magnet, and the
        resorts that mushroomed along them gave Mallorca a name for cheap and
        cheerful holidays in the 1960s and 70s. In recent years, the picture
        has turned decidedly boozy and tacky. Athough the coast around Palma is
        dominated by down-market package tourism, there are pockets of
        luxurious and expensive tourist villas.
        East: Platja de Palma
        The southeastern shore of the bay runs through former
        fishing villages to the beach resort and yacht harbor of Can Pastilla,
        almost at the end of the airport runway. Then come Sometimes, Las
        Maravillas, and SArenal, on a 7-km (4-mile) strip of hotels, fast food
        restaurants, high-throttle bars and discos, British pubs, and German
        beerhalls. By day youll have to pick your way across the beach through
        a sea of tightly packed bodies — despite the inconveniences, Platja de
        Palma is an outstanding long (4.5 km/2.8 miles) stretch of white
        sand.
        West Side of the Bay
        To the west of Palma, Cala Major (great cove) was a
        holiday center long before the package-tour boom. The Catalan
        surrealist painter Joan Miró was a longtime resident of this area, and
        the Fundació Pilar i Joan Miró displays a fine selection of his work,
        as well as his studio as he left it, and his living quarters. The
        coast, a mix of rocks and sand, continues west, past exclusive Bendinat
        up to Portals Nous, where apartment blocks cluster on the slopes. The
        glamorous-looking marina of Puerto Punta Portals is not natural but
        ambitiously carved out of the cliffs.
        Sandy beaches start again at Costa dEn Blanes and Palma
        Nova, which morphs into big, brash, and overwhelmingly British
        Magalluf. The wide and sandy beach, sloping safely into the sea, is a
        solid block of bronzing bodies in summer. If youre looking for a bit
        of tourism overkill, this is where youll find it: bars a block long,
        discos built like airport terminals, restaurants offering menus in
        eight languages from Finnish to French, waterslides, go-karts — you
        name it, Magalluf has it. Everything but sanity.
        To the south, the once-quiet cove of Cala Vinjes (kah-la
        veen-juhs) has been practically buried in an orgy of concrete. Head for
        cover by continuing on through pine woods to narrow winding lanes to
        the pretty coves and beaches of Portals Vells (pohr-tahls vays). In the
        cliffs, youll find huge rock-cut caverns dating from Roman times or
        earlier, enlarged over the centuries. Boats make the short excursion
        from the pier on Magalluf beach (meaning its not always as peaceful as
        you might hope). Not far south of Portals Vells, you can hike to a very
        quiet cove, Cala Figuera. Farther on the road is blocked: the end of
        the peninsula is a military zone.
        THE WESTERN TIP
        The main road bypasses the resorts of the Bay of Palma and
        meets up with the sea once again at Santa Ponça, a modern villa that
        boasts one of the widest ranges of sports in Mallorca and keeps going
        during the off season with an older clientele.
        The pleasantly tree-shaded beaches of Cala Fornells are
        still picturesque, although hotels and clusters of Mexican
        hacienda-style villas press closely round. A scenic but twisting little
        road leads to Port dAndratx, a broad, wonderfully sheltered bay that
        is home to more yachts than fishing boats these days. The old harbor
        area on the south side keeps its traditional appearance, though a
        closer look reveals a string of chic restaurants, and the slopes facing
        it across the water are encrusted with villas and apartments, most of
        which have now been bought up by wealthy Germans as second homes
        (Claudia Schiffer among them). Lack of a sandy beach has kept the big
        hotels away, which is just fine with most visitors. A short drive,
        brisk walk, or morning jog takes you 3 km (2 miles) to the Cap de Sa
        Mola, the most southwesterly point o n the island, with its superb
        views of sheer cliffs and sparkling sea.
        From in-land Andratx, a dead-end road leads to the coast at
        Sant Elm, a former fishing village that doesnt try too hard to be a
        resort. The view offshore from its mostly stony little beaches is
        dominated by the island of Sa Dragonera, said to look like a dragon
        rising from the sea, and subject of a long legal battle between
        would-be developers and conservationists. The green movement appears to
        have protected the odd-shaped island.
        NORTHWEST: COAST AND MOUNTAINS
        The most dramatic stretch of Mallorcas coastline looks
        across the Mediterranean to Barcelona. The rugged mountains of the
        Serra de Tramuntana sweep down to the sea so steeply here that there
        are few points of access and only one harbor and port of any size along
        the coast. The road winds along clifftops and the sea, providing a
        series of vertigo-inducing viewpoints, and meandering back into the
        mountains. Interspersed among the cliffs are terraced orchards, olive
        groves, and photogenic medieval villages. North of Andratx, the coastal
        road C-710 reaches the first of a succession of miradors, lookout
        points with a commanding prospect of the entire coast. Some of them are
        still crowned with an ancient watchtower, from which lookouts anxiously
        scanned the sea for pirate ships and signaled warnings to the next
        point along the chain. If possible, make the trip early in the morning,
        or youll be part of a procession from one parking spot to the next.
        The Mirador de Ricardo Roca provides enticing views of the coast
        looking north, but save some film, because theyre even better a bit
        farther on.
        Four km (21/2 miles) from the Roca lookout, Estellencs is a
        pretty, ancient town amid terraces and orange groves. From town you can
        walk or drive down a track to a little fishing cove. Back on the main
        road, some 5 km (3 miles) from Estellencs, take in perhaps the finest
        view of the entire coast — quite an accolade — from the snail-shaped
        16th-century tower of the Mirador de Ses Ànimes. Green cliffs tumble
        into the stunningly blue Mediterranean far as the eye can see on either
        side. The next towns name is clearly Arabic in origin, and in fact the
        hillsides around Banyalbufar have been tamed since Moorish times into
        some of the finest (and most photographed) terraces on the island.
        Banyalbufar (little vineyard by the sea) has a pair of pleasant
        hotels and several restaurants, making it a good place to spend the
        night. A small lane twists down to a rocky cove and small beach, while
        another reaches the sea at Port des Canonge.
        North of Banyalbufar, the road turns inland for a while.
        Just off the road, in the direction of Esporles, youll find La Granja,
        a popular tourist attraction and good family stop that is part stately
        home, part finca (traditional farmhouse), and part craft center.
        The town of Valldemossa was transformed by the short visit,
        over a century and a half ago, of French writer George Sand and her
        lover, Frédéric Chopin. Their few weeks here in the winter of 1838–1839
        seem to have been fairly miserable: Chopin was unwell, the weather was
        wet and cold and bad for his chest, and George Sand disparaged the
        villagers in her book A Winter in Majorca, calling them barbarians and
        thieves.  She nicknamed Mallorca Monkey Island. 
        Now, busloads of visitors arrive daily in this picturesque
        mountain village to see the couples lodgings in the former Carthusian
        monastery La Cartuja. The monks were expelled in 1835, and some of
        their cells were sold as holiday apartments. (The cells were in fact
        three-room suites with private gardens. ) The two cells the lovers
        rented are now a museum, with original manuscripts, Chopins death
        mask, and his piano. Youll see, too, the massive church, the monks
        pharmacy with its collection of 18th-century jars, their library, and
        the guests dining room.
        In great contrast to George Sands negative impressions of
        Mallorca was the lifelong love affair that the Austrian Archduke Ludwig
        Salvator (or Luis Salvador) had with the Balearics and their people. In
        1870 he bought the estate of Son Marroig just outside Deià, which he
        proudly proclaimed the most beautiful place on earth. The house, open
        to visitors, is filled with his collections. In the gardens, take in
        the birds-eye view from the cliff-edge temple built out of Italian
        marble. Hundreds of feet below the house is Sa Foradada (literally,
        rock with a hole in it), a rocky promontory jutting into the sea,
        pierced by a remarkable 18-m- (60-ft-) wide natural window. If you feel
        energetic, hop the little fence just south of Son Marroig and take the
        half-hours walk down to the sea and the landing stage where the
        archduke Salvator used to anchor his yacht.
        Deià, a gorgeous hilltop town of honey-colored stone and
        brightly painted shutters just east of Son Marroig, has attracted
        plenty of artists and assorted expatriates ever since Robert Graves,
        the poet and author of I, Claudius, came to live here with Laura Riding
        in 1929. Graves was pursued by a strange coterie of admirers and late
        in life became the Grand Old Man of Deià, fierce in his defense of the
        northwest coast against touristic exploitation. He convinced the
        Minister of Tourism, a friend, to declare the area a nature reserve.
        The picture-perfect town is extremely popular in summer, when the
        year-round population of 613 swells with the trendy and chic who drive
        up rents by taking houses in Deià. Besides fancy luxury hotels in old
        manor houses, there are a couple of smart, low-cost alternatives, and
        one of the best rosters of restaurants on the coast, making Deià an
        ideal base for a few overnights. At the top of the village, near the
        church is a small cemetery overlooking the Mediterranean; a simple
        cement slab bears the inscription: Robert Graves, Poeta, 1895–1985.
        Its a twisting 2-km (1-mile) drive down to Deiàs tiny
        fishing cove (Cala de Deià), where ladder-like ramps come out of the
        boathouses set into the cliffs. A snack bar and a beach café open in
        summer, but the rocky shore can get choked with seaweed and tourists
        whod hoped to find a private cove. Just beyond the turnoff to Cala de
        Deià is Llucalcari, which isnt properly signposted; look for the sign
        that says, simply, Hotel off to the left side of the road. The tiny
        village has but six or seven houses, several of them fortified with
        coats of armor emblazoned on the doors, but if youre up to an
        adventurous hike down the hill, hurdling a couple of gates property
        owners have installed to ward off crowds, youll discover a rocky
        section of shoreline with pristine, transparent waters ideal for
        swimming.
        At Sóller and its seaside twin Port de Sóller, the cliffs
        and mountains at last relent. The largest bay on the northwest coast
        makes a fine harbor, but both the water and the beach can be dirty.
        Sheltered slopes a few miles inland are covered in groves of lemon,
        orange, almond, and olive trees, with the islands highest mountain,
        Puig Major (1,445 m. /4,740 ft), as a rugged backdrop. Sóller is a
        busy, prosperous town that claims, like several others, that it was the
        birthplace of Columbus. Sóller and Palma are linked by the narrow-gauge
        Sóller Railway, built in 1912. Five times a day (six on Sundays),
        polished wooden trains make the hour-long journey in each direction
        through orchards and spectacular mountain scenery, stopping at Son
        Sardina and Bunyola. The 10:40am tren turístico from Palma takes in an
        extra scenic halt above Sóller, allowing travelers to snap their
        shutters before moving on (otherwise, the trip is the same, except for
        the price).
        In a valley of orange orchards and olive groves, Sóller is
        a compact little town of well-preserved 18th- and 19th-century mansions
        and agreeable churches and convents. The main square, Plaça
        Constitució, is a good place to idle for a while and absorb the
        appealing character of the town. A walk down Gran Vía reveals buildings
        with Art Nouveau and neo-Baroque flourishes, constructed during the
        towns early-20th-century expansion.
        Two tiny and handsome villages near Sóller have enticed
        foreigners to acquire many of the medieval houses. Fornalutx is a jewel
        of warm stone so immaculate that it won a national prize a few years
        ago for spotlessness. Its steep cobblestone streets are lined with
        cacti and palm trees, and the Tramuntana mountains soar in the
        background. Similarly set among orange trees and wild flowers,
        Biniaraix is only a short stroll away down narrow lanes.
        Authorities felt that the road from Palma to Sóller, with
        its hairpin bends and the 496-m (1,627-ft) pass, the Coll de Sóller,
        was impeding development. In spite of vigorous protests from
        environmentalists, plans were approved for a road tunnel under the
        mountains, and digging began in 1990. Travel time to Palma has been
        reduced to about a half-hour.
        On the southern slope, right opposite the tunnel entrance,
        are the Jardins dAlfabia, a seigneurial mansion and gardens that were
        once the country estate of the Moorish Vizier of Palma. These days, the
        cisterns, fountains, and irrigation channels are a tad run down, but
        the flowing water and shaded walks, turkeys feeding under fig trees,
        and birds singing among exotic plants exude a gentle appeal. The house
        is like a forgotten palace, full of neglected treasures. Dont miss the
        huge wooden 14th-century oak chair in the print room, called by one
        expert the most important antique in Mallorca. 
        The mountainous country to the east, reached via a lovely
        drive past Bunyola, is a favorite with hikers and walkers based at the
        tiny village of Orient or on daytrips from the coast. A massive
        mountain crag 822 m (2,700 ft) high is crowned by the Castell dAlaró,
        a ruined fortress built by King Jaume I during the Moorish era. You can
        make the long walk from Orient, or drive most of the way to the summit
        up narrow and tortuous lanes, starting a little north of Alaró. The
        higher they climb, the rougher and narrower the tracks get (but most
        standard rental vehicles are capable of the trek). Theres a restaurant
        and car park off to the left. The final ascent is on foot, up rocky
        paths; wear sturdy walking shoes. Look for the sign that reads Castell
        a Peu (To the castle on foot). Its a vigorous 30- to 45-minute climb.
        The gates and walls of the castle still guard the clifftop, and the
        views of the mountains and surrounding plains are as thrilling as any
        on Mallorca.
        Forced away from the sea by the steep terrain, the main
        road north from Sóller climbs over the high pass of Coll de Puig
        Major — the Mirador de Ses Barques has fine views of the coast and Port
        de Sóller, as well as a restaurant — and past the dams and reservoirs
        of Cuber and Gorg Blau. Near the second dam, a little road leads to the
        coast. Its name, Sa Calobra (the snake), gives a hint of the 13 km (8
        miles) of hairpin bends that have now become a tourist attraction in
        themselves; one loop is so exaggerated that the road passes under
        itself in a knot. Early morning is the best time to avoid the traffic
        (the most harrowing part of the descent is avoiding road-hogging,
        dangerous looking tourist buses). As a reward at the bottom of the
        winding road, Cala de Sa Calobra has a couple of restaurants, bars, and
        a pebbly beach, but all tend to be overcrowded with daytrippers. The
        main objective is the deep gorge of Torrent de Pareis (the twins).
        Tunnels, enlarged from natural crevices in the rock, burrow through to
        the riverbed where the gorge widens into a natural theater (concerts
        are given on some summer evenings).
        At the Monasteri de Lluc, Mallorcas most revered place of
        pilgrimage, foreign visitors are for once frequently outnumbered by
        locals. The monastery, sequestered in a valley near the Puig des
        Castellot mountain, was founded in the 13th century, but the massive
        buildings you see today date from the 17th and 18th centuries.
        Islanders come to see and pray to a statue of the Madonna and Child, La
        Moreneta (or little dark one), so called because of its dark stone
        color. If you can attend mass in the church, you may hear the famous
        Lluc boys choir, Es Blavets (the blue ones), named after the color
        of their cassocks. The monastery is a popular place with inexpensive
        accommodations, especially for hikers.
        NORTHEAST: CAPES AND BAYS
        The northwest coast isnt short on beauty or drama, but
        beaches are few and far between. Many visitors who seek beach time in
        Mallorca — a pretty reasonable desire, after all — beeline for the
        northeast coast and its two great sandy bays, which have picturesque
        mountainous backdrops and are within easy striking distance of the
        historic towns Pollença and Alcúdia, as well as the protected wetlands
        sAlbufera. The bays of Pollença and Alcúdia are lively and full of
        visitors, many of them families, during a long and hospitable summer
        season.
        Pleasant Port de Pollença is the kind of place that, in
        contrast to much of the south, gives Mallorca a good name — with a
        perfectly sheltered, gently sloping sandy beach, a decent spectrum of
        hotels, hostals, apartments, and villas, good seafood restaurants, and
        relaxed nightlife options. Wedged in between two rocky promontories,
        its a scenic place with luxury craft in the harbor and flotillas of
        windsurfers in the bay.
        Nearly every visitor to these parts ventures a bit farther
        northeast to the spectacular cliffs of Península de Formentor, the
        narrow headland jutting out 13 km (8 miles) on the north side of the
        bay. The best place to take in the extraordinary lunar landscape is the
        Mirador de Mal Pas, about 4 km (21/2 miles) from Port de Pollença along
        an adventurous, twisting road. Sheer cliffs plunge dramatically to the
        Mediterranean, and the cape juts out to sea. Most boats and cars also
        stop at the pretty, pine-shaded beach (Platja de Formentor), a favorite
        spot for a picnic and swimming. The beach enjoys splendid views across
        the Badia de Pollença — the same youd get with a nights stay at the
        exclusive Hotel Formentor, whose manicured gardens are visible from the
        beach.
        From the turnoff to beach parking, its another 6.5 km (4
        miles) to the lighthouse out on Cap de Formentor. The road, swamped
        with cars, bicyclists, and tour buses, can be tortuous, as they all try
        to squeeze into the tiny parking lot at the top. As great as the views
        are, on a crowded day it may be advisable to turn off after 2.5 km (1.5
        miles) from the top. There youll find a single trek path down to Cala
        Figuera, a tiny cove with piercingly blue waters and a small beach
        framed by the rocky masses of Formentor.
        A few miles inland from the sea, Pollença was founded in
        1230 after the defeat of the Moors. Until 1802 the town belonged to the
        Order of the Knights of St. John, whose influence is evident in many
        handsome stone buildings in the center. The town has a tranquil,
        inviting atmosphere, especially at the outdoor cafes of Plaça
        Major.
        Whether Pollenças tiny bridge labeled Pont Roman is really
        Roman is questionable, but the locals say so, and it certainly looks
        the part. But the towns principal sight is the Via Crucis (Way of the
        Cross), a long, steep climb of 365 steps, lined with 365 cypress trees,
        that lead to El Calvari and the venerated church with a rhyming name,
        Mare de Déu del Peu de la Creu (Mother of God at the Foot of the
        Cross). If youre driving, theres also a road up, which passes the 14
        Stations of the Cross.
        One of the finest walks on Mallorca can be made only on
        Saturdays. From Pollença, head north, taking the narrow road towards
        Ternelles. Cars usually can go just a short distance before reaching a
        checkpoint where they have to turn back. However, on Saturdays during
        spring and autumn the landowners open their frontier to allow only
        walkers to go through (even cyclists are prohibited). The route follows
        the gorge of the Torrent de Ternelles at first, then turns off to head
        for the ruined Castell del Rei, built by the Moors on a soaring crag
        500 m (1,640 ft) above the sea. Another rough track leads down to the
        shore at Cala Castell. The entire hike is about 13 km (8 miles).
        Between Pollença and Port de Pollença is the turnoff for
        Cala Sant Vicenç, a gleaming resort situated ar ound three gorgeous
        sandy coves with brilliant blue water, excellent for swimming and
        snorkeling. The setting, framed by the craggy Serra de Comayaques and
        El Morral mountains, is spectacular — excellent for both families and
        day hikers.
        Astride the neck of land between the Bay of Pollença and
        the even more expansive Bay of Alcúdia stands the ancient walled town
        of Alcúdia, first inhabited by the Phoenicians in the eighth century
        b.c. The Romans then built their capital, Pollentia, here. Too close to
        the sea for safety from raids, it must have depended on its impressive
        fortifications for protection (the massive walls you see today are mere
        imitations of the originals. ) The sturdy Gothic church of Sant Jaume
        forms the southern bastion in the walls.
        Beyond the road that circles the town you can see the low
        ruins remaining from Roman Pollentia. Theyre not impressive as such
        sites go, but some fine relics excavated here are now displayed in the
        little Museu Monogràfic, a nicely restored building opposite Sant Jaume
        church. Just off the road leading from Alcúdia to its port is the
        Teatre Romà (Roman theater), hewn out of solid rock in the first
        century b.c.
        Port dAlcúdia has evolved from a small fishing harbor into
        an all-purpose port for commercial, naval, and pleasure craft (theres
        a big yacht marina) and the largest summer resort in northern Mallorca.
        Restaurants and discos have multiplied, as have hotels and apartment
        blocks, which now spread around the bay to form an almost unbroken
        ribbon of buildings 10 km (6 miles) long. Platja dAlcúdia in summer a
        solid block of bodies soaking up the sun. Though big and crowded, the
        resort remains pretty low-key, a good option for families with restless
        children.
        Remarkably, so close to a major resort, lie the precious
        wetlands of SAlbufera are a haven for birdlife. Drainage plans in the
        19th century ran into such problems that the British company
        responsible for a network of canals, paths, and bridges — still to be
        seen today — went bust. Much of the bay was originally surrounded by
        swampland, until development plans prompted large-scale reclamation.
        SAlbufera was one of the beneficiaries of the new environmental
        consciousness in Mallorca. You can now walk or cycle among the 800
        hectares (2,000 acres) of wetlands and dunes that have been designated
        a Parc Natural (nature reserve), keeping a lookout for some of the more
        than 200 species of birds that have been spotted here.
        EAST COAST: COVES AND CAVES
        Mallorcas eastern coastline attracts nearly as many
        sun-seeking tourists as the extended Bay of Palma in the southwest.
        Its generally less seedy, if not much less crowded. Tiny harbors, some
        no more than a cleft in the cliffs, alternate with larger bays. Here
        and there, great clusters of villas are transformed from ghost town to
        boom town as soon as summer arrives.
        Cala Ratjada is about as far as you can get from Palma
        without having to take to the water. But the water is what most people
        are here for, whether its the fishermen, catamaran sailors, or the
        beach-bound vacationers. The resort is lively but undistinguished in
        appearance. Only the tourist information office (Tel. 971/56 30 33) can
        arrange a visit to the Joan March Sculpture Garden, on the grounds of
        the coastal mansion. March collected important works by Rodin, Henry
        Moore, Anthony Caro, and many modern Spanish masters.
        Fine sandy beaches are close by at Cala Gat and Cala Moltó,
        though most of the bathers head to Platja Son Moll, lined by large
        hotels. Up on Cap Capdepera theres a lighthouse with fine views of the
        coast. If its clear, youll be able to see Menorca. The cape takes its
        name from nearby Capdepera, a storybook town with crenellated
        battlements of the 14th-century castle (Castell de Capdepera) on the
        hill above the town.
        The agreeable country town of Artà, 8 km (5 miles) inland,
        seems far removed from the tourism that rules farther down the coast.
        Steps lead up Way of the Cross to the fortified church of Santuari de
        Sant Salvador, where you are rewarded with a fine view of the town,
        hills, and coast.
        A sign pointing down a side road in the southern outskirts
        of Artà says simply Talaiot, but it leads to one of Mallorcas most
        important Megalithic settlements, Ses Paisses.
        Some distance away on the coast, Artà has given its name to
        the limestone caves called Coves dArtà. The Coves de Drac, further
        down the eastern coast, get more fanfare, but the less commercial Artà
        caves allow visitors to get closer and better appreciate the awesome
        formations that have been brewing for millennia. Colored lights and
        Bachs organ music point up the name given to the lowest level, The
        Inferno.  Jules Verne is said to have been inspired by a visit here to
        write Journey to the Center of the Earth.
        Two groups of caves in the vicinity of Porto Cristo make a
        cool change from the beach — and attract an interminable procession of
        tour buses. The overcommercialized Coves del Drac (Caves of the
        Dragon), to the south of the port, contain almost 2 km (more than a
        mile) of huge chambers and spectacular formations, as well as the
        unquestionable highlight — a 177-m- (581-ft-) long underground lake
        named after Edouard-Alfred Martel, the French speleologist who explored
        the caves in 1896. Theres no denying the grandeur of the formations
        and their atmospheric lighting. The grand finale seems spectacular to
        some and completely unnecessary to others: The lights in the
        amphitheater dim and three rowboats decked out with Christmas lights
        paddle out to the middle of the lake, one with an organist and two
        violinists playing classical music. If you wish, after the concerto you
        can hop one of the boats yourself and go for a little spin across the
        water.
        Cala dOr came early to the resort business, and it has now
        evolved into a huge complex encompassing several individual coves and
        resorts, with all the facilities and watersports you could ask for. In
        contrast, nearby Porto Petro still looks like a traditional fishing
        village, though it, too, is not immune from the summertime tourist
        invasion.
        Cala Mondragó is practically undeveloped (by the standards
        of coastal Mallorca), and may stay that way by order of the regional
        government, which has become alarmed by the specter of unchecked
        building along the coast. One of the gems that first attracted visitors
        to this part, Cala Figuera is still delightful, with neat
        green-and-white houses and unpretentious boats lining its Y-shaped
        inlet.
        THE SOUTH
        Until recently, few visitors knew (or wanted to know)
        anything of Mallorcas deep south. Many of the coastal resorts that do
        exist are mundane, while large sections of the shoreline are simply
        inhospitable. The long sandy beach and dunes of Es Trenc, the souths
        best beach, were left to the islanders to enjoy. The situation is
        changing somewhat, but it appears that major development wont be
        permitted.
        Cap de Ses Salines, the islands southernmost point, takes
        its name from the local salt flats and ponds, where many bird-watchers
        gather in the spring to see the migrants on the way north from Africa.
        Colònia de Sant Jordi is lined with hotels and villas, but it seems a
        rather half-hearted attempt at a resort. The nearby harbor serves as
        the starting point for trips to Cabrera, a tiny island usually visible
        17 km (10 miles) to the south. Visits are limited to parties of
        bird-watchers or zoologists and to excursion groups.
        Some 5 km (3 miles) inland from Cala Pi is Capocorp Vell,
        the most remarkable of Mallorcas Megalithic settlements, situated 6 km
        (4 miles) from Cap Blanc on the road towards Llucmajor. From as early
        as 1200 b.c. massive stones were being cut and hauled into place to
        build a village. The five talaiots (three round towers, two square) may
        have been added later.
        THE INTERIOR
        The name given Mallorcas vast interior, Es Pla (the
        plain), may not sound promising. And in fact, it doesnt slow down the
        great majority of visitors who stampede across the middle of Mallorca
        in a mad dash to their assigned piece of coastline. Es Pla is lightly
        populated and little geared toward tourism. Still, there are lovely
        agricultural landscapes with ancient stone fincas (farmhouses),
        terraced olive groves, farmers who still plough with horses, leisurely
        back roads, and unassuming old towns. Its an area best covered by your
        own transportation, either automobile or bicycle.
        Northeast of Palma is the attractive town of Binissalem,
        the epicenter of Mallorcas wine industry (which earned a Denominación
        de Origen — a quality designation similar to the French Apellation
        dOrigine — in 1991). The town features a number of attractive
        townhouses dating from the 17th and 18th centuries. Farther along the
        main road heading northeast is the unattractive industrial town of
        Inca, center of the leather industry. The best reason to visit is to
        shop at the factory outlets. Incas Thursday market sprawls through the
        streets, and tour buses arrive in flotillas, even though the goods are
        much the same as in other markets on the island.
        Just north of Inca is the tiny town of Caimari, worth a
        quick detour to take in the amazing hillside of terraced olive groves,
        neatly layered among ancient stones.
        Sineu, practically at the center of the island, is probably
        the pick of inland towns. Built on the site King Jaume II chose to
        build a palace (which survives, now much altered, as a convent), Sineu
        has an elegant Gothic church, some attractive seigneurial homes, and a
        pleasant central plaza with some good restaurants. Wednesday is market
        day, when people come from all over Es Pla for fresh produce and
        livestock.
        In Felanitx, the honey-colored church Sant Miquel dates in
        part from the 13th century. In the street adjacent is a stone tablet
        commemorating a tragedy: During an Easter procession in 1844, the
        collapse of a wall killed 414 people. Felanitx is the starting point
        for a bracing trip to Castell de Santueri, a ruined hilltop castle that
        was fortified by every ruler from Roman times to the 17th century. Take
        the exhilarating walk round the ramparts — theres nothing between you
        and a dizzying precipice. The views of the coast are superb, and on a
        rare clear day youll see Menorca and Ibiza, too.
        On the next hill to the north — and unless youre a serious
        walker youll have to go back through Felanitx to reach it — the Puig
        de Sant Salvador is the site of a hermitage and one of Mallorcas most
        important places of pilgrimage. In the church, look behind the altar at
        the Gothic statue of the Virgin Mary, backed by an alabaster panel of
        blond angels.
        Suddenly rearing up out of the flat lands south of Algaida,
        the 542-m- (1,778-ft-) high Puig de Randa is crowned by a monastery
        founded in the 13th century by the Mallorcan sage Ramón Llull.
        MENORCA
        For many years, Menorca — one-fifth the area of Mallorca,
        with a tenth the population — was one of the best-kept secrets in the
        Mediterranean. While it still receives only about one visitor for every
        eight that Mallorca does, the secrets out of the bag. Occupied by the
        British in the 18th century, Menorca remains hugely popular with
        English package tourists, retirees, and vacation homeowners.
        The capital and largest town, Maó (Mahón in Spanish), and
        the former capital Ciutadella are on opposite coasts. Resort
        development is restricted to a handful of coves and beaches on the
        southeast coast and the west coast. Like a fishs backbone, one main
        road only 44 km (26 miles) long links Menorcas two main cities with
        coves, resorts, and beaches — as well as a handful of tiny towns — on
        the north or south coasts connected to it by a web of mostly one-lane
        roads. Many coves and beaches can be reached only by foot. Menorcas
        many Talaiotic monuments are scattered across the island, though
        theyre especially concentrated in the southeast.
        Maó
        Maó is the business and administrative capital of Menorca,
        but it remains, above all, a port.  The best ports in the
        Mediterranean are June, July, August, and Maó, said the 16th-century
        Venetian admiral Andrea Doria, noting that beyond the summer sailing
        season, a fleet couldnt do better than shelter here. The 6-km-
        (4-mile-) long, deep-water natural harbor, guarded by forts at its
        mouth and shielded from the winds by surrounding hills, caught the eye
        of the British Royal Navy early in the 18th century. In 1708, during
        the War of the Spanish Succession, the British seized the island for
        its port, and kept possession until temporarily losing it to the French
        in 1756.
        British occupation, on and off until 1802, left its mark.
        The English introduced gin, and Menorcan gin production has thrived
        ever since (see page 96). Parts of Maós old town appear straight out
        of Georgian England. Whole streets, including Costa de Sa Plaça
        (Hannover), resemble 18th-century Portsmouth or Plymouth.
        The only way to enjoy Maó is by foot. The city is clustered
        on a cliff; near the center, a twisting roadway (Costa de Ses Voltes)
        and flights of broad ceremonial steps lead down to the quays and port.
        Maós star sight is its beautiful port, and the enjoyable promenade and
        restaurants and pastel-colored houses that line it.
        At the top level, follow your nose to Plaça dEspanya and
        the fish market, where youll see more varieties of octopus and squid
        than you knew existed. Adjacent are a produce market and stalls, housed
        in the vast cloisters (Claustre del Carme) of a former convent, selling
        Abarcas (Menorcan peasant shoes), jewelry, and Menorcas famous Mahón
        cheese. Made of cows milk with a small percentage of sheeps milk,
        varieties range from the young and mild to a hard-skinned and almost
        crystalline, long-matured version rivaling the best Parmesan.
        The chief landmark in this area, on Plaça de la Conquesta,
        is the church of Santa María, a large Gothic space under a vaulted
        roof. Rebuilt in the 18th century, it was equipped in 1810 with a
        Baroque, 3,000-pipe organ — still played during organ concerts every
        morning but Sunday. Just round the corner, the stately Ajuntament (Town
        Hall) is graced by a clock presented by Sir Richard Kane (1713–1736),
        Menorcas first British governor.
        Elegant Carrer Isabel II, a long string of mansions
        overlooking the harbor, leads to leads to the Baroque church Església
        Sant Francesc and the Museu de Menorca. The façade of Sant Francesc,
        completed in the 18th century, conceals a delightful Churrigueresque
        Chapel of the Immaculate Conception. The museum, the best on Menorca,
        excels in its prehistoric and classical artifacts, which depict the
        fascinating history of the island.
        Between the museum and town hall, amid Maós network of
        narrow streets, is the Porto Sant Roc, one of the original city
        gates.
        The legacy of British gin can be seen — and tasted — at the
        Xoriguer distillery, west of the ferry port. Established in the 18th
        century, the distillery still operates, and you can look through big
        windows at copper stills bubbling away, producing a hot, colorless
        spirit, which is poured over juniper berries to become gin. You can
        sample any number of liqueurs produced here, including calent (spiced
        with saffron and cinnamon) and hierbas dulces, a bright green liquid
        (and acquired taste) that restaurant owners may force upon you at
        meals end.
        Take a stroll along the quayside, past the foot of the
        main steps, along Moll de Levant — where most of Maós best restaurants
        are located — and youll turn the corner into Cala Figuera (called
        English Cove in the days of the British Navy) and the Club Marítim,
        where pleasure craft congregate near the ships chandlers, shops, and
        restaurants that cater to them.
        If you have time, take a glass-bottomed cruise from the
        port or Cala Figuera for the best views of Maó, the harbor islands, and
        the forts on the shore. High in the hills of the north side is an
        imposing pinkish-colored mansion, Sant Antoní. Part Georgian and
        part Spanish style, the mansion is better known as Golden Farm. The
        house is privately owned, so youll have to admire it from a
        distance.
        Looking out over the harbor mouth toward vast fo
        rtifications on the opposite side (still used as a military base), Es
        Castell (also called Villacarlos) appears even more English than Maó.
        There are some lively restaurants and bars along Moll de Sant Fonts at
        the waterfront, and the Cala de Sant Fonts, a boardwalk cleaved into
        the rock framing the harbor, makes for a delightful stroll.
        Excursions from Maó: South and East
        If you set out from Maó, the first of many Talaoitic
        monuments is found near the city limit, at Trepucó off the road south
        to Sant Lluís. The talaiot and taula at the site have been slightly
        damaged, not least when the French army fortified it and mounted guns
        to fire on the British in Fort San Felipe.
        Sant Lluis, a little town of checkerboard streets and
        all-white, typically Menorcan houses, was built by the French army as
        their headquarters in the Seven Years War (1756–1763).
        The southeast, with its small sandy beaches, clear water,
        and proximity to Maó and its airport, was one of the first to be
        developed for tourism. At SAlgar and Cala dAlcaufar, villas cluster
        near a rocky shore, and Punta Prima has a sandy but often unkempt
        beach.
        Though theres little to distinguish many of these
        resorts, Binibeca Vell (also spelled Binibèquer Vell) is something
        different. Vell means old, which in this case is a misnomer. Inspired
        by a traditional Menorcan fishing village, a local architect created
        this sun-splashed toy-town of brilliant white houses and dark wooden
        beams and shutters in 1972.
        Just up the coast from Binebeca are some of the
        southeasts finest beaches and swimming waters. Literally right next
        door is an area known to locals as Las Ollas — the name means frying
        pans, perhaps pertaining to the circular shape of this natural
        swimming hole carved by the sea. More likely, though, the sobriquet
        refers to the sound of the continually moving waters, sloshing against
        a beautiful rock basin like sauces bubbling in a pan. The pools are
        popular with nudist bathers.
        The road makes detours inland on its way west to the
        resorts of Binidalí and fine protected coves Cala de Biniparratx and
        Cala de Binidalí. Both are small enough and sufficiently off the beaten
        path that youre unlikely to encounter large crowds. The former has a
        platform at the edge of the sea, which provides excellent views of the
        coast and back at the small cove. To get to Cala de Biniparratx, park
        your car in the small lot and walk along a beautiful path through a
        canyon and shrubs to a narrow cove. The beach is sheltered by steep
        cliffs that house ancient cave dwellings.
        Farther west along the coast is another spate of massive
        development. Cala en Porter is one of the largest, oldest-established,
        and, in season, loudest holiday towns on Menorca. This villa
        town — called an urbanització — is resolutely British. If youre
        looking for a pint of bitters and an English football game, youll have
        no trouble finding it. Steps lead down the hill through sprawling
        development to a rather nice, but crowded, sandy beach. Nearby is Cova
        dEn Xoroi a cave carved in the steep cliff that has been converted
        into a disco. You can dance the night away above a vertiginous drop to
        the crashing sea. For those who are curious but not nocturnal, the
        enterprising owner allows afternoon visits for a reduced cover
        charge.
        In contrast to CalaEn Porter, nearby Cales Coves is
        undeveloped. Although no buildings survive, theres evidence that it
        was a port in Roman times. Cales Coves is best known, however, for its
        amazing collection of caves — perhaps a hundred or more — burrowed out
        of the cliffs. You can see the openings of caves once used as
        necropolises (burial chambers) in the Talaiotic period; today some of
        them provide shelter for dropouts and backpackers.
        North Coast
        Wild, rocky, and deeply indented, much of the north coast
        cant be reached by road at all. Immediately north of Maó is the Cap de
        Favàrritx, a barren cape with a lighthouse. Down the coast is the
        attractive beach at Cala Presili and, inland, SAlbufera, a wetlands
        nature reserve distinguished by a freshwater lake, migrant birds, and
        sand dunes. From the small resort of Es Grau, with beaches and swimming
        waters popular with families, its possible to hire a boat to go to the
        beaches of rocky Illa dEn Colom (Pigeon Island).
        The twin coves of Port dAddaia — now a holiday village
        and harbor — were the site of the last British invasion in 1798, by
        Scottish Highland troops who probably thought these rocky hillsides
        covered with purple heather were just like home. You can drive down to
        the sea at only a few places, and inevitably some of these have
        developed rapidly into sprawling resorts. Na Macaret was an old fishing
        village, and much of the new development seeks to imitate a traditional
        look, especially around the neat little square. Arenal dEn Castell has
        a beautiful circular bay, almost enclosed and with a wide sandy
        beach.
        Nearby Son Parc, near a big, flat sandy beach backed by
        dunes, is an artificial creation centered around a golf club, the only
        one of its kind on Menorca. For greater authenticity, head back to the
        Maó-Fornells road and onto Fornells, which remains a real fishing
        village. This low-key town, a good base for exploring the north coast,
        is lined by pretty houses and ballyhooed seafood restaurants along the
        waterfront. The inlets sheltered coastline and shallow water make it
        ideal for sailing and windsurfing.
        For geological extremes, take the rough and pothole-ridden
        track to the most northerly point on the island, Cap de Cavallería.
        Its passable by car, with a farm gate to open and close, and leads
        past the site of the ancient Carthaginian and Roman port of Sanitja.
        Walk along the sheer drop of the clifftop near the lighthouse for
        breathtaking views.
        Back down the hellish road from the cape, and due west, is
        the isolated beach Platja Binimella. Menorcans favor the orange-tinged
        sand-and-pebble beach on weekends. But if its beaches youre after,
        you cannot do better on Menorca (or just about anywhere) than Cala
        Pregonda. You can only get here by scrambling over the hills just west
        of Binimella. About 20 minutes later, having passed through a desert
        landscape, you will have discovered paradise: a spectacular sandy beach
        framed by a lush pine forest and stalagmite-like sea stacks rising out
        of impossibly transparent waters.
        West from Maó: Taloitic Monuments and Inland Towns
        From Maó, plenty of people blitz right across Menorca to
        Ciutadella — only 45 km (27 miles) and a direct shot, it takes less
        than an hour. The busy main road from Maó to Ciutadella at first runs
        parallel to the one built by order of the first British governor, the
        Camí dEn Kane. The scenic and well-paved old road passes a number of
        handsome haciendas. Beyond Alaior, the modern road is superimposed on
        the old route.
        Near Maó, you can begin a tour of Menorcas mysterious
        3,000-year-old megalithic sites. Just 3 km (2 miles) from Maó, a
        lavender sign to the left points down a lane to Talatí de Dalt. Hop the
        small wall and walk through groves to discover an elegantly slim taula
        with a fallen stone supporting the base — which has led some to
        speculate that it was formed this way for a reason. (In all likelihood,
        the piece merely fell). Next to the taula is a dark columned room and
        nearby burial caves. The settlement here dates to the end of the Bronze
        Age, around 1400 b.c.
        Back on the main road, a little farther west, keep an eye
        on the fields on the north side. Youre looking for Rafal Rubí, a site
        with two stone structures shaped like upturned boats, navetas
        (prehistoric burial chambers). These were collective ossuaries, used
        for secondary burials of bones. If you crawl through the low doorway of
        the better-restored naveta, you can appreciate the spacious interior,
        over 2 m (7 ft) high, with shelves at each end. The other naveta is
        more of a ruin, but worth seeing for the beautifully recessed stone
        door frame, evidently designed to take a stone or wooden door.
        South of the road, and most easily accessible by the
        narrow lane from Alaior to Cala En Porter, is the fascinating Talaoitic
        complex Torralba dEn Salord. Torralba has perhaps the most beautiful
        taula of all — certain evidence that the ancients were masters of the
        art of stone construction. Recent excavations and radiocarbon dating
        put the taulas date at about 900 b.c. The Hypostyle hall has one of
        the few intact stone roofs supported by columns. This site is one of
        the only ones on the island to charge admission and keep set hours.
        The town of Alaior, a mass of white houses clustered on a
        low hill, looks at a distance like an Arab or Andalusian village. The
        old section of town, at the top, is the most attractive quarter. Alaior
        is famous for its cheese-making industry; stop at either the Coinga or
        La Payesa factory for a sample of queso de Mahón. To the south of town,
        a long, sandy, gently sloping beach and sand dunes have brought
        obtrusive high-rise hotel and villa developments to the south coast at
        Sant Jaume and Platja de Son Bou. Besides waterslides and windsurfers,
        the outline of a fifth-century basilica discovered in 1951, is visible
        next to the beach at its eastern end.
        A turnoff from the Alaior–Son Bou road, signposted to
        Torre dEn Gaumés, brings you to the second largest and most varied of
        Menorcas prehistoric settlements. Dont miss the hypostyle court, with
        its central supports and massive roof intact, or the water cisterns
        carved out in the soft sandstone rock.
        Choose a clear day and head for Es Mercadal, halfway along
        the main east–west highway (9 km/5 miles from Alaior). Here, climb the
        twisting but well-contoured road to the top of Monte El Toro, Menorcas
        highest peak. Its only 357 m (1,171 ft) high, but provides excellent
        views of the entire island.
        A horseshoe-shaped cove with white sand and turquoise
        water sheltered by cliffs and green pine woods has made the stunningly
        beautiful Cala Santa Galdana one of Menorcas most popular holiday
        destinations. To escape the crowds, take the path from the parking lot
        opposite the Hotel Gavilanes (disregard the sign that says Coto Privado
        de Caza — private hunting grounds) and walk 20 minutes through the
        woods along a fairly well-defined path. Youll come to Cala Mitjana, a
        secluded but popular beach. If you try to drive here, youll have to
        pay to travel the access road.
        Ciutadella
        Perhaps the most enchanting city of the Balearics,
        Ciutadella — with its sandstone buildings, churches, and cobblestone
        streets — preserves the flavor of a Spanish colonial island town. Until
        the early 18th century, Ciutadella (little city) was the capital of
        Menorca. The British, on the island mainly for Maós harbor, moved the
        capital in 1722. Ciutadellas beautiful but narrow and shallow inlet
        simply could not compete.
        Plaça Alfons III, on the eastern edge of town, marks the
        spot where the road from Maó reached the old city gates. The gates are
        long gone, but the cafés around the square — including the atmospheric
        Es Molí in an ancient windmill — probably began by refreshing thirsty
        travelers. Locals flood the old town in early evening. Join them on
        their paseo and stroll along the main, pedestrian-only street that
        bisects the old part of the city. It takes various names, beginning as
        Carrer de Maó; at Sa Plaça Nova it becomes Carrer J. María Quadrado,
        one side of which — the lovely Ses Voltes — is completely arcaded in
        Moorish style and lined with shops and restaurants.
        On Plaça de la Catedral is the stately Gothic cathedral,
        begun in the 13th century on the site of the old mosque. The bishops
        palace adjoins the church. Ciutadellas tourist information office is
        just across the plaza from the cathedral. The pedestrian-only streets
        of the Es Rodal area just south of the cathedral are replete with
        wonderful stonework, the buildings honey color glowing gold as the sun
        goes down. Look especially for the carved doorway of the 17th-century
        church Església del Roser down the side street carrer del Roser (across
        from the cathedral) and two 17th-century palaces, Palau Martorell and
        Can Saura, diagonally across from each other on carrer del Santissim.
        Nearby is the Museu Diocesà, housed in a former convent and cloisters
        on carrer Seminari. It displays archaeological and ecclesiastical
        finds.
        The carrer Major del Born leads west from the cathedral to
        dignified Plaça des Born, the ceremonial square on the heights above
        the harbor. Formerly the Moors parade ground, it is lined with
        imposing buildings, such as the former Ajuntament (now the police
        headquarters) and great 19th-century mansions (grand Palau Torresaura
        and Palau Salord). In the middle of the square, an obelisk commemorates
        a brave defense against some 15,000 besieging Turks in 1558. The town
        fell after nine days, and the survivors were carried off into slavery.
        Concerts are still held at the 19th-century Teatre del Born on the
        north side of the plaça.
        From Plaça des Born, you can view the port below, a long
        curving inlet lined with fishing boats on one side and pleasure craft
        on the other. The port, the focus of Ciutadellas nightlife, teems with
        seafood restaurants and open-air bars.
        Prehistory near Ciutadella
        About 5 km (3 miles) west of the city, just off the south
        of the main road, stands the Naveta dEs Tudons, one of the islands
        finest pre-Talaoitic complexes. A burial chamber — claimed as the
        oldest roofed building in Europe — dates from between 1200 and 750
        b.c.
        Two intriguing taula sites are hidden not far away.
        Heading away from Ciutadella, just after Naveta dEs Tudons, take the
        next lane to the south, and after 2.5 km (11/2 miles) turn left down a
        farm track to Torre Trencada. There is a signpost pointing across the
        fields to the taula and a huge cave. Back on the main road, take the
        next road turning south, through stone gateposts and across a farmyard,
        to the largely unexcavated Torrellafuda, obscured by trees. From the
        talaiot theres a wonderful view of the surrounding countryside,
        divided by rows and rows of stone walls.
        Head out of Ciutadella on the road towards Sant Joan de
        Missa and branch off towards Son Saura; after 6 km (4 miles) youll
        arrive at the prehistoric walled town of Son Catlar, situated in the
        farmland to the east of the road. You can walk round the 900-m-
        (2,880-ft-) long walls, which possibly date from about 600 b.c. ,
        though on the southeastern side you can see places where, much later,
        the Romans built bastions. The taula seems to have been deliberately
        broken off, and it is possible that the Romans used the precinct as a
        temple.
        Beaches and Resorts near Ciutadella
        Almost every accessible cove and inlet on the coast near
        Ciutadella has been developed in a rash of urbanitzaciós, creating a
        rash of holiday homes, hotels, and associated facilities. The resorts
        are easily accessible, but their sprawl is dull and suburban. Beaches
        here are very small, and overcrowded in high summer.
        However, some of the islands finest beaches, near the
        middle of the southern coast, are probably best visited from
        Ciutadella. The sea is reached only by narrow lanes and farm tracks,
        but its worth a trek to get away from the crowds. The twin coves of
        Macarella and Macarelleta are stunning, with the kind of calm turquoise
        waters and spectacular sea views Menorca is known for. Macarella is
        perhaps the nicest fully serviced beach on Mallorca; the beautiful cove
        has an excellent bar-restaurant, open daily. Macarelleta, a nudist
        beach, is lovelier still. To get to it, take the path to the right of
        Macarella, a 10-minute walk along the cliff.
        Occasionally there are times when so many head for the
        remote spots that they create a crowd there, too. A favorite spot for
        both locals and tourists is pretty Cala en Turqueta, 10 km (6 miles)
        from Ciutadella along the Sant Joan de Missa road.
        West and south of Ciutadella are the busiest and dreariest
        of Menorcas resorts, including Santandria, Cala Blanca, Cap dArtrutx,
        and Cala en Bosç. Just west of Ciutadella, Cala Blanes and the vast
        area of villas and hotels near Cala Forcat make a self -contained
        holiday town, though their two often scruffy little beaches can hardly
        cope with the summer influx.
        The northwest corner of the island, in total contrast, is
        almost untouched by tourism, and environmentalists are winning
        supporters who want it declared off-limits for development. Some
        building at Cala Morell (8 km/5 miles northwest of Ciutadella) has
        jumped the gun, and a number of little white houses and blocks of
        villas have sprouted on the eastern side of one of the loveliest bays
        on the north coast. A maze of paths leads down to the rocky shore and
        around the cliffs — a geology textbook of tortured strata. Carved into
        the rock above the bay is a prehistoric necropolis dating from the 6th
        century b.c. , including a cell with a sculpted façade. The oldest
        caves, though, are pre-Talaoitic, dating from around 1200 b.c. West of
        Cala Morell are the lovely, remote beaches of Algaiarens.
      
    
  
