
  
  
    
      
        Where to Go
        Madeiras small size can be deceiving. At just 57 km (35
        miles) long by 22 km (13 miles) wide, first glance might indicate that
        two days would be sufficient to see the whole place. Even in a rental
        car, Madeiras steep, moun­tainous terrain and winding, two-lane roads
        make that very difficult. The coastal route is beautiful, but
        potentially nerve-wracking; only the southern section from Caniço west
        to Ribeira Brava is served by the excellent highway (via rápida) cut
        through the mountains.
        A minimum of three days is necessary to see a good portion
        of the island; a week allows a visitor to do it justice and take the
        time to enjoy its scenic outdoors at a relaxed pace. Until recently,
        most visitors — counseled not to attempt to drive the islands
        difficult roads — hopped aboard bus daytrips that took in the main
        attractions. Roads are improving, though, and while driving isnt
        necessarily the horror it once was, traveling by rental car should be
        reserved for confident drivers comfortable on steep, winding
        terrain.
        More and more visitors are choosing to stay outside of
        Funchal; the offer of mountain lodges and smaller coastal hotels has
        greatly improved over the years, and there are now visitors who barely
        set foot in the capital.
        Funchal
        Funchal is the single town of any size on the island, indeed
        in the whole of the archipelago. Most historic buildings, museums, and
        traditional sights are located in the capital. With a population of
        120,000, it is a larger city than most expect to find on such a tiny
        island, but in fact you can walk across the center in just 10 to 15
        minutes. Exploring inland to the north is difficult on foot, however:
        The streets become very steep.
        Nevertheless, walking re­mains the only practical way to see
        Funchal: The narrow, cobbled streets were never meant for motor
        vehicles, and they can be surprisingly congested with traffic.
        One way to get your bearings upon arrival is to walk out on
        the jetty known as the Ilhéu de Pontinha and view Funchal as those
        aboard cruise ships do. Built in 1962, the Pontinha tunnels its way
        straight through the middle of the old fortress, which until then was
        perched on top of a tiny island known as Looe Rock.
        Funchals deep natural harbor propelled the citys
        development in the 15th and 16th centuries, when Ma­dei­ra became known
        to expeditions on their way to the Far East and Americas. With the
        exception of ocean liners and picturesque fishing boats, Funchal
        remains a working port (handling containerized freight) and home to a
        small oil terminal.
        The view of the town from the harbor is outstanding: Squat
        white houses with red terracotta roofs climb steeply through tropical
        greenery all around the spacious bay.
        Madeiras rugged mountains form an attractive backdrop to
        the city. Just north is the town of Monte, and tucked into the hills
        north and east of Funchal are two of the citys best gardens, the
        Jardim Botânico and Quinta do Palheiro. The newest hotel zone is due
        west of the city along the coast, stretching for 5 km (3 miles) or so
        before the coast bends on the way to the small town, Câmara de Lobos,
        and the high cliff, Cabo Girão.
        The Center of Town
        The dominant building on the seafront is the Palácio de São
        Lourenço (Fortress of St. Lawrence). Erected in the 16th century, it
        guarded the bay against pirate ships — you can still see the ancient
        cannons poking through the crenellated walls. White-gloved sentries
        guard the main gate of the fort, now the residence of Madeiras
        military governors. Although the main building is not open to the
        public, the official residence of the Portuguese government may be
        visited by prearranged, guided tours (Tel. 291/20 25 30).
        At the intersection of Avenida Zarco and the main drag,
        Avenida Arriaga, stands a statue of Madeiras discoverer, João
        Gonçalves Zarco — often referred to as the First Captain.  The
        imposing Palácio do Governo Re­gio­nal, a handsome building with tiled
        patios and the administrative headquarters of Madeira, rises behind the
        Zarco monument to the right.
        Av. Arriaga is particularly pretty during late spring, when
        jacaranda trees are in full blossom. Along here you will find the
        tourist information office and, just next door, at no. 28, the Adegas
        de São Francisco (the Old Blandy Wine Lodge), the oldest working wine
        lodge in Madeira. The atmospheric place was part of a Franciscan
        monastery built in the 17th century. Although Madeiras fortified wines
        arent made here any longer, you can take a tour of the lodge (Mon–Fri,
        10:30 am and 3:30pm, Sat 11am) and the wine cellars. A tour isnt
        necessary to visit (and have a taste or make a purchase) at the
        handsome vintage cellar and tasting room.
        A few steps west of the lodge is the small but lush Parque
        da Cidade (City Park), a delightful urban green space. Exotic trees and
        flowers are mingled with statuary, and black swans glide across a small
        pond. Across from the park is the Teatro Municipal (Municipal Theater),
        a miniature Victorian gem that hosts periodic concerts, while opposite
        the wine lodge is an old Scottish kirk (church), another indicator of
        the strong British influence on the islands development.
        Across the street is the incongruous but elegant Toyota
        Automobile Showroom, once the Chamber of Commerce and worth noting for
        its fine blue-and-white azulejo (tile) vignettes that depict scenes
        from old Madeira.
        Toward the center of town, at the end of Av. Arriaga (at
        Rua João Tavira) is Funchals principal landmark, the Sé (cathedral).
        Begun at the end of the 15th century, Funchals Sé is one of the citys
        only surviving buildings from the early days of colonization. The
        exterior is adorned with a brick clock tower, but the cathedrals
        interior is considerably more impressive. It has Gothic arches, a
        splendid inlaid cedar ceiling of Moorish design, beautifully carved
        blue-and-gold choir stalls, gilded altars, and a sprinkling of nice
        azulejos (blue-and-white ceramic tiles).
        A walk along Rua do Aljube takes you to some of Funchals
        pedestrian shopping streets. Tucked behind Rua João Tavira and Rua da
        Carreira is Praça do Município, the towns dignified main square, with
        a mosaic of black-and-white stones and pretty white buildings on three
        sides. To the left is the 17th-century Igreja do Colégio (Collegiate
        Church), originally founded by the Jesuits in 1574. A spacious and airy
        old place, its decorated with 17th- and 18th-century tiles, paintings,
        and gilt-wood carving. The adjacent school served as a barracks for
        British troops in the 19th century.
        Straight ahead on the square stands the Câmara Municipal
        (Town Hall), which occupies a former 18th-century palace. Dont miss
        the graceful, 19th-century statue of Leda and the Swan in the inner
        courtyard. The statue used to be in the old fish market — a fact
        corroborated by the tile panel outside the present municipal market
        (see page 29).
        On the squares third (south) side is the very interesting
        Museu de Arte Sacra (Museum of Sacred Art), housed in what was a
        17th-century palace, formerly the Bishop of Funchals residence. The
        outstanding works on view include a dozen or so 15th- and 16th-century
        Flemish paintings, regarded as some of the richest in Portugal and rare
        even in the rest of Europe. These vibrant masterpieces, as well as
        other excellent works from the Portuguese school of the same period,
        belonged to Funchals wealthy sugar merchants, who during the 16th
        century traded their white gold for principal art treasures of the
        day.
        The back door of the museum leads to Rua do Bispo (Street
        of the Bishop), and both this and the parallel street, Rua Queimada
        Cima, are worth exploring. Then continue west from the Praça do
        Municipio on Rua da Carreira, a bustling street full of interesting,
        old-fashioned shops and buildings. It is particularly noteworthy for
        the cheap restaurants that cater primarily to city workers, but also
        satisfy a good number of tourists.
        A few yards left is the Museu Vicente de Fotografia
        (Vicente Photography Museum). It is easy to miss, but once you have
        spotted it, cross the street and look back at the faded, ancient sign
        and the colonnades on the wall above. The narrow entrance squeezes past
        a bookshop and opens out into a delightful, plant-filled patio. This
        was the first public photo studio opened in Portugal (during the
        1850s), and some of the props on display are amusingly quaint. In
        addition to the varied selection of memorabilia and antique
        photographic equipment, dont miss having a flick through the albums of
        photographs of old Madeira, dating from 1884.
        Just a couple of hundred yards north of the São Francisco
        gardens, the streets rise sharply. Off Rua da Carreira is Calçada Santa
        Clara, a picturesque, hilly street full of interest. At the junction
        with Rua Mouraria is the Museu Municipal do Funchal (Municipal Museum),
        yet another 18th-century aristocratic home converted into a museum
        (entrance on Rua Mouraria). On the ground floor is a modest aquarium
        showing the sealife of Madeira, while upstairs is a thoroughly
        old-fashioned collection of stuffed local sea and land creatures. The
        museum is probably best for younger children.
        Returning to the hill, on the opposite side of the museum
        is the charming Igreja de São Pedro, an unusual church. Its walls are
        lined entirely with blue-and-white checked-pattern azulejos and it has
        a beautifully painted wood ceiling, 10 chandeliers, and a massively
        gilded altar and side chapels.
        A few yards farther up the hill is the recently restored
        Casa Museu Frederico de Freitas. The private collection includes
        paintings of old Madeira by 19th-century English artists and the
        apartments of a well-to-do 18th-century Madeiran household.
        Continue uphill to the Convento de Santa Clara. Built
        toward the end of the 15th century and expanded two centuries later,
        its now a school run by Franciscan nuns. The convent church is a
        splendid building, with walls completely covered by rare, 17th-century
        azulejos in geometric patterns, and with a fine painted ceiling.
        Madeiras discoverer, Zarco, is buried beneath the altar, but the
        memorial to him vanished long ago. The tomb at the back of the church
        is not Zarcos, but that of family members.
        During his stint as governor of the island, Zarco is
        believed to have lived a short distance up Calçada do Pico, in the
        Quinta das Cruzes. Originally constructed in the 15th century, but
        rebuilt after an earthquake in 1748 and expanded in the 19th century,
        this is Funchals finest quinta (estate villa) open to the public. The
        main house is now a museum of antiques, including furniture from a
        variety of centuries and origins. There are superb 16th-century
        Indo-Portuguese and 17th-century Madeiran as well as 18th- and
        19th-century English pieces.
        The house is surrounded by a lovely, somewhat unkempt
        garden of exotic flowers, trees, and plants (including a good orchid
        section). However, the outstanding feature is the archaeological
        garden, an outdoor display of relics from some of the oldest places on
        the island — tombstones, pieces taken from important buildings, and two
        splendid early-16th-century stone Manueline windows (pick up the
        Quintas own leaflet for information on these).
        The road separating Quinta das Cruzes from the Convento
        leads to a lookout point with a view over the town, the port, and the
        dome of the English Church.
        The Market, Old Town, and Seafront
        Between two streams — ribeiras (riverbeds) that carry
        excess water down from the mountains to the sea — is Rua Dr. Fernão
        Ornelas, a street lined with old shops that leads to Funchals certral
        market. In spring, the little rivers are hidden beneath trellises of
        blazing bougainvillea.
        Directly ahead lies the Mercado dos Lavradores (Workers
        Market), housed in a two-story, open-roofed structure built in 1941.
        The market is open from Monday to Saturday from early in the morning
        until late afternoon; the best time to visit is on a Friday or
        Saturday, when fishermen, farmers, and traders from all over the island
        pour into town. This is the only time when the central part is filled
        with stalls.
        The market is bustling, fragrant, and colorful, with exotic
        fruits, vegetables, and fish of all shapes, colors, and sizes. Meat
        stalls can be found around the outside, as well as several wicker and
        handicraft shops. You will also find an open-air fruit, vegetable, and
        clothes market just behind the main market, in the park area next to
        the bus stops.
        Mercado dos Lavradores is the beginning of the Old Town
        quarter (even though you will not see signs for the Zona Velha until
        farther east). The main streets are the narrow, cobbled alleyway of Rua
        de Santa Maria and, parallel, Rua Dom Carlos I. This east end of
        Funchal is the antithesis of the opulent hotel zone to the west: It is
        poor and decaying, but filled with character.
        The only visible gentrification is the row of restaurants
        that you reach at the pedestrian-only stretch leading to the Capela do
        Corpo Santo (Chapel of the Body of Christ). The chapel, dating to the
        end of the 15th century, is the oldest in Funchal. Although a few
        artisans workshops are nearby, this old fishermens quarter is mainly
        a residential area.
        Down a narrow alleyway, past Edwardian-style beach huts
        used by local fishermen for storage and napping in, is the 17th-century
        Forte de São Tiago (St. James Fortress). Built in the 17th century and
        expanded in the mid-1700s, the picturesque fort now houses a modest
        Museu de Arte Con­tem­poránea (Museum of Contemporary Art). Another
        sign that this part of Funchal is being revitalized is the new lido,
        known as Barreirinha, on the beach below the Igreja de Santa Maria
        Maior, an elegant 18th-century church worth a visit. The terrace of the
        café below has fine views of the sea to the east.
        Along the seafront, just off Rua da Alfândaga, is the
        Parlamento Regional (Regional Parliament Building). Built in the 16th
        century and formerly the Old Customs House (Alfândega Velha), the
        oldest parts of this building lie inside the imposing gateway. The
        stone-paved lobby area is dominated by an enormous Egyptian-style vase,
        which at over 5 m (171/2 ft) tall, stands almost as high as a giraffe.
        Made recently by a team of Portuguese and Brazilian craftsmen, it is
        listed in the Guinness Book of Records as the worlds tallest ceramic
        vase.
        West of Town
        Avenida Arriaga ends at the Praça do Infante, where a
        statue of Prince Henry the Navigator (a copy of the one at Lagos in the
        Algarve) sits at the easternmost tip of Parque Santa Catarina (St.
        Catherine Park). A delightful hilltop retreat, it has splendid views
        over the Marina to the bay beyond. Aside from the gardens, lake, and
        playground, other points of interest include a statue of Christopher
        Columbus (who may have lived in Funchal for a while), and, close by,
        the Chapel of Santa Catarina, dating from the 17th century. At the west
        end of the park, the elegant pink Quinta Vigia is the residence of
        Madeiras governor. The well-tended gardens are open to the public, as
        is the chapel.
        Above the park looms the startling sight of the Pestana
        Carlton Park Hotel (designed by Oscar Niemeyer, famous for the
        futuristic Brasilia). The giant box of a hotel signals the start of the
        traditional hotel zone, flush with well-known, deluxe 5-star hotels
        such as the Savoy, the Madeira Carlton, and Reids, plus a few 4-star
        hotels, quintas, and posh restaurants.
        Just north of Avenida do Infante (along Rua Dr. Pita) is
        the delightful Quinta Magnólia park. Here you can swim or play tennis
        in the morning, have a walk around the gardens, and round off the
        afternoon with tea on the patio.
        Beginning west of Reids Hote l is the newest hotel zone,
        known as the Zona Turista (Tourist Zone). The enclave, which in its
        entirety exists to host and serve visitors, is perennially stocked with
        cranes, as new hotels and restaurants continue to be erected.
        Glorious Gardens
        A short bus or taxi ride into the steep hillsides northeast
        of Funchal (on the road to Camacha) leads to the Jardim Botânico
        (Botanical Garden), the islands most comprehensive public garden.
        Inaugurated in 1960, the gardens have examples of virtually every plant
        that grows on Madeira and lots of subtropical flowers and plants from
        places like South Africa and Brazil. It occupies steep terraces that
        offer fine views over Funchal. The adjacent Parque do Loiro (Tropical
        Bird Park) has been incorporated into the Botanic Garden. In open areas
        and cages, it has all manner ofbirds, parrots, and peacocks.
        Just a short walk down the hill is the Jardim Orquídea
        (Pregetters Orchid Garden). A relatively new project in orchid
        breeding, it has some 50,000 plants and more than 4,000 varieties of
        delicate orchids.
        Another of Funchals loveliest gardens, five minutes away
        by car is Quinta da Boa Vista (Rua Luis Figueiroa de Albuquerque). The
        lovely 200-year old house and garden are flush with orchids. The
        cymbidiums have received many awards, most notably from the British
        Royal Horticultural Society. Orchids are also on sale here, and you
        will never find them any fresher. The grounds include an ancient wine
        press and a charming thatched cottage.
        The most splendid of Madeiras horticultural wonders,
        however, are the gardens at Quinta do Palheiro Ferreiro (formerly
        called the Blandy Gardens). The hillside estate, only a short bus ride
        from Funchal, is the property of the family that owned Reids Hotel and
        is one of the famous producers of Madeira wine. The original quinta and
        chapel of the Count of Carvalhal, Quinta do Palheiro has been in the
        hands of the Blandy family for more than a century. (The main house is
        closed to the public. )
        The gardens, designed by an 18th-century French architect
        and established over several generations, are most famous for their
        camellias, though the diversity of exotic plants, including a lush
        array of tropical species, is quite remarkable. The long, cobbled
        entrance avenue is shaded by plane trees, while the fields which lie on
        each side are carpeted with a wonderful spread of agapanthus and arum,
        and belladonna lilies in season.
        Formal and informal areas are landscaped with pools and
        fountains, while terraces tumble down the hillsides. A deep, wild
        ravine with thick tropical vegetation is nicknamed the River of Hell.
         Yet the garden retains the distinctive charming and peaceful
        atmosphere of the timeless grounds of an English country house.
        Around Funchal
        A number of excellent visits are within easy reach of
        Funchal. Tour operators often promote Monte, Pico dos Barcelos, and
        Curral das Freiras as a popular half-day excursion.
        Monte has been a fashionable hilltop town ever since
        wealthy merchants and exiled European aristocrats in the 19th century
        built their splendid quintas up here in the cool air above Funchal.
        Today its perhaps best known for the anachronistic toboggan rides that
        originate here. The main square in Monte pleasantly evokes yesteryear.
        The rack-and-pinion railway that once labored up the ferociously steep
        hill closed in the 1930s, but the railway station is still here, its
        arches visible over the perfectly clipped public gardens Jardim do
        Monte (established 1894). In fact, in 1930, after 37 years of service,
        the train exploded, killing a number of people. By the advent of World
        War II, Montes golden age was over.
        A short walk along a path from the square is the elegant
        and richly decorated Igreja de Nossa Senhora do Monte (Our Lady of
        Monte), dedicated to Madeiras patron saint. On 15 August, thousands of
        locals make the annual pilgrimage to the church. A chapel on the left
        holds the tomb of the last of the Austro-Hungarian emperors, Charles I
        of Austria (and IV of Hungary), who died on Madeira in 1922. At the
        bottom of the church is the starting point for the islands best-known
        attraction, the Carrinhos de Monte — the unique roller-coaster ride
        down the hill aboard a wicker toboggan (see page 36).
        The Jardim do Palácio do Monte (Monte Palace Tropical
        Gardens), a short walk east of the church, is firmly rooted in the
        past. The gardens that surround the château-like Monte Palace — once
        the areas most fashionable hotels — are home to hundreds of plants and
        various other displays. The entrance fee is quite high by Madeiran
        standards (1,500 esc. ), but within the gates is an impressive
        collection of native and exotic flora (especially good cycads), a koi
        pond, porcelain collection, and historical artifacts from throughout
        Portugal, including architectural pieces taken from important buildings
        and prized azulejo panels. The unimpeded views of Funchal are
        unbeatable.
        Terreiro da Luta, at 876 m (2,873 ft), has its base about
        1.5 km (1 mile) north of Monte, but climbs another 330 m (1,000 ft) to
        the top and offers yet another magnificent panorama of Funchal. It was
        here that the revered figure of Our Lady of Monte (now in the church
        below) was allegedly discovered in the 15th century.
        On the summit is a monument to Nossa Senhora da Paz (Our
        Lady of Peace), dedicated to the end of World War I. Around the
        monument are anchor chains from French ships sunk in Funchal harbor by
        German torpedoes.
        Equally stunning views of Funchal and surroundings can be
        enjoyed at Pico dos Barcelos. Although at 355 m (1,164 ft) the altitude
        of the balcony is less than half that of Terreiro da Luta, the sweeping
        views from west to east and back into the terraced hillsides are
        superb. If you have brought your own transport, make a short detour to
        see the handsome landmark church of São Martinho. Its surprising to
        find such a large church in a relatively isolated farming parish.
        Another 16 km (10 miles) north on the narrow, twisting road
        is Curral das Freiras, a village that until very recently was truly
        isolated from the outside world. The Refuge of the Nuns is a perfect
        crater surrounded by extinct volcanoes. The nuns in question fled here
        from Santa Clara Convent in the 16th century to escape raiding pirates.
        Protected on all sides — hidden is more accurate — by inaccessible
        mountains, and supported by rich volcanic soil and abundant sunshine,
        their settlement became permanent.
        The village became famous for its cherries and chestnuts,
        and the popular liqueurs ginja and licor de castanha. The cakes here
        are also excellent. The village continued in splendid isolation until
        quite recently, when tunnels were finally bored through the mountains
        to bring the first roads. Fitting for a place once cut off from the
        secular world, villagers had to wait until 1986 before the first
        television pictures arrived.
        Curral das Freiras is pleasant enough, but the quiet
        village is perhaps best experienced from above. The view peering down
        into the valley from the lookout point of Eira do Serrado (1,006
        m/3,300 ft) is breathtaking. The whitewashed houses and red-tile roofs
        scatter about a sun-dappled, green terraced valley. If you opt for a
        coach tour, make sure a stop at Eira do Serrado is included (theres
        also great shopping and a newly built estalagem, or inn, here).
        An alternative view is from the south, way across the
        valley, at the lookout point with the romantic name of Boca dos
        Namorados (Lovers Nest). This is a difficult trek that, although
        feasible by car, is usually incorporated on the itinerary of jeep
        safaris. From here, the panorama sweeps round and takes in the entire
        valley (though even at 3,608 m/1,100 ft youll still be close enough to
        hear the bell of the village church). The Alpine scenery looks as if it
        is straight out of Austria or Switzerland.
        Camacha, back toward Funchal and east of the city, is a
        pretty village set at a refreshing altitude of nearly 700 m (2,300 ft).
        In the heart of willow country, Camacha is famous throughout the island
        as the heart of the wickerwork industry. Around 2,000 people in the
        region are employed crafting wicker furniture, hats, trays, decorative
        deer, and about anything you can imagine in wicker. Around Camacha and
        north of here youll likely see the stripped willow soaked and left to
        dry, either by a river bank, propped up against a house, or in wigwam
        fashion in the fields. You may even see families sitting at the
        roadside, cooking the willow in cauldron-like vats and laboriously
        stripping off the bark.
        Most of the weaving is done in the home, however, and the
        only place you are guaranteed to see craftsmen at work is in the
        slightly dingy basement of the Café Relógio. Despite its rather dull
        appearance and the crowds of people, this three-story
        wicker-superstore is an excellent place for shopping and
        refreshments — and just about the only highlight in town. The upstairs
        restaurant features Madeiran food and has excellent panoramic
        views.
        Camacha is also the starting point for two excellent levada
        walks (see page 47), suitable for people of all ages and abilities. One
        heads west to Vale do Paraíso, the other northeast to Eira de Fora.
        Western Madeira
        Western Madeira begins just beyond the capitals tourist
        zone. Ten km (6 miles) west of Funchal is Câmara de Lobos (lair of the
        sea-wolves). The peculiar name refers to the seals that once swam near
        the fishing village.
        Câmara de Lobos is more picturesque from afar than it is up
        close. It owes its reputation to its youthful, moreso than present,
        beauty. In 1950, Winston Churchill spent time on the island painting
        the fishing port, an interest that ensured its standing as an idyllic,
        old-world fishing village. The gaily-painted boats are still here, as
        is the protected, rocky natural harbor, but the old quarter overlooking
        the ocean has seen better days.
        The port area has resisted attempts at gentrification and
        fairly swaggers with macho atmosphere. Hard-drinking locals down poncha
        (sugar-cane brandy, lemon juice, and honey) in shadowy bars, while
        grizzled old fishermen play cards or repair their boats, awaiting their
        next trip. Close to the waterfront is a small, white chapel, an early
        15th-century project that was later rebuilt (1723). The winery of
        Henriques & Henriques is also in town. Otherwise, theres not much
        for the tourist here, but you have to hand it to Câmara de Lobos for
        remaining a pure and simple working port.
        Beyond Câmara de Lobos, the coastal road climbs for some 10
        km (6 miles), passing through some of the richest agricultural country
        in southern Madeira, famous for the high quality of its grapes.
        Eventually it leads to the top of the mighty headland known as Cabo
        Girão. One of the highest sea cliffs in the world, it plummets 590 m
        (1,900 ft) to the Atlantic. The views east and west along the coast are
        sensational. Blue-and-white agapanthus cling to the top of the
        promontory, and pine and eucalyptus creep right to the edge, but an
        even greater degree of daring can be seen hundreds of feet below, where
        farmers have managed to salvage tiny plots of arable land, terracing
        them into little green postage stamps stuck onto the sides and base of
        the cliff.
        The winding road continues on through the sprawling
        settlements of Quinta Grande and Campanário. The latter, an important
        grape-growing area, is also remarkable for its cliff-side caves, used
        by local fisherman for storage purposes. A local boat trip is required
        to see them.
        The next major settlement, heading westwards, is Ribeira
        Brava (if in a hurry, it can be reached in just 15 minutes on the via
        rápida highway from Funchal). The towns name, which means wild river
        or ravine, seems hyperbolic for such an orderly and peaceful little
        community. Except in winter, Ribeira Bravas river is more of a tame
        trickle. The river heads due north, as does the road — straight across
        the island to São Vicente — making the ancient town of Ribeira Brava
        (established in 1440) an important junction. There are a couple of
        hotels here and a pleasant stony beach with umbrellas.
        A couple blocks back from the beach, the main focus of
        attention is a tidy square, paved with black, egg-shaped stones from
        the beach, and its 16th-century church, with a blue-and-white tiled
        steeple. Next door is the small municipal market, while behind is the
        town center, featuring an attractive old church.
        From Ribeira Brava, most coach excursions head north to São
        Vicente, as the road cuts through some of the best scenery on the whole
        island. However, those with more time can continue along the southwest
        coast.
        Ponta do Sol is the next village after Ribeira Brava. As
        its name suggests, it is blessed with more than its fair share of
        sunshine. Only during the summer does it really come alive, however,
        when beach umbrellas are set out on the pebbly shore across from the
        small square. There are two buildings of note here: an 18th-century
        church and an Art-Deco cinema. As is frequently the case in Madeiran
        villages, the best views are from vantage points on the hillside road
        as it climbs up away from the village.
        Past the tiny settlement of Canhas, notable for its statue
        of Santa Teresa and the Stations of the Cross, is a miradouro
        overlooking Madalena do Mar. About 10 km (6 miles) west of Ponta do Sol
        is Calheta, a banana plantation center and the only town of
        significance as you head west. Igreja Matriz, the parish church, dates
        to 1430 but was rebuilt in 1639: It features a handsome Moorish-style
        ceiling. Calheta is the site of recent tourism investment, but as of
        yet doesnt attract large crowds. From here, the best idea is to
        backtrack along the main road towards Funchal, either heading inland to
        Paúl da Serra or heading a bit farther east on your way toward Serra de
        Água and São Vicente.
        Paúl da Serra (High Moorland) comes as a surprise on this
        island with such luxuriant vegetation. A plateau that measures 17 km
        (11 miles) long by 6 km (3.6 miles) wide, the flat plain stands in
        dramatic contrast to the rugged mountains in the center of Madeira. The
        scenery and landscape of the plateau are reminiscent of the bleak moors
        of Scotland, and on clear days it is possible to see both the north and
        south coasts of the island. In good weather, hikers are drawn to its
        remote and barren character. If you are thinking of walking or hiking
        here, be warned that mists descend suddenly; you may want to go with a
        guide (see page 111).
        On the road west to Porto Moniz, a minor road leads to
        Rabaçal, a beautiful valley popular among Madeirans at weekends and
        holidays. It is also the starting point for a couple of spectacular
        levada walks (see page 47). One is an easy, flat, and short (about 30
        minutes roundtrip) trip to the Risco waterfall. The other takes about
        three hours and involves a pretty steep climb along the way to 25
        Fontes (25 Springs) — as the name suggests, a verdant and
        water-filled spot. Both walks, indicated on almost all maps of Madeira
        (including the free one given out by the tourism office), are
        delightfully scenic.
        At the islands extreme northwestern tip is Porto Moniz,
        located 70 km (44 miles), but seemingly a world away, from Funchal. A
        volcanic extension reaches out into the waves of the Atlantic, and the
        reefs form a series of protected natural pools. Small plots of land,
        divided by heath-tree fencing (to protect crops from the salt-laden
        wind) climb the hills overlooking the sea. With few facilities other
        than a couple of hotels and restaurants on the coach-tour circuit, it
        isnt really a place to linger, unless the weathers warm and you want
        to go swimming or sit on the rocks and contemplate the ocean.
        East from here, the coastal road is one of the islands
        star attractions. Often shrouded in mist, the two-lane road hugs the
        jagged coast and climbs the mountainside, clinging precariously to a
        narrow ledge. A rocky outcrop with a hole carved in it like an open
        window has lent itself to the name of the nearest settlement, Ribeira
        da Janela (River Window). Water gushes down from the mountains; some
        is diverted to hydro-electric stations, but a lot simply drains off
        into the sea, splashing off passing cars like a natural car wash or
        amusement-park ride.
        Seixal (say-shall) is the only other settlement before
        São Vicente. The Sercial grape, used to produce the driest style of
        Madeira, is named for this pretty coastal village that is the center of
        a wine-growing district. Just beyond Seixal, heading east, it is well
        worth taking a short detour to make the steep climb up to the
        attractive spot of Chão da Ribeira.
        São Vicente, perhaps the prettiest village on the island,
        begins at the point where the northern coastal road meets the
        north-south road heading 21 km (13 miles) to Ribeira Brava. The town
        lies just south of an unusual little chapel carved out of a rock. São
        Vicentes compact and well-cared-for center is pedestrian-only, and
        attractive shops and cafés look onto Igreja Matriz, a lovely church
        with a colorful painted ceiling depicting St. Vincent.
        Tourism is making inroads, and restaurants have been
        designed with day-trippers in mind, but the village remains pristine.
        Larger restaurants and a hotel line the seafront, but the village
        itself is set inland, protected from the harsh ocean winds.
        The newest tourist attraction in these parts is the Grutas
        de São Vicente (St. Vincent Caves), opened in 1997. Formed when a now
        extinct volcano erupted more than 400,000 years ago, the caves were
        carved by molten lava. The tubes formed are more than a kilometer
        (half mile) in length. In 1855 an Englishman discovered the caves,
        which, being a lava bed, do not have icy limestone stalagmites and
        stalactites but lava drops that look like thick whirls of chocolate
        mousse. In a low-rise building near the cave entrance is a small
        ethnographic museum, a place to see displays of local island customs
        and costumes as you wait a couple of minutes for the guided cave tour
        to begin.
        High on a hill above the village is an odd
        church — actually a clockless clock tower — standing over a small
        chapel dedicated to Our Lady of Fátima. This isolated spot is a
        significant pilgrimage place, and can be seen for miles around.
        From here, the road continues to cut its way through
        beautiful, verdant countryside until finally coming to a crest at the
        pass of Boca da Encumeada (626 m/1,007 ft). From this point you can see
        right to the north coast and well into the south, while stretching on
        each side are vast expanses of mountain scenery. This is one of the
        starting points for strenuous treks to Pico Ruivo (the islands highest
        peak, at 1,862 m/6,109 ft).
        Of a more relaxed nature, one of the islands best levada
        walks skirts the edge of the mountain and takes in the entire valley,
        with views of the sea. Look for concrete steps opposite the Café
        Encumeada. The 45-minute walk along the water canal, more a stroll
        through a botanical garden than a hike, is lined with hydrangea and
        ferns and ends at a waterfall. A tunnel about halfway along provides
        chilly relief on a hot day.
        Three km (1.5 miles) south of the pass, perched on the edge
        of Serra de Água, is a hand­some and comfortable mountain chalet, the
        best of its kind on Madeira. The Pousada dos Vinháticos (vinhático is a
        type of Madeiran mahogany tree) enjoys the sort of views that many
        Alpine hotels would cherish. Its the perfect place for lunch or tea on
        the terrace, but many visitors, especially those with hiking on their
        minds, find it an ideal place to stay several days.
        The valley on the opposite side of the road, south of the
        pousada, is known as Serra de Água, and lays claim to the distinction
        of being the islands first hydro-electric power station. In spite of
        the introduction of modern technology, however, the valley remains a
        quiet agricultural community tucked away in some of the islands
        lushest hills.
        The road from here leads down into Ribeira Brava, where the
        via rápida motorway whisks you back to Funchal.
        Madeiras Mountainous Middle
        The rugged mountain range that splits the island into north
        and south makes weather forecasting a difficult proposition on Madeira.
        One route to take in a good section of this picturesque terrain is to
        drive north (and up) from Funchal toward Santana on the north coast.
        There are beautiful vistas, secluded villages, and a range of
        exhilarating walks en route.
        While it is usually warm and clear down in Funchal, the
        mountains are often shrouded in a wintry mist. This doesnt necessarily
        mean that youll have no view once you start climbing, however. The
        tops of the mountains often jut through the clouds, a spectacular sight
        in itself. Madeiras microclimates are very difficult to judge,
        especially from below. If it looks clear, beat a hasty path up to Pico
        do Arieiro first thing in the morning. You should know by the time you
        arrive at Poiso whether or not the journey will be worth the
        effort.
        At 1,818 m (5,900 ft), Pico do Arieiro is the
        second-highest peak on Madeira, but the highest point reachable by car.
        As the road rises, the rugged countryside becomes spectacularly barren,
        though plunging volcanic hillsides have been softened and greened by
        time. If youre driving, beware of sheep straying onto the road.
        The lookout point at the windswept, lunar-like summit
        provides a 360-degree panorama. With its stratified canyon walls, a
        field of frozen lava, and boulders flung across the scene of volcanic
        catastrophe, its a geologists dream. During summer, the terrain is
        parched, while at other times of the year its often covered with snow.
        The overnight temperature plunges below freezing most of the year,
        while the average annual temperature is less than 10°C (50°F). There is
        also six times as much rain here as in Funchal. If the arrival of
        clouds catches you unaware, a welcome place of refuge is a modern
        pousada, a good stop for lunch and popular overnight stay with
        hikers.
        At 1,862 m (6,109 ft), Pico Ruivo, the rooftop of Madeira,
        is only 62 m (209 ft) higher than Pico do Arieiro, but much less
        accessible. The peak can be reached by an hour-long walk from Achada do
        Teixeira in the north, or the classic but strenuous, 4-hour roundtrip
        hike from Pico do Arieiro (see page 49).
        The latter is well signposted, and there is a paved
        footpath, with drops protected by railings. The trek is popular; on a
        good day you will see several other walkers, so dont worry about
        losing your way. Warm clothing and hiking boots are essential, though,
        and in winter bear in mind that conditions on the mountains can be
        hazardous, with landslides removing parts of the path. Check weather
        conditions from the tourist information office in Funchal, then
        double-check at the pousada when you get there.
        Back on the main road north (past Poiso) is the enchanting
        spot of Ribeiro Frio, more a bend in the road than a town. A
        microclimate in Cold River makes this an ideal stopover — the
        souvenir sellers along the main road are an indicator of the number of
        people that pop in. Victors Bar, a restaurant resembling an Alpine
        chalet, receives most of them, warming visitors with log fires and
        freshly grilled trout from the trout hatchery across the road.
        Adjacent to the restaurant is a tiny chapel and small
        botanical garden. The trout hatchery is a series of inter­connected
        concrete pools; the trout become increasingly bigger as you go along
        the pools. The botanical garden is not in the same league as the
        beautiful gardens you will see in Funchal, but it nevertheless claims
        to have examples of every species of flower, plant, and tree to be
        found on Madeira, and sprawls unpredictably along twisting paths among
        shady trees.
        Ribeiro Frio is relaxing, but the real reason for its
        popularity are two walks that begin here. The shorter one, 2 km (1
        mile) to the outstanding lookout point known as the Balcões
        (balconies), takes just 45 minutes roundtrip. After a stroll through
        the woods, you reach a platform that seems suspended in mid-air, with
        stupendous views across steep hillsides and dramatic ravines to the
        distinctive peaks of Ruivo and Arieiro. If its not hidden in cloud
        cover, the sight certainly ranks as one of the most beautiful on the
        island.
        The second walk is one of the islands most popular levada
        trails. It continues for just over 10 km (6 miles) until it reaches
        Portela, where a good restaurant offers sustenance to weary hikers. The
        walk takes most people about three hours, so you may wish to arrange
        for a taxi to collect you at Portela. An alternative short walk is to
        head out along the levada for a half hour or so (before steep drops
        begin), by which time you will certainly have been able to sample its
        charm, and then head back to Ribeiro Frio. Both options have food and
        drink waiting at the end.
        The Road to Santana
        North from Ribeiro Frio, toward the coast, is Faial, much
        photographed because of its picturesque setting at the foot of the
        Penha dÁguia. However, theres little of note in the village itself,
        aside from a handsome church and the Casa de Chá do Faial, which
        despite its name (Faial Tearoom) is a standard restaurant with
        picture windows and fine roof-top panoramas.
        The road winds westward to at least two memorable lookout
        points looking back at the village from the main road. Santana is home
        to a quaint but primitive style of housing — A-shaped structures known
        as palheiros (not to be confused with the A-shaped cow huts that dot
        the hillsides all over Madeira). The classic palheiro is a two-story
        white stucco with a brightly painted red door, red-and-blue window
        frames and shutters, and above all, a thatched roof.
        Santana is frequently labeled one of the most attractive
        villages on the island, but its setting is the real star. The emerald
        hills and jagged coastline are reminiscent of Irelands west coast.
        White houses shrouded in mist dot the slopes. The town itself is a
        rather straggly place with a modern town hall and no identifiable
        center. Two palheiros, perfectly painted in red, white, and blue, are
        the objects of many tourist cameras, while one immediately behind these
        remains a private home, its owners desperate to keep out gawkers.
        Elsewhere, there are miniature palheiro dog kennels, and
        down by the river even the ducks have their own palheiro. There is also
        a furnished showhouse palheiro (not always open) next to the O Colmo
        restaurant, where you can see the extremely confined living space.
        More thatched houses of a larger and more conventional
        kind are to be found 5 km (3 miles) south of Santana. Queimadas is a
        complex of cottage-style rest houses with attractive gardens. Its a
        lovely spot for a picnic, although if the weather is clear you might
        prefer to take the opportunity to ascend to the very top of the island.
        This is reached by a 10 km (6 mile) drive south of Santana, through the
        forest park of Pico das Pedras, up to Achada do Teixeira at 1,592 m
        (5,223 ft). From here, its a two-hour walk roundtrip to Pico Ruivo
        (see page 47).
        The scenery northwest of Santana is just as delightful.
        São Jorge has a fine, richly ornamented church, while past the village
        there is a splendid panorama from the miradouro of Cabanas, over to the
        valley of Arco de São Jorge.
        The road winds inland towards the picturesque, fertile
        countryside in the vicinity of Fajã do Penedo and on to the pretty
        village of Boaventura. To enjoy excellent views, follow the coast road
        down to the small peninsula of Ponta Delgada, where you can cool off by
        the rocks in the seawater swimming pool. From here its just 5 km (3
        miles) to São Vicente, at which point the road heads south to Ribeira
        Brava, then east back to Funchal.
        Eastern Madeira
        The eastern section of Madeira isnt as mountainous as its
        center, but it has some wonderful coastal spots, a handful of
        attractive small towns, productive agricultural fields, and a long,
        surreal promontory that juts out into the Atlantic.
        As you head out of Funchal, the village of Santo da Serra
        can also be reached via Camacha or from the Poiso cross­roads. The
        altitude of 670 m (2,200 ft) produces refreshing breezes, and explains
        why several wealthy British expats have chosen to build quintas here
        and why so many affluent Madeirans still flee the hot Funchal summer up
        into these hills.
        The most striking feature of Santo da Serra is its
        flatness; it may not be in the league of Paúl da Serra, but it is still
        large enough to accommodate a 27-hole golf course (see page 82). Even
        if youre not much of a golfer, you might still enjoy a stroll through
        the pleasant gardens of Quinta da Junta, once owned by the ubiquitous
        Blandy family but today public. A lookout point provides views across
        to Machico on the coast, and you can enjoy a drink at the golf club
        bar, set in what was once a pousada.
        At Portela (662 m/2,172 ft), the views of the coast are
        striking. If youre lucky, you may see a hang glider take off from a
        nearby platform. Penha dÁguia dominates the northeast coast. This huge
        rock formation, towering at 590 m (1,935 ft), levels off to a flat top.
        The name, meaning Eagle Rock, is derived from its former inhabitants
        rather than its shape.
        The village of Porto da Cruz, 6 km (4 miles) north, lies
        in the shadow of the rock. Here you will find one of Madeiras few
        sugarcane mills still working, pumping out steam as it processes the
        sugarcane to make aguardente, the local liquor. It doesnt operate all
        year round, however, and it is open to the public only in April. The
        village is neat and tidy, but theres nothing to detain you for very
        long.
        Machico can claim to be Madeiras first settlement, the
        spot where João Gonçalves Zarco first came ashore on the island in
        1419. Zarco ruled the western half of Madeira, while his fellow
        Portuguese captain and navigator, Tristão Vaz Teixeira, governed over
        the eastern half from Machico. A statue of Teixeira stands outside the
        towns 15th-century parish church, Igreja Matriz. King Manuel I donated
        the statue of the Virgin (over the altar) and the distinguished church
        portal. The latter is a fine example of the exuberant style of
        Manueline architecture.
        From Machicos triangular square, several streets lead
        to the seafront — a dark, pebbly beach with a small fort dated 1706.
        The local fishermens quarters lie just east of the river, where cows
        graze along the banks, a scene unexpected in sub-tropical Madeira,
        where cows are usually confined to tiny huts.
        Machico is one of Ma­dei­ras boat-building centers, and
        on the beach you will probably see work in progress on both old and new
        vessels, the former being used for scrap. With the aid of EU funding,
        large, new tuna boats are being built to replace old stock. Follow the
        road all the way around the bay for a fine view across, east to west.
        The incongruous high-rise blot on the landscape directly opposite is
        the massive Hotel Dom Pedro, rather out-of-place in this low-key town,
        but an indicator of its tourism ambitions.
        The road north heads inland after Machico. A huge,
        fenced-off area is under construction as a zona franca — tax-free
        business development area — intended to attract foreign investment.
        With so little in the way of industrial development elsewhere on the
        island, this zone is particularly startling.
        The landscape of the eastern peninsula, known as the Ponta
        de São Lourenço, is more like Porto Santo and the Ilhas Desertas than
        Madeira. It is wild and windswept, and its limited vegetation a far cry
        from the lush green interior. Keen walkers enjoy this tip of the
        island, but for many it is a little too invigorating for comfort.
        Caniçal was once a famous whaling port, but since whaling
        was banned in these waters in 1981, all that remains of this formerly
        lucrative industry is a Museum of Whaling and a few scrimshaw and
        whalebone souvenirs in a hut by the beach (more of the same is on sale
        at the car park at the end of the road heading east).
        Although the Museu da Baleia (Whale Museum) shows a video
        of a whale hunt in 1978, the owner is the epitome of a poacher turned
        gamekeeper. Once commander of the Caniçal whaling station and thus
        responsible for taking 100–200 of the great c reatures each year, he
        now devotes his energy to saving the whale and other marine life of the
        area. The 14-meter (45-foot) model of the sperm whale is a reminder of
        the leviathans that once swam in great schools in the waters off
        Madeira. Whales are still sighted here, but not frequently.
        The beach of Caniçal now looks rather forlorn, with
        rotting hulks and flotsam and jetsam testifying to better days.
        Nevertheless, its a working fishing port, complete with a selection of
        good fish restaurants. Close by, at Prainha, is the islands only
        natural sandy beach. Not surprisingly for a volcanic island, the sand
        here is black, and even this stretch is sometimes washed away.
        The town of Santa Cruz is a pleasant place, with an
        attractive church dating from the 16th century. Across the main square,
        the town hall, in spite of having been modernized, retains a pair of
        splendid 15th- to 16th-century Manueline windows. A few streets away,
        the courthouse is another survivor of that era, with fine verandas and
        an impressive main staircase. Along the seafront is the modern
        municipal market and a pebbly beach.
        These days Santa Cruz is best known for the Aeroporto de
        Santa Cataria (international airport) that serves Funchal and all of
        Madeira. In 2000 it was still undergoing a massive expansion. As you
        continue driving east, you actually travel underneath the runway, which
        is supported on huge pillars above you — a novel (not to mention rather
        sobering) sensation both for those above and below.
        The main road along the coast toward Funchal passes
        Caniço, the first settlement of any real size. The original village is
        built around an imposing 18th-century church, while the new Caniço de
        Baixa is a sprawling proliferation of smart holiday homes visible from
        afar.
        After roughly another mile, turn off the main road towards
        Ponta do Garajau, a holiday development popular with German visitors.
        The road ends at a fine miradouro, where a statue of Christ stands with
        arms outstretched (a miniature version of the statues at Rio de Janeiro
        and Lisbon). There is also a good view west to the Bay of Funchal; to
        the east, the modern resort on the small promontory is Caniço de Baixa,
        another favorite with German vacationers.
        The road dropping down into Funchal winds past some of the
        towns smartest villas. The first landmark youll see is the church of
        São Gonçalo in the parish of the same name. Also in the vicinity is the
        tiny, atmospheric chapel dedicated to Nossa Senhora das Neves (Our Lady
        of the Snows).
        Porto Santo
        The island of Porto Santo, 40 km (25 miles) northeast of
        Madeira, is the only other inhabited island in the archipelago, with a
        population of some 5,000. As desert islands go, its not exactly
        undiscovered — its accessible by ferry or very short flight — but only
        a handful of foreign visitors find these shores. Porto Santo is still,
        at heart, the resort of Madeirans, who seek what they have not:
        sand.
        Porto Santos prize is a long, golden beach, only recently
        touched by development. But thats not all that distinguishes Porto
        Santo from Madeira. In summer the smaller island is scorched and
        yellow, with rusty-colored rock and cliff formations. The island is
        mostly quiet, with a short, three-month summer season. Out of season,
        however, even the main town seems deserted.
        The frequently rough sea crossing drops passengers at
        Porto de Abrigo, on the eastern tip of the island. (The return
        crossing, however, is never as bad. ) From the dock it is a short taxi
        or bus ride, or a 20-minute walk, to Vila Baleira (sometimes referred
        to as Porto Santo Town), the islands only settlement of notable
        size.
        The center of Vila Baleira is a small, triangular plaza,
        comprising a small town hall and a church now restored after more than
        three centuries of use. Nossa Senhora da Piedade (Our Lady of Piety)
        was originally founded just after the islands discovery during the
        early- to middle-15th century. The present church was rebuilt after
        pirates destroyed the original in 1667, though part of it, the Morgada
        chapel, did survive.
        Porto Santos claim to fame, beyond its sandy beach, is
        its link to Christopher Columbus. The towns major attraction is a
        house that stands next to the church, set back a little off the square:
        Casa de Colombo (closed weekends) dates from the 15th century and has
        recently been restored. Its an atmospheric little house, built from
        rough-hewn stone; its not hard to imagine the great explorer living
        here.
        The story of Columbus and the Madeiran archipelago is not
        entirely apocryphal, unlike so many other tales related to the islands.
        Columbus married Felipa Moniz Perestrelo, the daughter of the first
        Governor of Porto Santo, Bartolomeu Perestrelo. However, there is no
        strong evidence that he ever lived here. Still, the museum claims that
        around 1480 Columbus lived here for about two years and that young
        Diego Columbo was born a Portosantense in this house.
        Regardless of the truth, Casa de Colombo is worth a visit.
        Displays include period pieces, memorabilia, replicas, maps, paintings,
        and sketches, though no personal effects or anything directly linked to
        the man himself. Another curious enigma about Columbus that has baffled
        historians is that no reliable likeness of him has ever survived. Take
        a look at the portraits in the museum, and then compare them with the
        dashing, modern bust of him in the public gardens by the quay.
        The most interesting street in Vila Baleira is Rua João
        Gonçalves Zarco, on the other side of the river, running down to the
        sea. Here you will find the towns small market and a number of old
        shops and bars with plenty of character.
        An Island Tour
        Porto Santo is tiny (less than 11 km by 6 km/6 miles by 4
        miles). It doesnt require much sightseeing, which is good, because
        most people just come to bake on the beach. Hiring a car is expensive,
        and what there is to see is usually near the main roads. Taxis will
        take you around the island, giving their own tours at fixed prices (see
        page 120). Pick up a leaflet from the tourist office and ask for a
        driver who can speak your language. Another alternative is to take a
        minibus tour with an agency such as Blandys.
        Heading around the island in a counter-clockwise
        direction, the first stop is the lookout point of Portela (163 m/535
        ft). From here, you can survey the whole 9 km (6 miles) of the golden,
        sandy beach. Head north, however, and the desolate nature of the
        landscape is inescapable. Crop yield is poor, partly because of the
        chronic lack of water, and fields once tended are now deserted. Earning
        a living from tourism here is, to most, more appealing than toiling in
        the fields.
        The islands highest peak, at 517 m (695 ft), is Pico do
        Facho, situated around 1.5 km (1 mile) due north of Portela. Youll
        need to don hiking boots to get to the summit. Its name, Peak of the
        Torch, is taken from the warning beacons that were lit here in the
        days when French and Algerian pirates posed a threat to the island.
        The circular road now arcs north to the diminutive village
        of Camacha, where the principal attraction is a picturesque old
        windmill — one of the last few still working on the island. If it is
        closed, ask locals if you can look inside; theyre likely to fetch the
        friendly mill owner to come and open up for you. Nearby, a ramshackle
        winery with an antique wooden press produces the local Porto Santo
        wine. If it is closed, you can still sample the wine in either of the
        villages two restaurant-bars.
        A minor road heads west out of Camacha to Fonte da Areia
        (Sand Spring), where the rugged coastline is particularly lovely.
        Sandstone cliffs and rocks have been weathered into interesting shapes
        and small caves. A spring filtering through the rocks is the source of
        the islands mineral water.
        The main road continues its loop, bringing you just about
        back to Vila Baleira, before a minor road heads north again towards
        Pico do Castelo. Its only a couple of hundred yards from Pico do
        Facho, and from its height of 437 m (1,433 ft), accessible by car,
        provides a quite commanding view itself.
        The old, rusted cannons are all that remain of the
        fortifications that once protected the islanders from pirates. Nowadays
        its a popular spot for picnics and barbecues. Porto Santos airfield
        (much larger than the one at Madeira before the latter was expanded),
        lies just below.
        A favorite local picnic spot is Morenos, towards the
        southwest tip of the island, though close to, and looking out over, the
        north coast. It is neat and well-tended with sunshades, flowers, and
        seats, and enjoys a picturesque view over to the tiny Ilheu de Ferro
        (Isle of Iron). The last viewpoint of the tour is Pico das Flores, at
        184 m (603 ft). From here you can see north along the beach; the only
        blot on the landscape is the unfinished Novo Mondo hotel — a notorious,
        8-story white elephant completely out of proportion with the rest of
        the island.
        Directly beneath Pico das Flores is the southern end of
        the beach and Porto Santos easternmost point, known as Ponta da
        Calheta. The rest of the islands beach is a long, uninterrupted
        expanse, backed by attractive but slightly featureless dunes. Here,
        however, there are small bays with picturesque, rocky outcrops and you
        can enjoy a beautiful view across to the Ilheu de Baixo.
      
    
  
