
  
  
    
      
        Hawaiian Highlights
        Oahu: Waikiki Beach is the tourist center of the islands,
        worth strolling or playing on; so is the parallel shopping street.
        Hidden beneath the glitter are veins of the old royal and romantic
        Waikiki (see page 28).
        The Bishop Museum is a repository of Hawaiiana and its
        Polynesian legacies (see page 36).
        The USS Arizona Memorial at Pearl Harbor powerfully evokes
        the outbreak of World War II in the Pacific (see page 39).
        The North Shore combines native Hawaiian culture and natural
        beauty with the modern charm of surfing villages and beaches (see
        page 41).
        Hanauma Bay, a gorgeous volcanic amphitheater on the shores
        beyond Diamond Head, draws thousands of snorkelers to its gentle reefs
        (see page 41).
        Maui: The vast Mount Haleakala caldera towers over the
        island (see page 51).
        Lahaina, once the chief whaling port of the Pacific, teems
        with period architecture and trendy shops (see page 46).
        The road to and from Hana goes through the heart of tropical
        forests and the real Hawaii (see page 53).
        Hawaii (Big Island): The Kona Coast has superb beaches and
        the Puuhonua-O-Honaunau City of Refuge, Hawaiis most striking native
        temple grounds (see page 62).
        Volcanoes National Park has active lava flows flowing to
        the sea at the end of the Chain of Craters Road (see page 64).
        Kauai: The Garden Island is lush with botanical estates and
        Waimea Canyon, the grand Canyon of the Pacific (see page 68).
        The roadless Na Pali Coast on the heavenly north shore is
        one of the worlds most challenging and majestic seaside hikes (see
        page 71).
        Molokai: The immense, sheer seacliffs of this rugged,
        sparsely-populated island are the setting for the leper colony founded
        by Father Damien at Kalaupapa, which can be reached by mule (see
        page 77).
        Lanai: This pineapple plantation island has become a tiny
        hide­away with two splendid resorts and the remains of the historic
        company town, Lanai City (see page 80).
      
    
  
