
  
  
    
      
        WHERE TO GO
        Planning an Italian vacation entails a series of difficult
        decisions.  Doing Italy is a lifetime job, and many devotees are so
        in love with the place that they wont even think of an alternative
        destination. After a predictable first romance with Rome, Venice, or
        Florence, they spend the rest of their lives systematically working
        their way through the small but wildly varied country, region by
        region, visit after visit. If this is your first trip, youll do well
        to establish an overall impression. If the seduction works, and it
        usually does, youll want to come back time and again.
        This section includes all the most important towns and
        regions to help you make your choice. Each of the five areas has a
        principal city as a focus or starting point: Rome for central Italy,
        plus Sardinia; Florence for Tuscany, with Umbria, and the Adriatic
        seaside resorts to the east; Venice for Veneto, the Dolomites, and
        Emilias historic towns from Parma to Ravenna; Milan for Lombardy,
        Piedmont, and the Italian Riviera to the west; and Naples for the south
        and Sicily.
        Given the sheer and unrivaled richness of Italy, the
        selection of places within those five areas is not in any way
        exhaustive (nor, by the same token, exhausting). Those who already know
        Italy well will inevitably feel that a few of their favorite spots have
        been neglected (though they may also be grateful to not have their
        secret exposed), while theyll find others they never heard of.
        Newcomers will have an embarrassment of destinations to choose
        from.
        Depending on how much time you have for that all-important
        first taste, we suggest you try to visit at least two, even three of
        the regions. Those with a passion for the big city can combine Rome
        with the artistic delights of Florence and Tuscany, or Milan with the
        magical romance of Venice. For many, the key to Italys Mediterranean
        soul is to be found in Naples and the south. After the intense emotion
        and summertime heat spells (air conditioning is not always available),
        cool off at the seaside resorts of the Riviera or any of the gem-like
        islands.
        The trick is in the mix. Not just geographically, in
        exploring the variety and contrasts of north and south, but in
        combining the attractions of town and countryside and the resultingly
        different facets of Italys daily life. Nowhere is it easier or more
        delightful to overdose on museums and monuments than in Italy. A dear
        old lady returned from her first visit with the observation: Italys
        very nice, very nice indeed, but for my taste, much too much history. 
        While it would be a crime to ignore the churches, palazzos, and museums
        chronicling the unparalleled glories of Italys history, the best way
        to enjoy them is also to spend plenty of time soaking it in from a
        front-row seat in a café, or from under a canvas beach umbrella
        watching seaside life unfold. The siesta is one of the greatest of all
        Latin institutions, and the most important Italian expression you may
        ever learn is dolce far niente (the sweetness of doing nothing).
        Many people cannot manage to go to Italy outside the major
        holiday periods — Easter, July, and August. But if your options are
        more flexible, the most enjoyable (though equally crowded) months are
        May, June, September, and October — especially for Rome, Venice, and
        Tuscany. Certainly, July and August can be almost unbearably hot and
        humid in most big cities, but some find an odd, ghostly pleasure in
        being in Rome on Ferragosto (on and around 15 August) when the city is
        abandoned to the cats and the crazy.  And remember, Italians make no
        bones about public holidays (see page 233); they just close the whole
        country down.
        Getting Around
        Even the most free-spirited traveler can use a little help
        occasionally. With the tourist industry such a vital factor in the
        economy, Italy has an elaborate network of information offices.
        Bureaucrats being bureaucrats, efficiency and amiability vary from
        place to place, but the tourist information offices all provide useful
        maps and brochures.
        For general information, the state tourist office ENIT
        (Ente Nazionale Italiano per il Turismo) has offices in major foreign
        cities as well as regional capitals. When in Italy, look instead for
        the APT (Azienda di Promozione Turistica) for more detailed regional
        sightseeing information; they occasionally help as well with hotel and
        camping accommodation. CIT (Compagnia Italiana di Turismo) is a
        national travel agency for transportation, excursions, and hotel
        bookings.
        The Travel Tips section at the back of the book (see page
        217) gives detailed practical guidance on the technicalities of travel
        through Italy, but here are some general thoughts to help you plan your
        trip.
        Major journeys from one part of the country to another,
        say, from Milan to Rome or down to Naples, is most enjoyed by train
        buffs and travelers with plenty of time, patience, and curiosity. The
        uncertainties of schedules and frequency of strike action gradually
        disappeared in the 1990s, but the occasional wrinkle still needs to be
        ironed out. If you are making a long rail journey, dont rely on the
        generally dreary dining-car service. Make up your own picnic hamper of
        cold meats, bread, cheese, fruit, and water or wine from the local
        market before you get aboard. Very often, you end up sharing it with
        Italian passengers who offer in exchange their own homemade
        goodies.
        The great breathtaking Italian adventure remains the road.
        The autostrada (toll motorway or expressway) runs the length and
        breadth of the peninsula, a challenge to the imagination and survival
        instincts of Western civilization. Only to the uninitiated do Italian
        drivers seem dangerous. Most of them are highly skillful — they have to
        be — and proud of their reflexes. Two attitudes to avoid: recklessness
        and excessive caution. Dont try to match their improvisations, you
        will only raise their competitive spirit into the realm of high risk.
        They may be similarly provoked by indecisive and slow drivers.
        Keep your car for use on the open road. In the overcrowded
        cities, just drop your bags off at the hotel, and then park your car.
        To see the city, you should walk, take a bus, subway or taxi, or rent a
        bike. Most towns have solved the problem for you by closing off their
        historical centers (centro storico) to traffic: Consider that your
        rental cars will cost you money while remaining unused albeit safely
        parked.
        Try to vary the kind of places that you stay in. Italy has
        all types of accommodations available, so youll have quite a few
        choices. Small family-run hostelries and country inns are charming,
        but, depending of course on your budget and personal preferences,
        consider indulging for at least one night on the special comforts and
        pampering of the great hotels. Look for converted monasteries and
        countryside farmhouses. In most cases the frugality has long gone, the
        heating is modern, and the medieval well has been replaced by a
        swimming pool, but the setting is still memorable.
        Even if youre a linguistic dud, try to learn a handful of
        Italian words or expressions. The pronunciation is remarkably easy and
        the Italians are usually delighted by anyone making the effort. A
        cheerful buon giorno (good day) or buona sera (good evening) can work
        wonders when entering or leaving a shop or restaurant. In a land where
        politeness is important, per favore (please), grazie (thank you), prego
        (dont mention it), and, when pushing through a bus or market, permesso
        (excuse me) will be greatly appreciated. Youll find some additional
        phrases beginning on page 218. Now enjoy it, buon viaggio!
        CENTRAL ITALY
        The center of Italy is the cradle of Latin civilization,
        one-time administrative headquarters of that ancient conglomerate known
        as the Roman Empire. Immediately surrounding Rome, todays Lazio is the
        ancient province of Latium. On the eastern flank of the Apennines, the
        Abruzzi region, of which the province of Molise is a recently created
        offshoot, came under Roman domination in the third century b.c.
        First-time visitors will understandably want to spend most or all of
        their time in Rome, but the area surrounding the capital makes a
        pleasant excursion within fairly easy reach of Rome for those
        adventurers with wheels and extra time.
        The rugged island of Sardinia deserves at least a week to
        do it justice, but you may want to spend a long weekend at one of its
        attractive little seaside resorts.
        Rome
        Crowning seven hills along the winding banks of the River
        Tiber, Rome has numerous different personalities: ancient Rome of
        imperial ruins; Catholic Rome of Vatican City and countless churches;
        the Renaissance city of Michelangelo and Raphael or the Baroque of
        Bernini and Borromini; and a modern metropolis of interminable traffic
        jams, fashionable boutiques and cafés, as well as factories and
        characterless apartment buildings that make up the post-war eye-sore
        suburbs.
        None is easily separable from the others. The secret of the
        Eternal Citys magic is that it lives and relishes all its ages
        simultaneously. Churches are commonly built on the ruins of Roman baths
        or pagan temples. The trendy café crowd on Piazza Navona draw natural
        inspiration from Berninis grandiose 17th-century fountain.
        Ease yourself into this magnificent city that has hosted
        visitors for millenia. To know its every crook and cranny is a daunting
        challenge, but concentrate on the ancient city around the Colosseum or
        the Vaticans formidable complex, and come to know one age at a
        time.
        The Center
        Make an early start with breakfast (or come back for a late
        afternoon apéritif) on Piazza del Popolo at Caffè Rosati, a veritable
        Roman institution and historical meeting-place of the citys literary
        personalities. Its outdoor tables are a perfect vantage point for
        admiring the gracefully curving piazza, an exemplary piece of open-air
        urban theater designed in 1816 by Giuseppe Valadier, architect to
        Napoleon.
        On the north side, the church of Santa Maria del Popolo is
        important for Raphaels Chigi Chapel, exquisite frescoes by
        Pincuricchio, and, above all, two profoundly disturbing early
        17th-century paintings by Caravaggio, the Conversion of St. Paul and
        Crucifixion of St. Peter, in the Cerasi Chapel left of the choir.
        Next to the church, an arched 16th-century gateway marks
        what was the entrance to ancient and medieval Rome along the Via
        Flaminia, leading from Rimini on the Adriatic coast. The obelisk in the
        piazzas center, dating from the Egypt of Rameses II (13th century b.c.
        ), was brought here from the Circus Maximus and re-erected by Pope
        Sixtus V in 1589. Rounding off the south side are the twin Baroque
        churches, Santa Maria dei Miracoli and Santa Maria in Montesanto,
        completed by the 17th-century masters Gianlorenzo Bernini and Carlo
        Fontana.
        Above the piazza to the east, the Pincio gardens offer a
        magical view of the city, especially at sunset. (For the great art
        museum in the Villa Borghese park behind the Pincio, see page 66. ) The
        ascending Pincio promenade lined with umbrella pine trees takes you
        past the Villa Medici, home of many French artists visiting on national
        scholarships, to the 16th-century French church, Trinità dei Monti.
        Its twin belfries loom over the Spanish Steps (Scalinata
        della Trinità dei Monti), eternal hang-out of Romes golden youths,
        lovers, peddlers of trinkets and the occasional hustler. The pleasant
        daze induced on the three-tiered travertine staircase, festooned in
        spring with pink azaleas, was celebrated by John Keats as a blissful
        cloud of summer indolence before he died here in 1821. His house at
        the bottom of the steps has been preserved as a museum.
        Named after a palace used as the Spanish Embassy, the
        famous steps and the Piazza di Spagna are the heart of the citys most
        fashionable and exclusive shopping enclave, leading to the Via del
        Corso. The piazzas 17th-century sunken-boat-shaped marble fountain,
        Fontana della Barcaccia, is by the great Berninis father. The nearby
        venerable Babingtons Tea Rooms are a relic of the days when Romans
        called the piazza the English ghetto.  More quintessentially Roman,
        on nearby Via Condotti, is the citys oldest coffee house, the
        18th-century Caffè Greco — popular, as youll see from pictures, busts,
        and autographs, with Goethe, Byron, Baudelaire, Liszt, Casanova, and
        Fellini.
        This is the general area of the Trevi Fountain (Fontana di
        Trevi) which benefited from Fellinis keen sense of Baroque aesthetics
        when he dipped the dazzling Anita Ekberg in its legendarily purifying
        waters for his film La Dolce Vita. Its been quite some time since
        anyone was caught romping in these waters reflecting Nicola Salvis
        astounding 18th-century fountain. It is in fact a triumphal arch and
        palace façade (to the old Palazzo Poli) framing mythic creatures in a
        riot of rocks and pools, with a rearing horse symbolizing the oceans
        turmoil and a calmer steed its tranquility. Tucked away behind narrow
        alleys, this recently restored extravaganza is out of all proportion to
        its tiny piazza and no amount of signposts leading to it can prepare
        you for the marvellous shock of discovery. Romantics go at the dead of
        night, to be alone with its illumination. Its a favorite haunt for
        local fellows looking for foreign innocents abroad. Tradition dictates
        a toss of a coin over your shoulder to ensure a return trip.
        That other symbol of la dolce vita, the Via Veneto, has
        been deserted by its starlets and paparazzi and only the expensive
        cafés, once stylish shops, and five-star hotels remain. Slowly, it is
        making something of a comeback in popularity.
        On one of the seven hills of ancient Rome, the
        fortress-like Palazzo del Quirinale, once summer residence to popes
        fleeing the malarial swamps of the Vatican down by the Tiber, housed
        the new king of Italy after 1870, and since 1947 is the presidential
        palace. The only embellishment on its formidable façade is Berninis
        graceful porch, but its piazza is worth the climb for the view over the
        city and the Vatican.
        You couldnt miss Piazza Venezia if you tried — and many do
        try, because of its endless traffic jams and the arguably ungainly
        white marble Vittorio Emanuele Monument. The monument celebrates the
        first king of unified Italy as well as the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier
        with inimitable 19th-century pomposity. Northwest of the monument, the
        15th-century Palazzo Venezia is a fine example of severe but elegant
        early Renaissance architecture, now containing a museum of medieval and
        Renaissance arms, furniture, and sculpture. Mussolini had his office
        there and harangued his followers from the balcony.
        Beside the Piazza Venezia, a steep staircase leads up to
        the austere 13th-century Santa Maria in Aracoeli, while another, more
        graceful and gradual, takes you up between the statues of Castor and
        Pollux to Michelangelos beautifully proportioned square of the
        Campidoglio (Capitoline Hill). This quiet traffic-free haven forges a
        superb link between the Renaissance and ancient Romes most sacred
        site, where sacrifices were made to Jupiter and Juno. The grand bronze
        equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius that anchors the piazzas center
        is a copy; the restored original from the second century a.d. is
        sheltered within the Palazzo Nuovo museum to its left. Opposite stands
        the Palazzo dei Conservatori, and at the rear of the square is the
        handsome 16th-century façade of the Palazzo Senatorio (now the City
        Hall). These two palazzos house the Capitoline Museums (see page 66),
        whose Greek and Roman collections provide an excellent introduction to
        the ancient Roman Forum that spreads below it.
        The church of the Gesù, severe and relatively discreet on
        its own square west of the Piazza Venezia, was a major element in the
        Jesuits Counter-Reformation campaign. Begun as their Roman
        headquarters in 1568, its open ground plan was the model for the
        Congregational churches that were to regain popular support from the
        Protestant faith. While its façade is more sober than the exultant
        Baroque churches put up as the movement gained momentum, the interior
        glorifies the new militancy in gleaming bronze, gold, marble, and
        precious stones. Perhaps inevitably, the churchs most elaborate
        ornament is the altar of St. Ignatius Loyola, covering the tomb of the
        Jesuits Spanish founder in the left transept. Its profusion of lapis
        lazuli is actually a thin shell fused to plaster stucco.
        In gentler contrast, the nearby church of SantIgnazio
        stands in an enchanting Rococo stage-set of 17th-century houses.
        Inside, Andrea Pozzo (himself a Jesuit priest and designer of the
        saints tomb at the Gesù) has painted a superb trompe loeil ceiling
        fresco (1685) depicting St. Ignatius entry into paradise.
        The circular Pantheon (Piazza della Rotonda) is the
        best-preserved monument of ancient Rome and rivals the Colosseum in its
        combination of quiet elegance and sheer massive power. Built by Emperor
        Hadrian around a.d. 125 on an earlier site destroyed by fire, it
        achieved a marvel of engineering with its magnificent coffered dome:
        over 43 m (141 ft) in interior diameter (larger than St. Peters),
        exactly equal to its height. Bronze that once embellished the entrance
        was carted away and recycled as Berninis canopy for the high altar in
        St. Peters. This Temple of all the Gods today contains the tombs of
        Renaissance masters such as Raphael as well as the first king of Italy
        Vittorio Emanuele II and his son Umberto I.
        Caravaggio admirers will find some of his greatest
        masterpieces right in the neighborhood: the St. Matthew trilogy in the
        fine Baroque church of San Luigi dei Francesi, and the moving Madonna
        of the Pilgrims in the Renaissance church of SantAgostino.
        Pause now at a café in that most serene of city squares,
        the Piazza Navona. Nowhere in Rome is the spectacle of Italian street
        life more pleasantly indulged, thanks to an inspired collaboration of
        Roman genius across the ages. The elongated oval piazza was laid out
        around a.d. 79 by Emperor Domitian as an athletics stadium, Circus
        Agonalis — a sporting tradition continued in the Middle Ages with
        jousting tournaments and other events in the centuries that followed.
        The 17th century contributed its sublime Baroque décor, and today it is
        protected as Romes most beloved square. In the center, Berninis
        Fountain of the Four Rivers (Fontana dei Fiumi) celebrates the great
        rivers of the four continents: the Americas (Río de la Plata), Europe
        (Danube), Asia (Ganges), and Africa (Nile). Romans who delight in
        Berninis scorn for his rivals suggest that the Nile god covers his
        head rather than look at Borrominis church of SantAgnese in Agone,
        and the river god of the Americas is poised to catch it in case it
        collapses. In fact, the fountain was completed several years before
        Borrominis splendid — and structurally impeccable — façade and
        dome.
        A large and boisterous fruit, vegetable and flower market
        takes place every morning in the Campo dei Fiori, overseen by the
        statue of philosopher Giordano Bruno. The Counter Reformation burned
        him alive here in 1600 for his preposterous idea that the universe was
        infinite, with many more galaxies than ours. An even more famous death
        occurred at the nearby Piazza del Biscione, more precisely the
        restaurant Da Pancrazio, whose cellar shelters ruins of Pompeiis
        Theater where Julius Caesar was assassinated.
        Only with a special appointment can you visit the glorious
        Palazzo Farnese, built by Antonio da Sangallo the Younger,
        Michelangelo, and Giacomo della Porta. Begun in 1514, it now houses the
        French Embassy. Only the inner courtyard of Romes finest Renaissance
        palace is accessible to the public, but its grand portico and the
        handsome stuccoed vestibule leading to it make it well worth a visit. A
        privileged few get in to see the ceremonial dining rooms fabulous
        frescoes by Annibale Carracci. Since 1871, the French pay a rent of one
        lira every year and provide a palace in Paris as Italys embassy.
        Narrow streets southeast of the Campo de Fiori take you to
        the Jewish Ghetto near the ruins of the ancient Roman Theater of
        Marcellus (Teatro di Marcello), architectural model for the Colosseum.
        Jews have been a permanent feature of Roman life for over 2,500 years
        but were forced into a ghetto in the 16th century. A small Jewish
        community still lives nearby around the Via del Portico dOttavia. The
        hefty neo-Babylonian synagogue (inaugurated in 1904), with a small
        museum of Jewish history next door, is by the river bank.
        Classical Rome
        The nucleus of classical Rome is around the Colosseum, with
        the Forum to the northwest and the Baths of Caracalla to the south.
        Dont be daunted — even the best-informed scholars find the monumental
        relics difficult to decipher — the mystery itself is more than half the
        charm of these vestiges of a vanished world. Take them in your stride,
        avoid the midday sun in the shadeless Forum, and finish your visit with
        a picnic and siesta on the Palatine. Even if youre not an archaeology
        buff who wants to understand the meaning of every stone, its worth at
        least an hour or two to stand among the debris of an empire and wonder
        whether Fifth Avenue, Piccadilly, the Champs-Elysées, or Red Square
        will look any better 2,000 years from now.
        Of Romes countless inspirational churches and palazzos, it
        is the Colosseum — what Byron called the gladiators bloody
        circus—that is the symbol of the citys eternity. Built in a.d. 80,
        the four-tiered elliptical amphitheater seated 50,000 spectators.
        Flowing in and out of 80 arched passageways known as vomitoria,
        aristocrats and plebs alike came to see blood: bears, lions, tigers,
        and leopards starved into fighting each other and against criminals,
        war captives, and (according to some historians) Christians.
        Gladiators, once criminals and slaves but later professional warriors,
        fought one another to the crowds cries of Jugula! (Slit his throat! 
        ).
        For their churches and private palaces, popes and princes
        have stripped the Colosseum of its precious marble, travertine, and
        metal. In the arenas basin, they have left a ruined maze of cells and
        corridors that funnelled men and beasts to the slaughter. The horror
        has disappeared beneath the moss and what remains is the thrill of the
        monuments endurance. As an old Anglo-Saxon prophecy goes: While
        stands the Colosseum, Rome shall stand; when falls the Colosseum, Rome
        shall fall; and when Rome falls, with it shall fall the world.  There
        is reason to believe it shall stand forever, a massive top-to-toe
        restoration completed in 1999 has it looking rejuvenated and
        soot-free.
        The nearby Arch of Constantine celebrates the
        fourth-century emperors battlefield conversion to Christianity. A
        cost-conscious Senate took fragments from monuments of earlier rulers
        Trajan, Hadrian, and Marcus Aurelius to decorate the arch.
        Immediately northeast of the Colosseum is the Domus Aurea,
        the fabulous villa with extensive gardens built by the Emperor Nero,
        who spent just a few years in his Golden House before killing himself
        in a.d. 68. It was reopened to the public in 1998 after 15 years of
        renovation work. On a site once 25 times the size of the Colosseum,
        only 30 rooms of the 250-room palace can be visited, and by guided tour
        only.
        With an exhilarating leap of the imagination, you can stand
        among the columns, arches, and porticoes of the Roman Forum and picture
        the civic, commercial, and religious hub of the great city, the first
        in Europe to house a million inhabitants. Earthquake, fire, flood, and
        the plunder of barbarians and Renaissance architects reduced the area
        to a muddy cow pasture until the excavations of the 19th century.
        Today, a detailed map and portable sound-guides rented at the entrance
        (on the Via dei Fori Imperiali) will make sense of the apparent
        confusion and help you trace the layout of palaces, temples, and market
        halls.
        Part of the brick-built Curia, home of the Roman Senate,
        still stands. Steps nearby lead underground to the Lapis Niger, a black
        marble pavement laid by Julius Caesar over the presumed grave of
        Romulus, the citys founder. To the south of it are remains of the
        Basilica Julia law court and the Rostra orators platform from which
        Mark Antony informed the people of Caesars assassination. Countless
        Renaissance and Baroque sculptors have drawn inspiration from the
        friezes on the triple Arch of Septimius Severus (honoring a
        third-century emperor who died in York, England, the northernmost
        boundary of the empire).
        The Temple of Saturn doubled as state treasury and center
        of the December debauchery known as the Saturnalia, pagan precursor of
        Christmas. In the circular Temple of Vesta, the sacred flame
        perpetuating the Roman state was tended by six Vestal Virgins who, from
        childhood, observed a 30-year vow of chastity on fear of being buried
        alive if they broke it. At the end of the Via Sacra, the Arch of Titus
        commemorates the sack of Jerusalem in a.d. 70.
        Most impressive monument of the Imperial Forums, built as
        an adjunct to the Roman Forum in honor of Julius Caesar, Augustus,
        Trajan, Vespasian, and Domitian, is the 30-m- (100-ft-) high Trajans
        Column (a.d. 113). Celebrating Trajans campaigns against the Dacians
        in what is now Romania, the minutely detailed friezes spiraling around
        the column constitute a veritable textbook of Roman warfare utilizing
        some 2,500 figures. St. Peters statue on top replaced that of the
        emperors in 1587.
        South of the Roman Forum, a slope leads up to the Palatine
        Hill, Romes legendary birthplace and today a romantic garden, dotted
        with toppled columns among the wild flowers and spiny acanthus shrubs.
        Only rows of cypress trees and summer pavilions remain from the more
        formal botanical gardens laid out here in the 16th century by the
        Farnese family. A small museum reopened here in 1998. From its grassy
        knolls, enjoy the fine view back over the Colosseum or southward over
        the great Circus Maximus, where chariot races were held for crowds of
        up to 200,000.
        A kilometer (about half a mile) south of the Colosseum, the
        huge third-century Baths of Caracalla (Terme di Caracalla) were built
        for 1,600 people to bathe in considerable style and luxury. The baths
        and gymnasia were of alabaster and granite, decorated with statues and
        frescoes. Public bathing was a prolonged social event as merchants and
        senators passed from the calidarium (hot room) to cool down in the
        tepidarium and frigidarium. Until 1994 the stage for spectacular
        open-air operas in the summer, the calidarium was vast enough for the
        unique setting of Verdis Aida and its processions of elephants,
        camels, and endless cast. Rumors persist that the performances will
        resume again: stay tuned.
        South of the baths begins the Old Appian Way (Via Appia
        Antica), built in 312 b.c. for the Roman legions who marched to coastal
        Brindisi to set sail for the Levant and North Africa. On either side
        lie the ruins of sepulchres of 20 generations of patrician families.
        The 17th-century chapel of Domine Quo Vadis marks the site where St.
        Peter, fleeing Neros persecution in Rome, is said to have encountered
        Christ. Farther along the Via Appia are three of Romes most celebrated
        catacombs, including those of St. Callisto, the largest of some 50
        underground Christian cemeteries.
        The Vatican
        The power of Rome endures both in the spirituality evoked
        by every stone of St. Peters Basilica and in the almost physical awe
        inspired by the splendors of Vatican City. At their best, the popes and
        cardinals replaced military conquest by moral leadership and
        persuasion; at their worst, they could show the same hunger for
        political power and worldly wealth as any caesar or grand duke. A visit
        to the Vatican is an object lesson for faithful and sceptic alike.
        Named after the hill on which it stands and which in the
        Middle Ages was surrounded by a malarial swamp, the Vatican has been a
        papal residence for over 600 years, but a sovereign state independent
        of Italy only since the Lateran Treaty signed by Mussolini in 1929.
        If you have the time, try to visit St. Peters Basilica and
        the Vatican Museums on separate days to avoid fatigue and visual
        overload. Check opening times: it is anyones guess if the generously
        extended hours for the Jubilee Year 2000 will be kept in effect.
        To appreciate the unique panorama of St. Peters Basilica
        and its 1 sq km piazza (0.4 sq mile), approach it by foot as historys
        countless pilgrims have. Cross at the beautiful SantAngelo Bridge, one
        of 20 crossing the Tiber River. Adorned by ten angel sculptures by
        Bernini and his studio, it arrives at the Castel SantAngelo,
        originally built as Hadrians mausoleum in a.d. 139. Its name derives
        from Pope Gregorys vision of the Archangel Michael — now represented
        by a statue on top — heralding the end of a plague in 590. It was
        sixth-century barbarians who commandeered the massive round brick pile
        as a fortress, using ancient statues as missiles to hurl on the heads
        of their enemies below. Linked to the Vatican by a thick-walled
        passage, it served as a hideout for popes in times of danger, notably
        Pope Clement VII, who holed up here for a month during the sack of Rome
        by Habsburg troops in 1527 (see page 27). The Papal Apartments are a
        strong contrast to the dungeons, both open to the public, where
        philosopher and monk Giordano Bruno and sculptor-goldsmith Benvenuto
        Cellini were once imprisoned.
        In St. Peters Square (Piazza San Pietro), Bernini has
        performed one of the worlds most exciting pieces of architectural
        orchestration. The sweeping curves of the colonnades reach out to the
        unending stream of pilgrims from Rome itself and the whole world, urbi
        et orbi, to take them into the bosom of the church beyond. In a rare
        opportunity for concentrated effort by one man on such a gigantic
        project, Bernini completed the 284 travertine columns, 88 pilasters,
        and 140 statues of the saints in just 11 years, from 1656 to 1667.
        Stand on either of the circular paving stones set between the squares
        twin 17th-century fountains and the red granite Egyptian obelisk to
        appreciate the harmony of the quadruple rows of Doric columns, so
        perfectly aligned that they seem like a single row. The purity of
        Berninis work here refutes the popular conception of Baroque as being
        nothing but overblown extravagance.
        St. Peters Basilica is the largest of all Roman Catholic
        churches and by any standards a grandiose achievement, but it
        inevitably suffered from the competing visions of all the architects
        called in to collaborate — Bramante, Giuliano da Sangallo, Raphael,
        Baldassare Peruzzi, Michelangelo, Giacomo Della Porta, Domenico
        Fontana, and Carlo Maderno — each adding, subtracting, and modifying,
        often with a pope looking over his shoulder.
        From 1506 to 1626, it changed from the simple ground plan
        of a Greek cross, with four arms of equal length, as favored by
        Bramante and his arch-enemy Michelangelo, to the final form of
        Madernos Latin cross extended by a long nave, as demanded by the popes
        of the Counter-Reformation. One result is that Madernos porticoed
        façade and nave obstruct a clear view of Michelangelos dome from the
        square.
        The churchs dimensions are impressive: 212 m (695 ft)
        exterior length, 187 m (613 ft) inside length; 132 m (435 ft) to the
        tip of the dome (diameter 42.45 m/139 ft).
        As you go in, notice the keys of St. Peter inlaid in the
        doorway paving. Set in the floor by the central door is the large round
        slab of red porphyry where King Charlemagne knelt for his coronation as
        emperor in the year 800 (see page 20).
        Youll find the basilicas most treasured work of art,
        Michelangelos sublime Pietà — Mary with the dead Jesus on her lap — in
        its own chapel to the right of the entrance. The Florentine artist was
        just 25, and justly proud enough to append his signature (the only
        surviving example), visible on the Madonnas sash . Since a religious
        fanatic attacked it with a hammer in 1972, the statue is protected by
        bullet-proof glass. But reverence can also cause damage: on the
        13th-century bronze statue of St. Peter near the main altar, attributed
        to Florentine architect-sculptor Arnolfo di Cambio, the lips and
        fingers of countless pilgrims have worn away the toes of its right
        foot.
        Beneath the dome, Berninis great baldacchino (canopy),
        cast out of bronze beams taken from the Pantheons porch (see page 51),
        soars above the high altar. It was built right over St. Peters tomb
        and reserved exclusively for the popes mass. In the apse beyond, the
        Baroque master gives full vent to his exuberance with his bronze and
        marble Cathedra of St. Peter, throne of the Apostles successors.
        It should come as no surprise that, as the greatest patron
        that painters, sculptors, and architects have ever known, the Catholic
        Church should house in its headquarters, one of the worlds richest
        collections of art. The 7 km (4 miles) of rooms and galleries of the
        Vatican Museums are made up of eight museums, five galleries, the
        Apostolic Library, the Borgia Apartments, the Raphael Stanze (or
        Rooms), and the incomparable Sistine Chapel. Shuttle buses run
        regularly from St. Peters Square to the museum entrance and back,
        otherwise a 20-minute walk.
        If you want at all costs to avoid the Sistines day-long
        crowds, go there first thing in the morning (dont forget your
        binoculars for details on the ceiling). In any case, you cant miss
        it — arrows indicate color-coded itineraries within the museum that
        showcase the myriad marvels to see en route, a remarkable degree of
        which is overlooked by time-restricted visitors on a mission.
        With the booty from the ruthless dismantling of ancient
        monuments to make way for the Renaissance city in the 16th century, the
        Pio-Clementino Museum has assembled a wonderful collection of Roman and
        Greek art. Most celebrated is the tortured Laocoön group (from Rhodes,
        first century b.c. –first century a.d. ), only recently returned more
        closely to its pristine state by the removal of one statues
        outstretched arm added by over-zealous 16th-century restorers).
        Pope Julius II took a calculated risk in 1508 when he
        called in a relatively untried 26-year-old to do the interior
        decoration of his new apartments. The result was the four Raphael Rooms
        (Stanze di Raffaello). In the central Stanza della Segnatura are the
        two masterly frescoes, Dispute over the Holy Sacrament and the famous
        School of Athens, confronting theological with philosophical wisdom.
        The Dispute unites biblical figures with historical pillars of the
        faith such as Pope Gregory and Thomas Aquinas, but also painter Fra
        Angelico and the divine Dante. At the center of the School, Raphael is
        believed to have given the red-coated Plato the features of Leonardo da
        Vinci, while portraying Michelangelo as the thoughtful Heraclitus,
        seated in the foreground. Raphael himself appears in the lower
        right-hand corner.
        In stark contrast to Raphaels grand manner, seek out the
        gentle beauty of Fra Angelicos frescoes in the Chapel of Nicholas V
        (Cappella del Beato Angelico). The lives of saints Lawrence and Stephen
        are depicted in delicately subdued pinks and blues.
        The richly decorated Borgia Apartments contain
        Pinturicchios frescoes with portraits of the Spanish Borgia Pope
        Alexander VI and his notorious son Cesare and daughter Lucrezia, and
        leads into the collection of modern religious artwork opened in 1973 by
        Paul VI. The latter includes Rodin bronzes, Picasso ceramics, Matisses
        Madonna sketches, and designs for ecclesiastical robes and, rather
        unexpectedly, a grotesque Francis Bacon pope.
        But nothing can prepare you for the visual shock of the
        Sistine Chapel (Cappella Sistina), built for Sixtus IV in the 15th
        century. Restored to its original colors after a controversial ten-year
        restoration finished in 1990, the brightness and freshness of the
        frescoes is overwhelming. Despite the distraction of the constant
        crowds (quiet is requested), visitors seem to yield to the power of
        Michelangelos ceiling, and his Last Judgement (restored in 1994). The
        other wall frescoes by Botticelli, Pinturicchio, Ghirlandaio, and
        Signorelli are barely given attention. In this private papal chapel,
        where cardinals hold their conclave to elect a new pope, the glory of
        the Catholic Church achieves its finest artistic expression.
        The chapel portrays nothing less than the story of man, in
        three parts: from Adam to Noah; the giving of the Law to Moses; and
        from the birth of Jesus to the Last Judgment. Toward the center of
        Michelangelos ceiling, youll make out the celebrated outstretched
        finger of mans creation, filled out by the drunkenness of Noah, the
        turmoil of the Flood. But most overwhelming of all is the impression of
        the whole — best appreciated looking back from the bench by the
        chapels exit.
        On the chapels altar wall is Michelangelos tempestuous
        Last Judgment, begun 23 years after the ceilings completion in 1512,
        when he was 60 and imbued with deep religious soul-searching. An almost
        naked Jesus dispenses justice more like a stern, even fierce Classical
        god-hero than the conventionally gentle biblical figure. It is said
        that the artists agonizing self-portrait can be made out in the flayed
        skin of St. Bartholomew, to the right below Jesus.
        Amid all the Vaticans treasures, the 15 rooms of the
        Picture Gallery (Pinacoteca Vaticana), in a separate wing of the
        palace, get short shrift. This collection of nine centuries of
        paintings includes important works by Giotto, Fra Angelico, Perugino,
        Raphaels Transfiguration (his last great work), Leonardo da Vincis
        unfinished St. Jerome, Bellinis Pietà, and Caravaggios Descent from
        the Cross.
        The neighborhood south of the Vatican, Trastevere,
        literally across the Tiber, has long been renowned as the most
        popular quarter of Rome. Here, ordinary people that consider themselves
        the original citizens uphold age-old traditions and customs (much like
        the Cockneys in London). It is good to wander among the narrow streets
        and markets to sample the authentic life of the city, highlighted by
        the Noantri (We Others) street festival of music, food, and
        fireworks, during the last two weeks of July. Another sort of festival
        atmosphere prevails every Sunday, when the Porta Portese section of
        Trastevere hosts Romes liveliest and largest flea market. The stalls
        are filled with everything from vintage clothing to the occasional
        valuable antique.
        Inevitably, popular and authentic became chic and the
        ambience is now somewhat contested by higher rents and the change in
        character that guarantees. But the true Trasteverini hang on, mainly in
        the area immediately around Santa Maria in Trastevere, reputedly the
        oldest church in the city. Its foundation may date back to the third
        century, but the present structure is the work of Pope Innocent II,
        himself a Trasteverino, around 1140. It is known for its wonderful
        Byzantine-influenced façade and the interiors pavements and mosaic of
        Mary enthroned with Jesus decorating the domed ceiling of the apse. The
        liveliest fruit and vegetable market is to be found on Piazza di San
        Cosimato.
        Other Museums
        The largest collection of Etruscan art in Italy can be
        found in the 16th-century Villa Giulia in the northwest area of the
        Villa Borghese park. Room after room is filled with objects from the
        tombs of this little understood pre-Roman people: shields, weapons, and
        chariots; exquisite gold and silver jewelry; and decorative ceramic
        works. The museums highlight is a life-size, sixth-century b.c.
        terracotta sculpture of a reclining couple that was used as the lid of
        a sarcophagus.
        The Borghese Gallery, opened in 1997 after an extensive
        14-year renovation, is housed in a handsome Baroque villa inspired
        originally by Hadrians Villa at Tivoli (see page 69), but with its
        Italian formal gardens now transformed into an English-style landscaped
        park. One of Italys loveliest and most important small museums, its
        highlights include some outstanding sculptures by Bernini and Canova
        (whose portrayal of Napoleons sister as a reclining Venus is arguably
        the museums most famous attraction), as well as paintings by Raphael,
        Correggio, Titian, Caravaggio, Botticelli, Rubens, Dürer, and
        Cranach.
        The Capitoline Museums, in the twin palaces of the
        Campidoglio (see page 50), have extensive collections of sculpture
        excavated from ancient Rome, particularly in the Palazzo Nuovo. In the
        Palazzo dei Conservatori is the most celebrated piece, the superb
        Etruscan bronze Capitoline She-Wolf (Lupa Capitolina), symbol of the
        city. The wolf dates from around the fifth century b.c. , but the
        little Romulus and Remus that she is suckling are actually Renaissance
        additions by Pollaiuolo. The top-floor Capitoline Picture Gallery
        (Pinacoteca Capitolina) has important Venetian works by Bellini,
        Titian, Tintoretto, Lotto, and Veronese, as well as a fine Rubens
        Romulus and Remus and Caravaggios St. John the Baptist.
        Alternatively known as the Palazzo Barberini or the
        National Gallery of Antique Art (Galleria Nazionale dArte Antica) (on
        the Via delle Quattro Fontane), another architectural battleground for
        arch-rivals Borromini and Bernini, is worth a visit as much for its
        splendid Baroque décor as for its collection of 13th–17th-century
        paintings. They come together in the palaces Salone or Great Hall with
        Pietro da Cortonas dazzling illusionist ceiling fresco, Triumph of
        Divine Providence. Notable in the collections are a Fra Angelico
        triptych, Raphaels La Fornarina (though the authorship is disputed),
        and works by Titian, Tintoretto, and El Greco.
        New on the scene is the vast Palazzo Doria Pamphili off the
        Piazza Venezia. The private collection of the important Doria family
        includes a number of masterpieces by artists of the 15th to the 17th
        century, particularly Annibale Carracci and Brueghel the Elder.
        Other Churches
        Its impossible to even count all of the delightful
        churches worth visiting in Rome (unofficial counts hover at 250), many
        of which are commonly stumbled on by accident. We suggest just three
        within easy reach of the Via Cavour thoroughfare leading from the main
        railway station (Stazione Termini).
        Originally built in the fourth century on the Esquiline
        Hill site of a Roman temple to the goddess Juno, Santa Maria Maggiore
        is the largest and most splendid of the churches dedicated to the
        Virgin Mary. Christmas time is especially popular here when pilgrims
        come to admire relics of the holy crib from Beth­lehem. In the Oratory
        of the Crib (Oratorio del Presepio) are the moving 13th-century
        sculptures of Joseph, the Three Kings, the ox, and the ass, by Arnolfo
        di Cambio (Mary and the child Jesus are 16th-century additions). The
        most spectacular art treasures of the church are its gorgeous Byzantine
        mosaics, glittering Old Testament scenes high on the walls (dont
        forget the binoculars), and a triumphant Mary and Jesus enthroned in
        the apse over the high altar. The coffered Renaissance ceiling glitters
        with the gold of the first shipments from the New World.
        In a nearby side street, Santa Prassede is unprepossessing
        from the outside but enchanting in the intimacy of its interior. The
        delicate ninth-century mosaics of Jesus and four angels make the Chapel
        of St. Zeno the citys most important Byzantine monument. To the right
        of the chapel is a fragment of rare jasper said to come from the column
        to which Jesus was tied for his flagellation. Notice the fine mosaic of
        Jesus and the New Jerusalem over the chancel.
        San Pietro in Vincoli (St. Peter in Chains) might not
        attract a second look if it didnt contain one of the greatest of
        Michelangelos sculptures, his formidable Moses. Intended for St.
        Peters Basilica as part of Michelangelos botched project for Pope
        Julius IIs tomb, the statue of the great biblical figure sits in
        awesome majesty. You can imagine how grandiose the original plan must
        have been when you realize that Moses was supposed to be one of 40
        figures adorning the tomb. The horns on his head continue a
        traditional medieval mistranslation of the Hebrew for halo-like rays of
        light. On each side, the comparatively passive figures of Jacobs
        wives, a prayerful Rachel and melancholy Leah, were the last completed
        sculptures of Michelangelo.
        Lazio
        The excursions to be made today into the Lazio hinterland
        around Rome are those that ancient Romans themselves made to vacation
        homes by the sea or nearby lakes.
        Tivoli
        Follow the old Roman chariot road (repaved) of Via
        Tiburtina 30 km (19 miles) east of the capital to the haunting ruins of
        Hadrians Villa (Villa Adriana), near the picturesque town of Tivoli,
        at the foot of the Sabine Hills. Sprawling across 70 hectares (173
        acres), this retirement hideaway of the great emperor-builder was
        designed to recapture some of the architectural marvels of his empire,
        especially the Greece he loved above all else — a travel notebook for
        his old age. Barbarians and museum curators have removed most of the
        villas treasures, but a stroll through the remaining pillars, arches,
        and mosaic fragments in gardens running wild among the olive trees,
        cypresses, and pines can be marvelously evocative of a lost world. To
        get a clear sense of the original, start with the villas excellent
        scale model. The monumental baths, separate Latin and Greek libraries,
        Greek theater, temples, and pavilions together make up the home of a
        man who drew no distinction between the pleasures of mind and body. In
        the center, the enchanting Villa ­dellIsola, a pavilion surrounded by
        a little reflecting pool and circular portico, epitomizes all the magic
        of the place.
        In Tivoli itself, overlooking the Roman plain, the Villa
        dEste is a 16th-century counterpart, celebrating all the extravagance
        of the late Renaissance. From the home of Cardinal Ippolito dEste,
        guests can look down at the terraced gardens, the real reason for
        Tivolis fame and your visit: alleys of cypresses and soaring fountains
        (500 in all, including Berninis Bicchierone), grottoes, waterfalls,
        reflecting pools, and everywhere the cool sound of rushing water.
        Alban Hills and Castel Gandolfo
        The region immediately southeast of Rome is known locally
        as the Castelli Romani (Roman Castles) for the fortified hilltop
        refuges built during the medieval civil wars. Today its just the
        summer heat that drives the Romans out on day-trips to the vineyards of
        the Alban hills and lakes. The country villages of Frascati,
        Grottaferrata, Marino, and Rocca di Papa make delightful stops, not
        least of all for a cool glass of their white wine, especially during
        the autumn grape-harvest festivals. The pope has his summer palace at
        Castel Gandolfo, on the shores of Lake Albano. As his health is
        failing, his usual Wednesday and Sunday blessings from mid-July to
        early September are no longer guaranteed.
        Tarquinia and Northern Lazio
        The A12 autostrada and the old Via Aurelia (which ends up
        in Arles in French Provence) take you to Tarquinia. Most important of
        the original 12 towns of the Etruscan confederation, the town dominated
        Rome in its heyday of the seventh and sixth centuries b.c. Today, the
        paintings and sculptures found in its necropolis of over 5,700 tombs
        provide fascinating evidence of the brilliant Etruscan civilization for
        archeology buffs. Visits to the tombs outside of town are organized
        from the National Museum, housed in the fine 15th-century
        Gothic-Renaissance Palazzo Vitelleschi as you enter Tarquinia. The
        museum exhibits sarcophagi, Etruscan and imported Greek vases, and some
        of the best wall-paintings — all in reconstructed tombs. Displayed in a
        room by itself, the prize of the collection is the Winged Horses
        sculpture from Tarquinias Ara della Regina Temple.
        Tuscania is a quiet little fortified town, recovering now
        from an earthquake in 1971 that luckily did not harm its two Romanesque
        churches on the eastern outskirts (check with the tourist office on
        Piazza Basile for erratic hours). Built from the eighth to the 12th
        centuries, San Pietro stands at the ba ck of a grassy courtyard with
        Etruscan sarcophagi, beside two crumbling medieval towers. The sober
        interior has Byzantine-style frescoes, an 11th-century altar canopy,
        and a crypt built on Etruscan and ancient Roman pillars. The Romanesque
        tower and rose window of Santa Maria Maggiores façade have a similar
        simple beauty.
        In the restful charm of its medieval quarters, Viterbo
        makes a good overnight stop. The oldest neighborhood, with narrow
        streets and little market squares, is around the Via San Pellegrino. On
        the equally attractive Piazza San Lorenzo, the Palazzo Papale has an
        impressive 13th-century Gothic loggia, opposite the Cathedrals
        intriguing mixture of Gothic campanile (bell tower) and Renaissance
        façade with Romanesque interior.
        Sardinia (Sardegna)
        The Mediterraneans second largest island (Sicily being
        the largest) is worth a vacation all to itself — and much more detailed
        treatment than follows. Those curious to get a feel for its atmosphere
        (rarely first-time visitors to Italy) should consider summertime stays
        at small seaside resorts (off-season visits will fail to capture its
        allure), meandering drives along its impressive coastline, and a couple
        of excursions into the little-visited hinterland.
        Prehistoric man dotted the island with his mysterious
        cone-shaped nuraghi houses and watchtowers before it was colonized by
        Cretans, Phoenicians, Carthaginians, and Romans. Later, the island
        became part of the commercial empires of Pisa, Genoa, and the Spanish,
        and was annexed in 1718 by the dukes of Savoy. Malarial mosquitoes and
        repressive feudalism restrained the islands development until the 19th
        century. Since then it has undergone a rapid industrialization balanced
        today by renewal of its cattle farming. Its environmentally-sensitive
        development of the Costa Smeralda is a mecca for Europes yachting set
        and August sees its limited five-star hotels booked months in
        advance.
        Cagliari
        The islands capital and main port is a largely modern
        city, but with a Spanish flavor to its older quarters up on the hill.
        The Archaeological Museum includes important bronze statues of warriors
        and priests found in prehistoric tombs. The much renovated cathedral
        has two superbly carved 12th-century pulpits, originally commissioned
        for the cathedral in Pisa. Before heading for the open road, try the
        excellent local cuisine, including both Spanish-style fish stews and
        Genoese pasta dishes.
        The winding Cagliari-Muravera road across the plunging
        ravines of the Sarrabus mountains to the coast is one of the most
        spectacular drives on the whole island.
        Continue up the coast to Lanusei and head inland across
        the rugged Gennargentu mountains, covered with dense forests of cork
        oak and chestnut trees. Farther north, just off the Nuoro-Dorgali road
        is the secluded site of Serra Orrios, a well-preserved prehistoric
        village (signposted Villaggio Nuragico). A short walk along a marked
        path through the fields takes you to a group of drystone houses with
        two temples and circular ramparts in a lovely setting of eucalyptus and
        olive trees. Archaeologists have located some 7,000 of these nuraghi
        structures around the island, most of them flattened cone towers
        believed to be parts of fortified citadels.
        Costa Smeralda
        The glittering Emerald Coast on the northeast tip of the
        island is one of Italys smartest resort areas, with beautiful beaches,
        five-star hotels, sports complexes, and exclusive marinas for yachts
        and motor launches. It stretches around bays and rocky inlets from
        Olbia in the east to the promontory of La Maddalena.
        Porto Cervo is the coasts fashionable center, but Baia
        Sardinia competes with its craggy coastline. More exclusive is the
        little luxury resort island and fishing village of La Maddalena, a
        15-minute ferry-ride from Palau. It is in fact the principal island of
        an archipelago of 14, most of them little more than piles of rocks.
        Linked to La Maddalena by a 7–km- (4–mile-) long causeway,
        the isle of Caprera was the last home of Giuseppe Garibaldi, military
        leader of the Risorgimento movement for Italian unity (see page 32).
        The house where he died in 1882 (his tomb is nearby) is now a museum,
        practically a sanctuary, where devout patriots refer to him not by
        name, but as lEroe, the Hero. 
        The north coast road makes an enjoyable excursion along
        the dunes and pine groves lining the Gulf of Asinara. The fortress-town
        of Castelsardo stands high on a spectacular promontory overlooking the
        gulf. Inside its 16th-century cathedral, you hear the sea crashing on
        the rocks directly below the foundations. At Porto Torres, visit the
        important 11th-century Pisan Romanesque church of San Gavino. Its
        façade was never finished, its interior of a noble simplicity. Some of
        the pillars come from an ancient Roman temple, with two Corinthian
        capitals serving as a lectern.
        Alghero
        This quiet little seaside resort on the northwest coast
        has a pleasant Catalan flavor to its older quarters around the
        cathedral. Take a sunset stroll along the 16th-century Spanish
        ramparts.
        Theres good fishing to be had in the nearby bay of Porto
        Conte, and the Palmavera nuraghi citadel is well worth a visit. On the
        bays southwestern promontory is the fascinating Grotta di ­Nettuno
        (Neptunes Grotto). Guided tours of these subterranean caverns with
        their dramatic stalactites and stalagmites are organized by boat from
        Alghero or on foot directly at the site, down a steep stairway in the
        cliffs.
        TUSCANY AND UMBRIA
        Light is the secret of Tuscanys magic. In that apparently
        miraculous collision of imagination and intellect that sparked the
        Renaissance in 15th-century Florence, its painters and architects had
        the constant inspiration of the dramatic changes in Tuscan light from
        dawn to dusk. And more than anywhere else in the country, Tuscany and
        neighboring land-locked Umbria present the ideal green Italian
        landscape, dotted with stalwart hilltop towns, where cypress-tree
        sentinels watch over groves of twisted olive groves and vineyards
        blanket the gentle rolling hills.
        Florence lies at the heart of the northern Apennines, in a
        basin of the Arno river which runs out to Pisa and the sea. Siena, its
        proud historic rival, dominates the Tuscan hill towns to the south,
        while the university town of Perugia and the Assisi of St. Francis are
        the keys to Umbrias luminous beauty.
        With some careful timing, modern visitors can capture a
        glimpse of that miracle of light. Arrive early in the morning for your
        first look across the hills from the grey-stone towers of San Gimignano
        (a medieval Manhattan), or come to Sienas Piazza del Campo at
        sunset. The dazzling white marble of Pisas Duomo and leaning campanile
        is most breathtaking in the noonday sun, but late afternoon is the
        blessed moment for the brilliant mosaic façade of Orvietos
        cathedral.
        Florence (Firenze)
        Despite the dead heat and humidity of summer Florence,
        with the magnificence of its monuments and museums, it is packed
        nonetheless. Its people are more reserved and less seductive than
        Romans or Nea­po­­litans in the South. This said, Florence remains one
        of the worlds great tourist meccas and boasts a panoply of
        architecture, history, and artwork in quantities not to be found
        elsewhere in the world.
        Our itineraries divide the citys heart into four
        quarters: from the Duomo north to Piazza San Marco; from the Piazza
        della Signoria, its Palazzo Vecchio and the Uffizi Galleries east to
        Piazza Santa Croce; from the Mercato Nuovo west to Piazza Santa Maria
        Novella; and the southern Left Bank of the Arno River around the
        Pitti Palace and the Piazzale Michelangelo.
        From the Duomo to Piazza San Marco
        The Duomo (cathedral), officially Santa Maria del Fiore,
        proclaims the inordinate but certainly justified civic pride of the
        Florentines. The very heart of the citys centro storico, it was begun
        in 1296 under Arnolfo di Cambio, although the imposing green, white,
        and rose marble neo-Gothic façade was completed only six centuries
        later.
        The first of its glories is the free-standing campanile,
        designed by the multi-talented Giotto. The 85-m- (267-ft-) tall
        bell-tower (its a 414-stair climb to the top) is decorated on its
        lower sections by hexagonal bas-reliefs sculpted by Andrea Pisano and
        Luca della Robbia, based on Giottos drawings. Characteristic of the
        citys civic consciousness, they portray the Life of Man from Adams
        creation to the rise of civilization through the arts and
        sciences — music, architecture, metallurgy, and the like — pursued so
        earnestly by the Florentine guilds that commissioned the work.
        Originals of Donatellos sculpture are kept in the cathedrals own
        newly renovated museum, Museo dellOpera del Duomo (Piazza del Duomo,
        9) as well as Michelangelos unfinished Pietà. The dead Jesus in his
        mothers arms emphasizes the agony rather than the pathos portrayed by
        the Pietà in St. Peters in Rome (see page 61). Michelangelo originally
        conceived the group for his tomb and represented himself in the figure
        of Nicodemus. Flaws in the marble so enraged the artist that he hurled
        a hammer at it, destroying Christs left leg — the left arm has been
        restored and the rather insipid Mary Magdalen was later added by a
        pupil.
        Brunelleschis masterpiece, the cathedrals grandiose
        terra-cotta cupola, with its eight white stone ribs curving to the
        marble lantern at the top, is the citys symbol, visible not only all
        over Florence but also from far beyond in the Tuscan hills. Completed
        in 1436, it measures 45.5 m (149 ft) in diameter. The 463 steps to its
        top climb in comfortable stages to reveal a panorama of the surrounding
        city, different views of the cathedrals interior, and fascinating
        close-ups of the domes structure and the 16th-century frescoes
        restored in 1996. Begun by Giorgio Vasari and finished by his pupil
        Federico Zuccari, it is the worlds largest depiction of the Last
        Supper. (Brunelleschis original wooden model of the cupola is
        displayed in the cathedral museum. ) Look for Ghibertis bronze shrine
        below the high altar, as well as his three stained-glass windows on the
        entrance wall. In the third bay on the north aisle is Paolo Uccellos
        statue-like equestrian painting of the 15th-century English mercenary
        Sir John Hawkwood (unpronounceable for Italians, so known as Giovanni
        Acuto).
        The octagonal 12th-century Romanesque baptistery of San
        Giovanni (St. John) is celebrated as the oldest building in Florence,
        and for the magnificent bas-reliefs of its three sets of bronze doors.
        The oldest, facing south and telling the story of John the Baptist,
        were designed by Andrea Pisano in 1330. A century later, Lorenzo
        Ghiberti won the competition to design the great north and east doors,
        devoted respectively to the life of Jesus and scenes from the Old
        Testament. Michelangelo said the latter, facing the Duomo, were good
        enough to adorn the entrance to heaven and they have been known ever
        since as the Doors of Paradise. Among the losing candidates was Filippo
        Brunelleschi, who thereafter devoted himself entirely to architecture.
        (In the Bargello, you can compare his bronze model with Ghibertis; see
        page 89) Magnificent Byzantine-style mosaics inside the cupola include
        scenes from the Creation, Life of St. John, and a Last Judgment and
        date from the 13th century.
        The might of the Medici family can be sensed in their
        massive palazzo, northwest of the cathedral on Via Cavour, the
        15th-century Palazzo Medici-Riccardi. Now Florences prefecture
        offices, the formidable edifice set the style for the citys
        Renaissance palaces. The ground floor originally had an open loggia at
        the corner for the family banking business. Dont miss the upstairs
        chapel for Benozzo Gozzolis 15th-century fresco of the Journey of the
        Magi to Bethlehem. It portrays the Medici clan led by Lorenzo the
        Magnificent in what is in fact an allegory of an ecumenical council
        with Pope Pius II in Florence. The Medici family lived here until
        moving to the Palazzo Vecchio and eventually the Palazzo Pitti.
        Around the corner is the family church of San Lorenzo
        designed by Brunelleschi before he designed the Duomos cupola. Funds
        ran out before Michelangelos planned façade could embellish the
        austere barn-like exterior. Inside, youll see the Medici family arms
        set in the floor in front of the altar. Brunelleschi is at his most
        elegant in the Old Sacristy at the end of the left transept (site of a
        few Medici tombs), decorated with four Donatello wall-medallions (the
        artist himself is buried in the left transept). Adjacent to the church
        is the Laurentian Library (Biblioteca Laurenziana), commissioned in
        1524 and most known for the graceful cloisters and monumental
        Michelangelo-designed stairway.
        Adjoining the church but with a separate outdoor entrance
        in the back are the Medici Chapels (Cappelle Medicee), monuments to the
        splendor and decadence of the family dynasty. The Princes Chapel
        (Cappella dei Principi) is a piece of 17th-century Baroque bombast in
        flamboyant multi-colored marbles, for which the altar was not
        completed, appropriately enough, until 1939. The summit of Medici power
        is found in Michelangelos superb New Sacristy (Sacrestia Nuova), a
        one-man show of his unparalleled talents that he worked on from
        1521–1534. Lorenzo the Magnificent and brother Giuliano lie in simple
        tombs beneath the sculptors Madonna and Child, flanked by lesser
        artists statues of the family patron saints Cosmas and Damian.
        Michelangelos greatest work here is reserved for two minor members of
        the family, Lorenzos grandson, Lorenzo the Duke of Urbino, portrayed
        as a pensive Roman soldier above two allegorical figures of Dawn
        (female) and Dusk (male), and his son, Giuliano the Duke of Nemours,
        more warrior-like above figures of Night (female) and Day (male). The
        Church of San Lorenzo finds itself surrounded by hundreds of stalls
        that make up the open-air Mercato San Lorenzo, one of Italys largest
        tourist markets offering good finds and competitive prices.
        Its an easy walk to Piazza San Marco and the Dominican
        Monastery of San Marco, an evocative setting for a museum largely
        devoted to the paintings of Florentine-born Fra Angelico (1387–1455),
        who lived here as a monk. Off the cloister, with its ancient cedar
        tree, is the Pilgrims Hospice (Ospizio dei Pelligrini) where some of
        his finest works are found, notably a Descent from the Cross. In the
        monks cells upstairs, the frescoes of the man historians call Beato
        (Blessed) Angelico were intended to be inspirational rather than
        decorative. His celebrated Annunciation faces the top of the
        stairs — compare the simpler version in cell 3 — while other
        outstanding works include the mystic Transfiguration in cell 6 and
        Jesus Mocked in cell 7. In the small refectory is the important
        Ghirlandaio mural of the Last Supper, a subject traditionally found in
        monastic dining rooms. The Priors Quarters in the second dormitory
        (cells 12, 13, and 14) were the home of fire-and-brimstone preacher
        Girolamo Savonarola from 1481 until his death in 1498 (see page 26).
        You can see some of his belongings, his famous portrait by fellow-monk
        Fra Bartolomeo, and the picture of his burning at the stake in Piazza
        della Signoria.
        As a museum conceived primarily for students of Florentine
        painting from the 13th to 16th centuries, the Accademia Gallery
        (Galleria dellAccademia) (Via Ricasoli, 60) ranks high on Florences
        must-see list. Its major interest is in the seven statues by
        Michelangelo. Six of them are unfinished — four Prisoners (a.k.a. The
        Slaves), St. Matthew, and a Pietà — each a fascinating revelation of
        how Michelangelo released their power from the marble. The Accademias
        uncontested star, the great David (which once stood in the Piazza della
        Signoria, now substituted by a life-size copy), provides the perfect
        object lesson of the finished product, a hero infused with all the
        contained energy needed to hurl that stone at Goliath. Perhaps the most
        famous piece of sculpture in the Western world, it was carved from a
        discarded defective column of marble by the artist when he was just 26
        years old.
        In the Piazza Sant issima Annunziata, Brunelleschi
        produced a consummate piece of Renaissance urban planning, a pioneering
        example of the piazza as stage-set. In the 1440s he designed the
        gracefully arched loggia and the Ospedale degli Innocenti, the first
        hospital for foundlings in Europe; swaddled babes are the subject of
        Andrea della Robbias roundels above the arches. Michelozzos later
        Santissima Annunziata church, together with the 17th-century fountains
        and equestrian statue of Grand Duke Ferdinando, preserve the harmonies
        of the masters overall design. Head out of the piazza just north of
        the Ospedale in the direction of Via della Colonna and the Museo
        Archeologico, whose important collection of ancient Egyptian, Greek and
        Etruscan art make it an interesting alternative to Renaissance
        overload.
        Piazza della Signoria to Piazza Santa Croce
        Flanked by some of the citys most stylish fashion
        boutiques and shoe stores, the quarters main street retains the
        commercial tradition of its medieval name, Via de Calzaiuoli
        (stocking- and shoe-makers). It connects the Piazza Duomo with the
        Piazza della Signoria.
        If the tall rectangular block of Orsanmichele looks to you
        more like a grain silo than the church its supposed to be, thats
        because it has been used as both. Formerly an open loggia, it was
        rebuilt in the early 14th century as a market, and then as a church in
        1380 converting its Gothic arches to the present ground-floor windows,
        and adding a granary upstairs. The fortress-like exterior is decorated
        with 14 niches: to fill them, the major guilds commissioned statues of
        patron saints from Florences greatest talents (replicas now stand in
        their place). Look for Ghibertis vigorous bronze of the citys patron
        St. John (east wall, on the Via de Calzaiuoli); St. Matthew, the
        bankers tax-collector turned Apostle (west); Donatellos St. George,
        the armorers dragon-killer (north, a bronze cast of a marble original
        in the Bargello); St. Mark, whose vividly sculpted robes do credit to
        the linen-drapers he protects (south); and Nanni di Bancos outstanding
        conspiratorial group of Four Crowned Martyrs for the sculptors own
        guild of stonemasons and wood-workers (north). In the mystical pillared
        interior is Andrea Orcagnas elaborate 14th-century Gothic tabernacle
        with a miracle-working icon-like Madonna painted by Bernardo Daddi.
        Piazza della Signoria is Florences civic and social
        center. Site of the stoic town hall (Palazzo Vecchio or della Signoria)
        since 1299, the square bustles in all seasons, not least because it
        leads to the richest of Italys art museums, the Uffizi. At the south
        end of the square is the 14th-century Loggia della Signoria or dei
        Lanzi, transformed from the city fathers ceremonial grandstand into a
        guardroom for Swiss mercenary Lands­knechte. It shelters Benvenuto
        Cellinis bronze masterpiece, Perseus (replaced by a copy in 1998 while
        undergoing restoration in the Uffizi) brandishing the severed head of
        Medusa. In one inspired moment, the Renaissance braggart has combined
        the legendary technical wizardry he loved to show off as a goldsmith
        with undeniable sculptural beauty.
        Also in the Loggia, the spiralling Rape of the Sabines of
        Giambologna (actually a Flemish artist named Jean de Boulogne) is
        another piece of dazzling virtuosity, donated by the Medici.
        In a piazza that is an open-air sculpture gallery, more
        statuary graces the orators platform along the Palazzo Vecchios sober
        façade. To the left of its entrance is a copy of Donatellos Marzocco,
        Florences heraldic lion, next to his bronze of Judith and Holofernes,
        which always made the Medici uneasy with its theme of a tyrant
        decapitated. Getting little attention is 16th-century Bandinellis
        clumsy Hercules and Cacus, standing as it does in the shadow of
        Michelangelos magnificent David; this life-size copy was placed here
        in 1873. Standing against a hostile world of cruel Philistines,
        Florentines loved to identify with the beauty and courage of the poetic
        young giant-killer.
        A commemorative plaque (near the Baroque fountain)
        embedded in the piazza marks the spot where Savonarola was executed
        (see page 26).
        In gentle contrast to the austere Italian Gothic exterior
        of the Palazzo Vecchio by Arnolfo di Cambio (architect of the Duomo),
        Vasari added ornate stucco and frescoes to the first inner courtyard
        for a Medici wedding in the 1560s (the palazzo served briefly as a
        Medici residence until they moved across the river to the Palazzo
        Pitti). A copy of Verrocchios delightful bronze cherub tops the
        porphyry fountain in the center. Upstairs, the Salone dei Cinquecento
        was built in 1495 for the short-lived Florentine Republic before
        serving as Duke Cosimos throne room and, three centuries later, the
        chamber of Italys first national parliament. The décor celebrates
        Florentine power — Vasari frescoes of victories over Siena and Pisa and
        Michelangelos Victory statue. On the second floor, the Sala dei Gigli
        (Hall of the Lilies) is brilliantly decorated in blues and golds with
        Florentine heraldry and vivid Ghirlandaio frescoes of Roman and early
        Christian history. It adjoins the Chancery (Cancelleria) where Niccolò
        Macchiavelli served as secretary to the Florentine Republic. Any
        world-weary thoughts inspired by the old cynics portrait and bust are
        quickly dispelled by the original of Verrocchios cherub cuddling a
        dolphin like a baby doll.
        The Uffizi museum of Italian and European painting
        stretches in a long U-shape from the Palazzo Vecchio down to the Arno
        river and back. Duke Cosimo had Vasari design it in 1560 as a series of
        government offices (hence its name), a mint for the citys florin, and
        workshops for the Medicis craftsmen. Vasaris greatest architectural
        work, it is now the home of one of the worlds most famous and
        important art galleries.
        Lines requiring achingly-long waits are commonplace
        year-round. Tickets can now be reserved in advance (inquire at your
        hotel or the tourist office). See some or all of the 33 rooms, stop for
        an occasional peek out the window over the Arno and Ponte Vecchio, and
        recharge your batteries at the museums newly reopened café above the
        Loggia dei Lanzi. It has lovely views of the piazza.
        Reorganization makes it hazardous to specify room numbers,
        but the paintings are generally exhibited chronologically from the 13th
        to the 18th century. Here are some of the highlights:
        Giotto breathes a warm humanity into his Madonna Enthroned
        (1310) that distinguishes it from the more formal pictures of the
        subject by Cimabue and Duccio in the same room. See also Giottos
        Madonna polyptych. Some 30 years later, the Annunciation triptych of
        Simone Martini, with Mary shying away from archangel Gabriel, has the
        characteristic elegance and poetry of his Siena school.
        Paolo Uccello shows a dream-like, almost surrealist
        obsession with his (unsolved) problems of perspective and
        merry-go-round horses in his Battle of San Romano (1456). It contrasts
        with the cool dignity of Piero della Francesca in his Federigo da
        Montefeltro and wife Battista (1465), portrayed against their Urbino
        landscape.
        Some of the museums most visited rooms are to come: In
        his graceful Allegory of Spring (1478) and the almost too famous but
        undyingly delightful Birth of Venus, Botticelli achieves an enchanting
        mixture of sensuality and purity. His Flemish contemporary Hugo van der
        Goes is more down-to-earth in the realism of his huge triptych
        Adoration of the Shepherds (1478), which influenced Florentine painters
        like Ghirlandaio.
        In the Baptism of Christ (1470) of Verrocchio, you can see
        the earliest identified work of his most famous pupil, Leonardo da
        Vinci — the background landscape and the angel on the left, beautiful
        enough to reduce his companion angel to wide-eyed jealousy. Leonardos
        Annunciation (1472–1477) of a few years later already shows his
        characteristic gentle tone and feeling for precise detail, and the
        Adoration of the Magi, even as an underdrawing left unfinished by his
        departure for Milan (1481), reveals his revolutionary power of
        psychological observation.
        The northern European rooms include a splendid Portrait of
        His Father (1490) by Albrecht Dürer; Adam and Eve (1528) by Lucas
        Cranach; Richard Southwell by Hans Holbein; and a moving Mater Dolorosa
        by Joos van Cleve.
        In the mystic Holy Allegory (1490) of Giovanni Bellini, we
        can appreciate the typical Venetian serenity even without understanding
        its symbols.
        The only Michelangelo in the Uffizi is the Holy Family or
        Doni Tondo (1504), his only known panel painting (he was far better
        known for his frescoes and sculpture), decidedly sculptural in quality.
        Without Michelangelos strength and torment or Leonardos complexity,
        the third of Italys three Renaissance giants, Raphael, brings his own
        powers of clarity and restraint to the Madonna of the Goldfinch (1505)
        and a revealing Self-Portrait made when the artist was only 23.
        Titian has a superbly sensual Venus of Urbino (1538), less
        Greek goddess than the princes mistress she probably was, and an
        equally disturbing Flora (1515; more works by Raphael and Titian can be
        found in the Palazzo Pitti). Some are also upset by the eroticism of
        Parmigianino in his strange but undeniably graceful Madonna with the
        Long Neck (1534) — just look at those elongated fingers — a masterpiece
        of the sophisticated and subsequently decadent Mannerism that followed
        the High Renaissance.
        There is an intriguing ambiguity to the half-naked peasant
        youth posing as a Bacchus for Caravaggio (1589), but nothing
        complicated about the robust sexiness of the Rubens Bacchanale. And
        compare Caravaggios mastery of chiaroscuro (the play of light and
        dark) in the service of realism in his violent Abraham and Isaac (1590)
        with the more contemplative style of Rembrandt in the famous Old Rabbi
        (1658) and other portraits.
        Designed in the late 13th century by Arnolfo di Cambio
        (architect of the Palazzo Vecchio and the Duomo) but with a neo-Gothic
        façade added in 1863, the Franciscan church of Santa Croce (east of the
        Uffizi) has an important series of Giotto frescoes. The pathos shines
        through the heavily restored paintings of St. Francis in the Bardi
        Chapel (c. 1320s), to the right of the apse, and two St. Johns in the
        Peruzzi Chapel next door. In a chapel in the left transept, the wooden
        Crucifixion by Donatello (1425) is in affecting naturalistic contrast
        to the Renaissance idealism of the time.
        The church is also revered by Florentines as the last
        resting place of many great Italians. Galileo, Machiavelli, Ghiberti,
        and composer Rossini are all buried there. Michelangelos tomb (right
        aisle, second bay) was designed by Vasari, with symbolic statues of
        Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture mourning beneath a bust of the
        Florentine-born artist who died at 89. Michelangelo wanted the tomb
        surmounted by the Pietà, now in the cathedral museum (see page 61), but
        the Florentines almost didnt get even his body — they had to smuggle
        it out of Rome. For Florentine-born Dante, they have to be content with
        a cenotaph, as Ravenna, his burial place, refuses to part with his
        remains (he was exiled from Florence for political reasons).
        At the back of the cloister of Santa Croces Franciscan
        monastery adjoining the church, Brunelleschis Pazzi Chapel (Cappella
        dei Pazzi) is a little gem of Renaissance elegance designed in 1443.
        Its spaciousness is enhanced by geometric patterns of dark stone
        against whitewashed walls. Luca della Robbias subdued glazed ceramic
        roundels depict the 12 Apostles and Four Evangelists. The most
        cherished treasure in the Santa Croce Museum is Cimabues 13th-century
        massive Crucifixion, rescued and painstakingly restored after the
        towns catastrophic 1966 flood. It now hangs on an electric cable to be
        hoisted above harms way should another flood ever happen.
        The ominous 13th-century fortress-like palazzo that houses
        the Bargello Museum (Via del Proconsolo, 4) was Florences first town
        hall and dreaded prison under the jurisdiction of the Police Chief, or
        Bargello, before becoming the National Museum of Sculpture. The old
        armory is now the Michelangelo Hall (Sala Michelangelo) greeting you
        with a dour bust of the master by Daniele da Volterra. Michelangelos
        works here are numerous, including his early masterpiece The Drunken
        Bacchus (done when he was just 21), and a Virgin and Child marble
        roundel (1504). Among the Cellini bronzes is an imposing bust of his
        master, Duke Cosimo. The General Council Hall (Sala del Consiglio
        Generale) is dominated by the works of Donatello: his vigorous St.
        George (1416), intended for the Orsanmichele (see page 81); his
        important David, naked and restless in bronze (1450); and the stone
        Marzocco lion, the towns symbol, from the Palazzo Vecchio. You can
        also see the two bronze panels submitted for the Baptistery doors
        competition in 1401 by Brunelleschi, the loser, and Ghiberti, the
        winner (see page 77). On the second floor is a Verrocchio David (c.
        1471), for which his 19-year-old pupil Leonardo da Vinci is believed to
        have been the model.
        From the Mercato Nuovo to Santa Maria Novella
        Start out from the center, the heart of medieval Florence,
        on the street named after the drapers guild, the Via Calimala. Just
        south of the café-ringed Piazza della Repubblica is the covered Mercato
        Nuovo, a 16th-century loggia once called the Straw Market because of
        the straw products for which Florence was known. The straw items (bags,
        placemats) are now made in China, as are many of the other tourist
        tchotchkes on sale here. The selection of tourist mementos is
        interesting enough, but pales in comparison to the open-air Mercato San
        Lorenzo just north of the Duomo near the church of the same name. The
        17th-century bronze statue of a wild boar known as il Porcellino, on
        the south side of the small Mercato Nuovo, is every Florentine childs
        favorite. They say that if you rub its burnished snout, and throw a
        coin in the fountain, your wish for a return trip to Florence will come
        true.
        West on the Via Porta Rossa is the 14th-century Palazzo
        Davanzati; its stern, fortress-like exterior still provides rings at
        ground level for tethering horses and on upper stories to hold torches
        and lanterns for festive occasions. Inside, on the first floor, is a
        museum of typical Florentine domestic life from the 14th to 16th
        centuries, with furniture, utensils, and ceramics — the most attractive
        are in the Sala dei Pappagalli (Parrots Hall) with its trompe lœil
        tapestries frescoed on the walls. After six years of restoration, fall
        of 2001 will see the grand reopening.
        The church of Santa Trinita has a late-16th-century
        Baroque façade with a Gothic interior. Ghirlandaio, master teacher of
        Leonardo da Vinci, decorated the Sassetti Chapel (far right of the high
        altar) with frescoes of St. Francis, and the Adoration of the Shepherds
        on the altar is considered his masterpiece.
        Florences most elegant shops continue the Via de
        Tornabuonis centuries-old tradition of aristocratic luxury. On the
        15th-century Palazzo Strozzi, look out for the intricate wrought-iron
        lanterns; the massive palazzo, once a private residence, is used for
        special exhibitions and the biennial antique fair. West of here is the
        Via della Vigna Nuova, where the spill-over of Tornabuonis most
        exclusive stores continues.
        The cavernous 13th-century Dominican church of Santa Maria
        Novella is the finest of Florences monastic churches. Leon Battista
        Alberti added the graceful white-and-green marble façade in 1470. The
        church is rich in artistic treasures, but its most prized, indeed one
        of the citys greatest paintings for its early handling of perspective
        and depth, is the Masaccio Trinity (from around 1427; left aisle, third
        bay). Mary and John stand on either side of the crucified Jesus upheld
        by his Father, while the dove of the Holy Spirit hovers between them,
        the whole forming an inspiring triangle under the coffered ceiling of a
        Renaissance chapel.
        The church also boasts one of Italys most delightful
        fresco cycles. Covering the chancel behind the main altar, the
        Ghirlandaio frescoes of the lives of the Madonna and St. John kept the
        masters entire workshop busy from 1485 to 1490. They were paid for by
        the prominent Tornabuoni family (his biblical scenes are peopled with
        portraits of his patrons in the latest fashions of the time).
        Ghirlandaios 13-year-old apprentice — Michelangelo Buonarroti — must
        have picked up a few tips for his future commission of the Vaticans
        Sistine Chapel.
        The Filippo Strozzi Chapel (right of the altar) is
        decorated with Filippino Lippis frescoes of saints Philip and John,
        rich in color and anecdotal detail: In the monumental Exorcism of
        Demons in the Temple of Mars, notice the three bystanders holding their
        noses at the smell.
        In the Gondi Chapel (left of the high altar), the
        Brunelleschi Crucifixion (1410), his only scultpure in wood, brings to
        the human body a characteristic idealized harmony, compared with
        Donatellos more personal piece in the church of Santa Croce (see page
        87). Of another age, at once austere and serene, is the Giotto
        Crucifixion (1290) in the Sacristy (left transept).
        Through a separate entrance left of the church, escape the
        bustle of the piazza in the Dominicans 14th-century cloister (Chiostro
        Verde), with Paolo Uccellos frescoes of the Universal Deluge. The
        Spanish Chapel (Cappellone degli Spagnoli) is covered by huge
        14th-century frescoes by the little known Andrea da Firenze.
        North of Santa Maria Novella, spare a glance at the
        simple, clean-lined architecture of the Stazione Centrale (main railway
        station), built in 1935 during Mussolinis heyday but somehow defying
        the prevailing monumental bombast of the Fascist regime that you can
        see in the monstrosity of Milans central station.
        Heading back down towards the river, have a restful drink
        in the plush neo-Renaissance bar of the five-star Excelsior Hotel
        (Piazza Ognissanti) — especially if youre not staying there. Then
        cross the square to the church of the Ognissanti (All Saints Church),
        13th-century but with a Baroque façade of 1637. In Ghirlandaios
        Madonna of Mercy (right aisle, 2nd bay), portrayed immediately to the
        right of Mary is the Florentine banker-navigator-cartographer Amerigo
        Vespucci, who gave his name to the continent of America (and whose
        family was a sponsor of this church). Botticelli is buried in a chapel
        (right transept), his St. Augustine adorning the church, while in the
        refectory in the adjoining cloister, youll find Ghirlandaios Last
        Supper.
        South of the Arno
        Theres nothing very romantic about the murky waters of
        the Arno river, with its broad, 19th-century lungarni embankments that
        protect it from flooding. Of the many bridges that cross it, two are
        noteworthy.
        The Ponte Santa Trinita, destroyed in 1944, has been
        rebuilt with the original 16th-century masonry scooped from the bottom
        of the river, including statues of the Four Seasons. Bartolomeo
        Ammanatis three lovely elliptical arches follow drawings by
        Michelangelo.
        The Ponte Vecchio, intact since 1345, was Florences
        first, and for centuries only, bridge. The boutiques with their back
        rooms overhanging the river were built from the 16th to 19th centuries.
        Across the tops of these small former workshops, Vasari provided a
        covered corridor for Duke Cosimo to keep out of the rain when crossing
        from his Pitti Palace to the Uffizi. The duke didnt like the smell of
        the bridges original butcher shops and had them replaced by goldsmiths
        and jewelers, whose descendants offer you their high-quality wares
        today: This is some of Italys finest window shopping. A bronze bust
        (1900) of Italys most celebrated goldsmith, Benvenuto Cellini, holds a
        position of honor in the middle of the bridge with a vantage point of
        lovely views.
        In Renaissance times, the quarter south of the Arno,
        Florences Left Bank, was an aristocratic preserve where the Medici
        held court. Today, their palace is a museum, the gardens that hosted
        their private festivities are a public park and the side streets where
        workshops supplied them with hand-made marvels are still vibrant with
        the humming bottegas of todays artisans.
        Cross the Ponte Vecchio to the sprawling Pitti Palace
        (Palazzo Pitti), its dauntingly heavy and graceless façade belying the
        ornate and colorful interior. After a brief stint living in the Palazzo
        Vecchio in the Piazza della Signoria, Duke Cosimo I and his wife,
        Eleonora of Toledo, acquired the palace from the bankrupt Pitti
        merchant family in 1549 as the Medicis official residence; it was
        enlarged and embellished substantially over the centuries.
        Its seven museums and galleries (following varying and
        erratic schedules with the exception of the largest and most reliable,
        the Pitti Gallery) take you into the rich world of the Medici, much as
        they left it. The important Pitti Gallery (Galleria Palatina) is the
        family art collection. The paintings are displayed just as the dukes
        themselves hung them, two-, three-, and four-high, by personal
        preference rather than in historical sequence. The 26 richly-decorated
        salons (just a fraction of the Medici residence) are named after the
        themes of their 17th-century frescoes — Venus, Hercules, Prometheus,
        etc. As in any collection of family pictures, theres a preponderance
        of portraits, though here the aunts and uncles tend to be princesses,
        cardinals, and popes. It is the most important collection of paintings
        in Florence after the Uffizi.
        And the Medicis taste and means did permit a considerable
        number of masterpieces. Titian displays his masterly use of color and
        light in The Concert (Hall 5, Venus), a haunting portrait of The
        Englishman and bare-breasted Magdalen (Hall 6, Apollo).
        An early proponent of make love, not war, Rubens shows
        Venus restraining Mars in his vivid Consequences of War and portrays
        himself on the far left of his Four Philosophers (Hall 7, Mars).
        Raphael is well represented by a stately Veiled Woman
        (Hall 8, Jupiter), a classic Madonna of the Chair and Maddalena Doni
        (Hall 9, Saturn), deliberately imitating the pose of Leonardo da
        Vincis Mona Lisa, and Pregnant Women (Hall 10, Iliad).
        Caravaggio contributes a typically disturbing canvas, an
        ugly Sleeping Cupid with intimations of death (Hall 32, Education of
        Jupiter).
        Up on the next floor, the Modern Art Gallery (Galleria
        dArte Moderna) is devoted to 19th- and 20th-century Italian art. Most
        interesting are the Macchiaioli (from the verb macchiare, to blotch
        or stain) school of Tuscan pre-Impressionists, who met at Florences
        Caffè Michelangelo in the 1860s seeking a new freedom from academic art
        that paralleled the political liberation of the Risorgimento. Giorgio
        de Chirico and Eduardo de Pisis are among the more important
        20th-century painters exhibited. In 1999, an additional 100 paintings
        were added to the collection.
        The Pittis next-most visited gallery, the Silverware
        Museum (Museo degli Argenti), occupies 16 sumptuously decorated rooms
        to offset the Medici familys invaluable treasures — gold, silver,
        jewels, beautiful 16th- and 17th-century amber and ivory, crystal,
        porcelain, and Baroque furniture. The Carriage Museum (Museo delle
        Carrozze), in a wing on the far right of the palace, and the Royal
        Apartments (Appartamenti Monumentali), upstairs, right of the main
        entrance, show an opulent, truly palatial life that the palazzos dour
        exterior never lets you suspect. The restoration of the Costume Museum
        (Museo del Costume), an unusual collection of traditional dress from
        the 18th–20th centuries, is complete in 2001.
        Time for a rest in the shade of the cypresses, pines, and
        holm oaks of the palaces Boboli Gardens, a favorite picnic destination
        in Florence. To the modern eye, they form a Renaissance and Baroque
        theme park dotted with loggias, cool fountains, grottoes with
        artificial stalactites, and myriad statues of gods, nymphs, and
        grotesques (derived from the word grotto).
        Directly behind the palace, the Amphitheatre, shaped like
        a Roman circus and with lovely views of the Palazzo Pitti and the city
        beyond, was the scene of the Medicis most extravagant fêtes and staged
        performances. In the middle of the nearby Pond of Neptune (Vasca del
        Nettuno), the burly sea god wields his trident in petrified parody of
        one of the Bobolis gardeners.
        After the Pittis riches, the unadorned white façade of
        the nearby Augustinian church of Santo Spirito (Piazza Santo Spirito)
        is a sobering antidote. Brunelleschis design was never completed but
        the interior preserves the spatial clarity of his Corinthian-capitaled
        colonnades. In the right transept is a strikingly theatrical Madonna
        Enthroned by Filippino Lippi.
        The church of Santa Maria del Carmine is an essential stop
        on any artistic pilgrimage to Florence. The church itself is an
        unprepossessing reconstruction after a devastating fire of 1771, but
        the Brancacci Chapel with the great Masaccio frescoes miraculously
        survived intact. The bright light of the early years of the
        Renaissance, the talented painter died at 27 after only five years of
        promising creative activity (1423–1428), working with his mild-mannered
        teacher Masolino on scenes from Genesis and the life of St. Peter.
        Compare Masolinos sweet and harmonious Adam and Eve in his Original
        Sin (chapel entrance, upper right) with Masaccios agonizing figures in
        the Expulsion from the Garden of Eden, opposite, to appreciate one of
        the early Renaissances most dramatic statements. Nothing like them had
        ever been painted before. Florences greatest artists, Michelangelo at
        their head, came to gaze and marvel, sketching Masaccios trail-blazing
        use of light and visual depth as instruments of emotional impact,
        particularly striking in the broad sweep of his St. Peter Paying the
        Tribute Money. The chapel frescoes were completed in the 1480s by
        Filippino Lippi, who painted the side walls lower panels.
        For a last panoramic sunset view of the city dominated by
        the terracotta cupola of the Duomo, take a bus or taxi to the vast
        Piazzale Michelangelo (anchored by a second copy of his David). While
        there, visit the charming Romanesque church of San Miniato (up the hill
        behind the square); rebuilt in the 11th century, it is Florences
        oldest and one of its most beloved churches. Try to be there in late
        afternoon when a handful of resident monks chant timeless Gregorian
        vespers.
        Tuscany (Toscana)
        The original territory of the ancient civilization of the
        Etruscans has always been independent-minded, even aloof, in its
        attitude to Rome and the other regions. For the serious Italophile, its
        beauty and riches deserve weeks, months, even years of attention, but
        no first visit would be complete without at least a brief foray here.
        After an easy side-trip from Florence to Fiesole, our itineraries go
        farther afield — west to Pisa and Lucca before turning south through
        the hills of Chianti to Siena.
        Fiesole
        Just 8 km (5 miles) northeast of Florence, 30 minutes on
        the number 7 bus from the Duomo or Piazza San Marco, the road winds up
        a wooded cypress-studded hillside, revealing at each bend ever-changing
        views of Fiesoles gardens and historical villas and the monuments of
        the great Renaissance city below.
        Car drivers can negotiate the winding old side-road Via
        Vecchia Fiesolana for glimpses of handsome villas half-hidden among the
        cypresses and olive trees. The town center, Piazza Mino da Fiesole,
        with its austere cathedral founded in 1028, is the starting-point for
        some exhilarating hill walks (the tourist office in the main piazza has
        walking maps), the most immediate being the steep paved lane leading
        from the square up to the small San Francesco convent and post-card
        views of Florence.
        Only some wall fragments remain of the former Etruscan
        stronghold in Fiesole itself, but there are extensive Roman ruins,
        including a well-preserved amphitheater dating to 100 b.c.   — still in
        use for summertime festivals — which seats 2,500 spectators.
        Pisa
        In its heyday from the 11th to the 13th centuries, Pisa
        created a powerful maritime empire down the Tyrrhenian coast and in
        Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily, Syria, Palestine, and Egypt. Its riches and
        prestige called for a legacy, providing the funds for the gleaming
        white marble complex of religious edifices known as the Campo dei
        Miracoli (Field of Miracles), of which its leaning bell tower is a
        national icon, left unscathed by the invasions and wars of succeeding
        centuries. Most rushed visitors see the square, stand in awe of the
        tilting tower, and leave town.
        Conquering a flat landscape with serene, other-worldly
        harmony, this assembly of buildings in an emerald green square also
        known as the Piazza del Duomo celebrates the whole cycle of life, from
        baptistery, cathedral, and campanile (a.k.a. the Leaning Tower) to the
        monumental cemetery of the Campo Santo. The Duomo was built during
        Pisas Golden Age, begun in 1063, to honor Pisas victory over the
        Saracens in Sicily. With Oriental and Byzantine decorative elements
        reflecting the Pisan Republics overseas interests, its four-tiered
        arcaded façade over three porches is a masterpiece of grace and
        delicacy. Architect Buscheto didnt hesitate to write in Latin (in the
        far left arch) This marble church has no equal.  Inside, there was no
        reason either for local Giovanni Pisano to show false modesty about his
        superbly sculpted 14th-century marble pulpit (left aisle), arguably the
        cathedrals masterpiece.
        Thanks to its unstable subsoil, the Leaning Tower
        (Campanile) is out of alignment by about 4.5 m (15 ft) though
        measurements vary. Give or take a micromillimeter or two depending on
        annual subsidence, that means the 8-storied belfry stands approximately
        57 m (187 ft) high on its north side, less on the south. Begun after
        the Duomo in 1173, it began to lean when only three of its eight
        stories had been completed (the Duomo is also marginally off-kilter).
        It has been closed indefinitely to the public since 1990 but is
        beautiful to view from afar none the less. Scientists are forever
        seeking new solutions for propping it up, but at its present rate of
        slippage, you still have at least another 200 years to see it standing
        more or less upright.
        The lovely circular Baptistery (Battistero) is topped by a
        traditional statue of John the Baptist. Inside, left of the baptismal
        font and altar, is Pisas greatest work of sculpture, a hexagonal
        marble pulpit by Nicola Pisano, father of the Giovanni who designed the
        cathedral pulpit. The 1260 carving of biblical themes has clear links
        to French Gothic sculpture, while drawing on models from Roman and
        Etruscan sarcophagi — a Herculean Daniel and a Mary inspired by heads
        of Juno and Phaedra.
        In the 13th-century cloistered cemetery of the Camposanto
        (Holy Ground — believed to be filled with sacred dirt brought back from
        the Holy Land during the Crusades), note the Gothic tabernacle
        enclosing a Madonna and Saints. Within the cloister, in the north
        gallery, is a striking fresco of the Triumph of Death (1360) showing
        how a humble person and an aristocrat face the same destiny.
        Lucca
        The sights of this town take scarcely a day, but the
        seductive tranquillity within its perfectly-preserved ramparts is
        irresistible. Things were not always so peaceful here. In the stormy
        15th and 16th centuries, Luccas prosperous silk merchants preserved
        the peace by intercepting enemy armies and paying them to bypass the
        town. It has been particularly rich in musicians, most notably
        Boccherini and Puccini, and hosts a series of music festivals
        throughout the summer.
        Begin with a stroll or bicycle ride on the tree-shaded
        pathway atop the brick 16th–17th century ramparts, along the
        Passeggiata delle Mura, for a good overall view of the towns
        traffic-free centro storico contained within the walls.
        Begun in 1060, the Duomo San Martino, has a Pisan-style
        three-storied façade with a Descent from the Cross carved by Nicola
        Pisano over the north door. Its prized possessions are two: the
        haunting Volto Santo (Holy Face), a wooden crucifix said to have been
        carved by Nicodemus and possessing miraculous powers; and the graceful
        white marble tomb of Ilaria del Carretto Guinigi by master Sienese
        sculptor Jacopo de lla Quercia (1408) in the former sacristy.
        Northwest of the cathedral, youll find an even more
        beautiful adaptation of the Pisan Romanesque style of architecture in
        the towns other beloved church, San Michele in Foro, less encumbered
        on its site of the ancient Roman Forum. Begun in 1143, its arcaded
        façade varies the patterns of its four tiers of columns — sculpted,
        striped, scrolled, chevroned — in pink, green, black, or white marble.
        With binoculars, you can spot up on the third tier of arches (third
        from the right), the heads of Risorgimento heroes Gari­baldi and
        Cavour. A huge winged statue of the archangel Michael crowns its
        façade.
        To capture something of the towns medieval character,
        explore the Via Guinigi, with its handsome 14th-century pa­laces, and
        the towered houses of Via Fillungo, leading to the Roman amphitheater,
        now the Piazza del Mercato. Nearby, the façade of the church, also of
        the typical Pisan Romanesque style, of San Frediano has a 13th-century
        mosaic of the Acsension of Christ. In the interior (fourth chapel on
        left aisle), look for Jacopo della Quercias marble altar (1422).
        Chianti
        The best introduction to the Tuscan hill country is a tour
        of the famous vineyards that grace its southern-oriented slopes. The
        grapes that qualify as Chianti Classico, distinguished by a coveted
        black rooster label, grow in the region between Florence and Siena,
        most of them along the ancient Via Chiantigiana, which is route S222.
        The liveliest, most colorful time is during the autumn grape harvest,
        la vendemmia, but tasting — and buying — goes on at many of the Chianti
        vineyards all year round.
        Start out at San Casciano in Val di Pesa, 17 km (11 miles)
        south of Florence, with a bonus for art-lovers of a Simone Martini
        Crucifixion and other Sienese works in the church of La Misericordia.
        Southeast across to route S222, you find the characteristic landscape
        of vineyards interspersed with equally renowned olive groves as you
        approach Greve, a characteristic town that is the major wine center for
        the area. (Americans pay homage at a monument in the local piazza to
        local son Giovanni da Verrazzano, navigator-explorer of New York Bay. )
        The wine route continues through Castellina with its 15th-century
        castle and ancient town gate. Then on to Radda, where you should peep
        in at the Piccolo Museo del Chianti, and to Gaiole in Chianti, one of
        the best centers for tasting and a place to linger.
        San Gimignano
        The haunting silhouette of this Medieval Manhattan, a
        skyline bristling with truncated towers dating to the 12th and 13th
        centuries, and its lovingly preserved historic center make it the most
        magical of Tuscanys hill towns. (One of the most photogenic views is
        from the north, on the road from Certaldo, home and last resting place
        of Boccaccio. ) There were once more than 70 towers — erected as
        symbols of its merchants power and prestige — until the towns
        Florentine conquerors ordered them dismantled in the 14th century. Just
        over a dozen remain.
        The most important are clustered around three adjoining
        squares: the triangular Piazza della Cisterna named after the citys
        13th-century travertine well, surrounded by elegant palaces; the Piazza
        del Duomo, grouping church and town hall as the center of civic and
        religious power; and the Piazza delle Erbe ­market place with twin
        Salvucci towers.
        The 13th-century town hall, Palazzo del Popolo, houses the
        civic museums. The small Pinacoteca includes an emotionally intense
        Crucifixion by Coppo di Marcovaldo and a Taddeo di Bartolo painting of
        St. Gimignano, in which you can see what the towers of the medieval
        city looked like. Visit the interior of the 12th-century Romanesque
        Collegiata (not officially a cathedral but proudly called the towns
        Duomo none the less) for its dramatic frescoes of New Testament scenes
        along the right aisle. In sharp contrast, the Ghirlandaio frescoes in
        its tiny Santa Fina Chapel (at the end of the right aisle) are a series
        of sophisticated social portraits (1475) dedicated to the young patron
        saint of San Gimignano. Against the east wall, flanking the church
        entrance, are wooden statues of Mary and the Archangel Gabriel by
        Jacopo della Quercia.
        For a fine view of the surrounding countryside, Tuscany at
        its most poetic, climb up to the ruins of the Rocca citadel, the
        highest point in town and a good picnic spot.
        Volterra
        This fortified town perched high on its hill works a sober
        charm among the buff-stone 13th-century edifices of its Piazza dei
        Priori and adjacent Piazza San Giovanni. The Palazzo dei Priori (1208)
        is the oldest of Tuscanys typical town halls, with a two-tiered tower,
        battlements, and mullioned windows. It stands opposite the massive
        triple-arched Palazzo Pretorio, medieval police headquarters. The two
        squares are separated by the 12th-century cathedral and 13th-century
        octagonal baptistery. The latters baptismal font has bas-reliefs by
        Andrea Sansovino.
        Away from the center, you can trace the towns ancient
        beginnings in the Etruscan Guarnacci Museum (Via Don Minzoni, 15). The
        collection includes sculpted stone, alabaster, and terracotta funeral
        urns dating back to the sixth century b.c. One gaunt statue, Ombra
        della Sera (Evening Shadow), is an uncanny 2,000-year-old precursor of
        a modern Giacometti. Volterra has always been known for its local
        alabaster production as a glimpse in any shop window will confirm.
        Siena
        A time-locked city of rich russet browns and weathered
        ochres, Siena is as perfectly medieval as greystone Florence is a
        Renaissance showcase, yet contrasts with its centuries-old rival to the
        north are striking and inevitable. Whereas the nucleus of Florence was
        built to a strict Roman city plan of straight streets intersecting at
        right angles, Siena has all the Tuscan hill-towns haphazard organic
        forms, straggling up and down a forked ridge of not one but three
        hilltops. Closed to traffic (and free of taxis), it is not for the weak
        of knee.
        While Florentine art developed its formidable intellectual
        and emotional power, the tone of Sienese painting — Simone Martini, the
        Lorenzettis, even the Mannerist Sodoma — remained gentle and delicate,
        bathed in the light and color of its surrounding countryside. But as
        its obstinately independent spirit has shown, even after the Florentine
        conquest of 1555 — a spirit epitomized by its lusty Palio
        tournament — the town is not without vigor. Like an open-air museum,
        Siena is still a very dignified lived-in town, with fashionable
        restaurants and boutiques, a vibrant local pride nurtured by economic
        stability and a rich historic legacy.
        At its heart is the grand sloping fan-shaped Piazza del
        Campo, site of the old Roman forum and arena of the towns world-famous
        annual Palio horse race. The unique piazzas red-brick herringbone
        paving/pavement is divided by nine marble strips for the nine patrician
        clans that ruled the city at the end of the 13th century.
        The painterly impact of the burnt sienna glows from the
        arcaded Gothic Palazzo Pubblico opposite, with its splendid 102-m-
        (335-ft-) high Torre del Mangia (climb to its first tier at 88 m [288
        ft] for a magnificent view of the city and countryside beyond). The
        loggia at the towers base is a chapel (Cappella di Piazza) marking the
        citys deliverance from the plague of 1348.
        The Palazzo Pubblicos ground floor houses the offices of
        the town hall, but its upstairs chambers, frescoed by the citys
        foremost artists, have been transformed into a Museo Civico (municipal
        museum). The Sala del Mappamondo (named after a lost map of the Sienese
        world painted by Ambrogio Lorenzetti to trace the citys international
        banking interests) has two great frescoes by the Siena-born master
        Simone Martini. To the left is the stately Maestà (Madonna Enthroned;
        1315) and to the right, Guidoriccio da Fogliano (1328, but whose
        authenticity has recently been disputed), depicting the Sienese
        captains ride to a historic victory at Montemassi — in the nicely
        detailed Tuscan landscape, notice the little Chianti vineyard in the
        military encampment. In the Sala della Pace (Hall of Peace, council
        chamber of the Nine Patricians), the full force of Sienas civic pride
        strikes home in the impressive allegorical frescoes (1337–1339) by
        another local master, Ambrogio Lorenzetti. One wall is devoted to Bad
        Government, a gloomy portrait of Tyranny, badly damaged, and the other
        two to Sienas own enlightened Good Government, full of fascinating
        detail of town life — roof-builders, shoe shop, school, outdoor tavern,
        ladies dancing in the street — and hunters riding out to the
        surrounding countryside. A second floor loggia is adorned with Jacopo
        della Quercias 15th-century carvings for the city fountain Fonte Gaia
        (of which a poor 19th-century replica stands in the piazza).
        Southwest of the Campo, the Duomo, built from the 12th to
        the 14th centuries, is for many the greatest of Italys, possibly all
        of Europes, Gothic cathedrals. The exteriors majestic black- and
        white-striped marble banding surrounding Giovanni Pisanos three
        intricately carved portals presents that quintessential Italian
        preference for pictorial qualities over mere architecture. The interior
        continues the bands of black and white marble, while elaborately inlaid
        marble paving  — one of the cathedrals primary attractions, with large
        sections regularly covered for protection — covers the floor with 56
        pictures of biblical and allegorical themes, done over two centuries by
        some 40 artists. Also of major note is the early-16th-century Cardinal
        Piccolomini Library, off the left aisle. Vividly decorated by
        Pinturicchios action-packed frescoes of the life of Pope Pius II (the
        locally-born Piccolomini cardinal himself became pope, Pius III, but
        lasted only ten days). In the left transept is a magnificent octagonal
        13th-century pulpit carved by Nicola Pisano, with help from son
        Giovanni and Arnolfo di Cambio. Among its fantastic detail of the new
        testament scenes, notice the damned being eaten alive in the Last
        Judgment. The 17th-century Baroque Madonna del Voto Chapel (in the
        right transept) was designed by Bernini, whose statues of St. Jerome
        and Mary Magdalen flank the entrance.
        In the neighboring Cathedral Museum (Museo dellOpera
        Metropolitana), Giovanni Pisanos original sculptures for the Duomos
        façade have strangely distorted poses because they were meant to be
        seen from below. The museums focal point is the Enthroned Madonna
        (1308) by local wonder boy Duccio di Buoninsegna. Simone Martinis
        Miracles of St. Agostino Novello, and Pietro Lorenzettis Birth of Mary
        are not to be missed.
        The importance of Sienas 13th- and 14th-century school of
        art is best illustrated in the imposing Palazzo Buonsignoris National
        Art Gallery (Pinacoteca Nazionale). Besides the works of the
        14th-century masters Duccio, Pietro, and Ambrogio Lorenzetti, as well
        as Simone Martini, see Sienas 16th-century Mannerists, painting at a
        time when the Renaissance teetered on the brink of effete decadence:
        Beccafumis dreamy Birth of Mary and a highly decorative Christ at the
        Column by Sodoma.
        Montepulciano
        South of Siena is a little trammeled niche of Tuscany and
        some of the regions most attractive hill towns with excellent local
        wines. Montepulciano (famous for its superb Vino Nobile di
        Montepulciano), perched some 610 m (2,000 ft) above sea level, is known
        as the Pearl of the 16th Century.  A stroll along the Via di
        Gracciano and Via Ricci to see the towns noble Renaissance palazzi
        will explain why.
        The Piazza Grande, the highest point in town, is the site
        of the graceful town well decorated with griffins and lions. The
        13th-century Gothic Palazzo Comunale (Town Hall) is a particularly
        imposing expression of civic dignity. In the austere 16th–17th century
        cathedral, see Taddeo di Bartolos fine triptych on the high altar.
        Antonio da Sangallo the Elder, architect of many of the towns palazzi,
        built his masterpiece, the 16th-century church of San Biagio, southwest
        of town, a gem of High Renaissance architecture hidden at the end of a
        cypress-lined road with views of the Chiana valley. The nearby towns of
        Montalcino (known for its Brunello wines) and Pienza (the first example
        of Renaissance urban planning) promise small-town distractions and
        culinary pleasures.
        Monte Argentario
        If youre taking the coast road to or from Rome during
        warm-weather months, stop off at the fashionable seaside resorts on
        this pine-forested peninsula beside the town of Orbetello. The sandy
        beaches and yachting harbors of PortErcole and Porto Santo Stefano are
        favorite weekend destinations for well-heeled Romans (with a growing
        international presence), but theyre much quieter during the week. Take
        a boat excursion out to the pretty island of Giglio; it is one of the
        islands of the Tuscan archipelago that includes Elba, best known as the
        island of Napoleons retreat.
        Umbria
        The region has a less glamorous reputation than Tuscany
        (and is reasonably less crowded), but its highly appreciated both for
        its great artistic treasures and the dreamy rolling green landscapes
        that inspired them.
        The area was dominated in the past by the papacy, which
        conquered the Lombard dukes of Spoleto in the Middle Ages, Perugia in
        the 16th century, and held sway until the unification of Italy. Apart
        from pilgrims streaming to St. Franciss Assisi and university students
        heading for Perugia, it has remained — at least in the eyes of foreign
        visitors — a very happy backwater.
        On 26 September 1997, two major earthquakes rocked the
        Umbria region, leaving ten people dead and causing extensive damages to
        local villages. Thousands of people were left homeless, and countless
        churches and public buildings were forced to close as aftershocks
        continued through the early days of October. Although the international
        media focused on the damage caused in Assisi, much of the region
        suffered structural damage, and many frescoes and monuments important
        throughout the region were severely damaged or destroyed. Tell-tale
        signs of scaffolding are still visible, although the most visited
        destinations got the most immediate attention in an attempt to ready
        them for the Jubilee Years tourism.
        Orvieto
        Half the pleasure of this lovely town dramatically perched
        on a rocky precipice is a first glimpse of it from afar (not so very
        different today from Turners 1828 painting in Londons Tate Gallery).
        For a good view, approach it from the southwest, on route S71 from Lake
        Bolsena, or look across from the medieval abbey La Badia (now a hotel),
        immediately south of town.
        Gourmands come for its noted white wine, art-lovers for
        the magnificent Gothic cathedral. Scores of architects worked on the
        church from the 13th to the 17th centuries (its central bronze doors
        were added in 1964), but its glory remains the gleaming façade (its
        mosaics were a 17th-century addition), with its four slender spired
        pilasters and its rose-window above the beautifully scrolled porches.
        At the base of the two northern pilasters, look closely at Lorenzo
        Maitanis marvelous carved marble bas-reliefs of scenes from the Old
        Testament and the Last Judgment.
        Grey and white bands of marble give the interior a
        spacious simplicity. Off the right transept, the recently restored San
        Brizio Chapel (a.k.a. Cappella Nuova) is famous for the 1447 frescoes
        covering the ceiling by Fra Angelico — Christ in Glory — and by Luca
        Signorelli (around 1500) on the walls. To the left, Signorelli portrays
        himself and Fra Angelico as bystanders in the vivid Preaching of the
        Antichrist (identified here with Savonarola). The nude figures in the
        Resurrection of the Dead on the right wall are considered by some art
        historians as less convincing. Many echo Leonardo da Vincis comparison
        to sacks of nuts. 
        The Cathedral Museum in the Palazzo Soliano includes other
        works by Signorelli, a Simone Martini polyptych, and sculpture by Nino,
        Andrea, and Giovanni Pisano.
        If you want to cool off, explore the monumental Pozzo di
        San Patrizio, a 16th-century well dug 63 m (206 ft) down into the
        volcanic rock on the nort heast edge of the precipice. Well lit by 72
        windows, two spiral staircases of 248 steps take you right down to the
        water level. The town sits atop a labyrinth of tunnels, caves, and
        storerooms carved into the soft tufa, begun by the Etruscans and
        elaborated upon by the ancient Romans. Guided tours explain the
        earliest chapters of this ancient town with a visit to its subterranean
        depths.
        Spoleto
        Its greatest tourist attractions are the summer music and
        arts festivals (in particular the world-famous Spoleto Festival
        established in 1957), but the towns beautiful natural setting amid
        densely wooded hills also makes it a base for hikes into the
        countryside. Especially popular is the oak forest (and monastery) on
        Monteluco, favored by St. Francis and St. Bernardino of Siena.
        An important Roman outpost with an excavated amphitheater
        as proof, Spoleto also boasts a sober Romanesque cathedral with
        17th-century additions, decorated with damaged but still graceful Fra
        Filippo Lippi frescoes (1469). The tomb for the licentious painter-monk
        who seduced Sister Lucrezia (the model for many of his Madonnas) was
        designed by Filippino Lippi, the son of Filippo and Lucrezia.
        Assisi
        The enduring popular appeal of St. Francis (1182–1226) has
        turned his native pink-hued town into Italys major pilgrimage
        destination, second only to Rome. Its basilica, like the peaceful
        medieval town center, has been beautifully preserved, and the
        centuries-old pilgrim trade manages (sometimes just barely) to avoid
        the unashamed commercialism that blights other religious shrines.
        The basilica of San Francesco is in fact two churches, one
        above the other, built on top of the saints simple tomb in the crypt.
        Unfortunately, the basilica was the regions one structure that
        suffered the most damage during the earthquakes of 1997, whose
        epicenter was located just outside of Assisi. Several priceless
        frescoes were severely damaged or destroyed, notably invaluable works
        by Cimabue (1226–1337) featured on a portion of the Upper Churchs
        vaulted ceiling, which plunged to the floor during the quakes.
        The Lower Basilica was begun in 1228, two years after
        Francis death and the year of his canonization, and the frescoes were
        painted in the 14th century, but a Renaissance porch now precedes the
        Gothic side entrance. The subdued and mystical light of the low vaulted
        nave evokes the sober piety of the Franciscan tradition. Tuscan painter
        Simone Martini has decorated the St. Martin Chapel (first left) with
        exquisite frescoes, including a most aristocratic Jesus appearing in
        St. Martins dream. Stairs in the nave lead down to the crypt and St.
        Franciss tomb, rediscovered only in 1818, centuries after it had been
        concealed from Perugian plunderers. The simplicity of the tomb would
        have been much more preferred by il Poverello than the well-intentioned
        lavishness showered upon the basilica.
        The superb frescoes of the life of Jesus in the St. Mary
        Magdalen Chapel (closest to altar on the right nave) and of St.
        Franciss vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience above the elegant
        Gothic high altar are attributed to Giotto (1307) and his workshop.
        In the right transept, the Cimabues famous portrait of
        St. Francis, believed to be a close physical resemblance, shows him to
        the right of the enthroned Madonna. Over in the left transept, see
        Pietro Lorenzettis noble Descent from the Cross.
        In the Upper Basilica, reopened in 2000 after intense
        round-the-clock restoration, Cimabues works in the apse and left
        transept have turned black, looking like photo negatives because of the
        oxidized white lead in his paints, yet you can still feel the intensity
        of the crowds anguish in his Crucifixion, blessedly untouched by the
        earthquakes damaging force.
        In the brilliantly illuminated nave, the faithful are
        exalted by one of the most grandiose series of frescoes in Christendom
        and, sadly, some of the most damaged in the earthquake. The basilicas
        highlight, and generally accepted as the work of a young Giotto, the
        Life of Francis (1296-1304) is movingly celebrated in 28 scenes along
        the lower tier (starting from the right transept), while 32 frescoes in
        the upper tier illustrate scenes from the Old and New Testament.
        Detractors question that Giotto designed the entire series but usually
        agree that numbers 2 to 11 are his work.
        Penetrate the historic heart of Assisi along the Via San
        Francesco, with its 15th-century Pilgrims Hostel (Oratorio dei
        Pellegrini) at number 11. Its frescoes are attributed to Perugino. The
        noble Piazza del Comune is the town center, grouping medieval palazzi
        around the old Roman forum. A triumph of Christianity over paganism,
        the Corinthian-columned church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva was built
        on the site of a Roman temple under Augustus. A small Pinacoteca art
        museum is across the square.
        The austere little church of San Damiano dates to the 11th
        century. Its a lovely 3 km- (2 mile-) stroll down from the Porta
        Nuova, and is a point of pilgrimage for those curious to see the wooden
        crucifix that spoke to a troubled 27-year-old Francis in 1209, telling
        him to go and repair the world.
        Perugia
        Dominating the Umbrian countryside from its 494-m
        (1,600-ft) hill, Perugia is emphatically more secular and more profane
        than its mystical Umbrian neighbor Assisi. But the imposing weight of
        its past is lightened by the lively cosmopolitan studentry of its two
        universities (its state university, one of Italys largest, was founded
        in 1270; its international division was set up by Mussolini) and its
        contemporary popularity as the sight of one of Europes most important
        jazz festivals each July. Perugias antiquity is symbolized on the
        north side of town by the lovingly preserved Arco Etrusco
        (Etruscan — and partly Roman —  triumphal arch) that was incorporated
        into its medieval ramparts.
        In its picture-perfect town center, something of its old
        aggressive civic power is evoked in the formidable Palazzo dei Priori
        (town hall) looming over the Piazza 4 Novembre at the far side of its
        pedestrian-only Corso Vanucci. Nicola Pisanos intricately carved and
        recently restored 13th-century Fontana Maggiore (Great Fountain) has
        long been everyones favorite point of rendezvous, in the shadow of the
        14th-century cathedral. Together with the Palazzo dei Priori, the
        cathedral sustained some damage from Umbrias 1997 earthquake.
        The fourth floor of the town hall (entrance on Corso
        Vannucci) is given over to the Galleria Nazionale dellUmbria, expanded
        in 1999, a handsomely modernized setting for a splendid collection of
        Umbrian and Tuscan paintings from the 13th to 18th centuries. It
        includes a Fra Angelico Triptych and Piero della Francescas
        Annunciation and Madonna with Angels. But Umbrias pride and joy is the
        work of Perugia-born Pietro Vanucci, a.k.a. Perugino (1445–1523). Look
        out for his Adoration of the Magi and a Madonna della Consolazione as
        sweet and serene as the Umbrian landscape of which youll catch a
        glimpse through the museum windows. Pinturicchio, master of narrative
        fresco and a student of Perugino, is represented by his Miracles of the
        Saints.
        Next door on the busy pedestrian street of Corso Vannucci
        is the Collegio del Cambio, 15th-century hall and chapel of the
        bankers guild. The vestibule is decorated with handsome 17th-century
        Baroque walnut panelling. But it is the Audience Hall (Sala
        dellUdienza) that is its highlight, covered with a delightful series
        of Perugino frescoes (1496–1500), considered his masterpiece. The left
        wall is allegorical, devoted to the bankers widely acknowledged
        virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, while religious
        themes invoke their piety on the other walls. (Fortitude and one of the
        Sibyls are attributed to Peruginos 17-year-old pupil, Raphael. )
        The presence of the Perugina chocolate industry (creator
        of the Perugino bacio in 1922) is surprisingly low profile. There is no
        flagship shop or outlet per say, though some of the larger cafés in
        town carry a representation of the confections produced by the local
        factory which, although open to the public, would be of interest only
        to serious chocolate buffs.
        Gubbio
        Some 40 km (25 miles) north of Perugia, this no-nonsense
        stalwart hill town is not easy to get to, and once youre there it
        remains hard to navigate — if you dont like climbing steep cobbled
        streets. But for anyone who cherishes the tranquility of a
        quasi-unspoiled medieval atmosphere, Gubbio is a delight. The
        brick-paved Piazza della Signoria is the center stage of the city of
        stone.  Its 14th-century crenellated Palazzo dei Consoli is one of the
        grandest civic edifices in all Italy, and from the piazza and the
        palazzos belltower you have a magnificent panorama of the town and
        surrounding country. Then climb (even higher! ) to the cathedral and
        the Renaissance courtyard of the 15th-century Palazzo Ducale. In
        warm-weather months an open funivia brings you up to the basilica of
        SantUbaldo, the towns patron saint, and you can go from there by foot
        to the 12th-century military fortress La Rocca for unmatched views of
        the wild Appennine Mountains.
        THE NORTHEAST
        Throughout Italys history, its northeast regions have
        linked the country to the exotic outside world of Byzantium and the
        Orient through Venice and its Repubblica Serena, and to the Alpine
        countries north of the Dolomites, while the plains of Emilia-Romagna
        from Ravenna to Parma provided an anchor to the heartland of the Po
        valley.
        The result is a rich variety of distinctive cities and
        colorful hinterland. The afterglow of Venices once-powerful empire is
        undimmed. Made possible by its conquests, elegant Palladian villas
        grace the Veneto mainland from Venice to Padua and Vicenza. The glories
        of Verona extend from its grand Roman arena to the palaces of the
        medieval and Renaissance families whose intrigues and love stories
        inspired Shakespeare. In Emilia-Romagna, the pride and creativity of
        the great city-states is still very much in evidence in the monuments
        and museums of Bologna, Ferrara, and Parma. Stretch your muscles in the
        Dolomites, with its first-class winter sports and summer hiking, or
        soak up sun and sea in the Adriatic resorts around Rimini.
        Venice (Venezia)
        These palazzos, canals, and lagoons claim a place apart in
        our collective imagination. In this new millennium, Venice remains a
        dreamworld more than ever, its myth more powerful than its harsh
        reality. Even when it threatens to disintegrate into nightmare at times
        of winter floods, Carnival shenanigans, or summer hordes, visitors can
        take refuge in a café once frequented by Casanova or in a quiet back
        alleyway away from the congestion, and continue their dream
        uninterrupted. One of the citys many blessings is that there remain so
        many quiet and beautiful corners that have changed little with time.
        Another obvious bonus, although impossible to over-emphasize, is the
        absence of cars, the simple joy of wandering around a town relieved of
        traffic and pollution, of standing on a little humpback pedestrian
        bridge far from the Grand Canal and hearing only the water lapping
        against the moss-covered walls, or the occasional swish of a sleek
        gondola that appears out of nowhere. Staying forever is most likely to
        cross your mind.
        Go in May or October, if you can — the crowds at Easter
        and from June to September can be horrible (May and October are hardly
        better, but are at least a bit cooler). Venice at Christmas has become
        fashionable and the late-winter Carnival (generally falling in February
        or March), very commercial. In the winter months it is dank and cold
        but with a mystical beauty all its own. But whenever you go, dont try
        to do it all in a day. Without the time to meander and explore those
        hidden corners, you risk not seeing much more than Piazza San Marco,
        and understanding very little of the citys inherent charm. Give
        yourself a bare minimum of three days, time to get lost (youre never
        very far from the main landmarks signposted with bright yellow arrows).
        The town has more than enough sights to see, but you can taste much of
        its pleasures before you even set foot inside the museums, churches,
        and monuments. The only must is Venice itself.
        Grand Canal (Canal Grande)
        From the railway station or the parking lot of Piazzale
        Roma, you begin with a vaporetto waterbus along the Canal Grande, the
        most uniquely stunning main street in the world. Use this wonderful
        first contact with the city as your introductory (and inexpensive)
        tour.
        Vaporetto number 1 takes you to the historic center of
        town, Piazza San Marco. Accelerated lines miss out on many of the
        canals sites; airport motor launches cross directly to San Marco from
        the Lido so drop your bags off at the hotel and then hop on the number
        1 in the opposite direction, round-trip. Save your gondola ride — yes,
        its touristy and expensive but not to be missed — for when youre
        settled in.
        Along the Grand Canals 3.8 km (more than 2 miles),
        varying in width from 30 to 70 m (100 to 230 ft), are the old trading
        headquarters and warehouses of its distant commercial heyday. Known
        locally as ca (short for casa) as well as palazzo, the marble, brick,
        and white limestone palaces range over 600 years from
        Venetian-Byzantine to Renaissance, Baroque, and Neoclassical, but most
        of them are exotically 14th- and 15th-­century Gothic, Venices
        trademark in architectural styles. Their sea-resistant limestone
        foundations stand on massive pinewood stilts driven 8 m (26 ft) into
        the lagoon bed.
        Lining the Grand Canal
        The superb Renaissance Palazzo Vendramin-Calergi, where
        Richard Wagner died in 1883, is today the winter casino. The gilt has
        gone from the freshly restored façade of the 15th-century Ca dOro
        (Golden House), but its still the towns most beautiful and best
        preserved of the citys Gothic palaces and home to the Galleria Giorgio
        Franchetti Museum. Italys most impressive post office, Fondaco dei
        Tedeschi was once the trading-center of Czechs, Hungarians, and
        Austrians as well as the Germans of its name. Just beyond, the
        shop-lined white marble Rialto Bridge arches the canal at its narrowest
        point. The 18th-century Palazzo Grassi has been recently restored by
        Gae Aulenti for major art exhibitions of world-class quality. The
        prefecture puts its bureaucrats in the fine Renaissance Palazzo Corner
        (or Ca Grande), while gondoliers claim Othellos Desdemona lived in
        the lovely late-Gothic Palazzo Contarini-Fasan.
        The 700-year-old Fondaco dei Turchi was a warehouse for
        the merchants of Constantinople, now the Natural History Museum. It
        stands next to the plain brick 15th-century Megio wheat granary,
        decorated only by battlements and the republics seal of St. Marks
        lion. The imposing 17th-century Baroque Ca Pesaro houses the Modern
        Art Museum. Come back early in the morning to the covered 20th-century,
        neo-Gothic Pescheria (fish market) and its adjoining produce market.
        The university has a department in the handsome 15th-century Gothic Ca
        Foscari. The Ca Rezzonico is itself a fine specimen of the
        18th-century Venetian art for which it is now a museum. Beyond the
        wooden Accademia Bridge and the Accademia art museum, the perspective
        is completed by the magnificent Baroque church of Santa Maria della
        Salute that has always marked the arrival at (or departure from) Piazza
        San Marco just across the way.
        Around Piazza San Marco
        Building-space on the water being what it is, Venice has
        only one real piazza (all others are called campi), but in
        comparison, any other contender would have died of shame anyway.
        Gloriously open to sky and sea, Piazza San Marco — to locals, just the
        Piazza—embodies the whole Venetian motherlode of history and
        adventure. Its airy arcades reach out to the 900-year-old basilica and
        turn a corner past the soaring brick campanile to the Piazzetta and
        landing stage of St. Marks basin (il Bacino), historic gateway to the
        Adriatic and distant ports beyond. For centuries, the odysseys of
        victorious commanders and commercial ventures of local merchants began
        and ended here.
        This is where th e thousand-year-old Repubblica Serena
        fell in 1797, at the hands of Napoleon. While he was busy removing the
        four ancient bronze horses from the basilicas façade (since returned)
        along with other art treasures to ship back to Paris, he was said to
        remark that the Piazza San Marco was the worlds most beautiful salon.
         He closed off the Piazzas west end with an Ala Napoleonica
        (Napoleonic Wing), through which you now enter the Museo Correr,
        devoted to paintings and documents of Venetian history.
        The north and south arms of the square, the 16th-century
        Procuratie Vecchie and Procuratie Nuove, were the residences of the
        republics most senior officials. They are now lined with Murano glass
        and souvenir boutiques, exclusive jewelry and lace shops, and, most
        important for weary or hungry travelers, elegant 18th-century cafés.
        During the Austrian occupation, the enemy frequented Quadri on the
        north side, while Italian patriots met only at Florian, opposite. In
        warm weather months, their spirited 4-piece orchestras play everything
        from Moon River to polkas and Neapolitan love songs. Pigeons chase
        seed-vendors chasing tourists chasing their children chasing pigeons.
        To catch the piazza and the basilica bathed in moonlight and
        quasi-deserted is a magical thing.
        The glittering façade of the Basilica di San Marco forms
        an exotic backdrop, illuminating Venices unique role at the crossroads
        of Eastern and Western culture. What began in a.d. 830 as the Doges
        chapel for the remains of the evangelist Mark, the republics patron
        saint, was rebuilt in the 11th century as a grandiose
        Byzantine-Oriental basilica influenced by the Hagia Sofia in
        Constantinople. Greek mosaicists were brought in to decorate the arches
        and domes. Five Romanesque portals correspond to the five Islamic-style
        domes covering the churchs Greek-cross ground plan. With its five
        mosquelike domes, it is the most sumptuously exotic and orientally
        inspired church ever built in the Roman Catholic world.
        The first portal on the left is the only one decorated
        with an original 13th-century mosaic, depicting the Transfer of St.
        Marks Body, smuggled out of Alexandria, Egypt. The mosaic also shows
        the basilica with the famous bronze horses brought from Constantinople
        after the Crusade of 1204 (the ones over the triple-arched main
        entrance are copies, the originals are kept in the basilica museum
        since their recent restoration).
        There is a soft glow in the gilded interior from the
        mosaics, gently illuminated by high stained-glass windows, more
        evocative yet with the worn patina of the elaborate inlaid-marble
        flooring. Entire books have been written about the original mosaics on
        the five domes and the great barrel vaults separating them, dating from
        the 11th to the 15th centuries. Among the best are the 12th-century
        Pentecost dome in the nave and the central domes 13th-century
        Ascension. Others have been heavily restored or replaced, not with true
        mosaics, but with reproductions in colored stone of drawings by such
        artists as Bellini, Mantegna, and Tintoretto. The whole is worthy of
        its nickname, church of gold. 
        The imposing high altar stands over St. Marks tomb.
        Behind it is the basilicas greatest treasure, the Pala dOro (Golden
        Altarpiece), dating back 1,000 years and bejeweled in its present form
        in the 14th century. Guides will tell you that its 255 enameled panels
        were encrusted by master Venetian and Byzantine artisans with close to
        2,000 precious stones, including pearls, garnets, sapphires, emeralds
        and rubies. It requires an entrance fee, as does the Tesoro (Treasury),
        a collection of the Crusaders plunder. To the left of the high altar
        is a small chapel whose 10th-century Madonna di Nicopeia, a bejeweled
        icon also from Constantinople, is said to have healing powers and is a
        runner-up as Venices protective patron after St. Mark.
        Steep stairs to the right of the main entrance lead to the
        small Museo Marciano, where you can see the original four tethered
        bronze horses, dating from the 2nd or 3rd century a.d. and a privileged
        close-up of the basilicas mosaic ceilings from the museums open
        galleries. From the outdoor Loggia dei Cavalli, you get an excellent
        view over the Piazza San Marco and its principal monuments.
        To the right of the loggia (north of the basilica), is the
        restored Torre dellOrologio (Clock Tower), reopened in 2000 in time
        for its 500th anniversary. The clock mechanism, all gilt and polychrome
        enamel, still keeps perfect time, activating statues of two green
        bronze Moors that hammer out the hour. For centuries, the clock tower
        has been every Venetians favorite rendezvous point, an arched
        ground-level entranceway leading to the Merceria, a narrow zig-zagging
        boutique-lined street that cuts through this ancient quarter on its way
        north to the Rialto Bridge.
        The piazzas beloved Campanile (Bell Tower), at 99 m (324
        ft) is the highest structure in the city, for 10 centuries its belfry,
        lighthouse, weather vane, and gun turret. Emperor Frederick III rode
        his horse up its spiral ramp (tourists can opt for the elevator).
        Criminals were suspended from it in wooden cages. In 1902, it cracked,
        crumbled and collapsed unexpectedly. Ten years later, on its 1,000th
        anniversary, it was rebuilt using much of the original brick and
        rescuing one of its five historic bells that is still used today:
        comera, dovera (as it was, where it was). Its collapse
        fortunately hurt no one, but did crush Jacopo Sansovinos beautiful
        16th-century Loggetta, equally lovingly restored as the entrance to the
        campaniles elevator. On clear days, enjoy a view high over the
        Adriatic and all the way north to the pink-tinged Dolomites.
        The two tall columns facing out over St. Marks Basin were
        brought from Constantinople in the 12th century. They are topped by
        statues of St. Marks winged lion and the citys first patron saint,
        Theodore (replaced by St. Mark), with his dragon.
        On the waterfront sits the Doges Palace (Palazzo Ducale),
        for 900 years the focus of Venices uncontested power and pomp, evoked
        in the imposing elegance of its delicate pink marble and white
        limestone façades with their airy arcades and loggias. Erected over an
        older Byzantine-style castle, the present 14th- to 15th-century
        Flamboyant Gothic building fronts the Piazzetta and the basin, the
        first building to behold upon arrival in Venice. It is open to the
        public with audio guides (in various languages) available at the
        entrance.
        Where the palazzo joins the basilicas southernmost flank
        is the Porta della Carta (Gate of the Paper, where the doge posted his
        decrees and scribes gathered). The Gothic sculpture shows the doge
        kneeling before St. Marks lion, flanked by Prudence above Temperance
        in niches on the left, and Fortitude above Charity on the right. (The
        book in the lions paw that you see all over Venice is inscribed: Pax
        tibi, Marce evangelista meus, Peace unto you, my evangelist Mark. 
        )
        In the inner courtyard the Scala dei Giganti staircase is
        so named for Sansovinos giant statues of Neptune and Mars. Visitors
        take the golden Scala dOro past the Doges opulent private apartments
        to the spectacularly decorated council chambers on the third floor.
        Here, as in most of the citys palaces and churches, the walls are
        decorated with painted panels and canvases by Venetian masters rather
        than delicate frescoes, too easily damaged by the Venetian climate.
        Look out for Veroneses Rape of Europa and Tintorettos
        Bacchus and Ariadne and Vulcans Forge in the Anticollegio; a masterly
        allegorical series by Veronese glorifying Venice in the Sala del
        Collegio, where foreign ambassadors were received; and weapons and
        suits of armor in the Armory (Sala dArmi).
        Highlight of the palace tour, back down on the second
        floor, is the huge Sala del Maggior Consiglio (Great Council Hall),
        where ordinary citizens presented their complaints in person in the
        Republics most democratic days before the oligarchy reserved it for
        their secret deliberations. The last doge presented his abdication to
        Napoleon here. Of the 76 doges portrayed here, one is blackened out,
        Marino Faliero, beheaded for treason in 1355. Tintorettos Paradise
        adorns the entrance wall above the doges throne. Said to be the
        worlds largest oil painting, 22 by 7 m (72 by 23 ft), it was done,
        with the help of son Domenico, when the artist was 70. Look for the
        brilliant colors of Veroneses oval ceiling painting of Venice Crowned
        by Victory, forerunner of the Baroque tours de force in
        perspective.
        For those hoping to go from the sublime to the sinister,
        the palace prisons, neat and tidy today along their narrow corridor,
        become all too romantic with their 17th-century Baroque Bridge of Sighs
        (Ponte dei Sospiri). The celebrated passage to doom, linking the Ducal
        palace with the prisons, supposedly moved its users to sigh on their
        way to the torture chambers (now off-limits). Some of the original
        graffiti can still be seen in the prisons, one of which held Casanova
        for 15 months in 1755 before he escaped.
        The waterfront Riva degli Schiavoni (Quay of the Slavs)
        begins at the Ducal Palace, named after the Dalmatian merchants who
        unloaded their goods here. The ghosts of Dickens, Wagner, and Proust
        wander around the lobby of the venerable Danieli Hotel, a former doges
        residence that is one of Italys most romantic (the romantic lobby bar
        offers a moment of rest for the weary).
        Probably nowhere is there so much spectacular painting on
        view in such a tiny space as in the Scuola di San Giorgio degli
        Schiavoni. This captivating building was the confraternity guildhall of
        the wealthy schiavoni merchants who commissioned Vittore Carpaccio
        (whose parents belonged to the community) to decorate their hall. His
        nine pictures, completed between 1502 and 1508, cover the walls of the
        ground-floor chapel. Note the wonderfully ornate wooden ceiling. It is
        one of a number of scuole (literally, schools or confraternities)
        unique to the days of the Venetian Republic.
        Just four minutes by vaporetto from the Piazzetta, on its
        own little island, is the church of San Giorgio Maggiore; its campanile
        offers the most photogenic view of the city and its lagoon. The
        16th-century church is a rare ecclesiastical building by Andrea
        Palladio, the master Renaissance architect from nearby Vicenza whose
        classic designs have so dominated aristocratic residential architecture
        throughout Europe and North America. His customary Corinthian-columned
        elegance prevails here, extended from the façade to an airy interior.
        Two superb paintings by an elderly Tintoretto flank the main altar,
        Gathering of the Manna and an otherworldly Last Supper, in which Jesus
        administers communion while servants bustle to clear up the dishes. The
        resident monks still offer mass sung in Gregorian chant every
        Sunday.
        Around the Accademia
        With an inherent pride so justifiably timeless, the
        rambling Galleria dellAccademia (Accademia Gallery) is devoted almost
        exclusively to the artistic legacy of the master artists of Venice and
        the Veneto, from the 14th century of the republics emerging glory to
        the 18th century of its gentle decadence. One of Italys most important
        art museums, it offers the chance to see just how little Venice has
        changed over the centuries. Here are only some of its most
        representative highlights:
        Room 1: The 14th-century Coronation of the Madonna of
        Paolo Veneziano, first of the citys great masters, glowing with
        characteristic Venetian color and texture.
        Room 2: Giovanni Bellini, youngest and most gifted member
        of the painter family, brings gentle humanity to his Enthroned Madonna
        with Job and St. Sebastian (1485).
        Room 4: Andrea Mantegna (a brother-in-law of the Bellini
        family) shows why St. George, the dragon-killer, became the most
        appropriate patron saint for England.
        Room 5: Giorgiones Tempest (1505) is one of the museums
        most cherished, most mysterious treasures, a girl calmly nursing her
        child in a landscape prickling with the electricity of the approaching
        storm.
        Room 7: Lorenzo Lotto, troubled loner among Venices
        16th-century artists, portrays a Gentleman in his Study with subtle,
        somber psychology.
        Room 10: This is the most important of Renaissance rooms.
        Titians Pietà, a vibrant last work completed by pupil Palma il
        Giovane, was originally intended for his tomb in the Frari church (see
        page 131); Veroneses Feast in the House of Levi was meant to be the
        Last Supper, until the Holy Inquisition complained about its buffoons,
        drunkards, dwarfs, Germans, and similar vulgarities; Tintoretto gives
        full play to his dark sense of drama in the Miracle of St. Mark.
        Room 17: Canalettos hugely popular 18th-century vedute
        (views) of Venice were aristocratic precursors of modern postcards; in
        such works as Island of San Giorgio Maggiore, Francesco Guardi achieved
        both poetry and melancholy.
        Room 20: Gentile Bellini breathes little life into the
        grand pageant of his Procession on San Marco (1496), but it remains one
        of the museums most fascinating photographs of Renaissance
        Venice.
        Room 21: Vittore Carpaccio depicts in nine canvases the
        bizarre Story of St. Ursula, a British princess, said to have led
        11,000 virgins on a pilgrimage to Rome, all of whom were raped and
        slaughtered on their way back.
        To the east of the Accademia along the Grand Canal, a
        breath of the 20th century awaits you at the Peggy Guggenheim
        Collection of modern art in the Palazzo Venier dei Leoni. Home of the
        American heiress until her death in 1979, this unfinished 18th-century
        palace provides a delightful canal-side setting for what is widely
        considered one of the worlds most comprehensive collections of modern
        art. Works include those by Picasso, Marcel Duchamp, Magritte,
        Kandinsky, and Klee, but it is known above all for Jackson Pollock,
        Mark Rothko, and Robert Motherwell. In the garden are sculptures by
        Giacometti, Henry Moore, and the collectors husband, Max Ernst.
        Guggenheim and her dogs are buried here. A lovely limited-menu café
        behind the garden and a new gift shop were added in 2000.
        Where the Grand Canal empties into the lagoon stands the
        imposing church of Santa Maria della Salute — la Salute to the
        Venetians — is the masterpiece of Baldassare Longhena, built to mark
        the citys deliverance from a plague in 1630. For a Baroque edifice
        (and one of the finest outside of Rome), the interior is rather sober,
        even chaste. One of Tintorettos best, the Marriage at Cana, is on the
        wall opposite the entrance, while three of Titians most vivid canvases
        decorate the chancel: Cain and Abel, Abraham Sacrificing Isaac, and
        David and Goliath, their drama heightened by the perspective di sotto
        in su (looking up from below).
        To the west of the Accademia, the Ca Rezzonico is another
        canal-side design of Longhena, completed in the 18th century and now a
        museum (reopened in 2000) dedicated to those swan-song years of the
        Venices Most Serene Republic, la Serenissima. When the last of the
        wealthy Rezzonico family disappeared, Elizabeth Barrett and Robert
        Browning bought the palazzo, and the poet died in a first-floor
        apartment in 1889. The extravagant ballroom and soaring allegorical
        frescoes like Giambattista Tiepolos Merit between Virtue and Nobility
        in the Throne Room (actually for Rezzonico weddings) and others, more
        wistful, by Guardi all catch the tone of a declining Venice and the
        frivolous lives of the idle rich.
        Venice was home to a number of scuole that were not
        schools at all but old confraternities similar, minus their religious
        affiliation, to todays Freemasons, Rotarians, Elks, or Lions. North of
        Ca Rezzonico, the Scuola Grande di San Rocco is Venices richest
        confraternity, in a fine 16th-century chapter house next to its own
        church. Local master artist Tintoretto (1518–1594) won a competition to
        create for the hall some 50 paintings (the largest collection of his
        work anywhere) over a period of 23 years, a series comparable in
        grandeur to Giottos frescoes in Paduas Scrovegni Chapel or Florences
        Brancacci chapel by Masaccio. In the Sala Grande, see the high drama of
        Moses Striking Wate r from the Rock and a fascinating Temptation of
        Christ, with Satan portrayed as a beautiful youth. Tiepolo and Titian
        are interlopers here, the latter with a solitary albeit remarkable
        easel painting of the Annunciation. Tintorettos masterpiece in
        chiaroscuro effects is the grandiose Crucifixion in the Sala
        dellAlbergo. Youll find a self-portrait just right of the rooms
        entrance.
        Nearby is the immense brick and white-marble Gothic Church
        of the Frari (full name Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari, built by the
        Franciscans), above all celebrated for the high altar adorned with
        Titians jubilant Assumption of the Virgin. The masters only painting
        on such a massive scale is a triumph of primary reds, blues, and
        yellows that irresistibly draw you up to the altar. Drag yourself away
        to see his other work here, the Madonna di Ca Pesaro (left nave), in
        which St. Peter presents the Mary to the Pesaro, a wealthy local
        family. Venetian composer Monteverdis tomb is in a chapel left of the
        altar.   Dont miss Titians own monumental tomb (in the right aisle);
        he died in 1576 during a local plague. Donatello has sculpted a fine
        polychrome wood St. John the Baptist for his compatriots Florentine
        Chapel, to the right of the altar.
        Back on the Grand Canal again: Longhenas exuberant
        Baroque Ca Pesaro is now the towns Modern Art Gallery, devoted
        principally to a small but impressive collection of purchases from the
        Venice Biennale exhibitions. Italian artists — Futurists Giovanni
        Fattori and Telemaco Signorini and the Ferrara trio of Filippo de
        Pisis, Carlo Carrà, and Giorgio de Chirico — are better represented
        than other Europeans, of whom Matisse, Klee, and Ernst are the most
        notable.
        Around the Rialto
        The ancient commercial heart of the city, named after the
        ninth-century settlement on Rivo Alto (high bank), the Rialto bridge is
        one of three that crosses the Grand Canal. Here, the Oriental spices,
        and silks and exotic cargoes from faraway ports were unloaded from the
        republics ancient galleons. The merchants headed for the banks, the
        sailors to the brothels. Today, the action is in the food markets and
        boutiques on the Grand Canals west bank. The Pescheria (fish market)
        bustles early in the morning except Sunday and Monday, while the
        Erberia (fruit and vegetables) is open until late afternoon for those
        looking for picnic supplies. Hidden amongst it is the little
        11th-century church of San Giacomo di Rialto — San Giacometto to
        them — claimed by locals to be the towns oldest.
        The 16th-century Rialto Bridge is one of Venices
        architectural icons, designed by ­Antonio da Ponte for a competition
        entered by Michelangelo, Palladio, and Sansovino — its still one of
        the liveliest spots in town. Northeast of the bridge, past the Fondaco
        dei Tedeschi post office, seek out the little 15th-century church of
        Santa Maria dei Miracoli. Its refined façade of delicate inlaid colored
        marble and intricately carved friezes has won it the name of golden
        jewel box (scrigno doro), its local designer Pietro Lombardo more
        sculptor than architect. A laborious 10-year restoration brought its
        gem-like beauty to light in 1999.
        Its worth carefully mapping out your visit to the Campo
        Santi Giovanni e Paolo. Follow the Calle Larga Giacinto Gallina to the
        humpbacked Ponte del Cavallo bridge for the all-important first view of
        the piazzas magnificent equestrian statue of Bartolomeo Colleoni,
        considered one of the finest in the world. With his last and greatest
        piece of sculpture brilliantly evoking all the fierce resolution of a
        condottiere riding into battle, Andrea Verrocchio need not regret
        abandoning painting to his pupil Leonardo da Vinci. Colleoni willed his
        huge fortune to Venice on the understanding that his monument would be
        on Piazza San Marco. Once dead, he had to settle for this spot in front
        of the Scuola of San Marco, a clever Venetian solution. The piazzas
        main attraction is the massive 13th-century Gothic church of Santi
        Giovanni e Paolo, a name compressed by Venetians into San Zanipolo.
        Built by the Dominicans, it was the doges funeral church with some 25
        buried here, many in masterpieces of monumental tombs.
        Returning to the Grand Canal: Youll find in the glorious
        Ca dOro the quintessential decorative tradition of Venetian
        architecture, arguably more successful in its compact form here than in
        the beautiful but sprawling Doges Palace. Completed in 1440, its
        Flamboyant Gothic design has a flair and grace that bewitch you into
        imagining the long-gone gilt of its façade (from which it earned its
        name). Take another, more leisurely, boat-ride for the view from the
        canal. The treasures of the CadOros Galleria Franchetti of
        Renaissance art include Andrea Mantegnas St. Sebastian and Titians
        Venus at the Mirror.
        Off the Beaten Track
        Among the corners of town far from the crowd, the old
        Jewish Ghetto (northeast of the railway station) is particularly
        peaceful and reveals a fascinating page of Venetian history. It was the
        former site of an abandoned iron foundry, ghetto in old Venetian
        dialect, which lent its name to this and scores of other future
        enclaves for the forced isolation of Jewish (or other minority)
        communities throughout Europe. In 1516, some 900 Jews (rising to a peak
        of nearly 5,000 by the mid-17th century) were confined to what was then
        a remote and isolated island.
        They built the six- and eight-story tenements you see
        today, cramped quarters in buildings twice as high as those permitted
        elsewhere, with some floors no more than 6 ft high. The only way to
        visit any of the six still active 16th-century synagogues is with a
        guided tour offered by the Museo Ebraico in the Campo del Ghetto Nuovo.
        A handful of Jewish families still live in the Ghetto.
        On the island of the Giudecca, youll find another of the
        great Palladio-designed churches (one of two in Venice), the Redentore.
        The grace of its overall form is best viewed from across the canal,
        because, like St. Peters in Rome, the dome disappears at closer
        quarters behind its elongated nave. The Giudecca takes it name either
        from the Jews (giudei) who lived here prior to the Ghettos founding or
        from the giudicati, nobles banished here by ducal judgment. Its now a
        quiet residential refuge popular with artists — and tourists seeking to
        escape the mobs.
        Out in the lagoon, Venetians have been manufacturing glass
        on the island of Murano since 1292, when the hazardous furnaces were
        moved away from the city center. Today, its factories and shops are an
        undeniable tourist trap, but the museum (Museo Vetrario) tracing the
        glass industry back to Roman times is worth a look. Many enjoy watching
        burly fellows blowing molten globules into cute little green giraffes.
        The islands quiet spot is the 12th-century Venetian-Byzantine church
        of Santa Maria e San Donato, with a powerful mosaic in the apse.
        The island of Burano is a simple fishing village, true
        haven of tranquility, though the olden days of ladies making lace on
        the doorsteps of their brightly colored houses, artists on the quay and
        no hustlers is all but history. A local attempt to keep alive its
        centuries-old lace-making legacy continues, though much of whats
        hawked is machine-made in China.
        Hemingways favorite old hangout, the romantically
        overgrown island of Torcello, beyond Burano, is one of the lagoons
        oldest inhabited spots, very prosperous until emptied by a malaria
        epidemic. The mosquitoes have gone, but its superb cathedral remains.
        Founded in the seventh century and reconstructed in 1008, its probably
        the finest of the Venetian-Byzantine churches, one of Europes finest
        outside of Ravenna. In the apse theres a moving mosaic of the Madonna
        above a frieze of the 12 Apostles. Notice the fine Corinthian capitals
        on the slender Greek marble columns.
        With its sandy beaches and smart hotels, the Lido is as
        restful as any fashionable seaside resort. After a couple of days in
        Venice, its cars come as something of a shock, though tourists and
        locals alike still prefer bicycles. Nostalgics take tea in the Grand
        Hôtel des Bains to recall the decadent 1900s, evoked there by Thomas
        Manns novella (and Luchino Viscontis movie) Death in Venice. A few
        public beaches are the principle draw during the summer months when
        Venices weather and heavy humidity can sap the most energetic of
        tourists.
        Veneto
        The Venetian mainland reflects some of the Serenissimas
        artistic and architectural glories. Most of the cities remained under
        its domination until the 15th century, yet retained much of their
        individuality.
        An autostrada and easy train service link Venice to Padua,
        Vicenza, and Verona for those in a hurry, but others should take the
        charming back roads; this is one of Italys principal wine growing
        regions outside of Tuscanys Chianti area.
        The Brenta Canal
        When Venetian aristocrats gave up the high seas for a more
        leisurely life on the land, they built Palladian Renaissance villas and
        extravagantly frescoed Baroque country houses on the banks of the
        Brenta Canal between Venice and Padua. For those with time, a romantic
        way to visit some of the best is on the burchiello, a modern version of
        the rowing barge that took the gentry, Casanova, and Lord Byron to
        their trysts and parties in the country. Get details from the city
        tourist office on the eight-hour trip, which goes in either direction
        on alternate days, optional return by bus, from March–October. It stops
        at a number of villas en route.
        Otherwise, follow the canal along the pretty country road
        (route S 11) to Padua (Padova). First stop, off a side road to Fusina,
        is Palladios La Malcontenta (1571), to which a too-flighty Venetian
        countess was sent to pine, malcontentedly, in exquisite isolation on
        the canal. The villa, with its classical portico to catch the summer
        breezes, was the Renaissance architects visiting card for scores of
        commissions, copied worldwide, especially on the cotton plantations of
        Americas Deep South, where elegant porch-living became an article of
        faith.
        At nearby Oriago, the Palladian style can be seen in Villa
        Gradenigo, and at Mira, in the 18th-century Villa Widmann. The
        influence is clear even in the most spectacular of the Brenta villas,
        at Stra, the opulent Villa Pisani, or Villa Nazionale. Built for the
        Pisani doges in 1756, with 200 rooms, Tiepolo frescoes in the ballroom,
        and vast park with pond, labyrinth, and stables, it was purchased by
        Napoleon in 1807 and subsequently hosted Tsars, Hapsburg emperors, and,
        for their first meeting in 1934, Hitler and Mussolini.
        Padua (Padova)
        This proud university town — Galileo taught physics here
        from 1592 to 1610 — was a major center of the Risorgimento
        reunification movement. Something of the old spirit remains at the
        handsome Neo-Classical Caffè Pedrocchi, the activists meeting place on
        a little square off bustling Piazza Cavour. First opened in 1831, it
        reopened in 2000 after a renovation resuscitated much of its historic
        character.
        North along the Corso Garibaldi is Paduas undisputed
        draw, the 14th-century Scrovegni Chapel, also known, due to its site
        among ruins of a Roman amphitheater, as the Arena Chapel. As a penance
        for his fathers usury, the patrician Enrico Scrovegni built the simple
        little hall in 1303 specifically for the great Giotto frescoes.
        Beautifully preserved, these are considered some of the most important
        artworks of the early Re­nais­sance. In 38 pictures arranged in three
        rows under a starry heavenly-blue vault, Giotto tells the story of Mary
        and Jesus. Among the most moving, look for the Kiss of Judas, the
        Crucifixion, and the Lamentation. A monumental Last Judgment covers the
        entrance wall.
        The entrance to the important Piazza del Santo south of
        the city center is guarded by Donatellos grand statue of Gattamelata,
        the 15th-century Venetian condottiere Erasmo da Narni, perfect ideal of
        a Renaissance hero, whose honeyed cat nickname still mystifies
        historians. Behind him is Paduas great site of pilgrimage, the 13th-
        and 14th-century Basilica of SantAntonio, the citys protector simply
        known as II Santo, built in honor of the Portuguese-born Franciscan
        monk who died in Padua in 1231. The Romanesque façade makes a striking
        contrast with the eight Byzantine cupolas and two minaret-like towers
        around a central Gothic cone-shaped dome, reminiscent of Venices
        Basilica San Marco. In the lofty Gothic interior, Donatellos seven
        sculptures at the high altar include a stoical Crucifixion and large
        bronze reliefs narrating St. Anthonys miracles. Of prime importance is
        the saints tomb to the left of the altar. The patron saint of lost
        items, it is covered with photos, flowers, and notes of petition left
        by the streams of pilgrims who come from all corners of the world. St.
        Anthonys feastday is June 13, when the saints relics (otherwise kept
        on display in the basilicas Cappella del Tesoro) are paraded through
        town.
        Vicenza
        This is the home town of Andrea Palladio (1508–1580), the
        most important architect of the High Renaissance, a must-see
        destination for architecture lovers or those interested in history and
        design. At the center, Piazza dei Signori is graced by Palladios first
        public work, the Basilica Palladina (1549), not a church at all, but
        the old Roman concept of a gathering place for the lawcourts and
        assemby hall of the Gothic Palazzo della Ragione that it encases with a
        colonnade and loggia. If you wonder what to think of it, Palladios
        modest opinion was that it ranked among the most noble and most
        beautiful edifices since ancient times, not only for its grandeur and
        ornaments, but also its materials (hard white limestone). Inside is a
        museum of his designs and models.
        The main commercial street is, inevitably, Corso Andrea
        Palladio, lined with the masters elegant mansions (today converted to
        major banks, swank stores, and cafés) and others by disciples; his
        simple home was at no. 163. The 15th-century Palazzo da Schio (number
        147) is also known as CadOro, after the famous Venetian Gothic
        palace. Turn off on Contrà Porti for others. Youll find Vicenzas
        greatest opus (his country villas were another story) where the Corso
        widens out into the Piazza Matteotti to give him more freedom for the
        wonderfully airy Palazzo Chiericati. Its Museo Civico houses works by
        Tintoretto, Veronese, Hans Memling, and Van Dyck.
        Across the piazza in a little garden, the audacious Teatro
        Olimpico is Palladios last work (completed by his protoge Vincenzo
        Scamozzi in 1584). Facing an amphitheater auditorium is a fixed décor
        of classical Roman statuary and columns that looks far deeper than its
        4 m (14 ft), a permanent stage curtain of trompe loeil depicting the
        ancient streets of Thebes. Begun by Palladio the year of his death, it
        was the first covered theater in Europe and is still used today.
        Take route N 247 to Monte Berico and Palladios most
        celebrated building, the hilltop Villa Rotonda, considered one of the
        most perfect buildings ever constructed and Palladios finest. Designed
        as a belvedere for Cardinal Capra in 1567, its an exquisite piece of
        applied geometry, a domed rotunda set in a square surrounded on all
        four sides by simple Ionic-columned porticoes. It offers different
        views of town and countryside with the changing light of day. Its a
        ten minute walk to the Palladian-inspired Villa Valmarana, notable for
        the Tiepolo frescoes that grace its interior.
        Verona
        Shakespeares Fair Verona of Romeo and Juliet fame,
        Verona was first a favorite of ancient Roman emperors and the
        barbarian rulers that followed. The city likes to be known as la
        Degna, the Dignified, but it also has a very lively and well-to-do
        atmosphere, stimulated by the presence of its Adige river that flows
        swiftly down from the Dolomites. The memory of its fierce medieval
        history lingers still, the tales of family feuds that inspired
        Shakespeares Romeo and Juliet ended only with the 14th-century
        ascendancy of the tough Scalageri dynasty, in turn conquered by Venice
        in 1405.
        The hub of city life is the vast Piazza Brà, with the town
        hall on its south side and the great Roman A rena dating back to a.d.
        100. Only four of its outer arches survived an 1183 earthquake
        undamaged, but the inner arcade of 74 arches is intact. The elliptical
        amphitheaters 22,000 seats sell out months in advance for summertime
        open-air productions of Aida.  People in the least expensive top-row
        seats enjoy a terrific view of the surrounding city and
        countryside.
        Along the north side of the Piazza Brà, the Liston, a
        people-watchers delight lined with smart cafés and fine restaurants,
        is the street for the Veronese bourgeoisies popular evening stroll
        (passeggiata). It leads to the boutiques, galleries, and antique shops
        of the equally fashionable Via Mazzini.
        Turn right at the end down Via Cappello for the
        13th-century palazzo that the local tourist authorities will have you
        believe was Juliets House (Casa di Giulietta Cappelletti), complete
        with balcony. The graffiti that covers the entranceway and ancient
        walls is a poignant reminder of how well beloved and internationally
        embraced this universally renowned storia damore is.
        The Piazza delle Erbe along the ancient elongated Roman
        forum makes the prettiest of marketplaces. Its medieval houses and old
        umbrella-covered stalls surround a 14th-century fountain and a line of
        columns, one of which bears the lion of St. Mark, in former allegiance
        to Venice. The quasi-adjoining Piazza dei Signori (a.k.a Piazza Dante)
        is the somber and elegant square ringed by crenellated palazzos and
        Veronas important historical Antico Caffé Dante. The 14th-century
        Arche Scaligeri (Scaligeri Tombs) are found just beyond this, some of
        the most elaborate Gothic funerary monuments in Italy.
        West of Piazza Brà, the massive brick 14th-century
        Castel­vecchio fortress on the Adige river now houses an art museum.
        Its collections are principally of the Venetian school, notably
        Mantegnas Holy Family, a Giovanni Bellini Madonna, and Lorenzo Lottos
        Portrait of a Man, attributed by some to Titian.
        The austerely handsome 9th–12th-­­centuries basilica of
        San Zeno Maggiore (dedicated to the citys patron saint), is Veronas
        most visited church. With superb bronze doors and an imposing
        free-standing brick cam­panile, it is a rare jewel of Italian
        Romanesque architecture. The 14th-century battlemented tower to the
        left is the remnant of an old abbey. The dignity to which the town
        aspires is there in the simple interior, illuminated by the magnificent
        Mantegna triptych (1459) on the high altar; two of its panels are in
        London.
        Dolomites
        The landscape of Italys eastern Alps is a mixture of rich
        green Alpine meadows with jag­ged white limestone and rose-colored
        granite peaks. Summer hiking in the largely German-speaking region of
        Alto Adige (Austrian South Tyrol till 1918) is a delight. Well-marked
        paths lead to farmhouses and rustic mountain-restaurants where you can
        try the local bacon (Speck) or spinach dumplings (Spinatknödl) as a
        change from pasta.
        Bolzano (Bozen)
        South Tyrols historic capital makes a good base for
        hikes. It has a 14th-century Gothic church with a characteristically
        Austrian polychrome tiled roof. Inside is a 16th-century sculpted
        sandstone pulpit and marble altar. Get your hiking equipment on the old
        arcaded shopping street, Via dei Portici (Laubengasse). Then head
        northeast of town to the Renon (Ritten) plateau for views of the
        Dolomite peaks, reached by cableway and rack railway.
        Cortina dAmpezzo
        The queen of Italian winter-sports resorts has elegant
        hotels, smart boutiques, and a bouncing nightlife. In a sunny sheltered
        basin high in the Boite valley of the eastern Dolomites, it provides
        excellent skiing facilities as well as skating and bobsledding. It is
        also a favorite with summer hikers. Take the cable car to Tofana di
        Mezzo for an awesome view clear down to the Venetian lagoon. Equally
        spectacular are the panoramas from the Belvedere di Pocol and Tondi di
        Faloria.
        Emilia-Romagna
        The two regions were united at the time of the
        19th-century Risorgimento, with Emilia following the Apennines from
        Bologna to Piacenza, while Romagna covers the eastern area of Ravenna
        and the Adriatic resorts around Rimini down to Cattolica.
        Rimini
        The Adriatic coast, of which Rimini is the chief resort,
        has wide sandy beaches, at some points stretching 300 m (1,000 ft) from
        the waters edge back to the dunes. Its lively hotels, beach clubs, and
        myriad discos make Rimini a favorite playground for the sun-seekers
        (Germans, Scandinavians, and Eastern Europeans arrive in droves) while
        in off-season months it is considerably more sleepy.
        Inland, on the other side of the railway, is the old city
        that was Ariminium to the Romans. The 27 b.c. triumphal arch (Arco
        dAugusto), anachronistically ornamented with medieval battlements,
        stands at the junction of the imperial highways from ancient Rome: Via
        Flaminia and Via Emilia (which gave the region its name). The Ponte di
        Tiberio bridge built over the Marecchia river in a.d. 21 is still in
        use. The unfinished 15th-century Tempio Malatestiano is an important
        Renaissance design of Leon Battista Alberti, incorporating elements of
        the Arco dAugusto in the façade. More pagan temple than church, it
        served as a mausoleum for the cultivated but cruel tyrant, Sigismondo
        Malatesta, and his mistress (later wife), Isotta degli Atti.
        To the south of Rimini are the resorts of Riccione, very
        popular, and the quieter Cattolica. Cesenatico, to the north, has a
        colorful fishing port.
        Ravenna
        For those who find it difficult to appreciate mosaics as
        we usually see them, in fading indecipherable fragments, the
        beautifully preserved mosaic decoration of Ravennas churches, up to
        1,500 years old, come as an exciting revelation. They stand at the
        summit of the art as originally practiced by the Byzantines, and are
        said to be the finest in Europe.
        Now some 10 km (6 miles) from the sea, the ancient capital
        of the Western Roman Empire was once a flourishing port on the Adriatic
        facing the Greek world. Honorius, last emperor of Rome, made it his
        capital in 404, followed by his sister Galla Placidia who ruled as
        lavishly. Ruled in the early sixth century by Theodoric, king of the
        Ostrogoths, it was recaptured for Emperor Justinian in 540, and
        Byzantine culture left its mark for another two centuries.
        Youll see something of the towns Venetian-dominated era
        on the graceful Piazza del Popolo, bordered by the 17th-century Palazzo
        Comunale — Venetian insignia on the piazzas two columns have been
        replaced by local saints Apollinaris and Vitalis. Next to the church of
        San Francesco, in a building of 1780, is the tomb of Dante, who died
        here, in exile, in 1321, with a fellow poets epitaph: Here I lie
        buried, Dante, exiled from my birthplace, son of Florence, that
        loveless mother. 
        The oldest most striking of the Byzantine monuments, in
        the northern corner of the city center, is the fifth-century Mausoleum
        of Galla Placidia. Three sarcophagi stand in the cross-shaped chapel,
        but no one knows if her remains (she died in 450) are in one of them
        (her husband and son should fill the others). The deep blue, gold, and
        crimson mosaics on the vaults and arches depict St. Laurence, the
        Apostles, and the Good Shepherd Feeding His Sheep (over the
        entrance).
        In the same grounds is the magnificent three-story brick
        basilica of San Vitale, consecrated in 547. Its narthex is set at an
        angle to the main entrance (through a Renaissance porch). The octagonal
        construction provides the interior with seven exedrae, or recesses, the
        eighth being the choir and apse. The Old Testament scenes, such as
        Abraham Sacrificing Isaac, are more lively than the rigidly formal
        Emperor Justinian and Empress Theodora, with their court retinue, and
        Christ between two angels, St. Vitalis, and, far right, Bishop
        Ecclesius holding a model of the church. The cloisters house a National
        Museum of Roman, early Christian, and Byzantine Sculpture.
        You can see the art of mosaics still being practised in
        workshops along the nearby Via Giuliano Argentario.
        Next to the present-day 19th-century cathedral, the
        fourth-century Battistero Neoniano (Baptistery of Bishop Neon) has a
        fine mosaic procession of the Apostles. It was built as the baptistery
        for the original cathedral that no longer stands.
        East of the city center, the early sixth-century church of
        Sant­Apollinare Nuovo was built by the Christianized Ostrogoth king
        Theodoric. In the nave, the churchs famous Byzantine mosaics show, on
        the left, Ravennas fortified port of Classis, from which a procession
        of 22 virgins follows the three Magi with gifts for Jesus on his
        mothers lap; on the right, from Theodorics palace, 26 male martyrs
        march towards Christ.
        Five km (3 miles) south of the town, protected only by a
        couple of cypresses from an incongruous wilderness of highways and
        bleak urban development, stands the lovely church of SantApollinare in
        Classe (549). Next to it is a splendid cylindrical 11th-century
        Romanesque campanile. In the apse of the Greek-columned interior is a
        delightful mosaic of St. Apollinaris, Ravennas first martyr and
        bishop, surrounded by 12 sheep representing the Apostles, with Moses
        and Elijah in the clouds above him.
        Bologna
        The capital of Emilia-Romagna is a thriving town with a
        certain patrician atmosphere to its beautifully-preserved historic
        center lined by loggias or arcade-covered sidewalks, 21 miles of them.
        It is famous as the home of Europes oldest university, established in
        the 10th century on the foundation of a renowned law school dating back
        even earlier to the 5th century, the end of the Roman empire. Bologna
        also boasts of the diploma its Philharmonic Academy gave Mozart in
        1770 — though he might have done quite well without it. The towns
        revered age-old place in Italian gastronomy compares to that of Lyon in
        France.
        On the west flank of the handsome Piazza Maggiore, the
        massive medieval Palazzo Comunale with its Renaissance porch is a
        striking expression of Bolognas civic power. The 14th-century basilica
        of San Petronio ranks among the most imposing of Italys Gothic
        churches. It has a fine central portal with reliefs of Old Testament
        scenes on its pilasters sculpted with great dignity and power by
        Siena-born master Jacopo della Quercia. Adams pose in the Creation
        scene (top left) inspired the Michelangelo figure reaching out to God
        on the Sistine Chapel ceiling. The soaring vaults of the sober interior
        have the monumentality of French or German Gothic.
        In the adjoining square, the 16th-century Neptune Fountain
        is one of the towns most popular symbols, for which Giambologna
        sculpted the bronze sea god surrounded by nymphs and cherubs.
        A medieval atmosphere clings to the old houses in the tiny
        streets behind the Metropolitana cathedral to the north. At the end of
        the Via Rizzoli, the two leaning towers are all that remain of a whole
        forest of more than 200 medieval status-symbols — like those of San
        Gimignano in Tuscany (see page 101). The Torre degli Asinelli, 98 m
        (320 ft), is the taller, with 498 steps to its rooftop view. Built in
        1109, it leans more than 2 meters (7 1/2 ft), less than its twin, Torre
        Giselda, that leans 3 m (10 ft).
        Youll find the citys characteristic arcaded palazzi
        along the Via Zamboni leading past the university to the Pinacoteca
        Nazionale. The Pinacotecas fine collection is devoted in large part to
        the Bologna school, most notably the Baroque paintings of Guido Reni,
        and the Carracci family, of whom Annibale was the most gifted — see his
        Annunciation and Madonna in Glory. Look out for Raphaels very
        important Ecstasy of St. Cecilia, a highlight of the museum, and
        Parmigianinos Madonna di Santa Margherita.
        South of the city center, the founder of the Dominican
        order is buried in the church of San Domenico, 13th-century but with
        many 18th-century Baroque modifications. The monks marble tomb (Arca
        di San Domenico, 6th chapel, right aisle) is one of Bolognas
        treasures. Although the monk died in Bologna in 1221, the tomb was
        designed much later by Nicola Pisano with additional works by Nicolò
        dellArca and the 20-year-old Michelangelo. He did the saints Petronius
        and Proculus, and the angel on the right — the first and last time he
        ever put wings on an angel.
        Ferrara
        A mere half-hours drive from Bologna on the autostrada
        takes you to this stronghold of the high-living dEste
        dukes — archetypal scheming, murderous, lovable Renaissance villains
        who ruled from 1200 to 1600. In their formidable Castello Estense, a
        14th-century moated fortress that is this lovely towns centerpiece,
        guides tell delightfully dubious stories of what went on in the damp
        dungeons.
        You get a sense of the dukes grandeur among the
        Renaissance palazzi of the Corso Ercole I dEste, part of a
        15th-century urban expansion, Addizione Erculea, that was one of the
        most ambitious pieces of town planning of its age. The dEstes Palazzo
        dei Diamanti (9,000 pointed pieces of diamond-shaped marble on its
        walls) houses the Pinacoteca Nazionale, with notable works of the
        Ferrara masters Cosmè Tura, Ercole de Roberti, Garofalo, and Dosso
        Dossi.
        The triple-gabled 12th-century cathedral still has its
        loggia of shops attached to the south wall. The cathedral museum
        exhibits two major works by Ferraras 15th-century master Cosmè Tura,
        St. George and the Annunciation, and sculptures by Jacopo della
        Quercia, Madonna of the Pomegranate and St. Maurelius.
        Parma
        The home of two famous painters, Correggio and
        Parmigianino, and birthplace of the conductor Arturo Toscanini, has
        much more to offer than just great cheese and ham. The Piazza del Duomo
        forms a harmonious space for the graceful octagonal baptistery, begun
        in 1196, and the austere nobility of the 12th-century Romanesque
        cathedral and its 13th-century campanile. Inside, on the ceiling of the
        central octagonal dome, are Correggios greatest masterpieces, his
        frescoes of the Assumption of the Virgin (1530) where he achieved, in
        the truest sense, exalting emotion without the sentimentality of
        Mannerist imitators.
        The lovely 13th-century pink Verona marble baptistery has
        superbly sculpted doors by Benedetto Antelami, who also carved most of
        the 12 statues of the months in the interior.
        Behind the cathedral, the 16th-century Renaissance church
        of San Giovanni Evangelista also has in its dome a fine Correggio
        fresco of the Vision of St. John on Patmos. Look for the Parmigianino
        frescoes in the first, second, and fourth chapels on the left aisle. In
        the 16th-century Renaissance church of Madonna della Steccata (Via
        Garibaldi), Parmigianino painted the frescoes of the Foolish and Wise
        Virgins on the arch above the high altar.
        In the charming Camera di San Paolo (Via Melloni), youll
        find the Benedictine convents private dining room for the highly
        unconventional abbess, Giovanna da Piacenza. She commissioned Correggio
        to decorate it in 1519 (his first work) with mischievous putti angels
        and a very pagan view of Chastity as symbolized by the goddess
        Diana.
        The Galleria Nazionale (on Piazzale Marconi) exhibits more
        excellent works of Correggio and Parmigianino, and an added prize of
        the collection, the sketch of a young girl, Testa di Fanciulla, by
        Leonardo da Vinci.
        THE NORTHWEST
        Lombardy, Piedmont, and the Ligurian coast make up the
        countrys most prosperous region. Industry and commerce have made the
        fortune of its three great cities — Milan, Turin, and Genoa. If the
        latter has drawn on the riches of the seas, Milan and Turin, in close
        contact with France and Germany just across the Alps, have had the
        added underpinning of a flourishing agriculture in their Po valley
        hinterland. The early lords of this constant economic expansion also
        called on the greatest artists both from Italy and beyond, from
        Leonardo da Vinci to Jan Van Eyck.
        The region has won world recognition in the vanguard in
        the arts, of modern design of clothes and furniture, and of the
        automobile and communications industries.
        For relaxation, the Italian Riviera east and west of Genoa
        alternates a rugged coastli ne with the occasional fine sandy beach.
        Hugging the slopes of Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco), Courmayeur is Italys
        oldest, and one of its most stylish, ski resorts. North and east of
        Milan are the romantic lakes Como, Maggiore, and Garda.
        Milan
        Quite happy to leave the embroiled politics of national
        government to Rome, Milan prides itself on being the countrys
        economic, cultural, and design-conscious capital. Despite its
        prestigious museums, excellent restaurants and shopping, and
        magnificent Gothic cathedral, tourists do not think of Milan as an
        obvious holiday destination (though some do make the pilgrimage just
        for Leonardo da Vincis Last Supper). But anyone interested in
        contemporary Italian life will want to experience its cafés and clubs,
        elegant shopping avenues, and side-street art galleries. If the main
        railway station is an overwhelming homage to Mussolini and fascist
        design (1925–1931), the Pirelli skyscraper, opposite, (Italys first),
        is a more graceful symbol of the new era. With its vivacious residents,
        ­fashionable, self-assured and sophisticated — this is modern
        Italy.
        Around the Duomo
        Nowhere does a cathedral more distinctly dominate a major
        city center. Almost non-stop throughout the day, but especially at that
        magic moment of the passeggiata, the Piazza del Duomo is one of the
        liveliest squares in all of Europe. People gather around the cafés,
        kiosks, and shopping arcades, the young on their cell phones confirming
        evening plans, the pensionati talking football (soccer) and
        politics.
        And all in the shadow of the Duomo, most grandiose of
        Italys Flamboyant Gothic cathedrals. Teams of Italian, French,
        Flemish, and German architects and sculptors contributed to this
        astonishing cathedral, begun in 1386 by the ruling Visconti family. For
        the best view of that awesomely rich façade, finished in 1813, and
        bristling silhouette of marble pinnacles and statues, stand in the
        courtyard of the Palazzo Reale south of the cathedral. (It houses the
        Cathedral Museum, which displays fine examples of Gothic sculpture from
        the façade. ) The cathedrals interior is a vast and noble space
        divided by 52 columns, showing its North European influence in the
        soaring columns and a decoration of stained-glass windows, from the
        15th century to the present day.
        Give yourself plenty of time for a spectacular walk out on
        the roof. The elevator entrance (clearly signposted outside the
        cathedral) is in the right transept. Wander high above the city turmoil
        under the flying buttresses and around the statues (2,245 in all) and
        forest of pinnacles (135), up to the roof-ridge for an unbeatable view
        of the city. To go down, take the staircase (158 steps) for some
        fascinating close-ups of the cathedrals construction.
        Leading north from the Piazza del Duomo, the huge
        cross-shaped shopping arcade of the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele is a
        splendid steel and glass monument to the expansive commercial spirit of
        the 19th century, and a prototype of todays shopping mall. Cafés,
        restaurants, bookshops, and boutiques are showcased in its unabashed
        neo-Renaissance décor. The Galleria provides a sheltered, much
        trafficked pedestrian passage from the Duomo to another holy entity,
        the revered 18th-century La Scala theater, high temple of opera. Even
        if you cant be there for an opera (opening with a gala to end all
        galas every sacrosanct December 7), attend a concert or dance
        performance there or at least visit the little museum (left of the
        theater), if only for a chance to see a strand of Mozarts hair,
        Toscaninis baton, or a peak into the sumptuous Neoclassical auditorium
        with its six tiers of balconies and galleries.
        Milans most prestigious retail thoroughfare is Via Monte
        Napoleone, an august parade of Neoclassical palazzi and luxury shops. A
        grid of narrow side streets such as Via Borgospesso, Via SantAndrea,
        Via della Spiga and Via Bagutta take you into a more tranquil
        18th-century world, now graced by the overflow of Montenapoleones
        high-fashion stores, art galleries, antique shops, and the towns
        smartest trattorie.
        Around Castello Sforzesco
        The massive brick fortress, the Castello Sforzesco,
        northwest of the city center, was originally built by the Visconti and
        later rebuilt in its present form in the 15th century by Duke Francesco
        Sforza. The bulk of the solid square structure stands around a vast
        courtyard, Piazza dArmiles. Beyond, in the handsome old residential
        quarters of the Corte Ducale, is the entrance to the Castello Sforzesco
        Musei Civici, a series of small art museums, devoted to sculpture,
        painting (Pinacoteca), ceramics, furniture, and archaeology. In
        collections that include important works by Giovanni Bellini, Mantegna,
        Titian, Correggio, and Tintoretto, pride of place — and a room to
        itself — goes to Michelangelos last work, the unfinished Rondanini
        Pietà (1564). Working on it until six days before his death, the
        sculptor chiselled a pathetic Mary struggling to hold up the dead
        Jesus, a strange throwback to medieval sculpture for his last tussle
        with recalcitrant stone.
        Even without Leonardo da Vincis masterpiece in the
        adjoining refectory, the church of Santa Maria delle Grazie (Via
        Caradosso, southwest of the Castello) would be worth a visit as a jewel
        of Renaissance architecture. Adding to an earlier Gothic design, Donato
        Bramante — Pope Julius IIs chief architect in Rome — fashioned a
        magnificent red brick and white stone chancel (tribuna) in 1492. The
        graceful lines of the rectangular choir and 16-sided cupola are best
        viewed from the little cloister that he built on the north side. Inside
        the church, stand in the choir to appreciate the majesty of the
        dome.
        Leonardo da Vincis Last Supper (Cenacolo) has been
        lovingly resuscitated in the little Dominican refectory to the left of
        the church. The completion in 2001 of a laborious 20-year restoration
        helped remove centuries of deterioration and clumsy restoration since
        it was completed in 1497. More than ever, it unveiled the enormous
        psychological impact in Leonardos depiction of the trauma for each of
        the disciples when Jesus declares: One of you will betray me.  As a
        result of the painstaking centimeter-by-centimeter recovery of the
        fragmentary but still powerful traces of the real Leonardo, we can
        now see, for example, that Philip (third to the right) has an
        expression of acute grief rather than the simpering pathos left by
        restorers who presumed to improve on the original.
        For another aspect of Leonardo da Vincis talents, visit
        the Science Museum (Museo della Scienza e della Tecnica) housed in a
        former Benedictine monastery on the nearby Via San Vittore. Among the
        rooms devoted to the history of science and technology, one gallery is
        reserved for Leonardos inventions, displayed as models constructed
        from his notebooks. Youll see his aircraft, a machine for making
        screws, hydraulic timber-cutter, revolving bridge, various
        machine-tools, and a system of map-­making by aerial views — created
        long before any aircraft, even his, was operational.
        At the eastern end of Via San Vittore, beyond a noble
        atrium courtyard, the church of Sant Ambrogio is the citys most
        revered sanctuary, built from the ninth to the 12th centuries. It
        stands on a foundation that dates back to the time of St. Ambrose
        (340–397), first bishop of Milan and one of the Churchs four founding
        fathers with Peter, Paul, and Jerome; his remains are on view in the
        crypt. Its sober five-bayed façade set the golden standard for the
        Lombard Romanesque style, flanked by a ninth-century campanile and
        taller 12th-century tower topped by a modern loggia. In the interior,
        left of the center nave, notice an 11th-century pulpit standing on a
        Christian sarcophagus of the Roman era. Under the canopy carved with
        Romanesque-Byzantine reliefs is the high altar, richly encased in
        elaborate, bejeweled, and enamelled plates of gold and silver.
        The Brera and Other Museums
        The handsome 17th-century palace of the Jesuits is now the
        Pinacoteca di Brera, one of the countrys foremost art museums of
        medieval and Renaissance art, concentrating on the master artists of
        northern Italy. In its fine arcaded courtyard, notice a bronze statue
        of Napoleon, who was responsible for turning the Brera into a national
        gallery with confiscations from the Church and recalcitrant nobles.
        Among the highlights: two paintings by Giovanni Bellini of
        the Madonna and Child and a highly personal Pietà; Veroneses Jesus in
        the Garden; Tintorettos dramatic Discovery of St. Marks Body; and an
        impressive Christ at the Column by Donato Bramante.
        Mantegna has a touching Madonna, but his true masterpiece
        here is the Dead Christ, achieving a gripping emotional effect with its
        foreshortened perspective. Piero della Francescas celebrated
        Montefeltro Altarpiece (1474) is his last work. Raphaels stately
        Betrothal of the Virgin contrasts with the earthier inspiration of
        Caravaggios Supper at Emmaus.
        Note the gentle beauty of Correggios Nativity and
        Adoration of the Magi. The non-Italian artists include El Greco,
        Rubens, Van Dyck, and Rembrandt. In the modern collection, look out for
        Modigliani, Boccioni, de Chirico, Carrà, and de Pisis. Enjoy the Brera
        neighborhood, Milans Greenwich Village, after your museum visit; it
        has been regentrified in the last decades and now offers cutting-edge
        quaintness in its trendy boutiques, stylish cafés and reputed art
        galleries.
        The Biblioteca Ambrosiana (Piazza Pio XI) has reopened in
        the newly restored 17th-century palace and library of Cardinal Federigo
        Borromeo. Its principal treasure, though of contested provenance, is
        Leonardo da Vincis luminous Portrait of a Musician (1485), unfinished
        but at the same time the best preserved of the masters few surviving
        works. You can see his pervasive influence on Milanese artists in the
        decorative paintings of Bernardino Luini and a fine Portrait of a Young
        Woman by Ambrogio de Predis. Caravaggios only still life, Bowl of
        Fruit, is here. Travelers on their way to or from Rome will be
        especially interested in Raphaels cartoons (preparatory drawings) for
        his School of Athens fresco in the Vatican.
        The Poldi-Pezzoli Museum (Via Manzoni 12) is a small,
        formerly private collection displayed in the charming ambience of its
        original home dedicated to the city in 1881. The prize pieces of this
        stunning collection include Piero della Francescas San Nicola da
        Tolentino, Mantegnas Madonna and Child, a Botticelli Madonna, and
        Antonio Pollaiuolos lovely Portrait of a Young Woman.
        Lombardy
        The central part of the Po valley is only a fraction of
        the Italian lands conquered by the Lombards when they crossed the Alps
        from eastern Europe in the early Middle Ages. But it proved to be the
        most fruitful, all too tempting to the acquisitive appetites of France,
        Spain, and rival Italian duchies and city-states such as Venice, which
        pushed its Serene Republic as far west as Bergamo. Natural fertility
        was enhanced by Europes most advanced systems of irrigation, still
        operating in the medieval canals that youll see on your way south to
        Pavia. Lombardys rice, wheat, and maize are the basis of the nations
        risotto, pasta, and polenta.
        On a more sentimental note, Italys Lake District at the
        foot of the Lombardy Alps — its major lakes are Como, Garda and
        Maggiore — is the perfect setting for mending broken hearts, breaking
        mended hearts, and all romantic conditions in between.
        Pavia
        The Lombards first capital, before Milan, is now a
        sleepy, well-preserved, redbrick university town. Its principal
        attraction, the spectacular Charterhouse or Certosa di Pavia, is in
        fact some 10 km (6 miles) north of the city, a 30-minute drive from
        Milan. Built by the powerful Gian Galeazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan, as
        his familys burial chapel, the Carthusian monasterys 15th-­century
        church is a high point in the transition from Flamboyant Gothic to
        Renaissance. Even without the originally designed crowning gable, the
        sculpted multi-colored marble façade makes an impact, with statues of
        prophets, saints, and apostles above the medallion reliefs of Roman
        emperors.
        The massive Gothic interior is lightened by the brightly
        colored paving and groin-vaulting. A­mong the chapels which were given
        Baroque finishings in the late 16th century, notice an exquisite
        Perugino altarpiece of God the Father. Right of the triumphant Baroque
        high altar is a beautifully carved 15th-century lavabo (ritual basin)
        and a charming Madonna and Child by Bernardino Luini. In the right
        transept is the Visconti tomb, and a door leading to the lovely small
        cloister of russet terracotta, with a fine view of the churchs
        galleried octagonal tower. Since 1947, Cistercians have taken over from
        the Carthusian monks living in an adjoining cloistered wing, but
        continue to manufacture Certosas well-known Chartreuse liqueur and
        herbal soaps in an adjoining shop.
        Bergamo
        Rising out of the plain of the Po valley on its own steep
        little hill, 47 km (29 miles) east of Milan, the delightful town of
        Bergamo is known as the 16th-century home of the Commedia dellArte.
        Founded by the ancient Romans, the city has a proud soldiering history,
        giving the Venetian Republic a famous condottiere, Bartolomeo Colleoni,
        and the largest contingent in Garibaldis 1,000 Red Shirts. The
        pleasant Città Bassa (lower city) at the foot of the hill is the
        attractive, modern town full of shops, hotels, and restaurants known
        for a savory rendition of risotto they insist is superior to Milans.
        Piazza Matteotti is the hub of the new towns lively café scene, along
        the Sentierone arcades. Opposite is the Teatro Donizetti and a monument
        showing the famous opera composer who was born here in
        1797 — accompanied by the naked lady he is said always to have needed
        for inspiration.
        One of Italys finest, the Galleria dellAccademia Carrara
        has an important Mantegna Madonna and Child and interesting works by
        Lotto (a Venetian master who spent many years living in Bergamo),
        Bellini, Raphael, and Titian as well as foreign masters.
        Venetian ramparts still protect the historic Città Alta
        (Upper City) on the hill, the older section of town linked to the Città
        Bassa by funicular. The gracious Piazza Vecchia is surrounded by
        Renaissance public edifices, notably the Palazzo della Ragione with a
        medieval Torre del Comune. The towns most venerable edifice is the
        12th-century Romanesque basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore. Notice the
        finely carved monumental north porch and slender campanile. The Baroque
        interior has impressive 16th-century tapestries, inlaid wooden choir
        stalls, and beautiful intarsia work at the altar rail. Adjacent to the
        church is the Renaissance Colleoni Chapel, an extravagant mausoleum in
        red, white, and green marble with ceiling frescoes by Tiepolo.
        Lake Garda (Lago di Garda)
        On the lakes west shore, the people of Salò (where
        Gaspare Bertolotti is regarded as the originator of the violin) suggest
        that his design was inspired by the contours of the lake. But Italys
        largest and eastern-most lake is actually shaped more like a banjo, 52
        km (32 miles) from the ruggedly romantic cliffs of the neck down to its
        broad sound box, 18 km (11 miles) across, surrounded by rolling green
        hills and gardens. Graced with vineyards (notably Bardolino), lemon
        trees, olives, and cedars, the lake enjoys mild winters and mellow
        summers.
        At the south end, boat cruises start out from Peschiera,
        Sirmione, and Desenzano, particularly recommended for dramatic views of
        the east shores mountains and the beautiful Punta di San Vigilio, with
        its little church and 16th-century Villa Guarienti. Begin your road
        tour out on the narrow Sirmione promontory. This former fishing village
        and renowned spa resort is the most popular of Gardas towns, and
        affords a splendid view of the lake from the tower of the 13th-century
        moated and turreted castle, the Rocca Scaligera. The drive itself,
        along the winding Gardesana Occidentale, which cuts through the cliffs
        of the west shore, is spectacular. The resort town of Gardone Riviera
        is much appreciated for its parks and botanical gardens and as a base
        for hikes back into the hills. Above the resort, in Gardone di Sopra,
        is a 20th-century folly, Il Vittoriale, the bizarre and disturbing
        hillside residence of Gabriele DAnnunzio — poet, adventurer, fascist.
        He died here in 1936: Melancholy gardens of dark laurel and cypresses
        lead up to a hilltop mausoleum of the writers sarcophagus flanked by
        those of his disciples. It overlooks the prow of a patrol boat that
        DAnnunzio commanded during WWI, the Puglia, hauled up the hillside as
        the crowning piece of his relics.
        Lake Como (Lago di Como)
        Embraced by green wooded escarpments and backed by
        snow-capped Alps, the lake favored by some of Englands most romantic
        19th-century poets — Words­worth, Shelley, and Byron — retains a
        certain wistful atmosphere for the leisure hours of the Milanese (its
        less than an hour from Milan by train or car). As at Garda, a mild
        climate nurtures luxuriant vegetation in the villa gardens and
        parks.
        The lake dramatically divides into two arms on either side
        of the pretty resort town of Bellagio, which juts out on a hilly
        promontory. Up on the heights above the town, the elegant 18th-century
        Villa Serbelloni stands in the middle of a beautiful park of rose
        trees, camelias, magnolias, and pomegranates. Now in the hands of the
        Rockefeller Foundation, its famous gardens can be visited by guided
        tour. Dont confuse the Villa Serbelloni with the luxury lakefront
        hotel of the same name.
        The lakes southwest arm is the most attractive for your
        excursions. From Lezzeno, take a boat cruise to see the colorful
        grottoes, and look for the waterfall at Nesso. Como itself is a large
        factory town famous for its centuries-old silk production, but it has a
        handsome Gothic-Renaissance cathedral crowned by a superb Baroque dome
        that was added in 1744 by Turins great architect, Filippo Juvarra. It
        stands next to the arcaded and half-timbered Broletto, 13th-century
        seat of municipal government.
        The western shores of the lake are lined with gracious
        villas nestling in perfumed gardens. At Cernobbio, the 16th-century
        Villa dEste is now a landmark 5-star hotel, one of Europes most
        special. Come at least for tea or a stroll among the cypresses and
        magnolias. Between the genteel resort towns (and ferry stops) of
        Tremezzo and Cadenabbia, youll find one of the lakes most beautiful
        and famous residences (open to the public), the 18th-century Villa
        Carlotta. Theres a marvelous view of the lake from its terraced
        gardens, much visited for the display of camelias, rhododendrons, and
        azaleas in late April and May.
        Lake Maggiore
        The northern, more blustery end of the lake is in
        Switzerland, but the Italian side shares the other lakes mellow
        climate. The resort towns offer excellent opportunities for relaxation
        and sports on longer stays, but for short visits youll get a better
        idea of the lake aboard a boat cruise (3–4 hours, with a meal on board,
        from Stresa, Baveno, or Pallanza) than by road.
        Stresa is Maggiores principal resort. The lakeside
        promenade, Lungolago, is famous for its flowers and bewitching view of
        the lakes islands. Take the cable car to the peak of the Mottarone at
        1,491 m (4,892 ft) for an exhilarating view of the Lombardy lakes, the
        Alps, and the Po valley. A toll road will also take you there via the
        Giardino Alpinia (Alpine Garden), which displays over 2,000 varieties
        of mountain plants.
        The most popular boat trip from Stresa is to the Borromean
        Islands (Isole Borromee) (the 5-star hotel in Stresa of the same name
        was the setting for Hemingways Farewell to Arms), celebrated for their
        Baroque palazzi and magnificent gardens. They are still the property of
        the Borromeo family that provided Milan with its greatest cardinals.
        The 17th-century palazzo on Isola Bella is decorated with admirable
        paintings by Annibale Carracci, Tiepolo, Zuccarelli, and Giordano. The
        luxuriously planted terraced gardens constitute one of the finest
        ensembles of the Italian formal style. View the lake from the uppermost
        of the ten terraces, by the unicorn statue that is the Borromeo family
        emblem. Isola dei Pescatori (a.k.a. Isola Superiore) is a delightfully
        peaceful fishing village with tiny narrow streets, while Isola Madre,
        farther out in the lake, is the largest and most peaceful of the
        islands. It might pass for deserted, if not for the peacocks and
        pheasants who inhabit the botanical gardens, and the visitors strolling
        amidst the palms and rhododendrons.
        Piedmont (Piemonte)
        As its name suggests, this region of the fertile upper
        basin of the Po river lies in the foothills between the Appenines and
        the Alps at the French and Swiss borders.
        From the fall of the Roman Empire to the 19th century, it
        stood outside the mainstream of Italian history. Its royal House of
        Savoy walked a diplomatic tightrope between the rivalries of France,
        Switzerland, Spain, and the German emperors until the fall of Napoleon.
        The new nationalism led Piedmont into the Italian orbit at the head of
        the Risorgimento unification movement, and the House of Savoy served as
        Italys reigning royal family from 1861 to 1946, with Turin serving
        ever so briefly as the capital of the newly unified Italy in 1861.
        Close links to France have left their mark. A French
        patois-like dialect is still spoken in some hill villages and youll
        notice bilingual street signs in the Aosta Valley (geographically part
        of Piedmont, but administratively separate). For example, Courmayeur,
        the countrys most venerable ski resort, never adopted its more Italian
        name of Cortemaggiore. The classical palaces and squares of Turin,
        Piedmonts royal capital, are in many ways closer in spirit to France
        than the rest of Italy. But whatever Gallic ambience this may have
        created has been thoroughly Italianized by the steady influx of
        workers from the south for the steel, chemical, automobile, and
        communications industries.
        Turin (Torino)
        Best known for its industry, most notably the giant Fiat
        and Pirelli works, the proud Piedmontese capital is far from being a
        dull or dismal factory town. It has retained the grid-like layout of
        its origins as Taurinorum, a Roman castrum. Its rise to prominence in
        the 17th and 18th centuries was accompanied by Italys first coherent
        urban planning; classical and Baroque palaces and monuments give its
        main streets and squares a great dignity and panache augmented by the
        citys economic prosperity.
        The tone is set by the formal elegance of the Piazza
        Castello, dominated by Filippo Juvarras richly articulated Baroque
        façade for the Palazzo Madama. The original medieval castle received
        its new name when transformed in the 17th century into the royal
        residence of Vittorio Amedeo Is widow, nicknamed Madama Reale, a.k.a
        Maria Cristina of France. It now houses the Civic Museum of Ancient Art
        (Museo Civico di Arte Antica) beside a splendid ceremonial staircase,
        also designed by Juvarra. The paintings include Jan Van Eycks
        14th-century miniatures for the Book of Hours of the Duc de Berry,
        Pontormos St. Michael, and a particularly handsome Portrait of a Man
        by Sicilian master Antonello da Messina. On the upper floors are the
        royal collections of furniture, ceramics, and carved ivories.
        Across the square is the former royal chapel, the
        17th-century church of San Lorenzo, designed by Turins other great
        Baroque architect, Fra Guarino Guarini. Philosopher and mathematician
        as well as priest, he has created a marvelously intricate interior
        surrounding the octagonal space with 16 red marble columns. Arches rise
        to hold the central lanterned cupola formed by an 8-pointed star.
        The Royal Palace (Palazzo Reale) was the ornately Baroque
        home of the Savoy princes from the mid-1600s to 1865. After strolling
        through one sumptuous room after another, visit the wing that houses
        the Armory (Armeria Reale), for a look at the important collection of
        Asian and European weapons and armor dating back to Roman and Etruscan
        times. It is one of the most comprehensive of its kind in Italy. Then
        relax a while behind the Palazzo Reale in its Royal Gardens (Giardini
        Reali), designed by Louis XIVs Tuileries and Versailles
        landscape-architect, André Le Nôtre.
        The late 15th-century cathedral (Duomo di San Giovanni)
        cherishes one of Italys most celebrated (and controversial) relics,
        the shroud said to have wrapped Jesus after his descent from the cross,
        taking the imprint of his face and body. Sometimes enshrined in the
        Chapel of the Holy Shroud (Cappella della Santa Sindone), it was
        brought to Turin in the 17th century after a journey 200 years earlier
        from Jerusalem to France via Cyprus. Measuring 4.1 by 1.4 m (13 by 5
        ft), the sheet is kept in an iron-lined silver casket placed in a
        marble urn and tucked away in the Museo della Sidone, and is rarely on
        display to the public (with the recent exception of the Holy Year
        2000). During the occasions that it is on display, it is brought to the
        chapel. Many dispute the modern scientific tests that have proven it to
        be a medieval fabrication, and crowds of faithful and merely curious
        still visit its black marble chapel, a masterpiece of Guarinis High
        Baroque, with its cone-shaped, six-tiered dome formed by a web of
        intersecting arches that rise to a 12-pointed star. It was recently
        restored after a 1997 fire that left the city, and the nation, alarmed
        at how close it came to being completely destroyed.
        The pride of Turin, as in so many Italian cities, is not
        in one monument but in a glorious square, the Piazza San Carlo and
        Piazza Santa Cristina, one of the most beautiful in Europe. The
        17th-century palazzi make an exquisite setting for your late afternoon
        passeggiata along the arcades of shops and cafés, culminating in the
        graceful symmetry of two Baroque churches, Juvarras Santa Cristina and
        its twin, San Carlo. Stretching north and south of the square is the
        towns most elegant shopping street and main axis, Via Roma.
        Northeast of the piazza, in the Palazzo dellAccademia
        delle Scienze, is the Egyptian Museum (Museo Egizio), second in
        importance only to the one in Cairo. The Savoys collection of more
        than 30,000 items is on display, including priceless treasures such as
        the staggering variety of statues of the Pharaohs of the period around
        1500 b.c. Smaller artifacts of everyday life are just as
        fascinating — combs, clothes, kitchen utensils, even food found in a
        well-preserved 14th-century b.c. tomb.
        Pace your stamina for the second floors excellent
        Galleria Sabauda (Savoy Gallery), with an important collection of
        Italian and European art, also due to the Savoys penchant for
        collecting. The Italian works include a Fra Angelico Virgin and Child,
        Vero­neses Supper at Simons House, and Pollaiuolos Tobias and the
        Archangel. But the Savoys also favored the Flemish, Dutch, and Northern
        European paintings, making this collection one of Italys richest. It
        includes Jan Van Eycks St. Francis Receiving the Stigmata and works by
        Roger Van Der Weyden, Van Dyck, Rembrandt, Hans Memling, and François
        Clouet.
        One of the citys more bizarre monuments is the Mole
        Antonelliana, with its swordfish-like 167-m- (547-ft-) high granite
        spire, named after its engineer designer Alessandro Antonelli. Planned
        originally in 1863 as a synagogue and for many years the worlds
        tallest building, its now a beloved city icon used for exhibitions and
        elevator trips to its panoramic terrace.
        Automobile buffs from all over the world come to check out
        the Italian designing talents of Fiat, Alfa Romeo, Bugatti, and Ferrari
        (but also Benz, Peugeot, and Ford) celebrated out at the Museo
        dellAutomobile (Corso Unità dItalia, 40), south of the city center
        beside the Po river.
        Take the pretty excursion up on a hill across the river to
        Sassi, 10 km (6 miles) east of Turin, to see Juvarras Baroque
        masterpiece, the splendid domed Basilica di Superga completed in 1731
        and the hilltop view of Turin, the Alps, and the Po Plain. It is
        something of a pantheon for the House of Savoy, buried in the
        basilicas Crypt of Kings.
        Courmayeur
        The 4,810-m (15,781-ft) peak of Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco)
        may be in France, but the Italian side of the mountain gets the better
        weather. The Aosta Valleys Courmayeur is as pleasant a base for
        hiking — and more strenuous mountain-climbing — in summer as it is for
        skiing in winter. This is Italys oldest ski resort and an Alpine
        Museum traces its history in the Casa delle Guide (Maison des Guides).
        With fine hotels and fashionable boutiques, Courmayeurs lost innocence
        is easily captured in Entrèves, its quiet, little-sister neighbor 3 km
        (2 miles) to the north.
        One of the most spectacular excursions in the whole
        country is the dramatic cable car ride from La Palud, north of
        Courmayeur, to the Colle del Gigante, 3,354 m (11,004 ft) and Aiguille
        du Midi, 3,842 m (12,606 ft) down to Chamonix in France. Youll have
        breathtaking views across to the peak of Mont Blanc and the whole roof
        of the western Alps. (The Aiguille cable car station is across the
        French border, so take your passport if you care to descend at any
        point on French soil. )
        Italian Riviera
        The Ligurian coast that holidaymakers have dubbed the
        Italian Riviera has an ancient history of piracy and commerce, not
        always easily distinguishable. The great port city of Genoa made the
        Mediterranean more or less safe for respectable traders, and the rest
        of the coast settled down to some quiet fishing, sailing, and harmless
        traffic in postcards and suntan lotion.
        The picturesque, more rugged coast east of Genoa is known
        as the Riviera di Levante (Riviera of the Rising Sun), while the coast
        west to the French border at Ventimiglia is the Riviera di Ponente
        (Riviera of the Setting Sun), better known for the sandy beaches of its
        family resorts.
        Genoa (Genova)
        Hemmed in between the Apennine mountains and the sea, for
        centuries Genoa tended, like historic rival Venice on the east coast,
        to turn its back on Italy and seek its fortune on the high seas. This
        may account for a cool reserve, almost aloofness, that some read even
        into the architecture of the tall houses in the straight and narrow
        streets behind the port.
        With 28 km (17 miles) of docks, Italys biggest port
        remains the key to the citys identity. As an important maritime center
        for the Roman Empire, Genoa would later be put on the map of sea-faring
        annals forever as the birthplace of Christopher Columbus. The
        quincentennial anniversary celebrating his 1492 voyage saw the citys
        historical port undergo a face-lift, and the addition of the Aquarium,
        the largest in Europe, a must-see for visitors with children.
        The main shopping street of this little-visited city is
        Via XX Settembre west of the Piazza De Ferrari that constitutes the
        citys bustling modern center, where the citys historic quarters
        begin. Piazza San Matteo was the medieval home of the august Doria
        family, navigators and merchants who helped build the citys great
        commercial empire. Their arcade houses, with gray-and-white striped
        façades (numbers 15–17) were built from the 13th to 15th century. The
        Romanesque-Gothic church of San Matteo has the same gray-and-white
        façade. In the crypt, youll find the tomb of Andrea Doria, great
        16th-century admiral who took Genoa into the Spanish camp against the
        French and became the citys virtual dictator.
        The Renaissance and Baroque palaces of the Via Garibaldi
        are a unique testimony to the towns historic prosperity, many of them
        now banks or museums. The Palazzo Bianco (number 11) makes a handsome
        setting for Genoas most important art collection, mostly the work of
        Genoese painters: Cambiaso, Strozzi, and Magnasco, as well as works by
        Pontormo and Palma il Vecchio, and the Flemish school —  Rubens, Gérard
        David, and Van Dyck. The 17th-century Baroque Palaz­zo Rosso (number
        18), taking its name from the red façade, displays works by Veronese,
        Titian, Caravaggio, Dürer, Rubens, and Van Dyck.
        Not only did his home town not finance his crazy trip to
        America, but Genoa still has no decent monument to Christopher
        Columbus. The closest reference youll find is on a ramp leading to the
        Port a Soprana, a medieval turreted gate on Piazza Dante, where there
        is an obscure plaque indicating the house of the discoverers
        father.
        Riviera Resorts
        Along the mostly rugged Riviera di Levante east of Genoa,
        by far the prettiest spot is tiny Portofino, seemingly more fishing and
        sailing harbor than resort, but look and youll find some fine hotels
        and private villas back in the forest-covered hills. From the
        colorfully painted houses clustered around the postage stamp-sized
        harbor, avoid the crowds of day-trippers by setting out on a paved
        cliff walk. Pass the yellow-painted church of San Giorgio to the
        lighthouse (faro) at the end of the government-protected Promontory
        Monte Portofino for a superb view along the coast. The cliffs are
        clothed in a profusion of exotic vegetation, with occasional glimpses
        of private homes framed by cypresses, palm trees, and cascades of
        bougainvillaea. Boat excursions will take you to other beautifully
        secluded villages, such as the historic monastery of San Fruttuoso,
        reachable only by boat or a 2-hour walk, and delightfully unspoiled
        Camogli. By foot, you can also visit the charming little fishing hamlet
        of San Rocco and take a 40-minute walk over to Punta Chiappa, looking
        out over the whole Riviera. A favorite boat ride from Santa Margherita
        is the cluster of former fishing villages called the Cinque Terre,
        cliff-clinging hamlets hugging a stretch of coastline reminiscent of
        the Mediterranean one hundred years ago. Reachable only by boat until
        recently, they are linked by a network of ancient cliffside mule paths
        that provide some of Italys loveliest treks.
        Santa Margherita Ligure is a lively resort town full of
        cafés, boutiques, good hotels, and a palm-lined waterfront esplanade
        with seafood-serving trattorie. It absorbs the tourism neighboring
        Positano cannot accommodate. The family resort of Sestri Levante has
        fine sandy beaches. Most popular of all, down the coast beyond the
        naval city of La Spezia, are the beaches of Viareggio, favorite Tuscan
        resort, together with its more up-market neighbor, Forte dei Marmi.
        Cool off with an excursion inland to Carrara, where the
        marble quarries provided the raw material for Italys greatest
        achievements, the monuments of the Roman Empire and the Renaissance.
        The town is still full of sculptors, and Piazza Alberica is the scene
        of a summer sculpture competition — 14 days to produce a masterpiece.
        Visit the still active quarries of Fantiscritti and Colonnata. The
        marble that Michelangelo chose for his Moses and Pietà is now hewn, at
        $3,000 a cubic meter, for replicas at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas,
        tombstones in the Los Angeles Forest Lawn cemetery, and countless homes
        of oil-rich sheiks.
        The Riviera di Ponente, west of Genoa toward the French
        border, is an almost continuous chain of family resorts. A faded resort
        of earlier times, dignified San Remo is the best known, with its
        well-heeled casino and elegant promenade along the Corso Imperatrice.
        For time away from the beach, explore the narrow, winding medieval
        streets of the hilltop La Pigna quarter, leading up to the 17th-century
        sanctuary of Madonna della Costa.
        The quieter resort of Bordighera is particularly proud of
        the palm trees along the Lungomare Argentina promenade. Since the 16th
        century, the town has had the exclusive privilege of providing Rome
        with its palm fronds for the Sunday before Easter. Alassio completes
        this coasts trio of major resorts, justifiably proud of its gardens
        nurtured by a particularly mild winter. Take an excursion east to the
        quiet medieval town of Albenga, with its Romanesque-Gothic houses
        around the 11th- to 14th-century cathedral and early Christian
        (fifth-century) baptistery.
        THE SOUTH
        One of the great joys of the south is the extent to which
        it is still virgin land for the majority of Italys visitors. It has
        its perennial favorites: the sister islands of Capri and Ischia in the
        Bay of Naples, the ruins of Pompeii, and the resorts of the singularly
        beautiful Amalfi coast. Otherwise, southern Italy is overlooked by
        tourists almost as much as it has been by the national government since
        the 1871 reunification. Less prosperous than the north, it cannot offer
        the same wealth of modern hotel facilities. Monuments and museums have
        suffered from earthquakes (the last catastrophic one was in Campania
        1980), and civic neglect. But things are slowly improving and the
        compensations for the more venturesome visitor are considerable. The
        chief pleasure of the south, or Mezzogiorno, is the people, who are
        warm-hearted, outgoing, and gregarious.
        Naples (Napoli)
        The very idea of this teeming, undisciplined town once
        intimidated the faint-hearted, but the last decade has seen interesting
        change in this history-rich city of which the enterprising and cheerful
        Neapolitans are justifiably proud. For adventurous travelers looking
        for an introduction to the South, the rewards are rich. Indeed, two of
        Naples museums are among the most important in Europe, but they and
        the piazzas and monuments play second fiddle to the colorful street
        life. In the outdoor theater that is Italy, Naples is unabashed
        melodrama: around the port, the popular quarters of Spaccanapoli, even
        the more bourgeois neighborhoods of Vomero and Posillipo. Youll want
        to spend hours in the restaurants. Naples is where pizza began (the
        region is the nations number one supplier of mozzarella), and
        flavorful home-cooking of fresh ingredients has been raised to an art
        form.
        The cautious tell you not to drive in Naples, where
        one-way signs are meaningless, parking is impossible, traffic is
        relentless, and red and green lights can be purely decorative. They are
        right.
        The face of Naples has been made and remade by its many
        earthquakes, permitting — imposing — transitions from Gothic to
        Renaissance and Baroque. Many of the citys churches, palaces, and
        museums still show signs of ongoing reconstruction and restoration
        after the devastating earthquake of 1980.
        The Port and Spaccanapoli
        Traffic roars down the broad Corso Umberto I to the
        pivotal Piazza Municipio to serve the docks or spin off into the
        commercial district behind Santa Lucia, the teeming historic center of
        Spaccanapoli, or the residential districts of Vomero and Posillipo.
        Towering over the long rectangular square on its south
        side is the massive dry-moated Castel Nuovo. Originally the
        13th-century fortress of Naples French ruler Charles dAnjou, it was
        rebuilt in the 15th century as a palace for the Spanish kings of
        Aragon. Entrance to what is now administrative offices and a communal
        library is between two towers on the west side, away from the harbor,
        through a fine two-story Renaissance triumphal arch crowned by a statue
        of St. Michael.
        Celebrated in song, the old popular harbor district of
        Santa Lucia is now lined with elegant hotels and restaurants, many
        overlooking the formidable medieval Castel dellOvo on its own islet,
        with a handful of outdoor trattorias and cafés that enjoy a unique
        setting. The waterfront walk at sunset offers timeless views of the bay
        and Mount Vesuvius, with the contemporary addition of a gleaming-white
        cruise ship or two. At the workaday zone of Mergellina at the western
        end of the harbor, the fishermen bring their morning catch into Porto
        Sannazaro.
        South of the Piazza Municipio, the Via San Carlo curves
        round to the 19th-century steel-and-glass shopping arcade of Galleria
        Umberto I, opposite the great Neoclassical temple of Neapolitan bel
        canto, the Teatro San Carlo opera house. First built in 1737 and
        rebuilt in 1816, it holds the distinction of once being under the
        musical direction of Gioacchino Rossini (1815–1822) and still
        possessing some of the finest acoustics in Europe. The solemnly
        monumental hemicycle of the Piazza del Plebiscito was laid out by
        Napoleons marshal Joachim Murat, when as King of Naples, he occupied
        the Spaniards Palazzo Reale on the east side of the piazza. The rooms
        are still decorated and furnished with the Baroque pomp of the 17th and
        18th centuries and reconstructed following Allied bomb damage in 1943.
        Its sumptuous royal apartments are the draw, but it also features
        temporary exhibits.
        Leading north from the palace, the Neapolitans favorite
        shopping street of Via Toledo separates the town hall (Municipio) and
        the broad commercial streets going down to the harbor from a
        checkerboard of narrow alleys to the west, a Spanish neighborhood of
        the 16th century that is now a mass of dilapidated working-class
        housing and a great opportunity for watching everyday-life.
        Via Toledo takes you into the citys historic heart,
        Spaccanapoli (around a Roman road that splits Naples into upper and
        lower districts). In an area stretching from the permanently
        traffic-jammed Piazza Dante, between Via San Biagio dei Librai and Via
        Tribunali and over to the Porta Capuana, the popular image of old
        Naples survives. A permanent festival of laundry hangs across the
        narrow streets. Gossip, business, and family arguments fly between
        balconies, while ropes haul up baskets of vegetables, letters, and pet
        cats.
        For a sense of the historic neighborhoods old splendor,
        start on Piazza Gesù Nuovo, with its characteristically extravagant
        Baroque Immacolata column (guglia) in the center. Behind an embossed
        façade, the same architectural exuberance continues inside the Jesuit
        church. But the jewel here, on the south corner of the square, is the
        14th-century Gothic church of Santa Chiara, built for the wife of
        Robert the Wise dAnjou and retrieved from its 18th-century Baroque
        additions and 1943 firebombing. The original rose window and elegant
        porch survive and the French Gothic interior is beautifully restored. A
        number of sculpted tombs include the sculpted tombs of Marie de Valois
        (on the right) and Robert the Wise dAnjou (d. 1343; behind the high
        altar). Next to the church are the lovely 14th-century cloisters
        (Chiostro delle Clarisse), converted in 1742 into a country garden of
        shaded walkways and Capodimonte ceramic tiles — a delightful haven of
        tranquility and one of Naples most charming spots.
        Take the Via Tribunali to the Franciscan church of San
        Lorenzo Maggiore, with its Baroque façade incorporating the
        14th-century marble porch, which was added after the earthquake of
        1731. Inside, the sober French Gothic chancel, exceptional in Naples
        for its ambulatory around the nine chapels, contrasts with the Baroque
        chapel left of the choir.
        The cathedrals three original 14th-century portals are
        somewhat overpowered by the 19th-century neo-Gothic façade. Inside,
        left of the Baroque nave, go down to Naples earliest known Christian
        sanctuary, the fourth-century Ba­si­li­ca of Santa Restituta, in which
        the original Roman columns survived the 1688 earthquake. At the end of
        the right nave is the fifth-century domed baptistery, one of the oldest
        buildings known in Christian Europe with some original mosaics still
        intact. The cathedrals richly Baroque Chapel of San Genaro is the
        highlight, its altar containing two phials of Naples beloved patron
        saints blood. On his much awaited feastday held twice annually (the
        first Sunday of May and 19 September), the blood is said to liquify,
        even boil: When it doesnt, disaster befalls Naples. The last time it
        is said to not have liquified was 1980, the year of the great
        earthquake. Scientists dont have an answer for this one.
        The Museums
        The roguish image of the citys present might make it easy
        to forget the citys glorious past. Luckily, two truly magnificent
        museums preserve the regions treasures from the ravages of earthquake
        and theft.
        Originally a 16th-century cavalry barracks, the
        Archaeological Museum (Museo Archeologico Nazionale) is in no way a dry
        bundle of old bones and stones, but sheer pleasure for anyone even
        remotely interested in southern Italys Greek, Etruscan, and Roman
        past. All visits to Pompeii and Herculaneum should begin or end here,
        since the world-famous collections beautifully display not only the
        paintings and mosaics buried there nearly 2,000 years ago by Mount
        Vesuvius, but a host of other sculptures from the regions villas and
        temples, brought here for safe-keeping.
        The ground floor is devoted to sculpture, including many
        Roman copies of classics from Greeces Golden Age in the fifth century
        b.c. , which are our only access to these lost masterpieces. The most
        famous of these is the Doryphorus (Spear-carrier) of Polycletus, second
        in fame among Greek sculptors only to Phidias. The Emperors Gallery
        includes busts and statues of Julius Caesar, Augustus, Claudius, and
        Caracalla.
        Most popular are the stunning Pompeii mosaics and
        Herculaneum bronzes on the mezzanine floor. The lively secular and
        pagan mosaics from Pompeiis patrician villas make a striking contrast
        with the rigid formality of church mosaics that we see elsewhere in
        Italy. They include Clients Consulting a Sorceress and Strolling
        Musicians, vivid little friezes of an octopus, a cat catching a quail,
        and the huge exciting mural of Alexander driving Darius of Persia from
        the battlefield at Issus in 333 b.c. The paintings here are the best
        preserved of any from Roman antiquity — frescoes in brilliant blues,
        greens, and the inimitable Pompeii reds. The most celebrated is the
        sophisticated portrait of Paquius Proc­ulus and his Wife, depicting an
        interracial marriage. Also look for the elegant Hercules and Telephus
        and four delicate portraits of women, including Artimedes and the
        Flower Gatherer. Opened in 2000, the Gabinetto Segreto (Secret Gallery)
        displays a small but discerning collection of mosaics and paintings,
        many never before seen because of their controversial nature. It can be
        visited by guided tour only, arranged upon the purchase of your ticket
        at the museum entrance.
        The Capodimonte Museum, reopened in 2000, is housed in a
        beautifully restored 18th-century hilltop palace. The grounds offer a
        welcome rest before and after a visit to the rich and handsomely
        re-hung collection of Italian and European paintings.
        Highlights include: Giovanni Bellinis gentle
        Transfiguration of Christ standing serenely between Moses and Elijah;
        Mantegnas Portrait of a Boy; and Michelangelos drawing of Three
        Soldiers for his Vatican fresco of St. Peters Crucifixion. The Titian
        room contains half a dozen of his great works, among them a brilliant
        Pope Paul II with his Farnese Nephews, the artists daughter Lavinia
        Vecellio and Philip II of Spain. The stark realism youll see in
        Caravaggios Flagellation and the Seven Works of Mercy launched a whole
        Neapolitan school of Caravaggeschi displayed here. Most notable among
        the museums non-Italian painters are El Greco, Breughel (Blind Leading
        the Blind and the Misanthrope), Cranach, Holbein, Dürer, and a Van Dyck
        Crucifixion.
        Vomero and Posillipo
        Much of Naples middle class looks out over the city from
        the hilltop Vomero neighborhood in geometrically laid out, treeshaded
        streets respectably named after artists and musicians of the
        Renaissance and Baroque periods: Michelangelo, Giordano, Scarlatti, and
        Cimarosa. On the southeast edge of the Vomero hill just below the
        massive Castel Sant­Elmo, the elegant Baroque Charterhouse Certosa di
        San Martino offers a soothing haven of tranquility in its cloisters and
        monastery gardens — and unbeatable views. The 14th-century church is
        rich in Neapolitan Baroque paintings, notably by Caracciolo, Stanzione,
        and Giordano. The monasterys museum traces the kingdom of Naples long
        history in costumes, sculpture, paintings, and prints. Both children
        and adults adore the Museum of Nativities (Museo di Presepi),
        showcasing four centuries of the unique Neapolitan specialty of
        hand-crafted Nativity characters — an endless cast of angels, animals,
        peasants, shepherds, kings, and their retinue are on display.
        Campania
        The green and fertile region round Naples, between the
        Tyrrhenian coast and the western slopes of the Apennines, was colonized
        by the Etruscans and Greeks. Since time immemorial, the volcanic soil
        has produced a profusion of tomatoes, olives, walnuts, grapes, oranges,
        lemons, and figs.
        The succession of authoritarian rulers from the Middle
        Ages to the 18th century — Norman and Angevin French, German emperors,
        and the Spanish — kept in place a feudal system that has left the
        region to this day socially backward compared with the north. Village
        festivals and processions bear witness to the heavy rural attachment to
        religion and even pagan superstition harking back to ancient times.
        International vacationers have long frequented the idyllic islands in
        the Bay of Naples and the resorts of the Amalfi coast. All are in easy
        reach of Naples museums, the archaeological remains of Pompeii and
        Herculaneum, the Vesuvius volcano, and farther down the coast, the
        Greek temples of Paestum.
        Capri
        Ferries or hydrofoils leave from Naples, Sorrento, and
        Positano (and Amalfi in the summer months only) for this fabled island
        10 sq km (4 sq miles) in size. With its walled, garden-surrounded
        villas, mountainous terrain, and dramatic craggy coast, this
        still-beautiful island manages to cater to the boisterous fun of day
        trippers and package tours while simultaneously providing quiet
        hideaways for the idle rich. Winters here are marvelously mild and
        deserted, but even during the peak summer months you can seek out the
        islands many enchanted corners away from the crowds. Evenings are
        immeasurably calmer, when the local folk venture out to reclaim the
        cafés and restaurants until the cool wee hours, and restore some of the
        charm and seduction for which Capri has been a magnet since the times
        of the ancient Roman emperors.
        Its useless to apply for a special permit to bring your
        car, which is pretty much impossible (and unnecessary) during high
        season anyway. At the main harbor of Capris Marina Grande, take a
        convertible taxi, minibus, or the funicular railway (the most
        practical) up to the main town of Capri. You can rent a taxi for the
        day — not cheap, but negotiable. Here, souvenir shops, pricey boutiques
        and bar/cafés cluster around the pretty 17th-century domed church of
        Santo Stefano in the Piazzetta (officially though infrequently called
        Piazza Umberto I) where the funicular lets you off. Many day trippers
        see little more than this. Escape down the little paved road south of
        town to the peace of the shady Romanesque and Renaissance cloisters of
        the 14th-century Certosa di San Giacomo, or in the direction of Via
        Camerelle that eventually leads to the famous Punta Tragara lookout and
        the Faraglioni. These rocky islets carved into fantastic shapes are a
        symbol of the islands beauty.
        Dominating the western (and larger) side of the island,
        the quieter and only slightly less crowded hillside town of Anacapri
        derives a quasi-sleepy charm from its white villas along narrow lanes
        flowering with bougainvillea. A short walk from the Piazza della
        Vittoria takes you to the island-famous Villa San Michele, home of
        Swedish doctor-writer (and great lover of Capri) Axel Munthe (d. 1949).
        The house is an intriguing mixture of Baroque furniture and Roman
        antiquities, but the main attraction is the charming garden with its
        trellised arches and dramatic overhang with magical views overlooking
        the island and the bay. Back at the piazza, take the seggovia chairlift
        for a soaring view of the whole island and some of the mainland on your
        way up to the terraced gardens and chestnut trees of Monte Solaro, at
        589 m (1,933 ft), Capris highest point.
        The islands most popular excursion — prettiest by boat
        from Marina Grande, but also possible by road northwest of
        Anacapri — is to the celebrated marine cave, the Blue Grotto (Grotta
        Azzurra), most effective (and crowded) at noon. The sun shining through
        the water turns the light inside the cave a brilliant unearthly blue,
        and objects on the white sand seabed gleam like silver. Duck your head
        as the rowboat takes you through the one-m- (3-ft-) high cave entrance.
        The cave, 54 m (177 ft) long, 15 m (49 ft) high, and 30 m (98 ft) wide,
        is believed (because of the man-made niches) to have been a nymphaeum,
        a kind of watery boudoir for the Emperor Tiberius, who retired to Capri
        in the first century a.d. and built a villa directly above.
        Of the dozen villas that Tiberius built on Capri, his
        favorite island retreat, the best preserved is the ruins of Villa Jovis
        (Jupiters Villa, or Tiberius Villa), sprawling across an eastern
        promontory opposite the mainland. But come instead for the spectacular
        view from the 297-m- (974-ft-) high Salto di Tiberio (Tiberius Leap)
        precipice, said to be the last pleasure enjoyed by the emperors
        enemies before they were hurled over the edge.
        Ischia
        Lying at the western end of the Bay of Naples — reached by
        ferry or hydrofoil from Naples and Pozzuoli — the island has won the
        overwhelming favor of German and Scandinavian tourists and package
        tours in the summer, thanks to thermal springs, fine sandy beaches, and
        good facilities for watersports. Casamicciola Terme and Lacco Ameno are
        among the smarter spa resorts.
        One of the best beaches, pockmarked with volcanic steam
        spouts, is the Lido dei Maronti on the south coast near the little
        fishing village of SantAngelo. The island interior has a rich
        vegetation of vines, olive trees, and exotic plants. Nature lovers can
        hike (or rent a donkey) up the extinct volcano of Mount Epomeo, 788 m
        (2,585 ft), starting from Fontana for unforgettable views of the island
        and the Bay of Naples. Far less known internationally than its
        glamorous neighboring island of Capri, it is just as different in its
        volcanic topography as in atmosphere.
        Pompeii
        More than any of the empires colossal arenas, soaring
        aqueducts, or triumphal arches, youll find the everyday reality of
        Roman life in the bakeries, wine shops, groceries, and brothels of
        Pompeii, a town of about 25,000 founded before the 6th century b.c. Mt.
        Vesuvius blotted out the flourishing town along with Herculaneum on 24
        August a.d. 79, burying it under 7 m (23 ft) of ash: It is still being
        slowly excavated. It was rediscovered in 1594 by an architect building
        an aqueduct, but excavation did not begin until 1748 under the
        Bourbons, making a tremendous impact on the rest of Europe.
        The road from the main gate (Porta Marina, the gate that
        led to the sea) passes on the right of the basilica law courts and
        stock exchange to reach the Forum, the center of town and its main
        public meeting place directly facing Mount Vesuvius. Imagine a vast
        square looking originally something like Venices Piazza San Marco,
        with two-story porticoes running along three sides and the six-columned
        Temple to Jupiter flanked by ceremonial arches at the north end. After
        earlier earthquake damage, the temple was used as the Capitolium and
        city treasury. You can still see plinths from the squares statues of
        local and national celebrities and the white base of the orators
        platform. In the northeast corner is the large, originally covered
        market (macellum), while in the southwest corner is the Basilica, the
        largest building in Pompeii.
        On the Via dellAbbondanza running east from the Forum,
        those are ancient, not modern graffiti you find scratched and daubed in
        red on the walls of the houses and shops. Election slogans, insults,
        obscene drawings — the tradition continued today is millennia old.
        Prominent phallus signs often indicate a house of ill repute, with an
        arrow pointing upstairs to where the action was, but sometimes they
        were just a shopkeepers good luck sign. Notice the oil and wine jars
        in the shops, the bakers ovens and flour-grinding mills shaped like
        giant cotton-reels (excavators found a donkey lying by one hed been
        turning when Vesuvius erupted).
        At the Stabian Baths (Thermae Stabianae), Pompeiis
        largest, you can see the separate mens and womens facilities,
        changing rooms, with clothes-locker niches, and three baths: cold,
        lukewarm, and hot (frigidarium, tepidarium, and calidarium). The
        2nd-century b.c. Teatro Grande seated 5,000 spectators. Behind the
        stage was the Gladiators Barracks, where 63 skeletons were found.
        Their weapons and armor, along with Pompeiis more fragile works of
        art, are exhibited at Naples Archaeological Museum (see page 173),
        which is an invaluable adjunct to your visit to Pompeii or
        Herculaneum.
        At the far end of the Via dellAbbondanza, visit two of
        the towns best villas: the House of Loreius Tiburtinus, for its
        beautiful peristyle garden of fountains, water channels, and cascades,
        one of them with paintings of Narcissus and Pyramus and Thisbe; and the
        House of Julia Felix, big enough to have been perhaps a luxury hotel,
        with its own bathhouse and a handsome portico of slender marble columns
        around the peristyle. Just to the south is the great Amphitheater, the
        oldest surviving in Italy, offering a fine view back over the town from
        its upper tiers.
        North of the Forum area are two of Pompeiis most
        important sites. The House of the Vettii was owned by two wealthy
        merchant brothers whose large home is one of the best preserved and
        elaborately decorated. Outside the main site to the north, the Villa of
        Mysteries (Villa dei Misteri) is Pompeiis other most cherished
        artistic treasure. The mysteries are those depicted in a vast fresco
        of a young womans initiation into the cult of Dionysius of Greek
        origin. Archaeologists, still unsure of what was involved, suggest that
        the gorgeously painted scenes of dancing satyrs, flagellation, and a
        woman kneeling before a sacred phallus indicate rites that the town
        preferred to keep at a decorous distance, in this splendid suburban
        villa, most likely the home of a priestess. The brilliant and little
        faded background of intense red to this day is still called Pompeiian
        red. 
        Vesuvius (Vesuvio)
        The old Roman name of Europes most famous volcano means
        Unextinguished — it is the only active volcano in continental Europe
        (with those on the nearby islands of Sicily and Stromboli not to be
        forgotten). In the 1980s, it was 1,281 m (4,203 ft) high, having added
        79 m (259 ft) with the big eruption of 1944 and subsequent smaller
        ones.
        Barring risks from unscheduled activity, you can go as
        far as the 600 m- (1,962 ft-) wide steaming crater. Exploiting the
        fertile volcanic soil, some vineyards still produce the esteemed
        Lacryma Christi white wine. The Eremo Observatory halfway up the
        mountain has been studying eruptions since 1845 and has an impressive
        display of relief plans, seismographs, and geological specimens spewed
        out of the volcano.
        Herculaneum (Ercolano)
        Herculaneum is smaller (only a fraction has been
        recovered) and less renowned than Pompeii, but its very compactness and
        better preservation give a more immediate sense of the shape and
        ambience of a whole Roman town, this one just 7 km (4 1/2 miles) from
        Vesuvius. While Pompeii was incinerated by volcanic cinders, a minimum
        of 20 m (65 ft) of ash and mud swamped Herculaneum, hardening and
        covering the houses in a protective crust that kept upper stories and
        even some of the woodwork intact.
        Rediscovered by well-diggers in the 18th century, the town
        is still being excavated, a delicate business as much of it is covered
        by the modern city of Ercolano. Much of the patrician town of only
        5,000 people was unearthed from 1927 to 1962.
        The entrance off the modern towns Corso Ercolano takes
        you around the archaeological site for a striking view down across the
        ancient town of terraced villas from which wealthy Roman landowners
        looked out to sea towards Ischia on the horizon. The three principal
        streets dividing the town (Cardine III, IV, and V) have curbed
        pavements, lined with two-story houses with balconies and overhanging
        roofs for shade. Most visited, perhaps, are the Baths (Terme), not
        particularly lavish, but in excellent condition, well equipped and
        practically laid out with separate areas for men and women.
        At the southern end of Cardine V, the patrician House of
        the Stags (Casa dei Cervi) is named after its frescoes of two stags
        being attacked by hounds. In one of the spacious rooms off the garden
        is a statue of a shockingly drunken Hercules, alleged founder of the
        ancient town. In the middle of Cardine IV, the House of Charred
        Furniture (Casa del Mobilio Carbonizzato) has a uniquely preserved
        latticed divan bed and small table. Next door, the House of Neptune has
        lost its upstairs façade, but the ground floor wine shop with its
        narrow-necked amphoras on the shelves looks open for business. The
        inner courtyard has a lovely green and blue mosaic of Neptune with his
        wife Amphitrite.
        The grandest of the villas, the House of the Bicentenary
        (excavated 200 years after the first dig in 1738) stands on the
        avenue Decumanus Maximus on the northeast edge of town. It has splendid
        marble paving and, etched in the wall of one of the smaller rooms, a
        controversial cross regarded by some as one of the oldest Christian
        relics, though others insist the emblem was not adopted until the
        conversion of Constantine three centuries later.
        Sorrento and the Amalfi Coast
        The coast curving along the southern arm of the Bay of
        Naples round the Sorrento Peninsula to Salerno is one of the most
        romantic and dramatic drives in Europe. The sinuous white-knuckle
        coastal road and its sheer drop of rugged cliffs and ravines tames even
        the most audacious Italian driver. In olden days, only brigands and
        pirates ventured out here, their ruined redoubts and look-out towers
        still dotting the hillsides and promontories. Now, road-side look-outs
        tempt travelers and aspiring photographers onto jutting crags high
        above terraces of orange and lemon groves, vineyards, walnut, and
        almond trees. Surrounded on three sides by ravines above the sea, the
        pretty tree-shaded resort of Sorrento still retains something of its
        old-fashioned air, and is still the most popular and best logistic base
        for boat and car excursions along the coast and peninsula. Its local
        craftsmen are famous for their inlaid woodwork called intarsia. Compare
        their modern and sadly more commercialized wares with their
        forefathers elaborate Baroque furniture exhibited at the Museo
        Correale, in an 18th-century palazzo at the east end of
        town — Sorrentos only real museum of note.
        Small, fashionable Positano spills down its hillside in a
        spectacular cascade of gleaming, bougainvillea-covered white-washed
        houses dotted with gardens of oranges and lemons and terraces of
        colorful hand-painted tiles. The pebbly beach is lined with canvas
        umbrella-shaded chairs and fishing boats, flanked by the pizzerias and
        restaurants that stay open until all hours. In the little church of
        Santa Maria Assunta, with the regions characteristic majolica-tiled
        dome, see the 13th-century Byzantine-style altar painting. A very
        stylish international crowd keeps its many small hostelries and two
        five-star hotels always full, with a certain cosmopolitan air that
        makes this the areas most upscale barefoot outpost. With only two
        roads to speak of, most travel is by foot up and down its endless
        staircases.
        The second most charming and lively of the coasts
        resorts, Amalfi was once a powerful rival to the maritime republics of
        Pisa and Genoa, with trading posts in the 10th and 11th centuries in
        Palestine, Egypt, Cyprus, Byzantium, and Tunis. Its two destinies come
        together in the Piazza del Duomo, where open-air cafés and ice cream
        parlors look up a long monumental staircase to the Arab-Norman
        campanile and polychrome mosaic façade of the Romanesque cathedral,
        built as a symbol of the republics glory. It was begun in the ninth
        century, with its massive bronze doors crafted in Constantinople and
        added in the 11th century, and the façade added in the 13th, when the
        remains of St. Andrew the Apostle were brought to its crypt from
        Constantinople. The interlacing Arab-Norman arches of the 13th-century
        cloister, Chiostro del Paradiso, make a handsome setting for the summer
        recitals of chamber music. Take a trip to nearby Conca dei Marini to
        visit the stalactites of the Grotta di Smeraldo or Emerald Grotto,
        where the waters are as brilliantly emerald green as those of Capris
        Grotta Azzurra are blue, believed by many to be even more
        beautiful.
        Set back on a high ridge 362 m (1,184 ft) above and behind
        A malfi is the tiny and peaceful (but no longer unknown) village of
        Ravello, once a hideout for Romans fleeing the Huns and Visigoths.
        Today its a delightful resort of both modest and elegant hotels and
        villas, all stunningly situated. Directly off the main square, which is
        anchored by its imposing Romanesque cathedral built in 1076, is the
        Villa Rufolo, with its mysterious polychrome arcaded arabesque
        cloister. Its hanging gardens of exotic flowers and palm trees and
        mesmerizing views were the inspiration for Richard Wagner in 1880 and
        that of his last opera, Parsifal. They are the perfect location for
        outdoor classical concerts that take place during warm weather months.
        Reached by a rambling footpath is the 1904 Villa Cimbrone. Its
        surrounding fragrant gardens also command a marvelous vertigo-inducing
        view of the craggy coastline and cerulean blue of the Gulf of
        Salerno.
        Paestum
        Italy has no more magnificent testimony of its Greek
        colonies than this complex of wonderfully preserved Doric temples, a
        40-minute drive south from Salerno, dating back to the fifth and sixth
        centuries b.c. Standing alone in fields leading to the sea, their
        buff-stone columns take on a wonderful golden glow at sunset. Four
        temples loom over the forum and residential quarters of Poseidonia (as
        it was known before the Roman era), City of Poseidon. After the town
        was abandoned to malaria and Arab invaders in the ninth century, the
        monuments disappeared under wild vegetation until their rediscovery 900
        years later. The most spectacular, directly opposite the entrance to
        the site, is the fifth-century b.c. Temple of Neptune (a.k.a.
        Poseidon). The roof has gone, but with its entablature and 14 fluted
        columns still standing, it is, with Athens Theseion, the best
        preserved of all Greek temples. To the south, the more dilapidated
        Temple of Hera (also known, mistakenly, as the Basilica) is a hundred
        years older and is Paestums oldest, predating Athens Parthenon by one
        hundred years. The northernmost Temple of Ceres was built around 500
        b.c. , and was later used as a church in the early Middle Ages, as
        attested by three Christian tombs.
        Puglia
        Known to many under its Roman name of Apulia, the region
        stretches from the spur of the Gargano peninsula to the heel of
        Italys boot, endowed with a wild and unspoiled beauty over the gently
        undulating stony plateaus grazed by sheep and goats. Massive fortresses
        and fortress-like churches testify to the passage of the Normans and
        then the German emperors in the Middle Ages. In among the groves of
        olive, almond, and fig trees, the stones have been gathered up from
        time immemorial to build the smaller, but equally sturdy, corbelled
        trulli that crop up like so many mushroom clusters dotting the
        countryside. It is an exotically distant holiday destination popular
        with Italians and the occasional German tourist, both incredulous that
        this end-of-the-world piece of Italy is still part of Europe.
        Gargano Peninsula
        The peninsulas seaside resorts have good beaches among
        the pine groves, first-class camping and water-sports facilities, and
        are a base for excursions and hikes into an attractive hinterland of
        rolling hills. The scenic coastal circuit begins (and ends) in
        Manfredonia, with historical attractions such as the 12th-century
        church of Santa Maria di Siponto (southwest of town), but tourism here
        is generally of the sun-and-sea kind, as it is one of Italys most
        attractive natural regions.
        Pugnochiuso is among the best of the beach resorts, along
        with Vieste, where Emperor Frederick II left a castle from which to
        view the Adriatic, and the pretty fishing villages of Peschici and
        Vieste climb up the rocky promontory.
        Go inland through Vico to join the wild deer for picnics
        in the Umbra Forest. Perched on the Gargano heights south of the
        forest, Monte SantAngelo was a major medieval pilgrimage town,
        celebrated for its fifth-century sanctuary of St. Michael in a grotto
        where the archangel appeared to the Bishop of Siponto three times. The
        sanctuary inspired the building of the great French island-monastery of
        Mont-Saint-Michel after Bishop Aubert traveled to Gargano to collect a
        piece of St. Michaels red cloak. From a Gothic portico in the middle
        of town, beside the massive 13th-­century campanile, a staircase of 90
        steps takes you down to the sanctuarys 11th-century bronze doors.
        Notice to the left of the altar the beautifully carved stone episcopal
        throne.
        From the north-coast resort of Rodi Garganico, you can
        take a 90-minute boat trip during the summer months out to the
        pine-tree-covered Tremiti Islands.
        Alberobello
        This agricultural town is the center of Puglias famous
        trulli, the white-washed cone-shaped houses with ruddy or gray
        dry-stone roofs dotting the landscape like giant spinning tops turned
        upside down. The cone is formed by small limestone slabs set in a
        spiral without mortar to bind them. Though the regions oldest
        surviving trulli date back only to the 16th century, the construction
        technique is believed by some to be prehistoric, brought here perhaps
        from Greece or the Middle East.
        It is a joy to wander Alberobellos two neighborhoods of
        trulli whose houses, shops, and even churches — Rioni Monti and Aia
        Piccola — are protected as a zona monumentale. Shopkeepers are happy to
        let you climb up to their roof terraces for a striking view across a
        whole fairytale forest of some one thousand trulli domes. Out in the
        country in and around Locorotondo and Selva di Fasano, youll find
        trulli (and trulli-inspired) farms, barns, grain silos, and even
        filling stations.
        Northwest of Alberobello, a strada panoramica along a
        ridge overlooking the Adriatic coast leads to Castellana Grotte, a
        spectacular cave system 60 m (190 ft) underground. Take a guided tour
        of the translucent stalactites reaching down to fuse with stalagmites
        in glowing columns of red, green, and pink.
        Last but not least is Puglias crown city, Lecce,
        understandably called The Baroque Florence for its plethora of
        16th–18th century palazzos of local and easily sculpted limestone.
        Foremost is the Basilica of the Holy Cross (Santa Croce), the citys
        best example of its Baroque heyday, and the Piazza del Duomo, ringed by
        the rebuilt cathedral and neighboring buildings of similar
        pedigree.
        Sicily (Sicilia)
        The Mediterraneans largest island is in many fascinating
        ways a country to itself, seemingly not part of Italy or Europe at all,
        and if possible, it deserves a separate and unrushed vacation to do it
        justice. However, for anyone who has a few days to spare for a first
        glimpse, we suggest some highlights representative of its many facets:
        the capital Palermo, the ancient Greek settlements, and the pretty
        coastal resort of Taormina.
        Palermo
        This bustling capital deserves the necessary effort to get
        into its colorful past. Cleverly integrating designs of Arab and
        Byzantine predecessors, the Norman palaces and churches join the
        crumbling grandeur of Spanish Baroque façades in momentary triumph over
        the chaos of the modern port city. Its not always an easy city to
        love, but few leave unimpressed.
        The intersection of Via Vittorio Emanuele and Via Maqueda
        is the towns historic center, Quattro Canti (Four Corners), in a
        characteristic setting of two great Baroque churches (San Giuseppe dei
        Teatini and Santa Caterina), the monumental 16th-century Pretoria
        Fountain by a Florentine sculptor, and the piazza of the same name. The
        delightful Piazza Bellini includes the 12th-century church of San
        Cataldo with its three little red domes and Arabic inscriptions. It was
        used for a spell in the 18th century as a post office. It has been
        restored to its bare Moorish beauty. Beside it, the Norman Gothic La
        Martorana church, partly remodeled with a Baroque façade and porch, has
        a fine campanile with four storys of slender mullioned windows. Inside
        the porch, mint 12th-century mosaics show, to the right, Jesus crowning
        Sicilys Norman king, Roger I, and to the left, his admiral, Georges of
        Antioch, at the feet of the Madonna. In the nave are more glittering
        mosaics of Christ Pantocrator (Omnipotent Lord) with angels.
        West along Via Vittorio Eman­uele, the Palace of the
        Normans (Palazzo dei Normanni) was built by the Saracens as a
        ninth-century fortress and later turned into a royal residence,
        appropriate setting for the later brilliance and luxury of Emperor
        Frederick IIs Sicilian court (see page 22). Although the interior is
        temporarily closed to the public, tour buses line up for the jewel of
        the palace (and Palermo), one of Norman architectures greatest
        achievements in Italy, the 12th-century Palatine Chapel (Cappella
        Palatina). The noble Romanesque interior has a magnificent painted
        wooden ceiling with Arabic honeycomb motifs and stalactite pendentives.
        The mosaics of the dome and apse depict Christ Pantocrator with the
        Evangelists and Jesus blessing Peter and Paul; together with those of
        Ravenna, they are Italys finest. The combination of figurative and
        intricate geometric designs was a collaborative effort of Syrian Muslim
        craftsmen with Byzantine Christians. Contact the tourist office to
        determine when the palace reopens.
        The pink-domed church of San Giovanni degli Eremiti (Via
        dei Benedettini) is an intriguing example of 12th-century Arab-Norman
        design. Its exotic character is enhanced by the twin-columned
        13th-century cloister overgrown with tropical plants, orange, lemon,
        and palm trees.
        Housed in a 16th-century monastery, the Archaeological
        Museum (Piazza Olivella) displays superb statues and sculpted metope
        (friezes) from Sicilys various archaeological sites, highlighted by
        those from the Greek temples of Selinunte (600–500 b.c. ), on Sicilys
        south coast.
        Offset the historical with the theatrical, and make a
        visit to Palermos daily Vucciria market (entrance near Via Roma and
        Corso Vittorio Emanuele), an unmissable photo op in what is the most
        famous of the citys daily markets. Vendors sing of their wares
        quality in the local dialect that is a language all its own, in a
        setting that often feels more like north Africa. Sicilys major port
        city offers fresh seafood in shapes and sizes unimagineable, and a
        number of good no-frills trattorias within or near the market promise
        an excellent, inexpensive lunch.
        Monreale
        This hilltop suburb 8 km (5 miles) southwest of Palermo
        boasts Sicilys finest cathedral (12th-century) and one of the best
        medieval mosaic cycles in Europe. Go round to the back of the church to
        see its wonderful russet and brown stone chancel of interlacing arches,
        Gothic rose windows, and Arab windows with pointed arches. In the
        grandiose interior, the luminous 12th- and 13th-century mosaics of the
        nave and apse depict the complete cycle of the Old Testament, replete
        with a 66-ft high Christ Pantocrator with saints, while the aisle
        mosaics narrate the miracles of Jesus. The more warmly-hued human
        figures are believed to be the work of Venetian mosaicists, as opposed
        to the more rigidly formal Byzantine figures of Palermos Palatine
        Chapel.
        As famous as the mosaics are, the cathedrals beautiful
        cloister offers a moment of spiritual meditation along the arcades of
        delicate carved twin chevron-fluted columns and an almost sensual
        pleasure among the exotic flowers and trees and Arab fountain of its
        garden. It is understandably a favorite spot for wedding photos.
        Agrigento
        Although known as the birthplace of the famous dramatist
        Luigi Pirandello (1867–1936), Agrigentos Valley of the Temples (Valle
        dei Templi) is its showpiece attraction, dating back to the fifth
        century b.c. The Temple of Juno, with its sacrificial altar, stands in
        majestic isolation high on a ledge at the eastern end of the Via Sacra.
        But it is the Temple of Concord that is the best preserved Doric temple
        in Sicily (if not the world), thanks to its subsequent use as a church
        in the sixth century a.d. But the golden glow of the temples Doric
        columns and the idyllic setting amid acadia and almond trees on a
        precipice overlooking the Mediterranean are enough to encourage you to
        worship a whole pantheon of Greek gods. Nearby is the oldest of the
        shrines, the Temple of Hercules, 500 b.c. , whose eight 33-ft-high
        columns have been re-erected to give some idea of its magnificence.
        North of Temple Valley, next to the 13th-century Norman
        church of San Nicola, the small but important Archaeological Museum has
        a fine marble statue of Ephebus (fifth century b.c. ), a gigantic
        telamon, a 25-ft sculpted male figure used to hold up a temple roofs
        entablature, and some superb Greek wine vessels.
        Syracuse (Siracusa)
        This east-coast Corinthian settlement, founded in 734 b.c.
        , was the most powerful of Magna Graecias overseas colonies and, under
        Dionysius (405–367 b.c. ), a direct rival to Athens. In its heyday, its
        population was nearly triple the size of todays 118,000. It was here
        in the third century b.c. that the famous mathematician Archimedes is
        said to have proven his water displacement theory in the bath, and then
        run naked into the street crying Eureka (I have it! ).
        Syracuses original settlement was the port island of
        Ortigia, joined by causeway to the mainland. Two pillars surviving from
        the Greek Temple of Apollo stand like a gateway, but the Spanish era
        has given it a charming 17th-century ambience of Baroque houses with
        iron balconies supported by floral carvings and an occasional stone
        nymph. The graceful crescent-shaped Piazza del Duomo is the perfect
        place for breakfast surrounded by 17th- and 18th-century palazzi and
        the monumental façade of the cathedral. The church is in fact a Baroque
        elaboration of the Greeks Temple of Athena (fifth century b.c. ), with
        its columns incorporated into the masonry of the outside walls. On the
        islands west side, the Fontana Aretusa is a freshwater spring (just
        steps from the ocean) with black-and-white ducks swimming in its
        semi-circular papyrus pond.
        The principal excavated site, Zona Archeologica, is
        located on the northwest corner of the modern city. Rebuilt by the
        Romans to hold 15,000 spectators (one of the largest of the ancient
        world), the Greek Theater dates back to the fifth century b.c. when
        Aeschylus himself arrived from his home at Gela to supervise
        productions of his tragedies. A classical drama festival is held here
        in May and June. The nearby Paradise Quarry (Latomia del Paradiso)
        provided the citys building materials and is now a pleasant garden of
        oleander and orange trees. Its popular attraction is the cave called
        Orecchio di Dionisio (Dionysius Ear), dubbed as such by Caravaggio in
        1608 because of its acoustics.
        Syracuses history merits the world-class Museo
        Archeologico Paolo Orsi (Viale Teocrito). It is arguably the best in
        Sicily, an invaluable one-stop crash course in understanding the Greek
        and other ancient cultures of the city and island.
        Taormina
        Sicilys most attractive resort town, already very popular
        in antiquity as a vacation spot for the Greek bourgeoisie from
        Syracuse, commands a splendid ridgetop view of the Mediterranean from
        its hillside villas and hotels. A popular port-of-call for countless
        cruise lines, the international crowds can be avoided for those lucky
        enough to be spending the night (a funivia cable car connects the
        hilltop town with Mazzarò Beach below). No Sicilian passeggiata is more
        celebrated than a promenade on the elegant pedestrian shopping street
        of Corso Umberto and out along the Via Roma, or through the subtropical
        vegetation of the terraced Public Gardens. With postcard panoramas
        south along the coast and to the volcano of Mount Etna to the west, the
        Greek Theater (third century b.c. ) is the only required site in town.
        It provides a uniquely gorgeous setting — if not slightly surreal — for
        the summertime festivals of classical drama, music, and film.
        Excursions further up the mountain take you to two medieval fortresses,
        on foot to Castello di Taormina and, by car along a winding road, to
        Castelmola, for grand views, although the summit of Etna is almost
        always swathed in clouds.
        Mount Etna
        Europes tallest volcano is still very active, as youll
        see from the tell-tale yellow sulphur stains of mini-eruptions as you
        approach the crater, where the lava beneath your feet is still warm.
        The lunarscape-like summit currently stands at 3,350 m (10,990 ft)
        above sea level, but varies according to the eruptions destruction or
        lava deposits. Because of the erratic nature of the eruptions, the
        approach to the central crater can vary from one eruption to the next
        (serious eruptions in 1998 lasted over a period of 8 months). Day
        excursions by bus and special Land Rover that connect with a cable car
        originate in Taormina or Catania. In any case, the last stretch to the
        crater itself is on foot, so take sturdy shoes and warm clothing — its
        cool and windy up there, even in the summer. From October to May, the
        summit is covered in snow and often closed to the public.
      
    
  
