
  
  
    
      
        WHERE TO GO
        France is a large country of infinite variety, so a great
        many factors come into play as you decide which parts to visit. Do you
        want to see historic sights and tour museums and art galleries? Is
        weather important? Do you want to lie on beaches or hike in mountains?
        Are there children who need to be entertained? Do you want to do a lot
        of driving or restrict your trip to destinations easy to reach by
        train?
        To make the geography (if not the choice) simpler, weve
        divided the country into just five regions: Paris and its vicinity
        (known to the French as the Ile-de-France); the Northeast (Picardy,
        Champagne-Ardennes, Lorraine, Alsace, Burgundy, and the Jura); the
        Northwest (Normandy, Brittany, and the Loire Valley); the Southeast
        (Savoie, the Rhone Valley, Provence, the Côte dAzur, and Corsica); and
        the South­west (Berry-Limousin, Périgord, the Atlantic Coast, the
        Pyré­nées, and Languedoc-Roussillon).
        It would be impossible to name every place of interest in a
        guide of this size, so we aim to give you a representative overview of
        the country rather than an encyclopedic listing of must-see sites.
        You will still have plenty to choose from.
        Depending on how much time you have, you may want to combine
        two or three of the regions in order to get a sense of the great
        diversity of French life: Paris and the wine country, the mountains, or
        the Atlantic or Mediterranean coasts.
        The itinerary for a first visit to France is bound to
        include Paris. Ideally, divide your stay — sightseeing in the capital
        at the beginning, spending a leisurely time at a seaside resort or in a
        sunny village in the hills, then shopping in Paris at the end. A
        relaxing vacation, for example, might combine Paris and the
        Ile-de-France with Normandy and Brittany. And for stark contrasts — of
        climate, countryside, cuisine, and temperament — combine the capital
        with Provence or Corsica.
        However, the mix shouldnt just be geographic. Frances
        cathedrals, museums, and palaces deserve your attention, but theyll be
        much easier to appreciate if you alternate them with time at the beach
        or on country walks. And if you feel like being idle, France is full of
        quiet places where its a simple joy to do absolutely nothing.
        Many people do not have the option of going to France
        outside the main holiday periods — Easter, July, and August. But if
        its at all possible, plan your visit for the spring, autumn, or even
        the winter, when the big sightseeing destinations are far less crowded.
        Its best to visit Paris in early summer and autumn, and the island
        church of Mont-Saint-Michel, on the Normandy coast, can be pure magic
        in the mists of December.
        You will also have more opportunity to meet the French
        themselves; in the summer months many Parisians flee the city and the
        whole country is full of foreign visitors. You may find that you spend
        as much time talking to Amer­i­cans, Germans, Scan­di­navians, and
        Britons as to the natives.
        A tip for visiting the big muse­ums in peak seasons: go at
        dinnertime on a late-closing day.
        Getting Around
        Even if youre the kind of traveler who likes to improvise
        and be adventurous, dont turn your nose up at the tourist offices.
        Tourism is a major factor in Frances econ­o­my and every effort is
        made to enhance your visit. Frances office de tourisme in your own
        country and branches in larger towns through­out France can help you
        with information, brochures, lists of hotels and bed and breakfasts,
        names of English-speaking guides, and so forth. Smaller towns will have
        a syndicat dinitiative, which provides the same services. The official
        Maison de la France Web site (<www.franceguide.com>) is also a
        good starting place; the section called Discover the Regions of France
        directs you to local Web sites of tourist offices around France.
        The Handy Travel Tips section at the back of this book
        (page 215) contains detailed practical guidance on the technicalities
        of travel in France, but here are some general thoughts to help you
        plan your trip.
        First of all, how are you going to travel? The excellent
        system of roads and public transport (now enhanced by the Channel
        tunnel) makes the combination of car and train an attractive
        proposition. Take the train for long journeys, and rent a car at your
        destination to explore the back country. Several special rail cards
        include reduced rates for car rentals and even bicycle rentals.
        With the high-speed TGV (train à grande vitesse) from
        Paris, you can make it to Dijon for a visit to the Burgundy vineyards
        in an hour and a half, Lyon in two hours, or to Avignon for a Provençal
        adventure in under three. Services also operate down the west coast to
        Rennes, Bordeaux, and the Pyrénées. The one frequently mentioned
        disappointment of French trains is the relatively uninspired dining-car
        service. Dont despair; make up your own picnic hamper from the local
        market before you get aboard — cold meats, salad, Camembert, grapes,
        baguette, and wine can add a terrific sparkle to the countryside
        flashing past the window.
        For drivers in a hurry, the network of toll autoroutes is
        first class, linking up most of the major cities and still expanding.
        Otherwise, its more fun to explore the country along the good-quality
        secondary roads (routes nationales, with a number preceded by an N).
        Its wise to buy a detailed map of the areas you plan to tour; these
        will also show you the smaller D roads, which are even more
        pleasant.
        French drivers are adventurous and even aggressive, but not
        unskillful. Patient driving is always a good idea, but timidity is not
        helpful in the Paris rush hour. In fact, its wise to drive as little
        as possible inside Paris; the périphérique ringroad runs around the
        city and its worth staying on it until youre as close as possible to
        your destination. The métro (subway) is the fastest way to move around
        the city, but the buses, both in the capital and the other big towns,
        are best for taking in the sights. Unless you feel really safe in
        French metropolitan traffic, keep your cycling — you can rent a bike at
        many railway stations — for the villages and country roads. Even so,
        Paris recently created miles of cycling lanes that crisscross the
        entire city, making bicycling much safer (and more popular).
        If you have plenty of time at your disposal, consider
        renting a sail-it-yourself canal boat or cabin cruiser and drifting
        slowly along the Canal de Bourgogne from Dijon, or the tributaries of
        the Loire, or the Canal du Midi from Toulouse down to the sea at Sète.
        Its great fun helping the keepers open the locks. With a couple of
        bikes on board, you can always explore the countryside as you travel.
        Larger boats for up to 20 people, plus crew, offer organized gourmet
        cruises.
        There is a great variety of places to stay, from luxury
        grand hotels (what the French would call a palace) and converted
        châteaux and abbeys to simple country inns (auberges) and gîtes ruraux
        — often a converted farmhouse where the farmers wife cooks your meal.
        Addi­tional alternatives are house and apartment rentals and camping or
        caravanning.
        However and wherever you choose to travel in France, one
        important piece of advice: even if you cant speak French properly,
        its well worth learning just a few words. The French always appreciate
        that you have made the effort to say Bonjour, Sil vous plaît, or Merci
        beaucoup.
        The French are also a very courteous people. Outside the
        big cities, make a habit of saying an appropriate Bonjour or Au revoir
        when entering or leaving a shop or café. As you stroll around ramparts
        or along the streets of small towns, you will find that the local
        people will acknowledge you with a Madame or Monsieur and a nod of the
        head. Respond in kind and youll soon feel at home.
        Being Berlitz, well try to help you with some of the
        simplest phrases (at the front of the book). The rest is up to you.
        Amusez-vous bien!
        PARIS AND VICINITY
        Paris and its immediate surroundings are a magnet for
        tourists, students, businessmen, artists, inventors — in short,
        everyone except perhaps the farmer and fisherman, who may well come to
        the city to protest government policies. A vibrant city, Paris sets
        tastes and fashions for France and the world.
        For years, ambitious French people saw Paris as the only
        place to make their fortune, and so people from every region of France
        — with every local cuisine to feed them — are represented in the
        metropolis. Renewed pride in Frances provincial cities is reducing
        this trend, but Paris retains its aura of superiority — and its lack of
        a distinctive cuisine.
        Before Paris became the national capital, it was the home
        of the medieval dukes of the region that is still known as the
        Ile-de-France — which, by gradually asserting itself over other duchies
        such as Burgundy and Normandy, imposed its name on the whole country.
        The Paris basin is a treasury of national monuments. Roughly bounded by
        four rivers — the Seine, Oise, Aisne, and Marne — the Ile-de-France was
        the birthplace of the first great Gothic cathedrals, including
        Saint-Denis, Senlis, Chartres, and Beauvais. It was the cradle of the
        French monarchy; its surrounding greenery and dense forests also
        provided good sites for later kings and nobles to build their châteaux,
        away from the troublesome mob of Paris, at Fon­taine­bleau, Chantilly,
        and Versailles.
        All the interesting sights around the capital make for an
        easy day trip by car or local train, enabling you to keep your Paris
        hotel if you wish (although you would probably enjoy a change of scene
        and find the local country inns less expensive).
        Paris
        The city and the people of Paris share a boundless
        self-confidence that exudes from every stone in its monuments and
        museums, bistros and boutiques, from every chestnut tree along its
        avenues and boulevards, from every street musician, mannequin, butcher,
        and baker, from every irate motorist and every charming maître
        dhôtel.
        Youll readily forgive the bombast of some of the
        monumental architecture when you see what makes this the City of Light.
        Stand on the Pont Royal in late afternoon and look down the Seine to
        the glass-paneled Grand Palais, bathed in the pink-and-blue glow of the
        river. This unique light brings a phosphorescence to the most
        commonplace little square or side street. To make sure the message is
        clear, Paris offers golden nighttime illumination of its major
        historical buildings. To celebrate Bastille Day (14 July) or the 1944
        Liberation (25August), blue, white, and red laser beams are bounced off
        the Eiffel Tower, Arc de Triomphe, and Hôtel de Ville.
        The Right Bank still conjures up an image of solid
        bourgeois respectability. Historically the stronghold of merchants and
        royalty, today it remains the home of commerce and government. Faubourg
        Saint-Honoré offers the luxury of jewelry shops and haute couture; the
        Champs-Elysées claims the first-run cinemas, airline companies, and car
        showrooms.
        The Left Bank has, in contrast, always presented a bohemian
        and intellectual image, dating back to the founding of the university
        and monasteries; today, the Sorbonne, the Académie Française, the
        publishing houses, and the myriad bookshops continue to exercise an
        intellectual magnetism.
        An unceasing flow and interchange of citizenry from one
        bank to the other takes place across the bridges of the Seine. But
        despite these migrations, immigrations, social change, and urban
        renovation, time seems to stand still in many Paris neighborhoods.
        Areas may go in and out of fashion but each will remain instantly
        recognizable to the visitor.
        Paris is one of the worlds most densely populated
        capitals. Its non-stop street scene derives from the fact that nearly
        every one of its 20 arrondissements, or districts, has shops, offices,
        and apartments side by side and on top of each other. Get out and
        explore the streets, the open markets, the cafés. You will find that
        each quartier has its own personality, different people to watch, and
        something special to offer.
        The Seine
        The river plays a central role in all visits to Paris. Its
        an excellent focal point, giving new visitors an easy reference to
        establish their location; its a spectacular vantage point for many of
        the citys great landmarks; and its bridges and quays offer history,
        entertainment, shopping… and exercise. Despite the roar of the traffic
        on the voies express, you can take delightful walks along the banks and
        rest quietly on benches beneath poplar and plane trees.
        A guided boat trip will also give an excellent
        introduction, displaying in leisurely fashion — and with informative
        commentary — sites including the Eiffel Tower, the Palais de Chaillot
        and Trocadéro Gardens, the Grand and Petit Palais, the Palais Bourbon,
        the Louvre, Notre-Dame, and of course many of the beautiful
        bridges.
        The Pont-Neuf (neuf means new) is in fact Pariss oldest
        standing bridge, completed by Henri IV in 1606. It consists of two
        spans, straddling the Ile de la Cité, and was initially populated with
        street-singers, charlatans, prostitutes, pickpockets, and above all
        bouquinistes selling old books and pamphlets out of boxes. Established
        booksellers on the island were enraged and drove them off to the banks
        of the Seine, where theyve been ever since.
        The centrally situated Pont Royal, built for Louis XIV in
        1685, commands some splendid panoramas, with the Louvre and the
        Tuileries Gardens on the Right Bank, the Musée dOrsay on the Left, the
        Grand and Petit Palais down­river, and the Palais de lInstitut de
        France, home of the Aca­dé­mie Française, upstream.
        The Pont de la Concorde, truly the bridge of the French
        Rev­o­lu­tion, was erected between 1787 and 1790. Stones from the
        demolished Bastille prison were used for its support structure —
        galling for Royalists, since it had originally been named Pont
        Louis XVI.
        The Pont Alexandre III is undoubtedly the most romantic
        with its Belle Epoque lanterns and melodramatic statues of Fame and
        Pegasus.
        Right Bank
        Etoile–Concorde–Les Halles
        Start at the Place de lEtoile (officially Place
        Charles-de-Gaulle, but nobody calls it that), preferably at the top of
        Napoleons gigantic Arc de Triomphe, from which youll get a good view
        of the 12-pointed star formed by the avenues radiating from the arch in
        a tour de force of geometric planning.
        Over the years the Arc de Triomphe — 50 m (164 ft) high and
        45 m (148 ft) wide — has become a symbol of the nation. Napoleon
        himself saw only a life-size wooden and canvas model of the arch.
        Louis-Philippe inaugurated the final version in 1836, complete with
        bas-reliefs and statuary celebrating the victories of the Rev­o­lu­tion
        and the Napoleonic Empire.
        Victor Hugo was given a magnificent funeral ceremony at the
        Arc de Triomphe in 1885. The Unknown Soldier of World War I was buried
        here in 1920, and three years later the Eternal Flame was kindled. When
        Hitler came to Paris as conqueror in 1940, this was the first place he
        wanted to see. But General de Gaulle gained his revenge by starting his
        march of Liberation here in 1944.
        The avenues that exit from the Place de lEtoile house some
        of the ritziest streets in Paris (Avenue Foch is a particularly good
        address). The Champs-Elysées stretches in a straight line from the Arc
        de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde, bordered by chestnut trees all
        the way. The first two-thirds are lined with car salesrooms, cinemas,
        shops, and (expensive) café terraces.
        After the Rond-Point, theres a pleasant, shady park that
        stretches down to the gigantic Place de la Concorde. Despite its name,
        the square has had a tumultuous history — home to a busy guillotine in
        the Rev­o­lu­tion and the site of the Germans last foot­hold in Paris
        in 1944 — and han­dles some aggressive traffic today. In the center is
        the most ancient monument in Paris, the 23-m- (75-ft-) tall
        pink-granite Obelisk of Luxor from the temple of Ramses II, dating back
        to 1300 b.c. It was erected here in 1836, a gift from Mohammed Ali,
        viceroy of Egypt.
        The Palais des Tuileries was destroyed by fire during a
        workers uprising in 1871. Fragments of the royal palace are still
        standing by the Jeu de Paume museum in the northwest corner of the
        Jardin des Tuileries. The gardens are popular with children who enjoy
        watching the marionette shows, riding donkeys, and sailing boats on the
        circular ponds. In the summer months there is a ferris wheel. Their
        parents are happy admiring the geometric lawns, neat flower­beds, and
        classical statuary, to which has recently been added a collection of
        modern and contemporary works by such artists as Rodin, Giacometti,
        Dubuffet, Henry Moore, and Roy Lichtenstein.
        At the eastern end of the Tuileries stands the pink Arc de
        Triomphe du Carrousel, roughly contemporary with the larger arch at the
        Etoile, visible in a straight line beyond the Obelisk. This imposing
        vista was originally planned for Napo­leon to see from his bedroom in
        the Louvre, which was then a palace (see page 73). Today the line is
        continued — some say, marred — by the modern skyscrapers of La Défense
        looming on the horizon.
        Cross the Rue de Rivoli to the Palais-Royal, built for
        Car­di­nal Richelieu as his Paris residence in 1639, and originally
        named Palais-Cardinal. This arcaded palace, with its garden of lime
        trees and beeches and a pond where the young Louis XIV nearly drowned,
        has a colorful history.
        In the days of Philippe dOrléans, Regent of France during
        Louis XVs minority, it was the scene of notorious orgies. To meet the
        familys extravagant debts, ground-floor rooms were turned into
        boutiques and cafés that attracted fashionable society, together with
        some shady hangers-on and intellectuals. On 13 July 1789, a young
        firebrand, Camille Desmoulins, stood on a table at the Palais-Royals
        Café de Foy to deliver the speech that set off the French Revolution.
        The royal apartments were set ablaze in the uprising of 1871 and were
        subsequently restored to become the home of the Council of State and
        more recently of the Ministry of Culture.
        Today the Palais-Royal is a chic self-contained
        neighborhood of expensive apartments, shops, and restaurants.
        Exhibitions of contemporary sculpture are held in the gardens, which
        also feature permanent exhibits of modern art, including Daniel Burens
        controversial black-and-white-striped stone columns.
        East of the Palais-Royal, the old food markets of Les
        Halles (now moved to less colorful surroundings in the suburb of
        Rungis) have been replaced by gardens, new apartment buildings, and the
        Forum des Halles, a rather garish shopping center. Around it, the
        lively neighborhood of cafés, boutiques, and art galleries linking up
        with the Centre Pompidou (alias Beaubourg, see page 75) is very popular
        with the young crowd. The liveliest meeting-place is around the
        handsome Renaissance Fontaine des Innocents, once part of a
        cemetery.
        On the north side of Les Halles, another monument of the
        Renais­sance period, although decidedly Gothic in silhouette, is the
        church of Saint-Eustache, remarkable for its beautiful stained-glass
        windows over the choir.
        Vendôme–Opéra–Madeleine
        The airy octagonal Place Ven­dôme still exudes the opulence
        of its original conception under Louis XIV; at that time only his
        financiers could afford the exorbitant rents. Three centuries later,
        not that much has changed — a score of international banks have their
        offices here, along with celebrated jewelers, the Ministry of Justice,
        and the Ritz Hotel.
        The spiral of bronze bas-reliefs on the Vendôme column,
        commemorating Napoleons victories and topped by a statue of the
        emperor himself, was cast from 1,250 cannons captured from the
        Austrians at Austerlitz.
        Window-shop your way past the goldsmiths and furriers of
        the Rue de la Paix to the Opéra Garnier, a massive neo-Baroque building
        designed by Charles Garnier, a then-unknown architect who wanted to
        create a new Napoleon III style of architecture. Com­plet­ed in 1875,
        it is claimed to be the worlds largest theater, although the size of
        the stage — which can hold 450 people — leaves room for only
        2,200 spectators.
        The Boulevard des Capucines and the Boulevard des Italiens,
        known as the grands boulevards, meet at the Place de lOpéra, which was
        a focal point in Baron Hauss­manns urbanization plans in the mid-19th
        century. Today you will find elegant boutiques around the square, as
        well as the famous Café de la Paix, and the boulevards are where you
        will find some of the most popular cinemas. Behind the Opéra are two of
        the best known department stores, the Galeries Lafayette and Au
        Printemps.
        The Madeleine — an imposing Greco-Roman edifice — doesnt
        look much like a church, but thats what it is. Originally planned
        under Louis XV, and begun in 1764, it wasnt consecrated until 1842.
        During that period, competing plans called for it to be a bank, a
        railroad station, and an additional memorial to Napoleon and his
        armies. Parisians like it most for the flower market at its base and
        the grand view from the top of the steps down the Rue Royale to the
        Place de la Concorde.
        Down on the right is Maxims restaurant, which began as an
        ice cream parlor and is now a monument more venerable than the
        Madeleine. Cutting across the Rue Royale, the Rue du
        Faubourg-Saint-Honoré is the citys most luxurious shopping street. At
        number 55, peek through the heavily guarded gates of the French
        presidents Elysée Palace.
        Montmartre
        Long famous as the home of artists and bohemians, who call
        it La Butte (The Mound), Montmartre is an essential piece of Paris
        mythology. According to legend, it was originally named Mons Martyrum —
        where, after being decapitated, the towns first bishop, Saint Denis,
        picked up his head and walked away. Scholars say it was really named
        Mons Mercurii, and was the site of a pagan Roman temple.
        In appearance, Montmartre is still the little country
        village of 400 years ago — narrow, winding, hilly streets and
        dead-ends. Leave the car behind and take the Porte de la Chapelle line
        on the métro from Concorde to Abbesses. (You can also take the
        funicular railway up from the Rue Tardieu; métro tickets are valid.
        )
        From the Place des Abbesses, take Rue Ravignan to 13 Place
        Emile-Goudeau. This was the site of the Bateau-Lavoir studio, an
        unprepossessing glass-roofed loft reconstructed since a 1970 fire. Here
        Picasso, Braque, and Juan Gris developed Cubism, while Modigliani
        painted his own mysteries and Apollinaire wrote his first surrealistic
        verses. Nearby, their illustrious predecessors Renoir, Van Gogh, and
        Gauguin lived and worked in the Rue Cortot, Rue de lAbreuvoir, and Rue
        Saint-Rustique (site of the restaurant A la Bonne Franquette, where Van
        Gogh painted his famous La Guinguette).
        Painters still throng the Place du Tertre, Montmartres
        historic village square, where marriages were announced and criminals
        hanged. The whole area retains some of the village feel, with a slow
        pace of life, a variety of street performers, and pleasant cafés. On
        the Rue Saint-Vincent, at the corner of Rue des Saules, look out for
        Pariss own vineyard, the Clos de Montmartre.
        At the other end of the Rue Saint-Vincent, you will come
        around the back of the 19th-century Romano-Byzantine Sacré-Cœur
        basilica, towering over Paris with its gleaming white façade and
        distinctive domes and arches. Inside are splendid mosaics, but most
        visitors are transfixed by the external views over the descending steps
        and gardens.
        Montmartre is lively at night, with famous clubs such as Au
        Lapin Agile. On the Boulevard de Clichy below, the Pigalle district is
        full of bars, sex shops, striptease shows, and cabarets — running from
        tawdry to the famed Moulin Rouge.
        Marais
        The Marais district, north of the two islands in the river,
        was built on land reclaimed from the marshes. It became fashionable in
        the 17th century and wealthy Parisians built luxurious private homes
        (hôtels) here. Many of these elegant Renaissance houses now serve as
        museums and libraries.
        Take the métro to Rambuteau and start at the corner of the
        Rue des Archives and Rue des Francs-Bourgeois, named after the poor
        people who were al­lowed to live here tax-free during the 14th century.
        Frances Na­tion­al Archives are kept here in an 18th-century mansion,
        the Hôtel de Soubise, fronted by a vast horseshoe-shaped courtyard. The
        interior was decorated by important artists and craftsmen of the time
        and the apartments of the Prince and Princess of Soubise are worth
        seeing. Upstairs is the Musée de lHistoire de France, which displays a
        number of important documents, including Louis XVIs diary with its
        famous entry noting, Rien (Nothing), for 14 July 1789.
        A garden (not always open to the public) connects the Hôtel
        de Soubise with its twin, the Hôtel de Rohan, on Rue Vieille-du-Temple.
        Look out for Robert le Lorrains fine sculpted horses of Apollo over
        the old stables in the second courtyard. Two other noteworthy mansions
        on the Rue des Francs-Bourgeois are the Hôtel Lamoignon, at the corner
        of Rue Pavêe, and the Hôtel Carnavalet, once home to the illustrious
        17th-century lady of letters Madame de Sévigné, today the Musée
        Historique de la Ville de Paris.
        At the end of Rue des Francs-Bourgeois is what many
        consider to be the citys most handsome residential square, the Place
        des Vosges, with its stone and red brick façades. The gardens, once a
        favorite spot for aristocratic duels, now serve as a pleasant
        childrens playground. The best time to see the square as a whole is in
        winter, when the lovely chestnut trees are bare. Victor Hugo used to
        live at num­ber 6, which is now a museum of his manuscripts, artifacts,
        and drawings. Other buildings house res­tau­rants, cafés, and
        fashionable bou­tiques and galleries.
        Finish your visit to the Marais with a walk through the old
        Jew­ish quarter (or shtetl, as Paris Jews call it) around the Rue des
        Rosiers, enjoying the wonderful smells from its delicatessens and
        falafel shops.
        Cimetière du Père-Lachaise
        The grounds of the cemeteries of Paris are beautifully
        kept, and the avenues of tombs provide a fascinating walk through
        history. The largest, Père-Lachaise, has a population estimated at
        1,350,000 buried here since its foundation in 1804.
        A little map available at the entrance will help you to
        locate the tombs of the famous, which include Rossini and Chopin, La
        Fontaine and Molière, Sarah Bernhardt, and Oscar Wilde.
        The Islands
        Ile de la Cité
        Shaped like a boat, with the Square du Vert-Galant as its
        prow, the Ile de la Cité is the ancient heart of Paris, settled by the
        Celtic Parisii people as early as the third century b.c. In the
        middle of the 19th century, it fell victim to the urban planning of
        Baron Haussmann. The much praised but often insensitive prefect of
        Paris swept away most of the medieval and 17th-century structures,
        leaving only the Place Dauphine and the Rue Chanoinesse as testimony to
        the islands rich residential life.
        The baron was also seriously thinking of replacing the
        triangular Place Dauphines gracious gabled and arcaded red-brick
        architecture with neo-Grecian colonnades — but fortunately was forced
        out of office before the wreckers could move in. The place was built in
        1607 by Henri IV, whose equestrian statue can be seen on the nearby
        Pont-Neuf. Today its sidewalk cafés shaded by plane trees are a world
        away from the roar of the city.
        The massive Palais de Justice, housing the law courts of
        modern Paris, holds echoes of the nations earliest kings, who dwelt
        here, and of the aristocrats and Rev­o­lu­tionary leaders who, in turn,
        were imprisoned here before execution.
        It also conceals a Gothic masterpiece, the Sainte-Chapelle.
        The delicate walls of 13th-century stained glass (Pariss oldest) and
        harmonious proportions give it an ethereal quality in startling
        contrast to the ponderous palace surrounding it. It was completed in
        1248 by the sainted King Louis IX to house precious relics, such as
        Christs crown of thorns. The 15 stained-glass windows depict
        1,134 scenes from the Bible.
        Between 1789 and 1815 the chapel served variously as a
        flour warehouse, a clubhouse for high-ranking dandies, and finally as
        an archive for Bonapartes Consulate.
        The sinister prison of the Conciergerie — named after the
        royally appointed concierge in charge of common-law criminals —
        welcomed Marie-Antoinette, Robespierre, Madame du Barry, Danton, and
        2,500 others into its antechamber of the guillotine.  Take the guided
        tour of the Galerie des Prisonniers. The Salle des Girondins displays a
        guillotine blade, the crucifix to which Marie-Antoinette prayed before
        execution, and the lock of Robespierres cell. Look out on the Cour des
        Femmes, where husbands, lovers, wives, and mistresses were allowed one
        last tryst before the tumbrels arrived.
        The site of the great cathedral of Notre-Dame de Paris has
        had a religious significance for at least 2,000 years. In Roman times a
        temple to Jupiter stood here, followed in the fourth century by the
        first Christian church, Saint-Etienne. A second church, dedicated to
        the Blessed Virgin, joined it 200 years later. Both were left derelict
        by Norman invaders, and Bishop Maurice de Sully authorized construction
        of the cathedral to replace them in 1163. The main part of Notre-Dame
        took 167 years to complete and, in its transition from Romanesque to
        Gothic, it has been called a perfect expression of medieval
        architecture with its majestic towers, spire, and breath­taking flying
        buttresses.
        Despite its huge size, the ca­the­dral achieves a
        remarkable balance in its proportions and harmony in its façade. The
        superb central rose window, encircling a statue of the Madonna and
        Child, depicts the Redemption after the Fall. Look for the Galerie des
        Rois across the top of the three doorways. The 28 sta­tues representing
        the kings of Judah and Israel have been remodeled after the drawings of
        Viollet-le-Duc; the original ones were pulled down during the
        Revolution, since they were thought to be the kings of France. (The
        21 heads discovered in 1977 are now displayed in the Musée de Cluny;
        see page 78. ) Inside, the marvelous light is due in part to two more
        outsize rose windows dominating the transept. To the right of the
        entrance to the choir there is a lovely statue of the Virgin and
        Child.
        As with many other Gothic masterpieces, the name of the
        first architect is unknown, but the renowned Pierre de Montreuil is
        credited with much of the 13th-century construction. During the 18th
        century, more damage was done by the improvements of redecorators of
        the Ancien Régime than by Revolutionary iconoclasts. For the present
        structure, we must be grateful to the great restorer-architect Eugène
        Viollet-le-Duc, who did extensive renovations from 1845 to 1863 in
        response to the public outcry started by Victor Hugos novel,
        Notre-Dame de Paris.
        The only original bell remaining is the South Towers
        famous bourdon, whose much admired purity of tone was achieved by
        melting down its bronze and mixing it with gold and silver donated by
        Louis XIVs aristocracy.
        If you have the energy to climb the 387 steps to the top of
        the south tower, you will be rewarded with a stunning view over the
        city. During renovations and cleaning undertaken in 1999, a low-wave
        electronic system was installed to keep pigeons away.
        Ile Saint-Louis
        The Ile Saint-Louis is an enchanted self-contained island
        of gracious living, long popular with the more affluent gentry and
        celebrities of Paris. In modern times, President Georges Pompidou lived
        here (on the Quai de Béthune), much preferring it to the ponderous
        Elysée Palace. In the 17th-century Hôtel Lambert, on the corner of Rue
        Saint-Louis-en-l Ile, Voltaire carried on a tempestuous affair with
        the lady of the house, the Marquise du Châtelet.
        The islands fine church, Saint-Louis-en-lIle, is as
        elegant as the mansions — bright and airy with a golden light
        illuminating an attractive collection of Dutch, Flemish, and Italian
        16th- and 17th-century art and some superb tapestries from the 12th
        century.
        One of the most notable mansions with highly ornamental
        interiors is the Hôtel Lauzun (17 Quai dAnjou), built in the 1650s by
        the great architect of Versailles, Louis le Vau.
        Today, one of the islands greatest attractions is the
        quiet poplar-shaded streets to the western end of Quai dOrléans where
        you have a wonderful view of the apse of Notre-Dame.
        Left Bank
        Latin Quarter
        Whats the origin of the name? Perfectly simple: from the
        13th century, when the citys first university moved from the cloisters
        of Notre-Dame to the Left Bank, the young came to the quartier to learn
        Latin.
        In those days luniversité meant merely a collection of
        people — students who met on a street corner, or in a public square or
        courtyard, to hear a teacher lecture from a bench, or from an upstairs
        window or balcony. These days the students attend overcrowded
        classrooms, but the tradition of lively open-air discussion continues,
        often over an endlessly nursed coffee or glass of wine in one of the
        sidewalk cafés on the Boulevard Saint-Michel, in the streets around the
        faculty buildings, or in the ever-present cinema queues.
        The narrow streets near the exquisite 13th- to
        15th-century Flam­boy­ant Gothic church of Saint-Séverin — Rue de la
        Huchette, Rue de la Harpe, and Rue Saint-Séverin — give the feeling of
        a medieval world updated by the cuisines of many countries and stuffy
        little cinemas.
        In the Place Saint-Michel students buy textbooks and
        stationery, and linger around the ornate Second Empire fountain.
        Directly behind the square sits the main building of the Sorbonne.
        Founded in 1253 as a college for poor theological students by Robert de
        Sorbon, Louis IXs chaplain, it took shape as a university under the
        tutelage of Cardinal Richelieu. Students protesting overcrowding,
        antiquated methods of teaching, and stifling bureaucracy made the
        Sorbonne a focal point in 1968. When the police invaded its precincts —
        which for centuries had guaranteed student immunity — the rebellion
        erupted into the streets. The Sorbonne has since been integrated into
        the larger Paris university system and lost its independence.
        Around the corner is the huge, domed, Neo-Classical
        Panthéon. It was originally intended as a church for Louis XV, but is
        now a secular mausoleum of some of the nations greatest heroes. In the
        crypt are interred the remains of Voltaire and Rousseau, Hugo and Zola,
        assassinated Socialist leader Jean Jaurès, and Louis Braille, the
        inventor of the alphabet for the blind. The most recent hero to be so
        honored was the World War II Resistance fighter Jean Moulin.
        Further up Boulevard Saint-Michel, away from the river, is
        the large Jardin du Luxembourg. Despite their 17th-century origins,
        these gardens avoid the rigid geometry of the Tuileries and
        Ver­sailles. The horse chestnuts, beeches, and plane trees, the
        orangery, and ornamental pond were a major inspiration for the bucolic
        paintings of Watteau. Every day these gardens attract a cross-section
        of Parisians, from early-morning joggers to children sailing boats on
        the pond and students reading on the quiet benches.
        Montparnasse
        In the 1920s, Montparnasse took over from Montmartre as
        the stomping grounds of the capitals artistic colony, or at least of
        its avant-garde. American expatriates such as Ernest Heming­way, F.
        Scott Fitzgerald, Gertrude Stein, John Dos Passos, and Theodore Dreiser
        also contributed to the free-living mystique.
        While other quarters are known for their palaces and
        churches, Montparnasse (named after a 17th-century gravel mound since
        removed) has cafés and bars for its landmarks, most of them along the
        Boulevard du Montparnasse: the Closerie des Lilas; the Select, a Henry
        Miller hang-out; the Coupole, favorite of Sartre and Simone de
        Beauvoir; the Dôme; and the Rotonde. If you want to follow in the
        footsteps of the Lost Generation, this is the place for you; otherwise,
        you may find better, cheaper fare elsewhere.
        Towering over the quartier is the controversial 59-floor
        Tour Montparnasse office block (33 Avenue du Maine) — an eyesore to
        many, but one that offers a good view from the top.
        Saint-Germain-des-Prés
        Saint-Germain-des-Prés is a charming neighborhood as well
        as the literary quarter — home of major publishing houses, literary
        cafés, the Académie Française — and a growing number of fashion
        boutiques competing with bookshops, art galleries, and antiques
        shops.
        The cafés around Place Saint-Germain-des-Prés act as the
        village center.  On the north side is the Café Bonaparte, and on the
        west the famous Deux Magots. Both provide ringside seats for the lively
        street theater of mimes and musicians, who pass the hat, and the
        neighborhood eccentrics, who provide entertainment for free. The Café
        de Flore up the boulevard has more intellectual aspirations, and was
        popular in the 1950s with Sartre and his existentialist friends. (Not
        all these cafés will be open throughout the summer months. )
        The church of Saint-Germain-des-Prés is an attractive
        mixture of Romanesque and Gothic, with an 11th-century clock tower. To
        the north of the church, the Rue Bonaparte takes you to the prestigious
        Ecole des Beaux-Arts. Incorporated in its structure are fragments of
        medieval and Renaissance architecture and sculpture.
        The Institut de France, handsome home of the august
        Acadé­mie Française, is on the Quai Conti by the Pont des Arts. It was
        built by Louis Le Vau in 1668 to harmonize with the Louvre across the
        river. The academy was founded by Cardinal Richelieu to be the supreme
        arbiter of the French language. The academys lifetime members — chosen
        in hotly contested elections — regularly produce edicts on French
        terminology and usage; among words recently declared legal were le
        ketchup and le hamburger.
        Invalides–Eiffel Tower
        The massive Hôtel des Invalides was built by Louis XIV as
        Frances first national hospital for soldiers. Today it houses a number
        of museums, the most important of which is the Musée de lArmée (Museum
        of the Army), with exhibits stretching as far back as the Stone
        Age.
        Set in the crypt directly be­neath the Invalides soaring
        golden dome, Napoleons tomb is awesomely elaborate. His body, dressed
        in the green uniform of the Chasseurs de la Garde, is encased in six
        coffins, one inside the other Chinese-box fashion. The innermost coffin
        is of iron, the next of mahogany, then two of lead, one of ebony, and
        the outer one of oak. The monument of red porphyry from Finland rests
        on a pedestal of green granite, encircled by 12 colossal Victory
        pillars sculpted by Pradier. Also in the crypt are the remains of
        Napoleons son, brought to France from Vienna by Hitler in 1940.
        The military complex continues with the Ecole Militaire
        and the spacious gardens of the Champ-de-Mars, once the site of
        military exercises and parades and the series of Worlds Fairs held
        between 1867 and 1937.
        There are monuments that you can ignore and those you have
        to look at twice, and then there is the Eiffel Tower. Monuments usually
        celebrate heroes, or commemorate victories, or honor kings or saints;
        but the Eiffel Tower is a monument for its own sake, a proud gesture to
        the world. Its construction for the Worlds Fair of 1889 was an
        astounding engineering achievement — 18,000 pieces joined together by
        2,500,000 rivets, soaring 300 m (984 ft) into the air but standing on a
        base that is only 130 m (1,400 ft) square.
        Like many other Worlds Fair exhibits, the tower was
        slated for destruction in 1910. But nobody had the heart to go through
        with it, although there was no shortage of people who hated it.
        Maupassant, for example, signed a manifesto against this vertiginously
        ridiculous tower, and Verlaine rerouted his journey around Paris in
        order to avoid seeing it. Nowadays, everybody seems to love it. It has
        a popular brasserie on the first platform, an elegant gourmet
        restaurant on the second, and a view from the top stretching for miles
        on a pollution-free day.
        The tower dominates a quiet residential district that
        houses embassies and government buildings.
        Bois de Boulogne
        These 900 hectares (2,224 acres) of parkland on the
        western edge of the city constitute one of Baron Haussmanns happier
        achievements. He transformed the old Rouvre forest, left completely
        wild until 1852, into the closest thing Paris has to a London-style
        park, with roads and paths for cycling and rambles, horse trails,
        boating lakes, restaurants and cafés with open-air dancing — and, in
        addition, the grand race course at Longchamp.
        One of the main attractions is the Parc de Bagatelle, a
        walled garden with the citys most beautiful display of flowers. For
        the children, the Jardin dAcclimatation offers a miniature railway,
        Punch and Judy show, house of distorting mirrors, pony rides, and a
        collection of farm animals.
        Museums
        The Louvre
        The Louvre museum is so huge that it can be intimidating.
        But even if you dont want to spend hours admiring the art collection,
        the building itself — a former home of Frances kings — has much to
        offer and, if you plan your visit well, it is sure to be enjoyable.
        The main entrance is through an inverted glass pyramid
        designed by American architect I.M. Pei. An escalator takes you down to
        a reception area with the ticket office, underground bookshops, and
        cafés. Pick up a copy of the free handbook with color-coded floor plans
        at the information counter — renovations and improvements are almost
        constant and exhibits may have moved since your last visit. Corridors
        lead from here to the various wings of the museum.
        François I, the Louvres first major art collector,
        acquired four Raphaels, three Leonardo da Vincis, and one Titian (a
        portrait of the king himself). By 1793, when the leaders of the
        Revolution declared the palace a national museum, there were 650 works
        of art in the collection; there are now, it is estimated, some 173,000.
        So dont be depressed if you dont have time to see everything!
        If youre planning several visits, you might like to
        concentrate on just one section at a time — the Italian, the French,
        the Spanish, the Flemish and Dutch, for example, but not forgetting the
        important sections devoted to ancient Egyptian, Greek, and Roman
        antiquities.
        For an overall view of the museums collections, weve
        attempted a small selection of highlights:
        Egyptian: lion-headed goddess Sekhmet (1400 b.c. ) and the
        colossal Amenophis IV (1370 b.c. ).
        Greek: the winged Victory of Samothrace and the
        beautifully proportioned Venus de Milo.
        Italian: the sculpture of Two Slaves by Michelangelo;
        Leonardo da Vincis Mona Lisa (La Joconde) and Virgin of the Rocks;
        Titians voluptuous Woman at Her Toilet and somber Entombment of
        Christ; the poignant Old Man and His Grandson of Ghirlandaio.
        French: Poussins bittersweet Arcadian Shepherds;
        Watteaus melancholy Gilles and graceful Embarkation for Cythera;
        Dela­croixs Liberty Guiding the People; and Courbets penetrating
        study of provincial bourgeois life, Funeral at Ornans.
        Dutch and Flemish: Rembrandts cheerful Self-Portrait with
        a Toque, his beloved Hendrickje Stoffels, also portrayed nude in
        Bathsheba Bathing; Van Dycks gracious, dignified Charles I of England;
        among the scores of Rubens, his tenderly personal Helena Fourment;
        Jordaens Four Evangelists as diligent Dutchmen.
        German: a gripping Self-Portrait by Dürer; Holbeins
        Erasmus.
        Spanish: the uncompromising Velázquez portrait of ugly
        Queen Marianna of Austria; El Grecos powerfully mystic Christ on the
        Cross; Riberas gruesomely good-humored The Club Foot.
        English: Gainsboroughs exquisite Conversation in a Park;
        and Turners atmospheric Landscape with River and Bay.
        At the east end of the Louvre is the Cour Carrée, covering
        the original fortress built by Philippe Auguste in 1190 to protect
        Paris from river attack while he was away on a crusade. You can see the
        base of the medieval towers in an excavated area of the Cour.
        The Louvres official Web site (<www.louvre.fr>)
        offers virtual tours that can help you choose the most important
        galleries for you to visit.
        Centre Pompidou
        The official name of one of Europes most important
        cultural centers is Centre National dArt et de Culture Georges
        Pompidou (after the French president who instigated the project). It is
        also sometimes called simply Beaubourg, after the 13th-century
        neighborhood that surrounds it.
        A combination of public library, modern-art museum,
        ciné­ma­thèque, childrens workshop, industrial-design center,
        experimental music laboratory, and open-air circus, it is a popular
        place despite the initial upset over its unorthodox inside-out
        design. Italian architects Renzo Piano and Gianfranco Franchi and
        Englishman Richard Rogers deliberately left the buildings service
        systems visible and color-coded: red for the transportation, green for
        the water pipes, blue for the air-conditioning ducts, and yellow for
        the electrical system.
        A recent redesign has added space to the museum of modern
        art, which is divided into two galleries: Les Modernes (1905 to 1960)
        on the fifth floor — displaying works by such key figures as Brancusi,
        Dada, Kandinsky, Matisse, Miró, Picasso, and Man Ray — and Les
        Contemporains (1960 to the present) on the fourth floor. Among key
        items are Braques Man with Guitar (1914), Matisses collage The Sorrow
        of the King (1952), Dalis Six Images de Lénine sur un Piano (1931),
        and Andy Warhols Ten Lizes (1963).
        One of the simplest pleasures here is the stunning view of
        Paris rooftops as you go up the escalator. And the cosmopolitan crowd
        outside mingling with street performers, artists, and fire-eaters
        provides hours of free entertainment.
        Other Major Museums
        Though physically part of the Louvre, the Musée des Arts
        Décoratifs is a separate museum with its own entrance at 107 Rue de
        Rivoli. The rich permanent collection includes tapestries, furniture,
        and porcelain, but look out for the fascinating temporary exhibitions
        that are held here, featuring great styles and eras of design history
        such as Jugendstil, Bauhaus, and the American 1950s. Next door is the
        Musée de la Mode et du Textil, devoted to high fashion, the decorative
        art of which Paris is still the world capital.
        Across the river, the 19th-century Orsay railway station
        has been transformed into the Musée dOrsay. This exciting museum
        embraces Frances tremendous creativity from 1848 to 1914 in the
        domains of painting, sculpture, architecture and industrial design,
        advertising, newspapers, book publishing, photography, and the early
        years of cinema. It also displays the collection of Impres­sion­ists
        and their followers transferred from the Jeu de Paume museum, which is
        now used for temporary exhibitions (see page 55).
        On the river side of the Tui­leries, the compact Orangerie
        (closed for renovation until late 2002) is best known for its
        ground-floor rooms decorated with Monets beautiful Nymphéas murals.
        Upstairs is an excellent Walter-Guillaume collection of works by
        Cézanne, Renoir, Utrillo, Henri Rousseau, and Picasso.
        The Musée dArt Moderne de la Ville de Paris (11 Ave. du
        Pres­i­dent Wilson) has an important collection of 20th-century art
        displayed in the spacious galleries of the Palais de Tokyo. The Musée
        Marmottan (2 Rue Louis-Boilly) is devoted mainly to Impres­­sion­ist
        paintings, with key works by Monet, Pissarro, Gauguin, and Sisley.
        The Musée Picasso at 5 Rue de Thorigny in the Marais
        (métro Saint-Paul) has received more than 200 paintings and
        158 sculptures, in addition to hundreds of drawings, engravings,
        ceramics, and models for theater décors and costumes. Also on display
        is Picasso s personal collection of masterworks by fellow artists
        Braque, Matisse, Miró, Degas, Renoir, and Rousseau. Splendidly housed
        in the Hôtel Salé, a beautifully restored 17th-century mansion, the
        museum offers a moving portrait of the man, his family, his mistresses,
        and friends, with letters, manuscripts, photo albums, notebooks, his
        French Communist Party membership card, bullfight tickets, and some
        holiday postcards.
        Housed in the elegant residence of a famous 19th-century
        collector, at 158 Bou­le­vard Haussmann, the Musée Jacquemar-André
        displays one of Frances finest gatherings of 18th-century French,
        17th-century Flemish and Dutch, and Italian Renaissance art, in much
        the same spirit as New Yorks Frick Collection or Londons
        Wal­lace Collection.
        La Villette — in the northeast corner of the city (métro
        Porte de la Villette) — has been converted from the worlds biggest
        slaughterhouse into a futuristic complex of cultural and scientific
        activities. La Villettes Cité des Sciences et de lIndustrie puts the
        accent on public participation. The Explora science museum has exciting
        exhibits on everything from astronomy and mathematics to computer
        science. There are a planetarium, a Cité des Enfants for those under 12
        years, and the shining stainless steel Géode sphere containing a
        revolutionary cinema with a hemispheric screen 36 m (118 ft) in
        diameter. Opposite, in the Cité de la Musique are the Musée de la
        Musique and a giant concert hall, the Zénith.
        Many museums are devoted to the work of just one artist,
        the most fascinating of these being Musée Rodin (77 Rue de Varenne),
        with its lovely sculpture garden and useful childrens play area.
        Others well worth visiting include the home of Balzac (47 Rue
        Ray­nouard) and Delacroixs studio (6 Rue de Furstenberg).
        Then there are also: the Musée de lHomme in the Palais de
        Chaillot (Trocadéro), devoted to mans prehistory; the Musée de Cluny
        (6 Place Paul-Painlevé), for the great Lady with the Unicorn tapestry
        and also for sculpture of Pariss Roman and Gothic past; Musée Guimet
        (6 Place dIéna), a superb collection of Indian, Jap­a­nese, and
        Chinese art; Musée de lAffiche (18 Rue de Paradis), for advertising
        posters of the past and present.
        A few lesser-known but worth­while museums are: Musée du
        Vin (Rue des Eaux), Musée Baccarat (30 Rue de Paradis), Musée de la
        Poste (34 Boulevard de Vaugirard), and Musée Grévin (a wax museum)
        (10 Bou­­le­­vard Montmartre).
        ILE-DE-FRANCE
        Versailles
        Versailles is an easy (and full) day trip from Paris, only
        21 km (15 miles) from the capital. Organized bus tours start at the
        Tuileries Gardens, on the Rue de Rivoli side. However, the palace and
        gardens are so enormous that you may prefer to see them at your own
        pace, leaving out what your head and feet cant take. (A little train
        will take you on a 35-minute tour of the park, with commentary in
        French and English; bicycles are available for rent. )
        With a little advance planning, you can transform an
        otherwise tiring day into a delightful treat. Try the following agenda:
        early start at a Paris street market to buy a picnic; morning tour of
        the palace; stroll through the palace gardens to lunch beside the Grand
        Canal; siesta and tea in the gardens of the Petit Trianon; finally,
        wander back across the palace gardens for a last sunset view of the
        great château.
        The official Versailles Web site
        (<www.chateauversailles.fr>) is well-organized and full of useful
        information. In addition to show­ing 360-degree interior and exterior
        panoramas and images of many of the art treasures, it gives practical
        advice on how to organize your day or weekend visit.
        The Palace
        If you dont already have a clear idea of what kind of man
        Louis XIV was, take a long, hard look at his palace. Never did a piece
        of architecture more exactly express the personality of its builder
        than the Château de Versailles — extravagant, pompous, dazzling,
        formidable, glorious, and vain.
        Louis XIII had hoped to make his favorite hunting lodge a
        modest retirement home. But his son turned Versailles into a
        self-centered universe that was far from modest, proclaiming his own
        grandeur in a vast, sprawling edifice of stone and brick, marble, gilt,
        and crystal.
        The palace has been splendidly restored since World War I
        with the help of private contributions, most notably from John D.
        Rockefeller. Wherever the original furnishings and decoration were
        missing, superb appropriate equivalents have been installed.
        The self-guided tour begins at the intimate little Royal
        Chapel, a harmonious mix of white marble, Corinthian columns, and
        Baroque murals with gilded altar and balustrades. The royal family
        worshipped upstairs, looking down onto the courtiers in the nave.
        In the rooms of the Grands Appartements, named after the
        gods and goddesses whom Louis felt to be his appropriate companions,
        the king entertained his courtiers. In the Salon de Diane, the billiard
        tables gone, but Bernini has left a superb bust of the king as
        reigning champion at 27. The ceiling painting of the Sun King in his
        chariot and pictorial references to Alexander the Great and Augustus
        Caesar make it abundantly clear the Salon dApollon was Louis XIVs
        throne room.
        But by far the most striking of these lavish royal
        apartments is the glittering Galerie des Glaces (Hall of Mirrors), 73 m
        (240 ft) long, built to catch every ray of the setting sun in the 17
        tall arched panels of mirrors. This was the palaces grandest reception
        hall, where the king gave his wildest parties and received his most
        important foreign envoys. Le Bruns paintings depict Louis XIVs wars
        in Hol­land and his more peaceful achievements at home.
        In the Queens Bedroom, 19 royal children were born, many
        of them — as was the custom — with members of the public looking
        on.
        On a separate guided tour, you can visit the Royal Opera
        of Louis XV, and the kings private apartments. The Kings Bedroom,
        with two portraits by Van Dyck, is set at the exact center of the suns
        path from east to west. The court was encouraged to come every day to
        witness the monarchs rising from bed and moment of retirement.
        Louis XIV died here in 1715 of gangrene of the leg.
        The Gardens
        If English and Japanese gardens attempt, in their
        different ways, to enhance nature by tidying it up while imitating a
        natural landscape, the French garden — which Versailles epitomizes —
        deliberately imposes a formal pattern.
        Resuming a tradition of classical Rome in his work at
        Versailles, André Le Nôtre used the paths and avenues of trees and
        statuary to divide flowerbeds, ponds, and fountain basins into
        intricate geometric patterns. Pause for a moment at the palaces
        western terrace alongside the Galerie des Glaces for a first view of
        his harmonious, subtly asymmetrical arrangement of the grounds.
        As you make your way through the gardens, look back
        occasionally at the changing perspectives of the palace. Directly
        beyond the western terrace is the Axe du Soleil (Path of the Sun)
        leading down to the Bassin dApollon (Louis XIVs solar obsession
        continues). Adorned with sculptures of Greek mythology, this and the
        great Bassin de Neptune and Bassin du Dragon in the northeast corner
        served as centerpieces for royal garden parties.
        Beyond the Bassin dApollon is the Grand Canal, on which
        the king kept his Venetian gondolas. Today, you can rent small rowing
        boats here.
        To the northwest of the château, the Grand Trianon palace,
        surrounded by pleasantly unpompous gardens, was the home of Louis XIVs
        mistress, Madame de Maintenon, where the aging king increasingly took
        refuge.
        The picturesque Petit Trianon, where Marie-Antoinette
        tried to hide from the Revolution, has the allure of a dolls house in
        comparison with the rest of Versailles. Its gardens, with ponds,
        mounds, and shady woods, are English in style — a relaxing change from
        the formality of the château. The childlike playfulness of the doomed
        queens hideaway is reinforced by the Hameau, a hamlet of thatched
        cottages where she and her retinue pretended to be milkmaids and farm
        boys.
        Chartres
        One of the most moving experiences on a journey through
        France is your first view of the silhouette of Chartres cathedral
        towering over the city and the wheat fields of the fertile Beauce
        plain. Its a pleasant one-hour drive from Paris and there are regular
        train departures from the Gare de Montparnasse.
        This unquestionable masterpiece of French civilization
        marks the transition in the 12th century from the solid, sober
        Romanesque style of the Churchs beginnings to the more airy, assertive
        Gothic of its ascendancy. Apart from a few decapitated statues, it came
        miraculously unscathed through the Wars of Religion and the
        Revolution.
        As you face the harmoniously asymmetrical western façade,
        the southern tower, the Clocher Vieux, is a prime example of
        Roman­esque simplicity, whereas the taller northern tower, the Clocher
        Neuf, is already lighter, with its slender, more ornate steeple.
        On the central porch, the Portail Royal, the stately,
        deliberately elongated sculptures of Old Testament figures contrast
        with the freer, more vigorous statuary that adorns the churchs
        northern and southern porches.
        Perhaps the most famous feature of the cathedral is its
        173 stained-glass windows. Their unique Chartres blue and deep red
        bring an ethereal light into the nave, especially when the
        late-afternoon sun is shining through the western rose window depicting
        the Last Judgment. Among the oldest and most famous of the windows, on
        the southern side of the choir, is an enthroned Mary with Jesus on her
        lap, Notre-Dame de la Belle Verrière. The church is dedicated to Mary,
        representing her 175 times in the various sculptures and windows.
        In the paving of the center aisle of the nave is a large
        circular labyrinth. Medieval penitents traced its path on hands and
        knees, from the circumference to the center, a symbolic spiritual
        journey.
        Back outside, from the Episcopal Garden (Jardin de
        lEvêché), at the rear of the cathedral, a stairway takes you down to
        the old town. Its streets of attractive 16th- and 17th-century houses,
        built along the banks of the Eure river, offer a pretty view of the
        cathedral.
        Fontainebleau
        The huge royal palace of Fontainebleau is an elegant
        monument to the Renaissance tastes of François I and Henri IV, although
        subsequent monarchs added on and generally refurbished. Key features
        are the horseshoe-shaped staircase (Escalier du Fer-à-Cheval) at the
        end of the stately Cour du Cheval Blanc; the Renaissance ballroom whose
        ornate ceiling is reflected in the parquet floor; and the allegorical
        paintings in the Galerie Francois Ier.
        Napoleon was fond of Fon­taine­bleau and he refurnished
        the pal­ace after the looting of the Revolution. It was at
        Fon­taine­bleau that he abdicated in 1814 to go into his first exile on
        the island of Elba. Napoleons apart­ments display the style of his
        empire, and a Napo­leonic museum has been installed in the Louis XV
        wing.
        Although theres enough to see inside Fontainebleau to
        keep you busy for a day or two, many visitors prefer to spend the bulk
        of their time exploring the beautiful grounds and the spectacular
        Forest of Fontainebleau — 25,000 hectares (over 60,000 acres) of oak,
        beech, silver birch, pine, chestnut, and hornbeam.
        You can opt for a delightful, leisurely walk or a lengthy
        hike over well-marked paths, and climbers will find a miniature
        mountain range of sheer rock faces and cliffs. The most popular are the
        rugged Gorges de Franchard, due west of the palace. The Gorges
        dApre­mont (near the little town of Barbizon, famed as a haunt of
        19th-century landscape painters) tend to be less crowded.
        Chantilly
        Located 50 km (30 miles) north of Paris, Chantilly is
        celebrated for its château, its elegant racecourse and stables, and,
        not least, for the crème chantilly (whipped cream) typically served on
        hot waffles.
        The château, which belonged to the powerful Condé dynasty
        in the 17th century, consists of a reconstruction of the great edifice
        destroyed in the Revolution — known as the Grand Château — joined to
        the charming, authentic Renaissance building called the Petit
        Château.
        The main body of the château houses the Musée Condé, a
        superb collection of Italian, French, and Dutch masters, including
        works by Raphael, Fra Angelico, Poussin, and Watteau, and portraits by
        Clouet, Van Dyck, and Teniers. One of the charms of the collection is
        that the paintings are hung not in any classical order but according to
        the personal whim of their last owner, the Duke of Aumale.
        The palace grounds are a pleasant place for a walk,
        especially the English Garden behind the Petit Château. Louis XIV was
        very envious of the Grand Canal, ponds, and waterfalls designed by
        André Le Nôtre and insisted the master gardener do even better at
        Versailles.
        Boat rides give you another perspective of the château and
        its park and you can also enjoy a relaxing view from a tethered hot-air
        balloon.
        In June, the Hippodrome, west of the château, is host to
        the prestigious Prix du Jockey Club horse race. But all year round, you
        can visit the monumental 18th-century Grandes-Ecuries (stables), now a
        horse museum — with live horses contentedly munching hay next to wooden
        statues.
        Senlis
        Just 10 km (6 miles) east of Chantilly is the town of
        Senlis, with its imposing Gothic cathedral and handsome 15th- and
        16th-century houses, still partly encircled by Gallo-Roman ramparts.
        The finely sculpted porch on the cathedrals western façade inspired
        the design for Chartres cathedral and also for Pariss Notre-Dame.
        Take time to stroll along the narrow streets in the old
        town stretching downhill from the cathedral, which offer a combination
        of historic charm and modern French sophistication.
        Parc Astérix
        Families with children — even those unfamiliar with the
        comic-book character and his Gallic resistance to the Roman invaders —
        will enjoy a change of pace and a day visit to this theme park.
        Attractions include a dolphin pool, a medieval encampment, a number of
        inventive water rides, and roller coasters.
        The park is open most days in April through August, and is
        22 miles north of Paris on the A1 autoroute. Shuttle buses run to the
        Roissy-Charles de Gaulle transportation hub.
        An alternative is Disneyland Paris, 32 km (20 miles) east
        of Paris near Marne-la-Vallée.
        Compiègne
        Some 80 km (50 miles) up the autoroute du Nord from Paris,
        Com­piègne is another classical Ile-de-France royal hunting forest and
        palace. In addition to being Marie-Antoinettes last home, the palace
        was a favorite of Napoleon III and his wife Eugénie, whose extravagant
        memorabilia constitute the Musée du Second-Empire.
        Also in the palace is a fascinating Musée de la Voiture.
        It displays all kinds of vehicles, from the coach that carried Napoleon
        to and from Moscow in 1812 to a splendid 4-horsepower Renault car from
        1904 and other turn-of-the-century classics.
        The Forest of Compiègne offers plenty of good walking; or,
        if you prefer to ride, you can hire a horse at the village of
        Saint-Jean-aux-Bois. The forest is famous for its Clairière de
        lArmistice, where, in Marshal Fochs private railway carriage, the
        Germans signed the Armistice that marked their defeat in 1918.
        Twenty-two years later, Hitler obliged the French to sign their
        capitulation in the same place.
        NORTHEAST
        The northeastern section of France offers everything from
        high coastal dunes and peaceful rolling farmland to picturesque
        mountains, forests, and vineyards. The villages of Flanders, once gray
        and gloomy, are now full of flowers in the summer and the larger towns
        in the region — Lille, Arras, and Amiens to the north, Reims in the
        center, and Nancy and Strasbourg to the east — exude great civic
        pride.
        The countryside, villages, and towns of Flanders, Picardy,
        Alsace, and Lorraine bear the scars of many wars. The English were
        victorious in the Picardy fields of Créc y (1346) and Azincourt
        (Agincourt, 1415). For Louis XIVs wars against the Netherlands in the
        17th century, the military architect Vauban built a line of
        fortifications at Calais, Dunkerque, Douai, Valenciennes, and — still
        visible — the great citadel at Lille.
        Flanders and the river valleys of the Somme and Marne were
        major battlefields of World War I, and their fields are dotted with
        memorials and military cemeteries.
        Deeper into the interior, Burgundy is most famous today
        for its vineyards. It was historically the stronghold of the dukes of
        Dijon, alongside the ecclesiastical empires of the Cluny and Cistercian
        monasteries and their great Romanesque churches.
        Picardy
        Visitors to France — and the French themselves — often
        overlook the charms of the far north. If youre coming into France from
        the English Channel or across the Belgian border, dont rush south on
        the autoroute but take a more leisurely journey and enjoy Picardy.
        Le Touquet
        This seaside resort was created at the end of the 19th
        century, when swimming became all the rage. Today it remains more
        stylish than other coastal towns, with plenty to please both adults and
        children: casinos, sophisticated shops and restaurants, and health
        spas; good sailing, windsurfing, sand yachting, riding, golf, and
        tennis. Children will also enjoy the excellent sea-life center,
        Nausicaa, half an hours drive north in Boulogne (the coast road is the
        prettiest).
        Montreuil-sur-Mer
        About an hours drive south of Calais, the walled town of
        Montreuil-sur-Mer sits high above the valley of the river Canche.
        Montreuil was a thriving port before the river silted up in the 1300s
        (the sea is now about 25 km away). Today it is a busy market town and
        civic government center.
        Victor Hugo used the town as a setting for Les Misérables,
        and each summer (usually at the end of July) the residents stage a
        retrospective son et lumière performance in the Citadelle, parts of
        which date from the ninth century.
        Montreuils churches are all noteworthy — particularly
        Saint-Saulve, which dates in part from the 13th century — but most
        visitors spend their time exploring the towns cobbled streets and
        medieval alleyways. A walk around the shaded top of the ramparts takes
        about half an hour and offers beautiful views of the surrounding
        countryside. Longer hikes follow well-marked trails across the
        fields.
        The Club Canoë Kayak (4 Rue Moulin des Orphelins) rents
        canoes and kayaks for the river Canche. A crêperie on the pretty Rue du
        Clape en Bas is open in summer months only and offers free concerts
        Thursday evenings.
        Montreuil is popular with British weekend visitors and
        makes a good base for trips into Picardy.
        Hesdin and Les Sept Vallées
        The river Canche flows right through the center of this
        small town, disappearing under buildings and hump-backed bridges. The
        striking Flemish/Spanish Hôtel de Ville that presides over the market
        square has a magnificently ornate porch (if you can pick your time to
        visit, choose Thursday morning when the weekly market is in full
        swing). The nearby Eglise Notre Dame also combines Flemish
        archi­tec­ture with a Renaissance porch.
        The battlefield at Azincourt lies about 15 km (10 miles)
        north of Hesdin, just off the D928. The Centre Historique Médiéval is a
        good preparation for a tour of the site.
        Leaving Azincourt, continue north to Fruges. In Fruges
        take the small D130 southwest toward Créquy, following the valley of
        the tiny Créquoise river back down to the Canche. Cross the Canche and
        continue south to Buire-le-Sec and the village of Maintenay, where a
        restored 12th-century mill now serves crêpes in a wonderfully cool and
        leafy setting.
        Across the river Authie and a few minutes drive east is
        the 18th-century Abbaye de Valloires, whose huge gardens display more
        than 5,000 species and varieties of plants, many from China and Japan,
        including a large collection of old-fashioned and wild roses, presented
        in a number of formal and informal settings.
        Saint Valéry sur Somme
        William the Conqueror set sail for England in 1066 from
        this small fishing port at the mouth of the Somme. Today Saint Valéry
        offers ramparts and half-timbered houses in the Haute Ville, and a
        pleasant waterfront promenade with views of seals in the estuary.
        Children will enjoy the little steam train that loops around the bay to
        Le Crotoy in the summer. The surrounding area is well known for its
        bird life. A tour of the beautiful Parc Ornithologique de
        Mar­quen­terre at St.-Quentin-en-Tourmont will take a couple of
        hours.
        Péronne
        Anyone exploring the battlefields and cemeteries of the
        First World War will want to visit Péronnes Historial de la Grande
        Guerre, a museum that gives an excellent overview of the war and the
        cultures of Britain, France, and Germany at that time.
        Saint-Omer
        Prosperous from the textile industry since the Middle
        Ages, this town survived bombardment in two world wars and remains a
        bustling center with an impressive main square.
        Once a cathedral, the 13th-century Basilique Notre-Dame
        can be hard to find among the narrow cobbled streets of the old town.
        It boasts a fine south porch and marble and alabaster treasures that
        evoke the wealth of the diocese in the 16th and 17th centuries,
        particularly the elaborate chapel screens and, in the northern arm of
        the transept, an intricate 16th-century astronomical clock.
        The Hôtel Sandelin museum is well worth a visit, both for
        the splendid 18th-century mansion with its Louis XV furnishings and for
        its rich collections of porcelain from all over the world. The
        Saint-Omer decorative glazed earthenware (faïence) is a major feature,
        and the Delft collection is outstanding, not only for its celebrated
        blue ware but also for some exquisite polychrome pieces.
        Lille
        Lille, center of the fourth-largest urban area in France,
        is an important industrial city with a growing high-tech influence. Now
        a major high-speed train (TGV) hub — the Eurostar from London calls
        here too — it is attracting more tourist attention.
        The Place du Général de Gaulle (also known as the Grand
        Place) is in the heart of Vieux Lille, a district of cobbled streets,
        shops, restaurants, cafés, and an assortment of architecture ranging
        from the beautiful 17th-century Vieille Bourse (Old Exchange) to the
        20th-century Nouvelle Bourse and Opéra. The Palais des Beaux Arts
        (Place de la République) has a large collection including works by
        Rubens, Van Dyck, and Goya.
        Arras
        Arras was famous in the Middle Ages for its production of
        cloth and hanging tapestries, the kind through which Polonius meets his
        demise in Hamlet. The town, just off the autoroute from Calais, has two
        of the most beautiful city squares in France, echoing the classical
        Flemish style of the 17th and 18th centuries in the arcades and the
        gabled façades of the Grande Place and the Place des Héros. View the
        town and surrounding countryside from the belfry of the Hôtel de Ville
        or go down to the basement and take the guided tour of the labyrinth of
        underground passages that have served a variety of purposes over the
        centuries.
        Amiens
        The majestic Cathédrale Notre-Dame is a masterpiece of
        French Gothic architecture. Its construction was almost completed in a
        mere 44 years in the middle of the 13th century; as a result it was
        possible to maintain a homogeneous architectural style. Miraculously
        the cathedral escaped unharmed from the heavy air raids of World
        War II.
        The largest cathedral in France, it is celebrated for its
        statues and bas-reliefs and the oak carving of the 110 choir stalls,
        the work of great 16th-century cabinet-makers. Dramatically depicting
        more than 400 scenes from the Old and New Testaments, 3,650 fig­ures
        present a magnificent pageant of the customs and costumes of the era of
        François I. Among the panels of Cain and Abel, Abraham and Isaac, Jesus
        and Mary — all very Flemish figures — are carvings of a Picardy baker,
        dairymaid, fruitmonger, and laundress.
        Other attractions of Picardys capital include the
        canalside Saint-Leu quarter, the Hortillonages — an area of water
        gardens east of the cathedral that is only accessible by punt or on
        foot, and the Musée de Picardie (48 Rue de la République) with its good
        collection of paintings, most notably a couple of Van Goyen landscapes,
        El Grecos Portrait of a Man, a witty self-portrait of Quentin de La
        Tour, and François Bouchers erotic pink nymphs.
        Champagne-Ardennes
        Wine lovers flock each year to this northernmost of
        Frances wine-producing regions, where a unique combination of geology,
        topography, and climate has produced the worlds most celebrated wine.
        But in addition to sampling the products of the cellar masters,
        visitors will find gourmet meals, wonderful towns, important churches,
        and dense forests.
        Reims
        Reims — a center of production of the wine of kings — is
        also home to the cathedral where kings of France were crowned from the
        Middle Ages to the early 19th century.
        The magnificently proportioned 13th-century Cathédrale
        Notre-Dame was badly damaged in World War I, but it has been well
        restored and it remains one of the countrys greatest Gothic edifices.
        Try to view it in the late afternoon sun, armed with a pair of
        binoculars to study the rich sculpture of the Gallery of Kings high
        above the windows.
        In the interior, the most noteworthy of the surviving
        13th-century stained-glass windows are the rose window above the
        western entrance, illustrating the life of the Virgin Mary, and the one
        devoted to the Creation in the north arm of the transept. Directly
        beyond the altar is the Chagall chapel, in which the Russian artist
        connects his Jewish origins to the Christian religion with a window
        depicting Abraham and Jesus.
        The originals of the cathedrals major sculptures are on
        display next door in the museum of the archbishops residence, the
        Palais du Tau. The most famous pieces are the Smiling Angel, symbol of
        Reims hospitality, and the allegorical figure of the Synagogue,
        blindfolded because it was felt that the Jews were too stubborn to
        behold the truth of Christianity.
        The citys Champagne cellars are in fact 250 km
        (155 miles) of galleries quarried out of the citys chalk foundations
        back in the days of Roman Gaul. Practically all the major Champagne
        labels offer tours; the Office de Tourisme (beside the cathedral, at
        2 Rue Guil­laume de Machault) is the best source of information on
        hours and prices. Free samples are not always given at the end of
        visits and the champagne houses may not be the cheapest places to buy
        champagne.
        Epernay
        The towns advantage over Reims is that you can combine a
        visit to its cellars — you are more likely to get a free dégustation
        here — with a drive southward along the great Côte des Blancs vineyards
        that produce the white chardonnay grapes. The prettiest view of the
        vines and the Marne Valley is just 10 km (6 miles) down the D10 at
        Cramant.
        Also out of town, you can see a reconstitution of Dom
        Pérignons famous 17th-century cellar and laboratory in the abbey
        museum of Hautvillers, just 6 km (4 miles) north of Epernay.
        Troyes
        The historic center of Troyes — which is shaped like a
        champagne cork — features no less than nine Gothic churches, narrow
        winding streets with medieval half-timbered houses, and a major
        collection of modern art.
        Among the most notable churches are the Cathédrale
        Saint-Pierre-et-Saint-Paul, which took centuries to complete; the
        Eglise Saint-Nizier, recognizable by its gaudy tile roof; and the
        Basilique Saint-Urbain. The Musée dArt Moderne (Palais Episcopal,
        Place Saint-Pierre) includes a collection of paintings from 1850 to
        1950.
        Troyes is also a center for shopping, with two outlet
        centers selling both French and international designer-name fashions
        and home accessories.
        Lorraine
        A region of strategic importance guarding the eastern
        approaches to Paris, Lorraine has long been a pawn in Frances
        perennial conflicts with Germany. Verdun was the site of a major battle
        in World War I and was badly damaged by bombing in 1944. Amid the
        devastations of war and the more-recent depression of the regions
        declining coal, iron, and steel industries, the historic town of Nancy
        stands out as a gleaming survivor. Its golden 18th-century architecture
        makes it a rewarding stopover on any journey between Paris and
        Alsace.
        Nancy
        Nancy owes its classical beauty to King Stanislas
        Leszczynski of Poland. Deposed by the Russians in 1736, Stanislas had
        the good fortune to be Louis XVs father-in-law and was given the Duchy
        of Lorraine as compensation. He expressed his gratitude by devoting the
        rest of his life to refurbishing a town devastated by the Thirty Years
        War of the previous century.
        Surrounded by elegant classical mansions and gilded
        wrought-iron grilles with ornamental gateways, which frame the marble
        fountains of Neptune and Amphitrite, Nancys huge Place Stanislas is
        one of the most harmonious urban spaces in Europe.
        The squares grand, spacious effect is completed to the
        north by an arc de triomphe (dedicated to Louis XV) at the entrance to
        the long Place de la Carrière — also graced by 18th-century mansions
        and Jean Lamours iron grilles.
        At the end of the place — in the Grande Rue — a splendid
        Renaissance doorway is all that remains of the former glory of the old
        ducal palace. Inside, the Musée Historique Lorrain offers a fascinating
        glimpse of Nancy before Stanislas. The Musée des Beaux-Arts, at 3 Place
        Stanislas, has a good collection of European art — notably Tintoretto,
        Ruysdael, Van Goyen, Ribera, and Rubens, with the French represented by
        Delacroix, Courbet, Bonnard, and Manet.
        Visitors suffering from a surfeit of culture will find a
        change of pace in the Musée du Téléphone (11 Rue Maurice Barrès), which
        presents the history of the telephone service, and the zoo in the Parc
        de la Pépinière.
        Alsace
        One of the reasons why the Germans and the French have
        fought for possession of this province is that its such a good place
        to live. Rich farmland, vineyards, and dense forest, with the
        protective Vosges mountain range on one side and the great Rhine river
        on the other, combine to make Alsace a nicely self-contained and
        comfortable region.
        Changes of nationality have left Alsace with a distinctive
        dialect, architecture, cuisine, and local pride — the best of both
        worlds. Visitors can choose to stay in cosmopolitan Strasbourg,
        picturesque Colmar, or hillside villages, and can eat in cozy winstubs
        (wine bars) or stylish restaurants (Alsace has more Michelin stars than
        any other province in France).
        Strasbourg
        This intellectual, cultural, and economic center has
        emerged handsome, if not unscathed, from its turbulent past. Many
        Gothic and Renaissance buildings have been lovingly restored. The
        winstubs of its old neighborhoods are gathering places for university
        students whose predecessors include Goethe.
        Its a good town for walking the narrow streets, or for
        taking a boat cruise on the river Ill, which divides into two branches
        to loop the historic center. Launches start from the Pont
        Sainte-Madeleine behind the Château des Rohan.
        The celebrated asymmetrical silhouette of the magnificent
        Gothic cathedral, with its single tower and steeple rising on the
        northern side of its façade, will give your tour of the city an
        inspiring start.
        When Goethe arrived in Strasbourg for the first time, he
        just dropped his bag at his hostel, Zum Geist, and rushed off to visit
        the cathedral. The stout-limbed can follow his example, and start by
        climbing the 300-odd stairs to the platform just below the steeple for
        a fine view over the city.
        Combining the architectural style of Ile-de-France Gothic
        with Rhenish German sculpture, the cathedral is an apt symbol of
        Alsatian culture. The original designer, Erwin von Steinbach, began the
        pink Vosges sandstone façade in 1277, but only got as far as the
        splendid Gallery of Apostles over the central rose window.
        Ulrich von Ensingen — the master builder of the great
        cathedral of Ulm — began construction of the octagon of the north tower
        in 1399. The graceful open­work spire was added in the 15th century by
        Johannes Hültz of Cologne. The French Rev­o­lu­tion­aries threatened to
        tear the steeple down because it offended their principle of equality,
        but were reassured when one of the townsmen coiffed the spire with a
        patriotic red-white-and-blue bonnet. All traces of an ugly 19th-century
        attempt to balance it with a second tower have been removed.
        The Revolutionaries couldnt be dissuaded from destroying
        most of the cathedrals statues, although 67 were saved (many of the
        originals are now housed in the Musée de lOeuvre Notre-Dame next
        door). The central porch is still intact, depicting Jesuss entry into
        Jerusalem, the Crucifixion, and other scenes from the Bible.
        Inside stands a formidable Flamboyant Gothic pulpit, built
        for the preacher Geiler von Kaysersberg to match his fulminations
        against the Protestant Reformation. Among the cathedrals admir­able
        12th- to 14th-century stained-glass windows in the nave and northern
        aisle there are portraits of medieval German emperors.
        The great popular attraction, situated in the southern arm
        of the transept, approached through the Portail de lHorloge, is the
        19th-century astronomical clock with its elaborate mechanical figures
        that appear with chimes at 12:30pm. In the summer, get there by noon or
        you wont see a thing. Then after everyones gone, stay on to see the
        marvelous 13th-century sculpted Angels Pillar (Pilier des Anges) in
        peace.
        A sound-and-light (son et lumière) show is held at the
        cathedral in summer, both in German and in French, recounting
        2,000 years of the citys history.
        On the Place de la Cathédrale, at the beginning of the Rue
        Mercière, stands the 13th-century Pharmacie du Cerf, older than the
        cathedral and reputedly the oldest pharmacy in France. The other
        venerable house in the square, now a restaurant, is the Maison
        Kam­mer­zell. The ground floor dates from 1467, and the beautifully
        sculpted wooden façade of the superstructure from 1589.
        Guardian of the citys medieval and Renaissance treasures,
        the Musée de lOeuvre Notre-Dame is itself made up of a superb group of
        14th-, 16th-, and 17th-century houses around a secluded Gothic garden
        on the Place du Château, south of the cathedral. Besides sheltering the
        most vulnerable of the cathedrals statuary and some stained-glass
        windows from the earlier 12th-century Romanesque building, the museum
        has a fine collection of Alsatian medieval painting by Konrad Witz,
        Martin Schongauer, and Hans Baldung Grien.
        In the midst of the predominantly Germanic old city
        center, the Château des Rohan, the classical 18th-century residence
        that was the home of Strasbourgs princes and cardinals, makes an
        emphatically French statement.
        The furniture collection of the châteaus delightful Musée
        des Arts Décoratifs offers interesting comparisons between Parisian and
        Alsatian aristocratic and bourgeois tastes of the 17th and 18th
        centuries. But the museums pride and joy is its great ceramics
        collection, displaying beside Europes finest porcelain and faïence the
        astonishing Rococo craftsmanship of the Strasbourg Hannong family, most
        remarkably a huge tureen in the form of a turkey. If you didnt get
        enough of the astronomical clock in the cathedral, you can have a
        close-up view here of figures from the original 14th-century model.
        The château also houses Stras­bourgs Musée des
        Beaux-Arts, noteworthy for its Giotto Cru­ci­fixion, Raphaels La
        For­na­rina, and the remarkable somber realism of Watteaus LEcureuse
        de cuivre.
        Behind the château, cross the Pont Sainte-Madeleine over
        the Ill and stroll along the quai des Bateliers, past the remnants of
        old Strasbourg, to the 14th-century Place du Corbeau near the bridge of
        the same name.
        Continue along the Quai Saint-Nicolas to the Musée
        Alsacien at num­ber 23, a group of 16th- and 17th-century houses
        appropriate to the colorful collections of Alsatian folklore. Children
        love the ancient toys and dolls. Instru­ments of worship and ritual
        illustrate the religious life of the prov­inces important Jewish
        community.
        Make your way westward to the Pont Saint-Martin for a
        first view of the citys most enchanting quarter, the old tannery
        district known as Petite France. At a point where the Ill divides into
        four canals, the tanners shared the waterways with the millers and
        fishermen. Sturdy gabled houses line the Rue des Dentelles and the Rue
        du Bain-aux-Plantes.
        The Barrage Vauban — remains of the fortifications Vauban
        built for Louis XIV — spans the Ill to the west. Its roof affords a
        splendid panoramic view across the canals and La Petite France to the
        soaring silhouette of the cathedral. At sunset it makes the perfect
        finish to a days walk but many like to start out from here and reverse
        the order of the walk we have proposed, reserving the cathedral for a
        triumphant climax.
        Route du Vin
        Sheltered from the cold, damp, northwest winds by the
        Vosges mountains, the vineyards of Alsace enjoy an ideal microclimate
        for producing white wines that confidently hold their own against the
        more famous wines of Burgundy and Bordeaux.
        The vineyards hug the gentle slopes between the Vosges and
        the Rhine Valley along a single narrow 120-km (75-mile) strip that
        stretches from Marlenheim, just west of Strasbourg, down to Thann,
        outside Mulhouse. The winding wine route is well signposted; its
        charming medieval and 16th-century villages and castles — such as
        Haut-Koenigsbourg and Kaysersberg — make it the prettiest vineyard tour
        in the country, best of all during the October wine harvest. Tasting
        and purchases are possible at many of the properties. Ask at the local
        syndicat dinitiative or Colmars Maison du Vin dAlsace for
        information about the vineyard tours organized from Obernai and
        Turckheim, among others.
        A walk around the lovely shaded ramparts of Obernai will
        convince you of the perennial prosperity of its wine growers and
        farmers. Among the elegant, spotless timbered houses of the
        16th-century Place du Marché, note the fine Halle aux Blés (Corn
        Market) and Hôtel de Ville, as well as the handsome Renaissance Puits
        aux Six Seaux (Six Pails Well) situated between the town hall and the
        parish church.
        Equally famous for its Riesling wines and its Renaissance
        houses, picturesque Riquewihr is often overcrowded during the tourist
        season. Cars must be left at the southern end of the town. If you
        arrive in Riquewihr on a quiet day, have a good look at the stately
        Maison Liebrich (1535) and at the Maison Preiss-Zimmer (1686), on the
        main street (Rue du Général-de-Gaulle).
        Just before you reach the main gate and town symbol, the
        13th-century Dolder, turn off to the right and take a peep at the
        little ­ghetto in the wooden-galleried Cour des Juifs. And for those
        who enjoy inspecting ancient instruments of terror and torture, theres
        a medieval chamber of horrors in the Tour des Voleurs
        (Thieves Tower).
        Nestling at the foot of its ruined castle, the pretty
        medieval town of Kaysersberg is widely known as the birthplace of Nobel
        Peace Prize winner Albert Schweitzer (1875–1965). His parents house
        has become the Centre Culturel Schweitzer (124 Rue du
        Général-de-Gaulle), devoted to the life of the humanitarian, who was
        also a great performer of Bachs organ works.
        The parish church, the Eglise Sainte-Croix, is worth a
        visit for the splendid 16th-century altarpiece by Jean Bongartz of
        Colmar. It is a polychrome sculpted wooden triptych of 18 panels, which
        portray the last days of Jesus in moving detail. A 10-minute walk up
        the wooded hill to the castle tower gives a delightful view of the town
        and the surrounding valley of the Weiss river.
        To escape the madding crowd, seek out the unspoiled little
        town of Turckheim — the epitome of the shiny, bright Alsatian village.
        Its 16th- and 17th-century charm is preserved within a triangular
        rampart.
        Colmar
        Some people make a pilgrimage to Colmar with the sole
        purpose of visiting the great Musée dUnterlinden. But the town itself,
        with its miraculously preserved old city center, has much else to
        offer. It also makes a quieter alternative to Strasbourg as a base for
        touring the vineyards of Alsace.
        Converted from a 13th-century convent of Dominican nuns,
        the Musée dUnterlinden provides a perfect setting in which to view one
        of the worlds undisputed masterpieces of religious art, Matthias
        Grünewalds awe-inspiring Isenheim altarpiece. Created for the
        Isen­heim convent of Saint Anthony between 1512 and 1516, the
        altar­piece originally folded out in three panels, which are now
        mounted for exhibition in separate sections. To appreciate the full
        impact of the whole work, view it in reverse order, starting at the far
        end with the stately sculpted polychrome wooden panel of Saints
        Augustine, Anthony, and Jerome, carved by Niklaus Hagenauer. The first
        of Grünewalds painted panels depicts on one side the conversion and
        temptation of Anthony and on the other the birth of Jesus and a chorus
        of angels. The second panel is devoted to the Annun­ci­a­tion and
        Resurrection and, on the reverse side, what is perhaps the most
        pain-filled and exalted portrayal of the Crucifixion ever realized.
        Be sure also to see the superb altarpiece of Martin
        Schongauer, Hans Holbeins portrait of a woman, and Lucas Cranachs
        exquisite Mélancolie. The museums modern collection of Braque,
        Bonnard, and Picasso offers an intriguing counterpoint.
        In the old town center — which is closed to traffic — keep
        an eye open for the many handsome gabled houses of the Renaissance
        period: the Ancienne Douane (Old Customs House, Grand-Rue); Maison des
        Arcades (Grand-Rue); Maison Pfister (Rue des Marchands); and Maison des
        Têtes (Rue des Têtes).
        The Petite Venise (Little Venice) district is south of the
        Old Town. From the Saint-Pierre bridge, there is a lovely view of its
        flowery river banks, weeping willows, and timbered houses, with the
        tower of Saint Martins church in the distance. The district on the
        opposite bank of the river was once a fortified enclave, inhabited
        mainly by market gardeners who used to sell their wares from barges on
        the river. It still holds on to its original name of Krutenau
        (Vegetable Waterway).
        Martin Schongauers beautiful altar painting Vierge au
        Buisson de Roses (Madonna in the Rose Bower) can be found in the Eglise
        des Dominicains, along with some remarkable 14th- and 15th-century
        stained-glass windows.
        Colmar is also the birthplace of Auguste Bartholdi,
        designer of the Statue of Liberty. His 17th-century house (30 Rue des
        Marchands) is now the Musée Bartholdi, displaying his models and
        drawings. His statue of Napoleons General Jean Rapp, another local
        resident, can be seen on the Place Rapp.
        Burgundy
        The prosperous Burgundy region boasts a great variety of
        attractions: fine wines and food; lazy days on the Canal de Bourgogne,
        drifting past green meadows; Romanesque architecture; tiny villages
        with exquisite parish churches and open-air stone laundries (lavoirs);
        the grand ducal palace of Dijon, and Dijons museums.
        If you are driving from Paris, youll get the best out of
        Burgundy by leaving the autoroute at either the Courtenay or the
        Auxerre exit and going the rest of the way on the perfectly good — and
        above all beautiful — secondary roads. The TGV goes to Montbard, Dijon,
        and Beaune.
        Auxerre, overlooking the Yonne river and with several
        interesting churches, makes a good first stop for trips into the
        Burgundy interior, particularly if you want to stock up for a picnic.
        It is the main distribution point for the famous Chablis white wines,
        but you may prefer to drive out to the vineyards in the delightful
        countryside east of the autoroute.
        Vallée du Serein
        This is just one out of a score of leisurely backroad
        trips you can make through northern Burgundys meandering green
        valleys. Either cutting across from Tonnerre (home of a beautiful
        circular lavoir at the Fosse Dionne) or starting out from the village
        of Chablis, follow the course of the little Serein river (a tributary
        of the Yonne) toward Avallon.
        You will pass huge farmhouses, characteristically roofed
        with laves — flat volcanic-stone tiles — that add color and texture to
        the landscape. The finely arched front doors are often at the top of a
        sturdy staircase over the street-level cellar. You can spot, set in the
        stone walls, little sculpted heads of angels or demons, floral motifs,
        or the scallop shell (coquille Saint-Jacques) marking the route of
        medieval pilgrims to Santiago de Compostela in Spain.
        Noyers is a fortified medieval village with 16 towers in
        its ramparts. Many of its timbered and gabled houses date back to the
        14th and 15th centuries, particularly in the Place de lHôtel-de-Ville
        and the Rue du Poids-du-Roy. From the little Renaissance church,
        theres a pretty view over the winding river.
        At LIsle-sur-Serein, the river divides to encircle the
        tranquil little town and the ruins of its 15th-century château.
        Leave the river briefly to loop east around Talcy, with
        its Romanesque church and the 13th-century château of Thizy, before
        ending your trip at Montréal. This medieval town boasts a Gothic church
        with a Renaissance interior; note the carved oak choir stalls and
        Nottingham alabaster altarpiece.
        Abbaye de Fontenay
        This Cistercian abbey is about 6 km (4 miles) from
        Montbard, standing behind high walls in a lovely valley at the edge of
        a forest. Found­ed in the early 12th century by Saint Bernard, it
        includes a church, cloisters, scriptorium, refectory, sleeping
        quarters, infirmary, forge, bakery, and herb garden — everything for a
        self-sufficient community. The building was converted into a paper mill
        in the 19th century, but has since been restored and the cloisters once
        again present the calm and simplicity that were the ideals of its
        founder.
        As you go through the gate decorated with the arms of the
        Cister­cian order, youll notice a niche for a guard dog below the
        staircase. On the right is an austere hostel and chapel for the few
        pilgrims who passed this way, and beyond it the forge of the
        hard-working Cister­cians. To the left of the entrance are the monks
        bakery and an imposing pigeon loft.
        Paid for by Bishop Everard of Norwich, for whom Fontenay
        was a refuge from the hostility of Henry II of England, the abbey
        church has a sober, unadorned beauty — no bell­tower, as there were no
        distant faithful to be called to worship, but harmonious proportions in
        the interior, and fine acoustics because Saint Bernard was a great
        lover of music. A serene statue of the Virgin Mary (13th century)
        stands in the north arm of the transept.
        You can use your computer to take a virtual tour of the
        abbey at <www.abbayedefontenay.com>.
        Vézelay
        A center of spirituality in a beautiful rustic setting,
        Vézelay is the home of one of the major churches on the pilgrim route
        from Ger­many and the Netherlands to Santiago de Compostela in Spain.
        Today it welcomes tourists, in large numbers. If youre traveling at
        the height of the tourist season, this is a place where it is vital to
        make a really early start.
        To recapture something of the experience of the medieval
        pilgrim, park at the Place du Champ-de-Foire, pass through the turreted
        Porte Neuve, and follow the Promenade des Fossés, which takes you along
        the ancient ramparts lined with walnut trees.
        At the Porte Sainte-Croix, there is a magnificent view
        over the Cure river valley and the path that leads to the place where,
        in 1146, Saint Bernard urged King Louis VII to lead the French on the
        Sec­ond Crusade. This was also to be the starting point of the Third
        Crusade in 1190, when Englands Richard the Lion-Hearted joined forces
        with Philippe Auguste.
        Vézelays Basilique Sainte-Madeleine, repository of relics
        of Mary Magdalene, is a magnificent example of French Romanesque
        architecture, in spite of the damage inflicted by natural disaste rs,
        wars, and revolution. The 19th-century restorations of Viollet-le-Duc
        have maintained the churchs majestic harmony.
        The narthex, or entrance hall to the nave, is crowned by a
        magnificent sculpted tympanum of Jesus enthroned after the
        Resurrection, preaching his message to the Apostles. On the central
        supporting pillar is a statue of John the Baptist — beheaded not by
        Herod but by iconoclastic Huguenot vandals.
        The nave is a wonder of light and lofty proportions,
        enhanced by the luminous beige stone and the splendid ribbed vaulting.
        In contrast to the exalted quality of the tympanums sculpture, the
        robust carvings of the capitals in the nave are lively and
        down-to-earth, making a clearly popular appeal to the throngs of
        visiting pilgrims.
        The themes depicted on the capitals are from the Bible and
        the legends of the saints. Beside David and Goliath, Daniel in the
        lions den, and the building of Noahs ark, one curious sculpture shows
        Saint Eugenia, tonsured and disguised as a monk, opening her robe to
        convince a skeptical friar that shes a woman.
        On the tree-shaded terrace beyond the basilica, relax on
        one of the benches and enjoy the splendid view looking out over the
        forested plateau of the Morvan. Then explore the old houses, wells, and
        courtyards in the towns narrow lanes leading back down to the Place du
        Champ-de-Foire.
        Autun
        At the other end of the densely wooded Morvan plateau,
        Autuns 12th-century Cathédrale Saint-Lazare makes a natural point of
        comparison with Vézelays Basilique Sainte-Madeleine. The Autun
        tympanums rich carving of Jesus presiding at the Last Judg­ment is
        full of vitality. On the left, you see the happy few being welcomed by
        Saint Peter. Imme­di­ately to the right of Jesus is the weighing of the
        souls, with Saint Michael trying to stop Satan from cheating. On the
        far right, a cauldron is boiling a few of the unlucky ones.
        Below Jesus feet is a Latin in­scription that suggests
        that the tympanum was the work of one man, Gislebertus (Gilbert). It
        says: Gislebertus did this. May such terror terrify those in thrall to
        earthly error, for the horror of these images tells what awaits them.
        
        Gilbert is also believed to have carved the magnificent
        cap­i­tals topping the pillars of the nave and aisles. Some of the more
        fragile pieces are exhibited in an upstairs chapter room, worth a visit
        for a close-up view of his workmanship. The sculpture places a graphic
        emphasis on the ugliness of sin (the hanging of Judas, the devil
        tempting Jesus) and the simple beauty of virtue.
        At the nearby Musée Rolin there is a fine collection of
        Bur­gun­dian and Flemish painting and sculpture. The museum is partly
        housed in the elegant 15th-century mansion that belonged to Nicolas
        Rolin, a wealthy dignitary and the benefactor of the famous Hôtel-Dieu
        (hospital) at Beaune (see page 115).
        Autun was founded in the first century b.c. The Porte
        Saint-André, Porte dArroux, and Théâtre Romain are some of the Roman
        remains in the town.
        Dijon
        Dijon is the capital of Burgundy and a center of art and
        architecture, of culture and learning. It is only one hour from Paris
        by TGV and is the ideal gateway for a tour of the vineyards to the
        south or a drive around the pretty Val-Suzon to the north. Its also a
        good starting point for barge cruises on the Canal de Bourgogne (see
        page 45).
        One of the citys attractions is the shopping center
        around the Place Darcy and Rue de la Liberté, where you can hunt for
        such regional delicacies as the famous mustards; pain dépices
        (gingerbread); and cassis, the blackcurrant liqueur that turns an
        ordinary white wine into a deliciously refreshing kir. For wines you
        many want to wait for your tour of the vineyards or the wider selection
        available at Beaune.
        Dijon is a good city for walking and exploring by
        yourself. To see some of the towns past glories, head for the
        semi-circular Place de la Libération (formerly the Place Royale),
        designed by Jules Hardouin-Mansart, architect of the Château de
        Versailles. The elegant 17th- and 18th-century façades of the Palais
        des Ducs conceal the underlying Renaissance structures of the dukes
        heyday, but many of their treasures remain to be seen inside, in the
        Musée des Beaux-Arts.
        You get a notion of the magnificence of Burgundian court
        life by starting your visit with the ducal kitchens, built in 1435,
        which boast six enormous walk-in cooking hearths.
        The ground-floor rooms of the museum house a model of the
        old palace and a collection of Burgundian sculpture from the 15th
        century to the present day. In the upstairs picture galleries, the
        dukes close links with the Flemish masters of their day are
        illustrated by works such as the fine Nativité of the anonymous Maître
        de Flémalle and Dierick Boutss Tête de Christ. The collection also
        includes important paintings by Rubens, Frans Hals, Veronese, Konrad
        Witz, and Martin Schongauer.
        But the museums greatest treasures are undoubtedly the
        dukes tombs in the Salle des Gardes — brought here from the
        Charter­house of Champmol, which was destroyed during the
        Rev­o­lu­tion. It took the sculptors Jean de Marville, Claus Sluter,
        and Claus de Werve 26 years (from 1385 to 1411) to complete the
        intricate marble and alabaster sculptures for the extravagant mausoleum
        of Philippe le Hardi. On the sides of the tomb bearing the recumbent
        statue of the duke are carved 41 mar­vel­ously expressive figures of
        mourners cloaked in monastic capes, variously praying, meditating, and
        lamenting. The double sepulchre of Jean sans Peur and his wife,
        Marguerite de Bavière, is also lavishly sculpted, although more
        stylized. Near the ducal tombs is Rogier van der Weydens portrait of
        the third great duke, Philippe le Bon, with the Golden Fleece — the
        emblem of the chivalrous order that he founded in 1429.
        To the east of the palace are the Eglise Saint-Etienne and
        arresting Eglise Saint-Michel. And to the north of the palace are the
        13th-century Gothic Notre-Dame and, along the Rue de la Chouette and
        the Rue Verrerie, attractive late-Gothic and Renaissance houses, with
        picturesque inner courtyards, that have been transformed into antiques
        shops. In the Rue des Forges, note the Hôtel Chambellan (at number 34)
        and the Hôtel Aubriot (at number 40), home of the Provost of Paris who
        built the Bastille prison.
        Côte dOr
        Delightful as the vineyards of Burgundy may be, the
        landscape and villages of certain other routes des vins may be
        considered prettier — those of Alsace, for instance. And other wine
        growers, such as those around Bordeaux, may have more handsome
        châteaux. But none can compete with the music of the famed names of the
        Côte dOr, which make a wine connoisseurs taste buds tingle:
        Gevrey-Chambertin, Chambolle-Musigny, Vougeot, Vosne-Romanée,
        Nuits-Saint-Georges, Pommard, Meursault, Puligny-Montrachet,
        Santenay.
        From Dijon down to Santenay, the Côte dOr — côte here
        means hillside not coast — is just 60 km (37 miles) long. As you
        drive south from Dijon, be sure to get off the main road, the N74, onto
        the parallel D122, signposted as the Route des Grands Crus (Route of
        the Great Vintages). You then eventually rejoin the N74 at Clos de
        Vougeot.
        The sign Grappillage Interdit means just what it says —
        Dont steal the grapes, referring even to those left hanging at the
        end of the harvest. Many of the famous vineyards are open to visitors,
        but tasting is strictly for serious customers who show a clear
        intention to buy.
        The village of Gevrey-Chambertin and the medieval
        châteaus wine cellars make a good first stop. But the best cellars
        open to the public are those in the château at Clos de Vougeot, owned
        by the Cis­ter­cian monks until the Revolution and now the property of
        the Chevaliers du Tastevin (fraternity of wine tasters). The splendid
        old vats and winepresses are themselves worth the visit, and the guides
        will tell you everything you want to know about wine.
        For the beginner — and for most others, too — Beaune is
        the place to buy. Its the center of the industry, and practically all
        the great wines are represented here. You wont get a better bargain at
        the vineyard unless you know the owner. A little Musée du Vin (Rue
        dEnfer) tells the history of wine-making, with all its paraphernalia,
        from Roman times to the present day.
        Beaunes best-known building, the Hôtel-Dieu, is a
        beautifully preserved 15th-century hospital with spectacular colored
        roof tiles. Be sure to see the masterpiece of Flemish art commissioned
        for the hospital chapel, Rogier van der Weydens altarpiece of the Last
        Judg­ment. It is now on display in the museum, along with tapestries
        that adorned the walls of the unheated hospital wards to keep the
        patients warm.
        Cluny
        The abbey that today stands in ruin at the southern tip of
        Burgundy ruled its medieval world the way Louis XIVs Versailles
        dominated 17th-century France. The gigantic 12th-century Abbatiale
        Saint-Pierre-et-Saint-Paul was the largest church in Christendom until
        the completion of Saint Peters in Rome in the 17th century. Only the
        right arm of one of the two transepts and the octagonal belltower, the
        Clocher de lEau-Bénite, remain. But these are impressive in themselves
        and Clunys excellent young guides (English-speaking in summer) help us
        conceive the rest. There used to be five naves, two transepts, five
        belltowers, and 225 choir stalls.
        The elegant classical 18th-century cloisters make a
        poignant contrast with the Romanesque church. The 13th-century granary,
        beside an even older flour mill, has been turned into an admirable
        museum for the abbeys sculpted capitals displayed on reconstructed
        pillars.
        To see some of Clunys impact on the surrounding
        countryside, visit a few of the villages whose Romanesque churches were
        built by Clunys architects and craftsmen: among them,
        Saint-Vincent-des-Prés, Taizé, Berzé-la-Ville, and Malay.
        Jura
        The Jura mountains cover several eastern départements
        making up the region of Franche-Comté. The rampart-like mountains and
        dense pine forests keep this area remote and, even today, blessedly
        un­spoiled. This area is a favorite of hikers who enjoy invigorating
        journeys through dense forests and along the river valleys celebrated
        in the paintings of Gustave Courbet.
        Besançon
        A convenient base for side trips, the capital of the
        Franche-Comté region has an attractive city center around the
        pedestrian zone of the Grande-Rue. Favorite sons of Besançon include
        Victor Hugo, 19th-century thinker Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, and Auguste
        and Louis Lumière, inventors of cinematography. Guided tours are
        available by boat and tourist train during the summer; and audio
        guides can be rented at the Office de Tourisme (Place de la Première
        Armée Française).
        The citadel, built by Vauban, offers great views and is
        home to several museums, including the fascinating Musée Comtoise, full
        of local artifacts; an Insectarium; an Aquarium; and a Noctarium, an
        exhibit of local nocturnal animals. La Porte Noire, a Roman arch on the
        Rue de la Convention, leads you to the 12th-century Cathé­drale
        Saint-Jean. Try to visit the cathedrals horloge astro­no­mique on the
        hour to see the figures emerge from the clock.
        The Musée des Beaux-Arts (in the Place de la Révolution)
        claims to be the oldest in France (1694). Of the Italian paintings,
        Bellinis LIvresse de Noé (The Drunkenness of Noah) and Gior­danos
        Philosophe Cynique are outstanding. Look, too, for Cranachs Lucrèce
        and Le Repos de Diane, and fine French works by Ingres, Courbet, and
        Bonnard.
        Arc-et-Senans
        The 18th-century Saline Royale (Royal Saltworks), now
        abandoned, is surely one of the most elegant factories in the world. It
        was in fact the nucleus of a utopian city conceived by Claude-Nicolas
        Ledoux, who had the outlandish idea of making working conditions for
        the salt-laborers pleasant. In green surroundings, the buildings of the
        saltworks are set in a semicircle around administrative offices, each
        with easy access to the other and all in simple classical style.
        There is a museum devoted to Ledouxs plans, models, and
        avant-garde theories; and seminars are held here on urban and
        industrial planning.
        Vallée de la Loue
        While you are in the Jura, take the time to trace the Loue
        river and its tributary, the Lison, back to their cascading sources
        through the landscapes that inspired so many of Courbets paintings.
        His hometown was Ornans. Stand on the Grand Pont for the celebrated
        view of the strange old timbered houses reflected in the calm waters of
        the river that runs through the middle of the town. Close by the bridge
        is the Musée Courbet, in his childhood home, with the old walking stick
        depicted in his famous painting Bonjour Monsieur Courbet.
        Les Reculées
        These intriguing horseshoe-shaped valleys nestle like
        narrow amphi­theaters against abrupt rocky cliffs, making rewarding
        destinations for a pleasant days hike.
        One of the best is the Cirque de Baume, between
        Lons-le-Saunier and Baume-les-Messieurs. Southeast of Arbois, the
        Reculée des Planches takes you to the fairy-tale waterfalls of the
        Cuisance and ends at the dramatic Cirque du Fer à Cheval. By then
        youll be more than ready to sample some heady Arbois wine — try the
        vin jaune with a chunk of Comté cheese.
        NORTHWEST
        Northwestern France includes a long seacoast, stretching
        along the English Channel (La Manche), around Brittany, and down to the
        mouth of the Loire. The sea has always played an important role in the
        history of this corner of France, from Scandinavians arriving in
        longships to Celts fleeing from Anglo-Saxons and Normans sailing to
        conquer England.
        Today, Normandy offers a welcoming coastline dotted with
        old seaside resorts, wonders such as Mont-Saint-Michel, and reminders
        of the battles of D-Day. The interior is a patchwork landscape of rich
        green farmland, timber-framed houses, ruined abbeys, Romanesque
        churches, and busy cities, all with a distinctive cuisine featuring
        apples, butter, cream, and cheese.
        Brittanys countryside is wilder and less civilized, with
        a jagged coastline to match. But the rugged coast shelters many sandy
        beaches, seaside resorts, and fishing ports, and inland you will find
        picturesque châteaux and towns, canals and rivers.
        The Loire Valley is impressive for more than its countless
        châ­teaux. Its coastline, inland waterways, forests, architecture,
        wine, and food present the good life in abundant variety.
        Normandy
        The region divides into an eastern half, Haute-Normandie,
        along the Seine Valley, similar in scenery to the Ile-de-France; and
        the more rugged Basse-Normandie to the west, more akin to neighboring
        Brittany. Vast expanses of land are cultivated; orchards and lush
        cattle pastures produce the famous strong cider and pungent cheeses.
        The Atlantic climate produces changeable but pleasant summer weather.
        Visitors should be wary of incoming tides, which can move very
        fast.
        Dieppe
        Frances oldest seaside resort and the closest beach to
        Paris is a popular gateway to Normandy for those crossing the English
        Channel from Newhaven. But as a working fishing port with an attractive
        seafront, long promenade, and restored 17th-century Saint-Jacques
        quarter, the town is worth a visit in its own right.
        Children will enjoy the Cité de la Mer (37 Rue de lAsile
        Thomas), with exhibits on the history of boatbuilding, the fishing
        industry, and how tides and currents shape the coastline.
        The Musée de Dieppe, also known as the Château-Musée, in
        the 15th-century château in the Rue de Chastes, has a good collection
        of model ships and carvings in ivory, dating from the 18th century when
        elephant tusks were a major import from Africa and Asia.
        Memorials in the Square du Canada and the beautiful
        Canadian Cemetery in nearby Hautot-sur-Mer commemorate the courageous
        but abortive Canadian raid on Nazi-held Dieppe on August 19, 1942.
        Rouen
        Rouen is the ancient center of Normandys thriving textile
        industry, and the place of Joan of Arcs martyrdom — a national symbol
        of resistance to tyranny. Gustave Flaubert was born in Rouen and used
        the city as a setting in Madame Bovary.
        Normandys capital suffered devastating bomb damage in
        1944 and many buildings have since been lovingly restored or
        reconstructed. The charming medieval and Renaissance center around the
        cathedral has been renovated and is now reserved for pedestrians. Rouen
        continues to work on its monuments and public buildings, and recently
        has finished quayside renovations aimed at bringing life back to the
        riverside with new promenades.
        To tour the center of the city, start your walk at the
        western end of the historic district, on the Place du Vieux-Marché. The
        old and new Rouen come together around the bright and airy market halls
        and the attractive modern Eglise Sainte-Jeanne-dArc. Nearby is a
        monument to mark the spot where Joan was burned at the stake in 1431.
        Inside the church are some fine 16th-century stained-glass windows,
        salvaged from an older church bombed in 1944.
        Leading eastward from the market is Rouens most famous
        street, the Rue du Gros-Horloge — now as always the citys bustling
        commercial center. Its timber-framed houses of the 15th, 16th, and 17th
        centuries are marvelous examples of sturdy Norman architecture,
        achieving a pleasing irregularity in the way the plaster is set in
        oblique forms between the solid oak posts and collar beams supporting
        the balconies. The elegant Renaissance arched clocktower of the Gros
        Horloge is Rouens emblem, its Eiffel Tower. The ornamental gilded
        clock face has only one hand, for the hours.
        East of the Gros Horloge stands the great Cathédrale
        Notre-Dame, made famous in modern times by Monets many Impres­sion­ist
        studies of its façade. The asymmetry of the two towers embracing the
        delicate tracery of the slender spires creates a distinctive
        silhouette.
        The cathedral was constructed over several centuries and
        the façade offers a remarkably harmonious anthology of Gothic
        architecture. The north tower, the Tour Saint-Romain, has the sober
        simplicity of the cathedrals early Gothic beginnings in the 12th
        century, while the taller, more elaborate south tower, the Tour de
        Beurre, is Flamboyant Gothic of the 15th century. According to local
        belief, Catholic burghers subsidized this Butter Tower in return for
        the privilege of eating Normandy butter during Lent. The austerely
        sculpted porches flanking the main entrance are from the early period,
        and the more ornamental elongated central porch and the gabled upper
        windows were added in the 15th and 16th centuries. The main spire is
        neo-Gothic of the 19th century.
        The rather severe interior of the cathedral contrasts with
        its elaborate exterior, but the impact of the double-storied nave is
        lightened by the tall arches of the choir. In the Chapelle de la Vierge
        (beyond the choir) is the monumental Renaissance Tomb of the Cardinals
        of Amboise, with superbly sculpted allegories of the cardinal virtues.
        On the south side of the choir is the more modest tomb of the most
        heroic of medieval English kings, portrayed recumbent above the
        inscription in Latin: Here is buried the heart of King Richard of
        England, known as the Lion-Hearted. 
        Behind the cathedral, cross over the Rue de la République
        to the 15th-century Eglise Saint-Maclou, the richest example of
        Flam­boy­ant Gothic in the country. Note the masterful Ren­ais­sance
        carving of the oak doors on the central and north portals. In the
        interior, the same exuberant artistry can be admired in the sculpted
        wood organ frame and the stone tracery of the spiral staircase.
        Turn north on Rue Damiette, graced by some of the towns
        handsomest old houses. The street leads to the elegant 14th-century
        Gothic abbey church, the Abbatiale Saint-Ouen, best observed from the
        little park east of the chancel.
        The last great monument of the old town, in the Rue aux
        Juifs, is the grand Palais de Justice, a jewel of Renaissance and
        Flamboyant Goth­ic architecture built on the site of the medieval
        ghetto. Exca­va­tions have uncovered a 12th-century structure under
        part of the Palais de Justice. This structure is currently known as the
        Mon­u­ment Juif as experts debate whether it was a synagogue, a school,
        or perhaps a residence.
        This prosperous city has many museums, including a
        well-endowed Musée des Beaux-Arts (Square Verdrel), with works by
        Velázquez, Caravaggio, Perugino, Veronese, and Rubens. French painters
        represented include Delacroix and François Clouet, as well as
        Géricault, who was born in Rouen. The Musée de la Céramique (1 Rue
        Faucon) displays the local colorful glazed earthenware (faïence) and
        china from France and the rest of the world. For a collection of early
        — and attention-getting — medical equipment, visit the Musée Flaubert
        (51 Rue de Lecat).
        Jumièges
        The D982 leading west from Rouen is the start of the Route
        des Abbayes, which meanders through woodland and meadows around the
        medieval Norman abbeys — most of them enjoying their heyday under
        William the Conqueror — at Saint-Martin-de-Boscherville, Jumièges,
        Saint-Wandrille, Le Bec-Hellouin, and Caen, culminating in their
        masterpiece, Mont-Saint-Michel.
        The ruins of the huge abbey of Jumièges are perhaps the
        most impressive: the white-granite shells of two churches, the
        Roman­esque Notre-Dame and the smaller Gothic Saint-Pierre. Duke
        William returned from his conquest of England to attend the
        consecration of Notre-Dame in 1067. Seven centuries later, the
        Bene­dictine mon­as­tery was disbanded by the Revolution. The sturdy
        edifices resisted total destruction and are still dominated by
        Notre-Dames two soaring square towers, minus their original
        spires.
        Honfleur
        Situated on the Seine estuary, this pretty port has
        witnessed the beginning of many seafaring adventures — including Samuel
        de Cham­plains departure for what would become Quebec — and is still a
        mecca for sailors. Artists are also fond of this harbor and its
        constantly changing light; among 19th-century visitors were Cézanne,
        Corot, Monet, Seurat, and Sisley, and painters still flock to Honfleur
        today.
        Towering over the sheltered yachting harbor of the Vieux
        Bassin are tall houses with slate and timber façades. The old
        shipbuilders quarter, along the Rue Haute, is well worth exploring. It
        runs westward from the Lieutenance, the 16th-century remains of the
        royal governors house at the harbor mouth. Among the several museums
        in Honfleur are the Musée de la Marine, with a collection of nautical
        treasures, housed in the 14th-century Eglise Saint-Etienne (Quai
        Saint-Etienne); and the Musée Eugène Boudin (Place Erik Satie), with a
        rich display of paintings by Norman artists and visitors to
        Normandy.
        The Pont de Normandie, only 2 km from Honfleur, is an
        elegant new bridge spanning the mouth of the Seine, and giving quick
        access to the port of Le Havre. Completed in 1995, it shattered the
        record for cable-stayed bridges, with a span of 856 m (2,808 ft).
        Deauville
        Blending old-fashioned elegance with modern comforts, the
        most prosperous of Normandys seaside resorts is also the most
        expensive. But even if your budget doesnt extend to staying in
        Deauville, take a walk along the wooden promenade (the celebrated
        planches) and participate in one of the towns favorite activities:
        people-watching.
        Horse-lovers come for the summer racing — flat and steeple
        — and for the prestigious yearling sale. What they win on the racing,
        they gamble at the casino. The tennis and golf are first class.
        Yachts­men should bear in mind a Deauville proverb: if you can see the
        port of Le Havre, it will rain in the afternoon, and if you cant, its
        already raining.
        Côte Fleurie
        Between the estuaries of the Touques and Dives rivers,
        20 km (12 miles) of sandy beaches, handsome villas, and picturesquely
        ­weather-beaten old hotels give a nostalgic peek at Napoleon IIIs
        Second Empire and the Belle Epoque of the 1900s.
        The oldest of this coasts resorts, Trouville, is now a
        slightly down-market Deauville, but just as lively. It has an excellent
        beach, and bistros on the port serve excellent seafood.
        The charm of Houlgate is in the trees and flowers of its
        gardens and its sandy beach. Take the long walk at low tide east to the
        cliffs of the Vaches Noires (Black Cows).
        Cabourg is the most stately of the old Channel resorts.
        Marcel Proust spent many summers at its splendid Grand Hôtel, where he
        wrote part of his A la Recherche du Temps Perdu.
        Pays dAuge
        Inland from the Côte Fleurie the countryside reflects the
        popular image of Normandy: orchards, rolling valleys, and massive
        timbered manor houses, the land where apples are turned into cider and
        Calvados, and dairies churn out pungent, creamy Camem­bert, Livarot,
        and Pont-lEvêque.
        The well-marked Route du Cidre and Route du Fromage are
        good guides to the towns and villages of the area, including the
        picturesque village of Beuvron en Auge. Local tourist offices will
        gladly direct you to farms where you can sample the regional cheeses
        and buy them on the spot — more fun than in the unexceptional towns of
        Camembert, Pont-lEvêque, and Livarot themselves. Drivers should be
        wary of the strong cider.
        Caen
        Little remains of Caens historic center, but its good
        hotels and excellent seafood restaurants make it, with Bayeux, a useful
        starting-point for visits to the Normandy invasion beaches. Caen was a
        major objective of the Allies in the 1944 landings. It took two months
        to capture and was devastated by Allied bombs and the shells of the
        retreating Germans.
        Fortunately, the noble silhouette of the Abbaye aux Hommes
        has survived (best seen from the Place Louis-Guillouard). Its church,
        the Eglise Saint-Etienne, harmoniously combines Roman­esque towers and
        nave with Gothic steeples, choir, and chancel. It was begun in the
        momentous year of 1066, and William the Con­quer­or made its first
        abbot his archbishop of Canterbury. The elegant 18th-century monastery
        buildings are now Caens town hall.
        The remains of Williams solid 11th-century castle house
        an ex­cellent collection of Euro­pean painting in the Musée des
        Beaux-Arts. Highlights include Pous­sins Mort dAdonis, Tiepo­los
        Ecce Homo, Veroneses Ten­ta­tion de Saint Antoine, and Rubens Abraham
        et Melchisédech. The nearby Musée de Normandie makes a handsome
        introduction to regional folklore.
        The Mémorial de Caen (Espla­nade General Eisen­hower)
        calls itself a museum for peace.  The exhibits — which are highly
        interactive — place the events of D-Day and World War II in the context
        of the 20th century as a whole.
        Bayeux
        The first French town to be liberated in World War II (on
        the day after D-Day), Bayeux was blessedly preserved from destruction.
        Its Gothic cathedral dominates a charming old town (vieille ville) of
        medieval and Renaissance houses on Rue Saint-Martin, Rue Saint-Malo,
        and Rue Bourbesneur.
        But the towns most cherished treasure is the magnificent
        Bayeux Tapestry (or more accurately, embroidery), which was created for
        Bayeux Cathedral in 1077 to tell the story of Duke Williams conquest
        of England. It is lovingly mounted in the Centre
        Guillaume-le-Conquérant, in the Rue de Nesmond, and is accompanied by a
        fascinating film (in English or French) that explains the works
        historical background.
        No dreary piece of obscure medieval decoration, the
        beautifully colored tapestry gives a vivid and often humorous picture
        of life at Williams court, with insights into medieval cooking,
        lovemaking, and the careful preparations for war. These and the
        climactic Battle of Hastings are depicted with all the exciting action
        and violence of a modern adventure film, with a cast of
        626 char­ac­ters, 202 horses, 55 dogs, and 505 other animals.
        D-Day Beaches
        Before 6 June 1944 the peaceful stretch of coast west of
        Cabourg, from Ouistreham to the Cotentin peninsula, was known simply as
        the Côte du Calvados, a flat, undramatic shoreline broken by a few
        unspectacular chalk cliffs and sand dunes. And then, at 6:30am on
        D-Day, came the first of a fleet of 4,266 vessels to turn the beaches
        into beachheads with their now famous code names: Sword, Juno, Gold,
        Omaha, and Utah.
        Today the visitor will find an atmosphere of rather bleak
        serenity that is in itself as evocative as the remaining concrete
        bunkers and blockhouses, some simple monuments on the sites of the
        action, and the miles of crosses in the military cemeteries.
        To see where the British and Canadians, with the support
        of the Free French forces, attacked on the eastern half of the beaches,
        start out at the port town of Ouistreham-Riva-Bella. A museum, in the
        Place Alfred-Thomas, details the combined Anglo-French operation to
        capture this stretch of Sword Beach, with uniforms and weapons used
        during the action, including a pocket submarine and Goliath tank.
        Drive west along the D514 to Bernières and Courseulles
        (where the Canadians staged their Juno Beach landings, marked by
        monuments on the beaches), and then the Canadians cemetery 4 km
        (21⁄2 miles) to the south at Reviers.
        At Arromanches, you can see the most fascinating monument
        to British ingenuity in the Allied landings — the remains of an
        artificial harbor. The floating steel-and-concrete jetties and
        pontoons, hauled across the English Channel, were the only way of
        unloading tanks and heavy artillery on a coastline (Gold Beach) without
        natural harbors. The Musée du Débarquement on the seafront includes an
        exciting film explaining the whole heroic action.
        The Americans Omaha and Utah beaches, from Colleville to
        La Madeleine, are now official map references, a cartographers tribute
        to the theater of the fiercest fighting in the D-Day landings. The
        windswept, desolate coastline frequently recalls the stormy conditions
        that prevented the Americans from setting up their own artificial
        harbor to land their equipment. More eloquent than any museum are the
        9,386 white marble crosses of the American military cemetery on a cliff
        overlooking Omaha Beach at Colleville-Saint-Laurent.
        The Utah Beach museum and monument are 5 km (3 miles)
        inland from La Madeleine, near Sainte-Marie-du-Mont. Local tourist
        offices and the ones at Caen and Bayeux can direct you to other museums
        and to the 27 Allied and German military cemeteries in the region.
        Mont-Saint-Michel
        This island sanctuary at the border between Normandy and
        Brittany is truly a merveille de lOccident — a Wonder of the Western
        World.  That first glimpse of the towering, steepled abbey rising from
        the sea on its rock is a moment you will not forget.
        Unfortunately, the crowds of tourists in the summer can be
        overwhelming, and some visitors prefer to admire it from a distance.
        The view of the illuminated mont at night is spectacular from the other
        side of the bay. If you do decide to go in summer, start early in the
        day.
        The bay around the mounts granite outcrop has been
        steadily silting up in recent years, so that its an island only during
        very high tides. These are most dramatic during the spring and autumn
        equinox, when the sea comes in at a rate of nearly 50 m (164 ft) a
        minute over a distance of 15 km (9 miles). This proved highly dangerous
        to pilgrims who approached the abbey across the sands (the causeway
        joining the island to the mainland was not built until 1874).
        On what was once a Celtic burial ground (originally named
        Mont-Tombe), the bishop of the nearby town of Avranches began by
        building an oratory in the eighth century — at the prompting, he
        claimed, of the Archangel Michael. Then in 1017 Benedictine monks
        started work on the flat-roofed abbey you can see in the Bayeux
        Tapestry, propped up on a platform with blocks of brown granite brought
        from the Channel islands of Chausey 40 km (25 miles) away.
        By the 14th century, the abbey was surrounded by a
        fortified village. The pilgrims flocked here throughout the Hundred
        Years War, paying tolls to the English, who controlled the surrounding
        territory — though they never succeeded in breaking through the mounts
        defenses. After a period of steady decline, the monaster y was
        dismantled even before the Revolution. It was saved from total
        destruction only to end up, ignominiously, as a state prison.
        Beginning on the upper terrace with a splendid view of the
        bay, the hour-long guided tour (conducted in English, French, or
        German) takes you through three levels of abbey buildings: the church,
        cloister, and refectory at the top; the Salle des Chevaliers (Knights
        Hall) and Salle des Hôtes (Guests Hall) in the middle; and the
        storeroom and almonry underneath.
        The abbey church combines a sturdy Romanesque nave with a
        markedly lighter and more airy Flamboyant Gothic chancel. The choir and
        chancel do not stand on the islands granite core but on a platform
        formed by three crypts, with the massive columns of the Crypte des Gros
        Piliers doing most of the work.
        In a magical space looking out over the sea, the
        beautifully sculpted columns of the cloister create a perfect framework
        of grace and delicacy for a moments meditation. With the cloister, the
        monks ethereally lit refectory, the grand Knights Hall, and the
        elegant Guests Hall together make up the masterpiece of 13th-century
        Gothic architecture that earned the abbey its name of la Merveille.
        Future access to the island has been the subject of lively
        debate — with suggestions of replacing the causeway with a bridge or
        with boat service. And there have been proposals to control sales of
        fast food and souvenirs.
        Brittany
        The province of Brittany, as its natives will tell you, is
        a country apart, proud of its regional culture and guarding its
        seclusion from the rest of France.
        The sea beckons many visitors to Brittany, with a
        combination of a craggy coastline and great sandy beaches, seaside
        resorts on the Côte dEmeraude (Emer­ald Coast), and small harbor towns
        on the Golfe du Morbi­han. But you will also have fun hiking in the
        forests and rocky landscapes between Huelgoat and Roc Tré­ve­zel and
        exploring the prehistoric menhir country around Car­nac and the famous
        Parish Closes (enclos paroissiaux).
        Côte dEmeraude
        The Emerald Coasts 70 km (43 miles) of rugged cliffs and
        caves alternate with quiet resorts offering sandy beaches.
        The little port town of Cancale — with a wide vista across
        the bay of Mont-Saint-Michel — has been a major center of
        oyster-breeding since earliest Celtic times. You can examine the oyster
        beds from the ports jetty, the Jetée de la Fenêtre.
        The coast road takes you west to Pointe du Grouin, a cliff
        40 m (130 ft) high, with a spectacular view of the Chausey Islands to
        the north and to Saint-Malo, a town steeped in seafaring history; its
        sailors left their name as far afield as the Malouines, claimed by the
        British as the Falkland Islands. Saint-Malo remains an important
        fishing port, ferry terminal, and yacht harbor.
        Saint-Malo suffered severe bomb damage during World War
        II, but the old town, surrounded on three sides by the sea, has been
        tastefully restored. Its ramparts, built and rebuilt from the 12th to
        the 18th centuries, make a bracing walk, with the stretch between the
        Saint-Philippe bastion and the Tour Bidouane opening up a vista along
        the whole Emerald Coast. At low tide you can walk or wade out to the
        little island of Grand Bé, with its simple, unadorned tomb of the
        locally born Romantic writer Chateaubriand.
        In the Musée dHistoire de la Ville, in the castle keep,
        the towns naval history is told through the lives of its great
        navigators and pirates, together with all the colorful paraphernalia of
        sailing.
        Like many French seaside resorts, Dinard was a discovery
        of the British in the 19th century, who called it Queen of the Emerald
        Coast.  The British, soon followed by Americans, appreciated the
        broad, sheltered beach and the particularly mild microclimate — palms,
        fig trees, tamarisk, and camellias all flourish here.
        In a still faintly Victorian atmosphere, Dinard has
        preserved all the best assets of a good resort: luxury villas and long,
        paved promenades, plush hotels, elegant boutiques, discothèques,
        casino, parks and gardens, and an Olympic-size public swimming
        pool.
        The pink sandstone cliffs at Cap Fréhel, 70 m (230 ft)
        above the sea, look out across the Grande and Petite Fauconnière bird
        sanctuaries, with their colonies of cormorants and black-and-white
        guillemots. On a clear day, from the new lighthouse (145 steps) you can
        see 100 km (62 miles) or more.
        Dinan
        Inland from the Côte dEmeraude, on the Rance River, is
        the pretty market town of Dinan. The ramparts of its vieille ville
        enclose medieval cobbled streets and half-timbered houses. Climb the
        15th-century clock tower in the Rue de lHorloge or visit Le Jardin
        Anglais, in front of the 12th-century Basilique Saint-Saveur, for a
        good view over the river, the small port, and the viaduct.
        Parish Close Road
        The enclos paroissial (parish close) epitomizes the
        religious life of rural Brittany during the 16th to 18th centuries.
        This architectural ensemble encompasses church, cemetery, charnel house
        or ossuary, and calvary (a unique free-standing structure with carvings
        illustrating Bible scenes, often with characters in contemporary
        dress), all grouped in a square and entered via a triumphal arch. The
        elaborate interiors and decorations are attributed to rivalry between
        neighboring villages.
        In a mornings tour from Mor­laix, about 160 km
        (100 miles) to the west of Dinard, you can take in three of the most
        important ones on a route signposted as the Circuit des Enclos
        Paroissiaux. 
        Saint-Thégonnec is an outstanding example, its triumphal
        arch setting the tone for the majestic calvary of 1610. Among the
        40-odd expressively sculpted figures dressed in the costume of
        Henri IVs time, notice the roped hands of the blindfolded Jesus and
        the angels collecting his blood; his tormentor, in breeches, is thought
        to be Henri IV himself. The ossuary, now a chapel, is late Renaissance
        in the very elaborate Breton manner — with Corinthian columns,
        lanterns, niches, and caryatids. The church has an even more elaborate
        Baroque pulpit.
        More than 200 Old and New Testament figures are sculpted
        on the calvary at Guimiliau. The elegant Renaissance style lends an
        unaccustomed sophistication to the nightmarish superstitions of
        medieval Brittany incorporated in the sculpture. Look for the servant
        girl hurtled into hell for flirting with the devil. The church has
        granite statues of Jesus and the Apostles adorning its porch. Inside,
        eight spiral columns support the canopy of the 17th-century carved oak
        baptistry.
        Although a lightning bolt toppled the tower of the church
        of Lampaul-Guimiliau in 1809, the churchs interior remains impressive.
        The 16th-century polychrome rood beam spanning the nave is decorated
        with 12 prophetesses (on the chancel side) and scenes from the
        Passion.
        Huelgoat
        This pretty little town is mainly attractive as a base for
        excursions into the nature reserve of forests, rivers, and pools in the
        Parc Régional dArmorique. You can fish for perch and carp in the lake
        or for trout in the Rivière dArgent (Silver River), or just glide
        around the lake among the swans. At the top end of the lake, you wander
        into dense forest through a fantastic chaos of rocks and grottos that
        according to local tradition are variously inhabited by the Devil and
        King Arthur himself.
        Carnac
        Like the wild countryside of the interior, the megalithic
        monuments of Brittanys menhir country on the south coast take you back
        into the legends and mists of time.
        Carnac is surrounded by fields with thousands of gigantic
        stones (menhirs) arranged in mysterious alignments and patterns set up
        over centuries beginning as early as 5500 b.c. Scholars have suggested
        that the alignments are associated with cults of the sun or moon, or
        are astronomical arrangements for predicting such phenomena as
        eclipses.
        The alignments occupy three main fields a short walk north
        of town. Le Ménec, the biggest, has 1,099 menhirs in 12 rows (plus
        70 menhirs in a circle or cromlech around part of the hamlet of Le
        Ménec). The field of Kermario has a dolmen (chamber built of flat slabs
        on pillars) and 1,029 menhirs in 10 rows. Among them is the Giant of
        Manio, a menhir over 6 m (20 ft) high, shaped like a clenched fist.
        Most impressive is the Kerlescan alignment, 594 menhirs that form what
        local legend calls a frozen army. The best time to see them all is
        early morning, looming out of the mist, or at sunset, throwing dramatic
        shadows.
        The Musée de la Préhistoire (10 Place de la Chapelle)
        exhibits artifacts representative of local life during the Paleolithic,
        Neolithic, Bronze, Iron, and Roman ages.
        La Baule
        The best beach in Europe — at least thats the verdict of
        its regulars. Five km (three miles) of fine sand from Pornichet to Le
        Pouliguen stretch in a perfect half-moon, past chic sailing and beach
        clubs, along an esplanade of luxury hotels with a casino at the
        center.
        If you tire of the easy life on the beachfront, take a
        trip west of La Baule around the wilder coast of the peninsula past
        Batz-sur-Mer (pronounced Bah) to the pretty little fishing port and
        resort of Le Croisic.
        Loire Valley
        The Loire is the longest river in France — flowing an
        impressive 1,010 km (630 miles) from its source in the Vivarais
        mountains south of Saint-Etienne to its estuary west of Nantes — but
        the region of the most interesting châteaux, from Chambord to Angers,
        covers barely a fifth of that distance.
        The route we propose for visitors driving from Paris
        bypasses Orléans on the autoroute, exits at Blois and, after a side
        trip to Chambord, heads west on the N152 to Angers. Just reverse the
        route if youre coming from Brittany.
        For centuries, the Loire river was a vital highway between
        the Atlantic and the heart of France. Commercial traffic declined
        during the 17th and 18th centuries, revived briefly with the advent of
        the steamship in 1832, then succumbed to silting and the onslaught of
        the railways. Today, the Loire is a sleepy waterway, running deep only
        with heavy rains or spring thaws, and its sandbanks and mud flats
        become islands during the summer.
        Blois
        Situated on a hill overlooking the Loire, the town itself
        invites the visitor to linger in the narrow winding streets that lead
        from the cathedral to the château, pausing to admire the handsome old
        houses on the Place Saint-Louis and the Rue Porte-Chartraine.
        The royal château of Blois is interesting for its variety
        of styles — ranging from the 13th to 17th centuries — built around one
        central courtyard. The entrance to the château is through the
        brick-and-stone gateway of the late Gothic Louis XII wing, completed in
        1503. Across the courtyard on the right-hand side is the châteaus most
        distinctive feature, the splendid François I wing. It was built only a
        dozen years after the Louis XII wing but, reflecting the contrast
        between the debonair Ren­ais­sance prince and his dour predecessor, is
        a world apart in elegance and panache.
        The open loggias of its magnificently sculpted octagonal
        stone stair­case dominate the fa­çade. They served as a kind of
        grandstand for courtiers watching important personages arriving on
        state occasions. The little beasts carved on the balconies and
        ­elsewhere around the châ­teau are the royal familys personal em­blems
        — including Louis XIIs porcupine, Fran­çois Is salamander, and Anne
        de Bre­tagnes ermine.
        Of particular interest on the first floor of the
        François I wing is the wood-paneled cabinet (study) of Catherine de
        Médicis, conniving queen mother and regent to three kings of France.
        Many of the 237 carved panels, each different, were believed to conceal
        poisons, as well as jewels and state papers. On the second floor, in
        1588, her son Henri III used not poison but a dozen men armed with
        swords and daggers to do away with his archrival, Duke Henri de
        Guise.
        Chambord
        Upriver, east of Blois, in a huge densely wooded park
        surrounded by 31 km (20 miles) of high walls, the brilliant white
        Château de Cham­­bord is the most extravagant of all the royal
        residences in the Loire Valley. To have easy access to the wild boar
        and deer (which can still be seen from observation platforms in the
        park), François I built himself this glorified 440-room hunting lodge.
        Construction began in 1519 and was largely finished by 1547.
        Apart from its sheer size, the roofline is the most
        striking aspect of the château — a surprisingly harmonious blend of
        cupolas, domes, turrets, spires, and chimneys. It is believed that
        Leonardo da Vinci, whom François brought to the Loire Valley in 1516,
        participated in the design, especially of the central four-towered
        donjon — which makes a dream palace out of a classically feudal castle
        keep — and the celebrated double-ramped spiral staircase in the
        donjons center, which enables people to go up and down without
        meeting.
        The interior is sparsely furnished.
        From Blois, follow the N152 along the right bank of the
        Loire before crossing over to Amboise for a brief look at the exterior
        of the château that housed many of Frances kings. Although a large
        part of the château complex is no longer standing, it remains an
        impressive site. An unusual feature is the huge spiral ramp of the Tour
        des Minimes, wide enough to allow access for horses and provisions.
        Some of the interior has been refurbished in recent years and there is
        a collection of interesting furniture. Leonardo da Vinci spent his last
        days in a small manor house nearby, the Clos-Lucé, now a museum
        illustrating his talents. A bust in the château gardens marks the site
        of his grave. Chenonceaux (unlike the château, the town is spelt with
        an x) is on the south side of the Amboise forest.
        Chenonceau
        One of the most elegant Renaissance châteaux, Chenonceau
        and its famous long gallery are raised on arches to span the Cher
        river. The château was owned by a series of women including the
        beautiful Diane de Poitiers, mistress to Henri II, and Catherine de
        Médicis.
        In the apartments, in addition to fine 16th-century
        Flemish tapestries and French, Italian, and Spanish furniture, youll
        see Dianes neatly kept household accounts. No one knows whether
        Prima­ticcios vivid contemporary portrait of her as Diana, the goddess
        of hunting, does full justice to her beauty.
        After Henris death, his widow, Catherine de Médicis, took
        Chenonceau for herself and added the galleried floors of ballrooms and
        reception halls that complete the bridge across the river.
        Tours of the château are self-guided and there are
        impressive formal gardens and a large park. Boat rides are available on
        the river when the water is deep enough.
        Loches
        To the south of Chenonceaux, on the Indre river, the
        medieval village of Loches is as much an attraction as the château
        itself. The Collegiate Church of Saint-Ours is an interesting piece of
        Roman­esque architecture: it has two steeples at either end of the
        nave, which is surmounted by two octagonal pyramids in place of a roof.
        In the interior, the narthex, or entrance hall, has some fine, although
        partially mutilated, sculptures. Over the nave, the two hollow pyramids
        appear to be designed in the style of chimneys for a castle
        kitchen.
        Stroll along the Rue Saint-Ours and the Rue du Château,
        then wander around the ramparts. Particularly interesting is the
        11th-century donjon (keep) that formed part of the towns southern
        defenses. Two 15th-century additions served as prisons for royal
        enemies.
        At the other end of the fortifications, the terrace of the
        Logis Royal (Royal Lodge) affords a delightful view over the village
        and the Indre Valley. Architecturally, the lodge offers an interesting
        transition from sober Gothic to more decorative Renaissance. An
        interesting feature is Anne de Bretagnes private oratory, built around
        1500 and a masterpiece of Flamboyant Gothic style.
        Azay-le-Rideau
        With walls of dazzling white stone beneath gray slate
        roofs, the picturesque château at Azay reflects the waters of the Indre
        river, 30 km (19 miles) southwest of Tours.
        It was erected in the early 16th century by François Is
        corrupt treasurer, Gilles Berthelot — part of it on a Venetian-style
        foundation of timber piles close-driven into the bed of the river.
        Berthelots wife supervised the design, and the delicacy of its forms,
        especially the slender conical turrets at each corner and the
        double-arched loggias of the main staircase, are the result. The moats
        and turrets — though Gothic in style — are purely decorative, and the
        staircase is noted for its innovative straight flights and landings
        rather than the old spiral form that was designed to fend off
        invaders.
        Madame Berthelot had the large vaulted kitchen built
        almost on a level with the river, so that an indoor well provided the
        closest thing to running water, and an unusually hygienic stone drain
        sent back the slops. You can see the kind of utensils and cake tins her
        cooks would have used — at least, until the château was confiscated by
        the king for Berthelots misdeeds.
        There is a popular son et lumière on summer evenings.
        Saumur
        Heading west from Azay-le-Rideau toward Angers, you cannot
        miss the towering Château de Saumur. The town is also known for its
        sparkling wine and for the caves where about 70 per­cent of Frances
        cultivated mushrooms are grown. The fascinating Musée du Cham­pignon
        (Saint Hilaire Saint Florent) explains the whole process and displays
        fossils found in the caves as well as a troglo­dyte familys home.
        Angers
        The capital city of Anjou is a perfect base for exploring
        the Loire Valley from its western end; this bustling university town
        offers first-class modern shopping in the pedestrian zone around the
        Place du Ralliement.
        Angers is considered one of the most beautiful cities in
        France and is home to many buildings of interest and musuems, including
        the imposing 12th- and 13th-century Gothic Cathédrale Saint-Maurice. If
        not the most beautiful, the château is certainly the most formidable in
        the Loire Valley, a real defensive fortress, its black ramparts still
        forbidding despite having had their towers decapitated on the orders of
        Henri III. The châteaus proudest possession is the great 14th-century
        Apocalypse Tapestry narrating the gospel of Saint John in moving
        detail. Seventy pieces of this remarkable work survive out of an
        original hundred.
        The beautifully restored ruins of the Eglise Toussaint
        (dating from the 13th century) have been incorporated into the Galérie
        David dAngers (33 Rue Toussaint), which houses a unique collection of
        the sculptors portrayals of notables including Balzac, Victor Hugo,
        Gutenberg, Paganini, and George Washington (here in Angers youll see a
        plaster bust, the bronze of which stands in the United States
        Capitol).
        SOUTHEAST
        The southeast of France, from the Alps down through the
        Rhône Val­ley to Provence and the Côte dAzur (French Rivi­era), is
        Frances playground, with resorts that cater to tourists needs in both
        summer and winter. Wheth­er you prefer lying on a beach, leisurely
        strolls, or more energetic activities, you will find what you want
        here.
        The outdoor life in the Savoie Alps and the resorts around
        Mont Blanc (Western Europes highest mountain) can be as exhilarating
        in summer as in winter. Though less energetic, life is equally
        refreshing down on the lovely lakes of Annecy and Le Bourget.
        The Rhône Valley region around Lyon is the epicenter of
        French gastronomy.
        And further south, in Pro­vence, the climate and the slow
        Medi­­ter­­ra­­nean lifestyle take charge. There are Roman ruins and
        feudal fortresses to explore, but you will also want to do some serious
        lounging under shady trees and in sidewalk cafés.
        We also suggest a small selection of holiday resorts and
        excursions on Napoleons wild and beautiful island of Corsica.
        Savoie
        The once-remote province of Savoie, long an independent
        duchy, voted to become a part of France in 1860. The French had little
        interest in the Alps until the mountain-climbing craze was launched by
        the conquest of Mont Blanc in 1786. But it wasnt until 1924, with the
        first Winter Olympic Games at Chamonix, that skiing — at the time only
        cross-country — attracted international attention. Today the slopes are
        packed in winter and some of the newer resorts lack the charm of the
        traditional villages, but the scenery remains unbeatable.
        However, the high mountains, lakes, and spas of Savoie are
        not just for skiiers. Vast fields of wildflowers welcome the spring
        visitor, and in summer horseback riding, mountain biking, tennis,
        rafting, hang-gliding, and paragliding now join the more traditional
        activities of climbing and hiking.
        Even in summer, you should keep a sweater and sunglasses
        with you — for sudden changes in temperature and for the brilliant
        sunlight. Its also important to take the rarefied atmosphere into
        account when exercising.
        Chamonix
        The neighborhood around the church has enough
        old-fashioned charm to retain something of the towns 19th-century
        pioneering atmosphere. For a fuller sense of what it was like when
        mountain-climbing and skiing were in their infancy, spend an hour or so
        in the Musée Alpin, tracing the history of the region, its heroes, and
        their exploits, in photos and displays of equipment.
        The cable car (téléphérique) ride up to the Aiguille du
        Midi (3,840 m/12,470 ft) is the most spectacular in the French Alps,
        offering a breathtaking view of Mont Blancs snow-covered peak,
        altitude 4,800 m (15,770 ft), and the surrounding landscape. For some
        easy hiking, stop off at the lower station of Plan de lAiguille
        (2,310 m/7,580 ft). The cable car up to Le Brévent (2,525 m/8,284 ft),
        northwest of Chamonix, will give you a panoramic view of the whole
        north face of Mont Blanc and the Aiguille du Midi. For a close-up view
        of a glacier and formidable ice caves, take the cable car and rack
        railway up the Montenvers to the dazzling Mer de Glace (Sea of
        Ice).
        Megève
        This perennially fashionable resort is particularly
        popular for family skiing holidays. The slopes are ideal for
        intermediate skiers and instructors are able to pay special attention
        to children.
        For summer visitors, in addition to superb facilities for
        tennis and swimming, the towns setting among grassy alpine meadows and
        pine, spruce, and larch forest is perfect for hikes. A cable car takes
        you to Mont dArbois (1,833 m/6,014 ft) for a great view of the Aravis
        peaks and Mont Blanc. Hikers then continue to Mont Joly (about 5 hours
        to and from the Mont dArbois cable-car station) for an even more
        spectacular view.
        Annecy
        The old town of Annecy would be picture-perfect even
        without the addition of a river running through it — complete with
        swans, a pristine Alpine lake alongside, and a backdrop of snowcapped
        mountains.
        Strolling along the waterfront promenades and through the
        narrow streets and taking boat trips on the lake are the main
        attractions in summer.
        One of the major sights is the much-photographed,
        triangular 12th-century Palais de lIsle, which stands in the middle of
        the Thiou river like the prow of a boat. The building has filled many
        roles over the years, from residence to jail to mint, and is now used
        for exhibitions.
        The imposing château — former home of the Counts of Geneva
        — contains an interesting museum devoted to local archaeology and
        folklore and the natural history of the Alps. The châteaus terrace is
        the best vantage point for pictures of the old town.
        Cruises around Lake Annecy start from the Thiou river.
        Some of them include a cable-car ride to the top of Mont Veyrier
        (1,291 m/4,230 ft) and its spectacular panorama of the Alps, but all
        will give you a wonderful view of the jagged snowcapped peaks of the
        Dents de Lanfon and the rugged La Tournette to the east, and the
        gentler Entrevernes and Taillefer mountains to the west.
        As a sidetrip, take the D909 east to the Mont Veyrier
        cable car, continuing on to the pretty town of Menthon-Saint-Bernard
        and its medieval castle high above the lake. The D42 takes you up to
        the Col de la Forclaz (1,157 m/3,800 ft).
        Aix-les-Bains
        This elegant spa town on the edge of the Lac du Bourget
        has offered cures for rheumatism and other ailments for centuries. The
        fourth-century Roman emperor Gratianus was an early visitor, followed
        much later by such luminaries as the Romantic poet Alphonse de
        Lamartine, Queen Victoria, Saint-Saëns, and Rachmaninov.
        In recent years the French national health system has
        approved reimbursement for spa treatments and the number of curistes
        seeking treatment has risen. Aix is extending its thermal facilities
        and is enhancing its waterfront. Swimming, waterskiing, windsurfing,
        and sailing are all available on the lake as are boat cruises. One
        popular cruise destination (leaving from the Grand Port) is to the
        neo-Gothic Abbaye de Hautecombe.
        The Musée du Docteur-Faure (Villa des Chimères, Boulevard
        des Côtes) contains some Rodin bronzes and watercolors, and works by
        Degas, Sisley, Corot, and Cézanne.
        Rhône Valley
        From its source high in the Swiss Alps, the Rhône flows
        almost due south to the Mediterranean. The Rhône Valley has always been
        a central artery, a channel for river, road, and rail traffic between
        the north and the south. It was the main path of the Romans invasion
        of Gaul, and the key to Lyons commercial wealth in the Middle
        Ages.
        The farmers of the Lyon region benefit from a subtle
        mixture of the cooler and damper north with the first hints of
        Medi­ter­ra­ne­an warmth and light. Some of the best food in the
        country is produced here: poultry from Bresse; freshwater fish from the
        Savoie lakes; Charolais beef; pears, apples, and cherries from orchards
        to the north of town, and peaches and apricots from the ones to the
        south.
        The fruit industry started in earnest in the 1880s as a
        reaction to the phylloxera disease that struck the local vineyards.
        Today, the Beau­jolais country thrives and wine-lovers heading south
        detour to such familiar names as Fleurie, Juliénas, Chénas, Morgon, and
        Brouilly. Continuing south, opposite Tournon, there is the lure of the
        celebrated Côtes du Rhône at Tain-lHermitage.
        Lyon
        Located at the crossroads between north and south, Lyon
        was the ideal choice as the Roman capital of Gaul. The silk trade
        played a large role in Lyons expansion in the 16th century and
        Frances second-largest city remains a prosperous and growing banking,
        textile, and industrial center with a bouncy pride, a taste for the
        good life, an important cultural heritage, and a lively contemporary
        arts scene.
        Food is an important part of any visit to Lyon; superchef
        Paul Bocuse is based here and has many local rivals. In addition to the
        great shrines of haute cuisine in and around the city, you should seek
        out the little bars and cafés and the old-fashioned bistros that the
        Lyonnais call bouchons (after the bunches of straw or foliage that
        served as a sign for the restaurant).
        Its not easy to find your way around Lyon as the city is
        built across the looping confluence of the Saône (rhymes with Rhône)
        and Rhône rivers, with hills on either side and a peninsula in the
        middle. A street map is a must.
        So head first for the tourist office on the huge Place
        Bellecour, in the middle of the Presquile, the peninsula between the
        two rivers. The square has a pretty flower market, and you know youre
        approaching the south of France when you see your first serious games
        of boules here.
        Cross over the Pont Bona­parte to view the Cathédrale
        Saint-Jean and its astronomical clock and then stroll around the fine
        Ren­ais­sance houses of Lyons old town between the Saône river and the
        Fourvière hill. Some of the best examples are found along the Rue
        Saint-Georges, Rue Saint-Jean, Rue du Boeuf, and Rue Juiverie. In the
        handsome Hôtel de Gadagne (Rue du Boeuf), there is a museum of the
        history of Lyon and displays of the marionettes of the towns
        celebrated Guignol theater. The building is undergoing restoration that
        will last until 2004 but the exhibits are expected to remain open.
        Further west, off the Rue de lAntiquaille, are two
        important Roman amphitheaters that are still used for performances
        today and the attractive Musée de la Civilisation Gallo-Romaine (corner
        of the Rue Cléberg), which houses a collection of statues, mosaics,
        coins, and tools.
        Towering over the old city is the elaborate
        late-19th-century Basilique Notre-Dame-de-Fourvière, which boasts four
        towers and various adornments. Take the funicular railway from the
        Place Saint-Jean up to the top of the hill and walk down the Chemin du
        Rosaire, which gives spectacular views of the town below.
        All of this will work up an appetite, easily satisfied in
        the restaurants and cafés of the old town or the Presquîle, or perhaps
        the daily market on the Quai des Célestins and Quai Saint Antoine.
        Shoppers will want to visit the lively Rue de la
        République and the streets around the Place des Jacobins.
        Lyon has a wealth of museums, among which the following
        are certainly worth a visit. The Musée des Beaux-Arts, finely housed in
        a 17th-century Bene­dic­tine abbey (20 Place des Ter­reaux), has a rich
        collection of European paintings, and sculpture. Among the most notable
        are three Rodin bronzes in its cloister, and works by Perugino,
        Veronese, El Greco, Rubens, Courbet, Manet, and Matisse. The Musée des
        Arts Décoratifs (30 Rue de la Charité), which is in the 18th-century
        Hôtel Lacroix-Laval, displays tapestries, furniture, and porcelain;
        next door in the Hôtel Villeroy (34 Rue de la Charité) is the Musée
        Historique des Tissus, with more tapestries and silks and other
        fabrics.
        Provence
        Most people approach Provence from the north; the warmth
        of the sun, the red-tiled roofs, the cypress trees, the garrigue
        (scrubland), and the fragrance of lavender alert you that you have
        arrived. Apart from the flat, well-populated coastal area, much of
        Provence is hilly, with small towns and villages that seem unchanged by
        the passage of time. Women dressed in black chat outside their houses;
        the men gather in shady squares to discuss the days news and play
        pétanque, or boules.
        Provence has been popular for centuries; the monuments of
        the Roman Empire still stand proudly in Orange, Arles, and Nîmes, as do
        the medieval strongholds in Les Baux and Avignon. But the most
        important pleasure of Provence is not the sightseeing but the
        sun-soaked landscape, the leisurely pace of life, and the wonderful
        cuisine.
        Along the coast Provence bristles with cultural activity
        in the summer months, each town using its ancient amphitheater,
        cathedral, or palace as a magnificent setting for festivals of music,
        theater, and the other arts (see page 196).
        The itinerary we propose deals in turn with the various
        layers of Provençal life: the Roman towns of Orange, Vaison, Nîmes,
        and Arles; the medieval bastions of Les Baux and Avignon; the ancient
        villages of the Lubéron mountains; and finally the cheerful streets of
        Aix-en-Provence.
        Orange
        Since Orange is the gateway to Provence, make an
        appropriate entrance into town from the north, at the imposing
        three-arched arc de triomphe. Erected in a.d. 21, it stands on a
        traffic island across the old N7, which here traces the route of the
        ancient Via Agrippa. The friezes on the northern side, depicting battle
        scenes, weaponry, and naval equipment, celebrate Julius Caesars
        victories over the Gallic tribes of the region and the merchant fleet
        of the Greek colony in Marseilles.
        The towns other great Roman monument, the théâtre
        antique, is on the south side of town. His­to­rians regard this as the
        finest and best preserved of all the surviving theaters in the Roman
        Empire, unique for its towering scenic wall, with a statue of Em­per­or
        Augustus to greet you. In Roman times, some 7,000 spectators would
        gather here to watch a circus, Greek tragedy, Latin comedy, or lottery
        draw. Today the theater still provides a wonderful setting for the July
        festivals opera and symphony concerts. From the top of the Colline
        Saint-Eutrope, you get a good birds-eye view of the theater in
        relation to the triumphal arch and the Rhône Valley beyond.
        Vaison-la-Romaine
        A pleasant drive 30 km (19 miles) northeast of Orange
        along the D975 takes you to the site of one of the most important towns
        of Roman Provence. The river Ouvèze, spanned by a Roman bridge,
        separates the attractive medieval haute ville from the modern town and
        Roman ruins. To gain a better understanding of the layout of the
        ancient town, its streets, houses, shops, fountains, and theater, visit
        the museum on the Puymin hill. It displays some superb marble
        sculptures of the second century a.d. , most notably a Venus and the
        Emperor Hadrian and his wife Sabina.
        Pont du Gard
        Take the A9 autoroute southwest from Orange to the
        Fournès-Remoulins exit, then follow the D981 to this gigantic
        2,000-year-old aqueduct, without doubt the most impressive of all the
        Roman mon­u­ments preserved from an­cient Gaul. It carried spring water
        from near Uzés to the town of Nîmes, a distance of 35 km
        (22 miles).
        Built of enormous granite blocks joined without mortar in
        three tiers of arches, 6 at the base, 11 at the middle level, and 35 at
        the top, this highly functional construction is also remarkably
        beautiful, in total harmony with its landscape. The best view is from
        the riverbank near the Château Saint-Privat, beyond the aqueduct.
        Nîmes
        The Emperor Augustus made a gift of this town to the
        veterans of his victory over Antony and Cleopatra in Egypt,
        commemorated to this day in the Nîmes coat of arms with the chained
        crocodile of the Nile. The grand Roman amphitheater (arènes) was built
        for gladiator battles and held more than 20,000 spectators. It has
        since served as the site of combats between lions and Christians, as a
        fortress for the invading Visigoths in the fifth century, as a communal
        residence for the poor in the Middle Ages, and today is the site of a
        variety of events including bullfights.
        The more pacific Greek-style temple known as the Maison
        Carrée, an elegant monument dating from the first century b.c. , is
        noted for the finely sculpted Corinthian capitals on its columns. After
        a varied history as town hall, residence, stable, and church, it was
        saved from plans devised by Louis XIVs minister Colbert to move it
        stone-by-stone to Versailles. Today it houses a small museum­.
        The Carré dArt, an ultramodern building opposite the
        Maison Carrée, exhibits modern art. The rooftop restaurant offers a
        good view over the town. The Musée Archéologique (13 bis Boulevard
        Amiral Courbet), housed in a 17th-century Jesuit college, has an
        important collection of Roman glass.
        The Jardin de la Fontaine — a pretty, tree-shaded
        18th-century park on the slopes of Mont Cavalier at the northwest edge
        of the town — offers a refreshing respite from the summer heat and a
        good view of the surrounding mountains. The park is built around the
        spring of Nemausus, which gave the town its name; it includes a ruined
        temple attributed to the hunting goddess Diana, and the octagonal Tour
        Magne, once part of the Roman walls.
        Arles
        An important town in Roman Gaul, replacing Lyon as capital
        toward the end of the Empire, Arles boasts a very well-preserved
        amphi­theater (arènes), seating over 20,000 in the days of the
        gladiators. Today it is the site of bullfights. For the most
        spectacular view, climb up to the broad path that runs along the roof
        of the arches on its perimeter.
        Less lucky than the one at Orange, the Roman theater
        (théâtre antique) has been reduced to ruins over the centuries, as
        builders carted away masonry for their houses, churches, and town walls
        — but the remains, in a pleasant park, are quietly eloquent of its
        noble past and its stage still rings during the Arles Festival
        (July).
        In the Eglise Saint-Trophime (Place de la République), you
        can see the Roman influence recurring in the triumphal-arch design of
        its splendid porch. This masterpiece of Provençal Romanesque sculpture
        depicts the Last Judgment in the tympanum above the doors, surrounded
        by statues of the saints. Nearby, the church cloister, Cloître
        Saint-Trophime, with its beautiful sculpted capitals on the pillars, is
        a haven of peace.
        To the southeast of the town, cut off by a railway track,
        youll find the melancholy remains of the Alyscamps, the famous Roman
        and medieval burial grounds that were a favorite subject of Van Gogh
        when he came to live in Arles in 1888.
        In the dramatic new Musée de lArles Antique (Avenue de la
        Première Division France Libre), lively exhibitions of Roman statues
        and early Christian sarcophagi with impressive architectural models
        bring the ancient city back to life.
        La Camargue
        At the delta of the Rhône, where its two arms spill into
        the Medi­ter­ra­nean, the Camargue has been reclaimed from the sea to
        form a national nature reserve. The region is famous for its white
        horses, which you can hire to ride along the sandflats; for the black
        bulls that race through the streets of Provençal towns to the
        bullfight; and for the wild duck, herons, and pink flamingos that
        gather here. There are relatively few roads through the Camargue, and
        those that do exist are not always very attractive. So many people
        choose — despite the heat — to follow the many hiking and riding trails
        through the area.
        The Musée Camargais at Albaron gives a glimpse of the
        traditional lifestyle of the area, and sets you off on a 3.5-km
        (2-mile) guided walk through the marshland, and the Parc Ornithologique
        at Pont de Gau allows you to watch a number of bird species without
        long hikes into the interior.
        But the Camargue isnt just a remote haven for wildlife;
        despite the dearth of villages inland there are modern resorts along
        the coast, including the bustling Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer with its
        long, sandy beaches, docking facilities for yachts, and good
        windsurfing — theres even a speed canal that allows surfers to reach
        world-record speeds. The local tourist office will help you find
        organized tours into the interior — on horseback, by boat, and by jeep.
        This town is most famous for the annual gypsy pilgrimage that ends here
        with a festival in May.
        Les Baux-de-Provence
        The astounding sight of this medieval citadel, clinging to
        a massive outcrop of rock cut adrift from the Alpilles mountains, takes
        your breath away. Officially acknowledged as one of the most beautiful
        villages in France, it is also one of the major tourist attractions and
        can be unpleasantly crowded in midsummer.
        The feudal barons of Les Baux put the star of the Nativity
        on their coat of arms, claiming to be descendants of Balthazar, one of
        the Three Wise Men. They ruled the 79 towns of medieval Provence and
        their impregnable fortress became a center of courtly love prized by
        traveling troubadours.
        For centuries the barons defied the papal authority in
        Avignon and the kings of France, offering refuge to Protestants during
        the Wars of Religion, until, in 1632, Louis XIII ordered the
        destruction of Les Baux. The demolition of the citadel was a
        half-hearted job, however, and theres plenty left to see today, from
        ramparts and castle walls to ruined chapels, stone stairways, and
        quaint cobbled streets. Museums, art galleries, and boutiques all add
        to the charm.
        Visit at sundown or out of season to get the full flavor
        of the setting. The nearby Cathédrale dImages uses a former limestone
        quarry as the backdrop for a stunning show of giant images. The theme
        changes each year.
        Avignon
        The City of the Popes is today a proud cultural center,
        home of one of Europes greatest arts festivals, and all year round a
        lively and cheerful town of good cafés, art galleries, and fashionable
        shops.
        Seven popes reigned in Avignon from 1309 until 1377,
        followed by three renegade popes. The Palais des Papes is the resulting
        combination of feudal fortress and opulent palace. During the
        Rev­o­lu­tion, all evidence of luxury was stripped from the palace
        interior, but the structure itself proved stronger than its assailants
        and today it hosts major productions during the annual festival.
        The forbidding design of the Palais Vieux, reflecting the
        pious austerity of Benedict XII, contrasts with successor Clement VIs
        more decorative Palais Nouveau. Frescoes adorn many palace cham­bers,
        among them works by Simone Martini, brought from the porch of
        Notre-Dame des Doms cathedral.
        The Petit Palais, at the northern end of the Place du
        Palais, displays, together with interesting Gothic sculpture and
        frescoes of the Avignon school, a fine collection of Italian painting
        from the 13th to 16th centuries, including major works by Taddeo Gaddi,
        Veneziano, Botticelli, and Carpaccios Holy Conversation.
        Beyond the much-remodeled cathedral, north of the palace,
        is the pleasant garden of the Rocher des Doms, extending to the outer
        ramparts. From here you will get your best view of the Pont dAvignon —
        more correctly called the Pont Saint-Bénézet — broken off halfway
        across the Rhône river. Despite the words of the famous song, the
        dancers used to perform under the bridge, on a little island.
        There are several museums in Avignon, the most exciting of
        which is the newest. The Fondation Angladon-Dubrujeaud (5 Rue
        Laboureur) presents an exceptional private art collection including
        many 19th- and 20th-century masterpieces by the likes of Picasso,
        Cézanne, Van Gogh, Modigliani, Manet, and Degas.
        Center of the bustling life of the modern town is the airy
        Place de lHorloge, surrounded by cafés and a pedestrian zone of smart
        shops along the Rue des Marchands. At the far end are the Place
        Jéru­salem and an old synagogue.
        For an interesting walk through the old town, start at the
        14th-century Eglise Saint-Didier, with its altar sculpture of Jesus
        Carry­ing the Cross by the Dalmatian artist Francesco Laurana. The Rue
        du Roi-René will take you past some handsome 17th- and 18th-century­
        houses; and on the pretty, cobblestoned Rue des Tein­tu­riers you can
        see where the dyers used to work the paddlewheels for their
        Indian-style cloth in the little Sorgue river, emerging here from its
        underground course.
        Lubéron and Vaucluse
        Starting out from Cavaillon, home of famously succulent
        cantaloupe melons, head east to the Lubéron mountains, the heart of the
        Provençal countryside and now a protected regional park. Whole valleys
        are carpeted with lavender, and the garrigue scrubland shimmers with
        every color and fragrance of the sunny Mediterranean. The villages have
        been lovingly restored.
        Perched on a spur of rock, the village of Oppède-le-Vieux
        has been rescued from its ruins by writers and artists seeking a
        residence off the beaten track. Ménerbes is also on a hill, with a
        medieval citadel that served as the Protestants last redoubt in the
        16th-century Wars of Religion. Behind the church on the outskirts of
        town there is a magnificent view over the mountains to the Vaucluse
        plateau and the distant peak of Mont Ventoux.
        Bonnieux juts out over the Coulon Valley. From the
        hillside terrace behind the town hall, look northwest to the
        rust-colored ravines surrounding Roussillon. In order to set off that
        startling red, the villagers of Roussillon paint their houses with
        every imaginable variation of ochre from the neighboring quarries.
        Its dramatic location, looking across to the Lubéron from
        the southern edge of the Vaucluse plateau, has made Gordes one of the
        most prosperous villages in the region, popular for its boutiques and
        little galleries. Its houses hug the hillside on steep, winding
        streets, leading to a 16th-century castle at the top. About 2 km
        (1 mile) south­west of Gordes is the strange little Village Noir,
        consisting of bories, old dry-stone cabins grouped around a bakers
        oven and serving as a museum of rural life in Provence.
        Aix-en-Provence
        The first Roman town in Gaul (a citadel and spa founded in
        125 b.c. as Aquae Sextiae), Aix-en-Provence today is elegant and
        cultured, charming and cheerful. The towns great treasure is a street.
        There are few more refreshing experiences than to arrive in Aix at the
        end of a long hot afternoon and walk under the arching plane trees and
        past the fountains of the Cours Mirabeau. One side of the street is a
        quiet row of gracious buff-colored 17th-century mansions, now home to
        banks and pastry shops dispensing calissons, the celebrated local
        delicacy made from ground almonds, orange, and candied melon. The other
        side is a bustle of cinemas, boutiques, and cafés.
        People still come to take the waters — the moss-covered
        fountain in the middle of the Cours Mirabeau spurts water with a
        natural heat of 34°C (93.2°F). But the university keeps the spirit of
        the town young and cosmopolitan. Youll find fountains and little
        squares scattered all over the old town north of the Cours Mirabeau
        (one of the most attractive of these squares is the tranquil Place
        dAlbertas).
        The cathedral is less worthy of your attention than its
        exquisite little Romanesque Cloître Saint-Sauveur. Chamber music and
        choral recitals are held there during Aixs summer music festival; the
        operas are performed behind the cloister, in the Palais de lAncien
        Archevêché.
        Paul Cézanne spent the greater part of his life in Aix,
        and his studio (Atelier de Cézanne, 9 Avenue Paul-Cézanne) has been
        preserved as a museum, including his palette and other personal
        belongings. But the best way to evoke his memory is to drive out to the
        subject of his most famous landscapes, the Montagne Saint-Victoire,
        14 km (9 miles) east of Aix on D10.
        Côte dAzur
        When the British invented this playground in the 19th
        century, they called it the French Riviera, distinguishing it from the
        Italian one that begins round the corner at Ventimiglia. Nowadays, its
        considered more chic to use its French name, the Côte dAzur.
        In summer its overcrowded, but thats part of the fun.
        You can always head away from the coast and into the hills for some
        peace. Most of the beaches are great; the young people are
        good-looking, and even the older crowd makes for entertaining
        people-watching. Good weather, with hot days and balmy nights, is
        almost guaranteed and apart from the occasional unsightly modern
        apartment block, the coastline outside the resorts has considerable
        charm. The native umbrella pines share the landscape with acacia,
        eucalyptus, and palm trees imported by British gardeners.
        Purists say the Côte dAzur reaches from Cannes to Menton,
        including only the original, more expensive resort towns of
        Juan-les-Pins, Antibes, Nice, and Monte-Carlo. But in recent years the
        tourist industry has extended the Côte westward to include popular
        family-style resorts like Saint-Raphaël and Sainte-Maxime and the
        glamorous Saint-Tropez. Marseilles may not strictly qualify for
        inclusion, but this tough and gritty metropolis is hard to overlook —
        particularly if you like bouillabaisse.
        Marseilles
        This noisy, boisterous, multicultural port is not a
        typical French tourist destination. But Frances oldest city, founded
        by Greek colonists more than 2,500 years ago, should not be ignored. It
        has worked hard to rid itself of its seedy image as a center of
        corruption and drug trafficking, and vast renovations in both the city
        and the port have resulted in a surge in the number of cruise
        visitors.
        The main thoroughfare, the Canebière, will give you a
        taste of the citys heady atmosphere. Explore further and you will find
        a wide variety of urban landscapes, from peaceful squares and parks to
        the narrow streets and steep stairs of the medieval Panier district,
        which make you feel as if you have left France altogether. The Tourist
        Bureau (4 la Canebière) has laid out a two-hour fil dhistoire that
        allows you to explore the old city on foot; there is also an innovative
        choice of tours conducted in air-conditioned taxis equipped with
        recorded cassettes (Taxi-Tourisme).
        The Vieux Port marks the spot where Phocaean-Greek
        merchants from Asia Minor docked to create their Western
        Medi­ter­ra­nean trading post. Today, its a colorful harbor for yachts
        and motor launch es and the site of a lively daily fish market. From
        the Quai des Belges, you can take a cruise out to the Château dIf, the
        island prison that was the scene of Alexandre Dumass Count of Monte
        Cristo.
        The 19th-century basilica of Notre Dame de la Garde offers
        an amazing view over the city, the Mediterranean, and the mountains
        inland. East of Marseilles lies an area of rugged, narrow inlets called
        calanques that are favorites of hikers, mountain climbers, scuba
        divers, cliff divers, yachters, swimmers, and bird-watchers. There is a
        Histobus service from Marseilles and frequent boat tours from the
        charming town of Cassis, about 20 km away.
        Saint-Tropez
        Discovered by the film stars of the 1950s, Saint-Tropez
        has retained its popularity with fashion photographers, models, and
        sundry groupies of the good life.
        The essence of Saint-Tropez has always been the parade of
        people along the Vieux Port, nipping in and out of fashionable
        boutiques, on and off flashy yachts, and table-hopping through the
        cafés.
        You may not find many masterpieces among the offerings of
        the harborside artists, but the Musée de lAnnonciade (Place
        Charles-Grammont) has an outstanding collection of paintings from 1890
        to 1940 — many of them studies of Saint-Tropez itself. Housed in a
        handsomely renovated 16th-century chapel with wonderful natural
        Medi­ter­ra­nean light, they include important works by Bonnard,
        Derain, Van Dongen, Matisse, Signac, and Braque.
        Away from the harborside, the town keeps its Provençal
        character intact on Place des Lices, nicely shaded by plane trees for
        the morning market, a late-afternoon game of boules, or a sunset
        apéritif. For a fine view over the port, climb up to the 16th-century
        citadel, built to defend the town on a coast under constant attack from
        pirates. Drive out of town south along the D93, sign­posted Route des
        Plages, to Tahiti or Pampelonne for the best beaches, which have fine
        sand shaded by lovely umbrella pines.
        Cannes
        This luxury resort offers a magnificent beachfront, the
        most elegant of boutiques and jewelry shops, and the ultimate in grand
        hotels.
        Overlooking the fine white-sand beaches, the Croisette is
        Canness grand palm tree-lined promenade, which runs past the great
        hotels to the old port and the gigantic new Palais des Festivals. This
        is the venue of the international film festival in May and the recorded
        music festival (MIDEM) in January. If you dont mind crowds, both these
        festivals offer plenty of opportunities to gawk at the stars, but dont
        expect to get in to any of the galas unless you have professional
        accreditation.
        Up on the hill overlooking the port, Le Suquet preserves
        something of the old fishing village and gives you a fine view of the
        coast. This may whet your appetite for a boat cruise (from the ports
        Gare Mari­time) to the Iles de Lérins, where you can stroll through
        eucalyptus and pine groves and beautiful flower gardens.
        Just east of Cannes are two towns renowned for their
        craftwork. At Vallauris the ceramics and pottery industry was revived
        almost single-handedly by Picasso, who worked there after World War II.
        He also decorated its Romanesque chapel with murals entitled La Guerre
        et la Paix and left a bronze sculpture on the Place Paul-Isnard. Biot —
        certainly worth visiting for its well-preserved 16th-century center —
        is known for ceramics and heavy tinted glassware that has tiny
        Champagne-like bubbles.
        Saint-Paul-de-Vence
        This feudal fortified village is situated amid colorful
        terraces of vines, bougainvillea, and mimosa, guarded by tall
        cypresses. To enjoy the view over the valley, have a drink on the
        terrace of the Colombe dOr restaurant. If you stay for dinner, youll
        be able to inspect the restaurants famous collection of paintings by
        Matisse, Derain, and Utrillo. An even more impressive collection of
        modern art awaits you at the splendid Fondation Maeght (Montée des
        Trious), located on a grassy hill just outside the town. Here sculpture
        is the main attraction, with an im­posing black stabile by Alex­ander
        Calder at the entrance, some monumental pieces by Miró in the gardens,
        and a matchless array of Giacometti statues in the beautiful
        courtyard.
        Nice
        An ancient Greek trading post, the town manages to combine
        the atmosphere of a resort with a gutsy, bustling city life. The
        tempting shops and first-class restaurants more than make up for the
        crowded pebble beach. Natives and visitors alike stroll on the grand
        Promenade des Anglais, financed by the towns English colony in 1822 to
        replace a little footpath. (Improvement continues to this day with
        efforts to enhance the lot of the pedestrian while still catering to
        the roaring traffic. ) The most remarkable landmark on this waterfront
        is a masterpiece of Belle Epoque wedding-cake architecture, the
        pink-domed Hôtel Negresco. The promenade terminates with a spectacular
        display of flowers and fountains in the Jardin Albert-I.
        The vieille ville, whose architecture shows the towns
        long relationship with Italy, is now the home of many art galleries and
        boutiques. The daily market in the Cours Saleya is a real treat and
        will whet your appetite for the fare at the surrounding cafés
        and restaurants­.
        For a good view over the port, the Baie des Anges, and the
        mountain backdrop, climb up to the little park on top of the hill still
        known as Le Château, even though its castle was destroyed centuries
        ago. The ruins you can see there now are the remains of the
        11th-century cathedral.
        The fashionable residential Cimiez district sits on the
        hills outside the center and offers a quiet interlude from the busy
        streets. In addition to a large park you will find the Franciscan
        Monastère Cimiez (Place du Monastère) with an excellent museum of
        religious art, the Musée Matisse (164 Ave. des Arènes de Cimiez), and
        the Musée et Site Archéologique (164 Ave. des Arènes de Cimiez), next
        to the remains of Roman baths and amphitheater.
        On the way to Cimiez dont miss the Musée Chagall (Ave. du
        Dr. Menard).
        Les Corniches
        The route from Nice to Monaco, along the precipices of the
        Mari­time Alps southern slopes, offers one of the most spectacular
        drives in the country. There are actually three winding roads, or
        corniches: the Grande, the high road, starting out from the Avenue des
        Diables-Bleus in Nice; the Moyenne, the middle one, beginning at Place
        Max-Barel; and the Basse, along the coast from Boulevard Carnot, but
        usually jammed with traffic. Above them all runs the high-speed
        autoroute, a challenging drive itself.
        The Grande Corniche follows the route of the ancient Roman
        road, Via Aurelia. Stop off at Belvédère dEze and La Turbie for great
        views of the coast, especially the lights of Monaco at night. In La
        Turbie, climb up to the remains of a curious 2,000-year-old Roman
        monument — the towering Trophée des Alpes, erected by Emperor Augustus
        to commemorate victories over the 44 Gallic tribes named in the
        inscription on the base.
        The highlight of the Moyenne Corniche, the best road of
        the three, is the hilltop village of Eze. Hanging at a dizzying angle
        above the sea, it was once the fortress of Ligurian brigands. In summer
        its a bit of a tourist trap, but take a look at the cacti and tropical
        flowers (plus ruins of a 14th-century castle) in the Jardin Exotique.
        Its terrace affords the best (but not free) view of the coast.
        The pretty hillside town of Villefranche-sur-Mer is a good
        base for exploring the area, particularly for families with children.
        The deep­-water port allows cruise ships and even aircraft carriers to
        anchor, so the sandy beaches and colorful waterfront cafés and
        restaurants can become quite crowded. But if you climb the maze of
        steep narrow streets into the upper part, youll find peaceful, shady
        squares. Jean Cocteau decorated the little Chapelle Saint Pierre (Quai
        Courbet) with modern frescoes in 1957. The Rue Oscura is the most
        impressive of the ancient vaulted passages.
        Within easy reach of Villefranche are the exclusive resort
        of Saint Jean Cap Ferrat, Beaulieu, Eze, La Turbie, Monaco, and
        Roquebrune-Cap Martin.
        Monaco
        Monaco really is a millionaires paradise. Ever since the
        roulette wheel and baccarat tables began bringing in enough money to do
        away with taxes in the 19th century, this tiny principality has
        attracted the cream of dethroned monarchs, tired moguls, and
        resting athletes­.
        Situated between the Alps and the Mediterranean,
        surrounded by exotic gardens, gleaming skyscrapers have sprung up to
        house all this wealth. North of the square-shaped port, Monte-Carlo is
        the center of the principalitys luxury. The worlds most celebrated
        ­casino was designed by Charles Garnier, architect of the Paris Opera
        House, and boasts a lavishly ornate interior.
        Across the square, the Hôtel de Paris is another monument
        of unabashed ostentation. The Palais du Prince up on Monaco Rock is a
        fairy-tale affair, neo-Renaissance and neo-Baroque, with a quaint
        changing of the guard — fife, drums, and all — at 11:55am
        every day.
        Corsica
        In every sense a region apart from the rest of France,
        this rugged, unspoiled island offers dramatic coastlines and a wild
        interior of densely forested hills. The population of less than a
        quarter million is concentrated mainly in the two major towns of Bastia
        (industrial and noisy, but with a colorful old town) and the more
        attractive Ajaccio.
        You can alternate lazy days on the beach with some of the
        Medi­ter­ra­neans best deep-sea diving, boat excursions around pirate
        coves, canoeing and fishing on inland rivers, or hikes and picnics in
        the mountains. For the vacationer, the best seaside resorts are along
        the indented shorelines of the west and south coasts, for which
        Ajaccios airport and harbor (for the car ferry from Nice, Toulon, or
        Marseilles) provide a convenient gateway. Give yourself plenty of
        driving time to reach your destination, as the roads are narrow and
        tortuous.
        Ajaccio
        At the head of the Gulf of Ajaccio, Napoleons birthplace
        is the liveliest of Corsican towns, but tourists impatient to get out
        to the seaside resorts are usually content with a stroll around the
        port and a pilgrimage to the Maison Bonaparte (Rue Saint-Charles). A
        guided tour of the house will tell you how, on Assumption Day (15
        August) of 1769, Napoleons mother Letizia was rushed out of church
        with her first birth pains. She made it no farther than a first-floor
        sofa to bring little Nabulio kicking and screaming into the world he
        was to conquer. The sofa you see there now is a replica, the original
        having been stolen during the Revolution. South of Ajaccio, the major
        seaside resorts are Porticcio and Propriano, both with sandy beaches
        and good opportunities for sailing and deep-sea diving.
        Bonifacio
        The best way to approach this proud old town perched high
        on the cliffs is by boat, past the limpid blue waters of the Sdragonato
        cave and the Escalier du Roi dAragon, a staircase cut diagonally into
        the cliff face, used by the soldiers of the Spanish king in an abortive
        siege of the town in the 15th century. When you are visiting the old
        town on foot, you can enjoy an exhilarating walk down the staircase to
        the base of the cliffs and along the waters edge.
        Porto-Vecchio
        Surrounded by a pretty forest of cork oaks and
        sweet-smelling eucalyptus, the gulf surrounding Porto-Vecchio boasts an
        ever-expanding series of luxury resorts, the best being out on the fine
        sandy beaches of Cala Rossa. Inland, there are some beautiful
        excursions to be made into the forests of lOspedale and Zonza. The
        cork oaks are stripped of their valuable bark every ten years or so,
        baring a ­russet-brown trunk until the cork grows back again.
        For a memorable picnic up on the lovely wild mountain pass
        of Bavella, take some of the delicious Corsican tomatoes, smoked liver
        sausage (figatelli), and ewes or goats milk cheese (broccio). Be
        careful with the heady Corsican wines; the most enjoyable ones are the
        rosés.
        Golfe de Porto
        Some of Frances most grandiose panoramas of sea and
        landscape are clustered around this gulf 70 km (43 miles) north of
        Ajaccio. Piana is the most delightful of the gulfs sleepy village
        resorts, unspoiled by commercialization and blessed with the nearby
        natural wonders of Capo Rosso and the Calanche. These rugged
        red-granite­ cliffs and boulders have been hurled down to the sea by
        volcanic eruptions and eroded there by wind and water, forming the most
        bizarre and fantastic shapes. Take the well-marked walk on the Chemin
        du Château-Fort to admire them.
        Dont miss taking a boat cruise from the little resort
        town of Porto. The best one goes out to the cliff caves on the northern
        edge of the gulf, to the isolated fishing village of Girolata and the
        nature reserve of Scandola — a marvelous coastal haven for eagles, bald
        buzzards, and other rare species nesting on the peaks of the volcanic
        rocks.
        In the interior, drive along the winding mountain road to
        Evisa and the cool, quiet Forest of Aïtone. Off the D84 road, just 3 km
        (2 miles) northeast of Evisa, is a sign reading Piscine. This is not a
        municipal chlorine-saturated swimming pool, but a series of clear,
        clean, natural pools formed in smooth slabs of rock by the Cascades
        dAïtone (waterfalls) — a sheer delight.
        SOUTHWEST
        The area extending from the southern edge of the Loire
        Valley to the Pyrénées and from the Atlantic coast into the Massif
        Central and the southern Mediterranean coast encompasses a variety of
        terrains, all distant in geography and spirit alike from Paris and the
        industrial north.
        In and around the lovely valley of the Dordogne, Périgord
        beckons enticingly, with its rich cuisine, fortified towns, and
        fascinating cave paintings and other prehistoric remains.
        Below the estuary of the Loire, the Atlantic coast is the
        preserve of the countrys most independent-minded ports, the Protestant
        strong­hold of La Rochelle and the proud, prosperous city of
        Bordeaux.
        From the Basque country to the Mediterranean, you can
        explore the sunny Pyrénées. And in between, youll come upon the
        historic towns of Toulouse, Albi, and Montpellier.
        Berry-Limousin
        Many visitors driving from Paris to the Dordogne and
        Toulouse speed through this area on the autoroute, missing some very
        pleasant countryside and towns and the joy of driving on more relaxing
        routes nationales. Among the stops to consider are Bourges, Limoges,
        and Uzerche.
        Bourges
        Ancient capital of the flat region of Berry on the
        northern edge of Périgord, Bourges is on the road south to
        Clermont-Ferrand and Montpellier but worth a brief detour for those
        using the A20.
        The intricate harmony of the five portals of its façade,
        and the peculiar grace of its silhouette, make Bourgess Cathédrale
        Saint-Etienne one of Frances half-dozen Gothic masterpieces. The
        church is dominated by the massive nave and graceful flying buttresses
        linking the five chapels to the chancel. The best view is from the
        arch­bishops gardens behind the cathedral. The Last Judgment portrayed
        on the center portal is an example of 13th-century sculpture at its
        best.
        The Palais Jacques-Cœur, a rare example of Gothic secular
        architecture, was the luxurious residence of a wealthy merchant,
        treasurer to Charles VII. The elegance of the palace becomes apparent
        only in the inner courtyard, with its seven turreted staircases and
        handsome balconies. The mottos engraved around the windows proclaim the
        self-made man: A vaillans (cœurs) riens impossible (To valiant
        hearts, nothing is impossible) and Dire, faire, taire (Say, do, and
        be silent). Note the pigeon loft from which, 400 years before Reuters
        and Associated Press, Jacques Cœur organized a private news service
        using carrier pigeons.
        During the tourist season splendid illuminations make
        exploring Bourges in the evenings a pleasure. The cathedral in
        particular is impressive after dark.
        Limoges
        Limoges is best known for its porcelain and enamel, and
        still produces a major portion of Frances tableware. The 18th-c entury
        Musée Municipal de lEvêché (Place de la Cathédrale) contains an enamel
        museum as well as a lapidary collection and a handful of paint­ings by
        Renoir, who was born in Limoges. The Musée Nation­al de la Porcelaine
        Adrien Dubouché (Place Winston Churchill) traces the history of
        pottery, china, stoneware, and porcelain, with as many as 12,000 items
        on display.
        Other sights in Limoges include its Cathédrale
        Saint-Etienne, a Gothic masterpiece that took 600 years to complete,
        and the part of the haute ville (also called the Château) that contains
        the ancient Rue de la Boucherie and pretty Cour du Temple.
        There are pleasant walks along the banks of the river
        Vienne.
        Uzerche
        The Pearl of Limousin consists of an impressive
        collection of slate-roofed turrets and towers rising high above the
        Vézère river. A fortified town that withstood many sieges in the Middle
        Ages, Uzerche later became a favorite of prosperous families who built
        manor houses on the steep slopes. Among the structures of note are the
        ancient Porte Bécharie and Tour du Prince, Romanesque Eglise
        Saint-Pierre with its 11th-century crypt, and the Ren­ais­sance Hôtel
        dEyssartier (Place de la Libération). Trucks on the route nationale
        used to roar through the narrow main street, but since construction of
        the autoroute, Uzerche has become a peaceful place to walk and admire
        the 16th-, 17th-, and 18th-century architecture. LEsplanade de la
        Lunade provides a great view down onto the river below.
        Périgord
        This rich and fertile country is densely forested and
        crisscrossed by rivers flowing from the plateau of the Massif Central
        out to the Atlantic Ocean. Of these, the Dordogne has carved a
        particularly beautiful winding valley of gentle greenery.
        The village markets groan with fruits and vegetables,
        mushrooms and nuts of every description. Truffles, pâté de foie gras,
        and slowly roasted confit of goose and duck are specialties, as are
        wild mushrooms, dried and smoked pork, and walnut oil.
        Stone Age people found abundant fish in the rivers and
        dwellings safe from wild animals in the caves riddling the valley
        cliffs. With a similar concern for self-protection, the proliferation
        of for­tresses throughout the Péri­gord region bears witness to the
        many wars against the English, be­tween Protestant and Catholic, and
        resistance to the marauding bands of brigands.
        Vallée de la Vézère
        Exploring this valley that shelters the earliest signs of
        European civilization is by no means a dry and dusty archaeological
        tour of fossils and bones. Children who are suffering from an overload
        of art and architecture will enjoy the caves with their stalactites and
        stalagmites, as well as the exhibits and zoo at Le Thot. Adults and
        children alike will appreciate the hanging cliffs and pleasant
        countryside of meadows, vineyards, and orchards, with graceful willows
        and poplars at the waters edge.
        Montignac is the departure point for visits to the
        world-famous cave paintings of Lascaux. Concealed and protected against
        atmospheric changes for 17,000 years, these awe-inspiring frescoes and
        engravings of bulls, horses, ibex, bison, and deer were discovered by
        four teenagers chasing a dog in 1940.
        Within a few years, the carbon dioxide generated by the
        crowds of visitors caused a rapid deterioration in the cave walls, and
        the caves had to be closed to the general public. A careful replica
        that was created at Lascaux II makes a satisfying alternative.
        Anthro­pol­o­gists and artists have reproduced the Painted Gallery and
        the Hall of Bulls (Salle des Taureaux) which contains 100 pictures of
        the animals that shared the environment of Stone Age man. Complete your
        visit with a side trip to Le Thot, where the museum has excellent
        audiovisual exhibits and models of cave life; the nearby park has been
        turned into a zoo devoted to descendants of the animals portrayed at
        Lascaux.
        Returning to the river, you will pass the 16th-century
        Château de Losse (where visitors can admire Renaissance furniture and
        tapestries) on the way to Saint-Léon-sur-Vézère. Surrounded by poplars
        and willows, the towns buff-stoned 11th-century church is a
        characteristic example of Périgord Romanesque.
        For a wonderful view of the valley, climb to the top of La
        Roque Saint-Christophe, a spectacular cliff 80 m (262 ft) high,
        honeycombed with caves where you can see traces of troglodytic
        life.
        Les Eyzies-de-Tayac is known, justifiably, as capitale de
        la préhistoire.  Besides its important museum in the remains of a
        medieval castle, the village is at the center of literally dozens of
        major palaeolithic excavation sites. The Cro-Magnon shelter (Abri de
        Cro-Magnon) on the north side of town is the spot where, in 1868,
        railway workers uncovered three 30,000-year-old human skel­e­tons
        beside their flint and bone tools. Anthropologists say that these tall,
        large-brained men with high foreheads (homo sapiens sapiens) were of a
        physical type still found today.
        For cave paintings, all accessible by guided tour only,
        the most attractive site is the Grotte de Font-de-Gaume, reached by an
        easy walk up on a cliff above the eastern edge of town. The pictures of
        mammoths, bison, horses, and reindeer are between 15,000 and
        40,000 years old. The Combarelles cave, farther to the east, is a long
        winding gallery where the pictures are engraved rather than painted,
        and very often superimposed. Access to this cave is limited, so book
        early in the morning.
        The caverns of the Grotte du Grand Roc, to the northwest
        of Les Eyzies, are a natural rather than a historical phenomenon, but
        well worth a visit for the weirdly shaped stalagmites and stalactites
        and the panorama of the Vézère Valley.
        Dordogne
        The name Dordogne is given to a river, a département of
        France, and to a larger surrounding area that is sometimes extended to
        the whole Périgord region. It has been popular with British and Dutch
        visitors for many years, and many British people have chosen to become
        permanent residents.
        The river itself flows through changing terrain, from its
        source in the Auvergne mountains through deep gorges to fertile
        lowlands and on to the sea near Bordeaux.
        The landscape in the tour proposed below is dominated by
        the river as it flows between limestone cliffs, meadows, and woodland.
        The river is good for both fishing and canoeing, and if you havent
        brought your own bike for exploring the back country, you can rent one
        at Sarlat.
        Start at the confluence of the Vézère and Dordogne rivers,
        where the hilltop village of Limeuil affords a fine view of both
        valleys and their bridges meeting at right angles down below. Drive
        south away from the river to Cadouin, with its impressive 12th-century
        Cister­cian ab­bey, a major Périgord Roman­esque church with wooden
        belfry on a remarkable split pyramidal cupola. The soberly designed
        church contrasts with the more decorative Gothic and Ren­ais­sance
        sculpture of the cloister.
        Back on the river, perched above a 150-m- (490-ft-) deep
        ravine, is the fairytale castle of Beynac-et-Cazenac. The barons of
        Beynac lost it in turn to Richard the Lion-Heart and Simon de Montfort,
        Earl of Leicester, before turning it into a Renaissance palace. Across
        the river are Beynacs rival, Castelnaud, its ruins recently restored
        and now housing a museum of medieval warfare, and the privately owned
        15th-century castle of Fayrac, complete with restored drawbridge,
        battlements, and pepperpot towers.
        The village of La Roque-Gageac, glued to an overhanging
        cliff, is known as one of the most beautiful (and most visited) in the
        country — especially well-deserved when the late-afternoon sun catches
        the houses stone-tiled roofs. Its also an antiques-collectors
        paradise.
        To get a wonderful view of the whole stretch of river, and
        to stretch your legs in a beautiful parklike setting, climb up to the
        Château de Marqueyssac and its jardins suspendus (hanging gardens).
        Sarlat, capital of the Périgord Noir, is a lovely old town
        with a fine mix of architecture, bustling in high season but quiet in
        spring and autumn. The Saturday market is a joy, as are the narrow
        streets of the old town east of the busy Rue de la République. Look out
        for the Gothic and Renaissance houses on the Rue Fénelon and Rue des
        Consuls (especially Hôtel Plamon) and for the Place du Peyrous grand
        Maison de la Boétie, across from the cathedral. An open-air summer
        festival is held on Place de la Liberté, the marketplace and a center
        for cafés and shops. Specialties of the region are truffles, wild
        mushrooms, foie gras, and walnuts. Dont leave without trying the
        pommes sarladaises, thin-sliced potatoes sautéed in goose fat with
        garlic and parsley.
        Rocamadour
        Since the 12th century, sightseers and religious pilgrims
        alike have been flocking to this spectacularly situated fortified town
        atop a cliff above the Alzou river (best appreciated from the village
        of LHos­pi­ta­let across the valley). Founded on the tomb of a hermit,
        Saint Amadour, which was believed to have mystic curative powers,
        Rocamadour attracted Henry II of England and a number of French kings
        after him.
        The present-day mobs of tourists buzzing around the
        souvenir shops of the old town capture something of the medieval
        frenzy. Pil­grims would climb the 216 steps of the Via Sancta on their
        knees to get to the shrines halfway up the hillside, which include the
        Cha­pelle Mira­cu­leuse de Notre-Dame with its statue of the Black
        Vir­gin and the 12th-century basilica. High­er up, at the top of the
        cliff are a château and ramparts.
        The great chasm (gouffre) of Padirac, 16 km (10 miles)
        north­east of Rocamadour, is one of Péri­gords most exciting natur­al
        wonders. Ele­vators take you 100 m (328 ft) down to a sub­ter­ra­nean
        river for a spooky boat ride past gigantic stalactites and stalagmites,
        formed by the calcite residue and deposits of thousands of years of
        persistently dripping water.
        Atlantic Coast
        In contrast to the Mediterranean coast, the Atlantic
        offers wide open spaces, beaches with rolling waves and high dunes, and
        vast stretches of quiet pine forests. The wines and seafood are good
        and abundant, and theres plenty for families with children to do.
        La Rochelle
        One of the most handsome of Frances ports, La Rochelle
        has always been innovative and today calls itself belle et rebelle
        (beautiful and rebellious). It was an early experimenter in democracy,
        electing its first mayor in 1199, and was long a Protestant bastion in
        a Catholic country. More recently it has been a leader in urban
        planning, careful to preserve its quiet charm and dignity. La Rochelle
        was one of the first towns to introduce a pedestrian-only zone and
        today free bicycles are available for visitors.
        Surrounded by lively cafés, with an avenue of trees along
        one quay, the old harbor still serves the fishing fleet and small
        sailboats. Its entrance is guarded by two 14th-century towers
        re­main­ing from the towns fortifications. To the left, the Tour
        Saint-Nicolas served as a for­tress and prison. At the foot of the Tour
        de la Chaîne, which was a gunpowder storehouse, lies the huge chain
        slung across to Saint-Nicolas to bar passage at night.
        In the grand old lighthouse (and second prison), the Tour
        de la Lanterne, you will find prisoners graffiti on the walls as you
        climb up to the balcony for a view over the city and the bay. The
        Gothic tower gate and belfry, Porte de la Grosse-Horloge, leads into
        the prosperous old merchant quarters with gracefully vaulted shopping
        arcades and 16th- and 17th-century houses. Dont miss the handsome
        Renaissance Hôtel de Ville (on Rue des Merciers) with its Italian-style
        courtyard, staircase, and belfry. Another elegant house is the
        double-gabled Hôtel de Pontard, hidden away at the rear of a garden
        (Caisse dEpargne, 11 Rue des Augustins).
        La Rochelle is full of museums, among them the Musée du
        Nouveau Monde (10 Rue Fleuriau), which celebrates the towns early
        trading links with the New World; the Musée des Beaux-Arts (28 Rue
        Gargoulleau), which includes an important portrait of Martin Luther by
        Lucas Cranach and notable canvases by Giordano and Ribera; and the huge
        Aquarium (Avenue du Lazaret). Children will enjoy the Musée Maritime
        Neptunéa, among whose treasures is Jacques Cousteaus Calypso, in the
        process of being restored.
        Ile de Ré
        With its gleaming white villas and smart little hotels, a
        sunny micro-climate, beautiful pine-shaded beaches, and succulent
        oysters and mussels, this cheerful island is a popular holiday resort,
        especially with sailors. Visit the Phare des Baleines, a lighthouse at
        the western end of the island (257 steps to the view at the top). Boats
        to the island leave from La Rochelles Vieux Port.
        Bordeaux
        Anyone interested in ships will no doubt head first for
        the great port to inspect the freighters and tankers from Asia,
        Australia, Africa, and the Americas. Guided boat tours depart from the
        landing stage (Embarcadère Vedettes) of the vast Esplanade des
        Quinconces.
        Others may prefer to stay ashore in the cafés, shops, and
        galleries around the Place de la Comédie, a main center of city life.
        The square is dominated by the Grand Théâtre, the jewel of Bordeauxs
        many 18th-century buildings. It is a temple-like structure of twelve
        Corinthian columns, adorned with statues of Greek muses and goddesses.
        The majestic double staircase inside inspired Charles Garnier for his
        design of the Paris Opera House.
        South of the imposing Place de la Bourse, the old Quartier
        Saint-Pierre around the church of the same name is a masterpiece of
        urban renewal. The once ill-famed slum has grown into a lively
        neighborhood of art galleries and quaint little shops, with an open-air
        market on the Place Saint-Pierre. On the beautifully renovated houses
        along the Rue Phillippart and Rue Bahutiers, notice the grotesque masks
        and winged angels sculpted over the doorways.
        The dimensions of the gigantic Flamboyant Gothic
        Cathédrale Saint-André closely rival those of Notre-Dame de Paris —
        which is a mere 6 m (20 ft) longer and 4 m (13 ft) wider. It has two
        eye-catching­ steeples and remarkable sculpture over the porches.
        The Musée des Beaux-Arts (in the Cours dAlbert) includes
        works by Veronese, Perugino, Rubens, and Van Dyck, as well as major
        paintings by Delacroix and Matisse. The new Musée dArt Con­tem­porain
        (also known simply as CAPC; 7 Rue Ferrère) has a collection of art from
        the last three decades.
        Saint-Emilion
        At the western end of the Dordogne Valley, this is
        undoubtedly the most attractive of the Bordeaux wine villages, not
        least due to the golden-tinted stone of the medieval houses around its
        sleepy Place du Marché. Unique in Europe, the 1,000-year-old church
        known as the Eglise Monolithe was carved out of the solid rock on which
        the village is built. After wandering around the old ramparts and
        narrow streets, take a rest in the ivy-covered ruins of the
        14th-century Cloître des Cordeliers. The local Maison du Vin can give
        advice for your tour of the surrounding vineyards.
        Pyrénées
        The Pyrénées mountains — the second-highest range in
        France — form a natural border with Spain, snowcapped year-round.
        Tourism in the high mountains is little-developed; there is some
        downhill and cross-country skiing, and camping and hiking are popular
        in the unspoiled scenery of the Parc National des Pyrénées, where
        trails are well-marked. Wildflowers cover the high pastures in spring
        and early summer, and the wildlife ranges from butterflies to bears.
        Tour­ist offices throughout the region can help with information on the
        park. Andorra, a principality high in the mountains that is owned
        jointly by France and Spain, is a popular ski resort and center for
        duty-free shopping. There is good hiking away from the busy towns, but
        it is a long hard drive from the French side.
        The foothills of the Pyrénées form a landscape of gentle
        rolling greenery, with tantalizing views of the snowy peaks behind.
        Biarritz
        Nostalgia fans will appreciate the patina of faded
        grandeur of this elegant resort where Queen Victoria once promenaded
        along the front and Bismarck fell madly in love with the wife of a
        Russian ambassador. Known as the queen of beaches and the beach of
        kings, the town was made fashionable by Napoleon III and Empress
        Eugénie and became known as the site of elaborate — even wild —
        parties. Though it still has a thriving nightlife, the town is more
        sedate today and is a favorite of retirees and surfers. There are good
        beaches, 10 golf courses within a 20-km (12-­mile) radius of the town,
        and ample opportunities for tennis, horseback-riding, and
        windsurfing.
        At the aquarium of the Musée de la Mer (Rocher de la
        Vierge) you can see more than 150 species of fish and invertebrates
        from the Bay of Biscay, a seal pool (with daily feedings), and a shark
        grotto.
        Pays Basque
        The rural Basque country (or Euzkadi) stretches south into
        Spain along a coastal plain and through the Pyrénées. The
        moun­tain­sides and valleys are dotted with gleaming white, gabled
        houses, set off by russet brown timbering. The French Basques — more
        peaceable than their Spanish brethren — are nevertheless an independent
        people, proud of their cultural differences from the rest of France and
        of their obscure language (Euskara).
        Biarritz is perhaps the best-known town in the Basque
        country, but Bayonne is the acknowledged capital of the region. The
        Musée Basque (Château-Neuf) provides a valuable introduction to the
        folklore of the region. Bayonne is a good town to visit on foot, with a
        pedestrian shopping area around the 13th-century cathedral, many parks,
        ramparts, and the quays along the two rivers. The collection of the
        Musée Bonnat (5 Rue Jacques Laffitte) includes paintings by Rubens, El
        Greco, Degas, Titien, Raphaël, and Watteau. Bullfights are held in the
        summer months.
        The charming little fishing village and artists colony of
        Saint-Jean-de-Luz has a sheltered harbor with a sandy beach and lively
        cafés, galleries, and boutiques. The towns great claim to fame is the
        wedding of Louis XIV to the Spanish Infanta Maria Theresa in 1660; the
        houses that lodged them, Maison de Louis XIV and Maison de lInfante,
        still stand by the port. The austere façade of the 15th-century Eglise
        Saint-Jean-Baptiste, where the wedding was celebrated, doesnt prepare
        you for the characteristic Basque interior: carved oak galleries to
        separate the various classes of worshippers on three sides of a single
        nave, with polychrome wooden vaulting and a three-tiered
        gilded-and-crimson Baroque altar.
        Southeast of Saint-Jean-de-Luz is Ascain, with a village
        square surrounded by enchanting 17th-century houses and a typical
        wooden-galleried church. A rack-and-pinion railway at Col de
        Saint-Ignace carries you 900 m (2,950 ft) up to the top of La Rhune for
        an exhilarating view of the Atlantic Ocean and the western Pyrénées. In
        the pretty village of Aïnhoa each sturdy-beamed whitewashed house is of
        a different height and juts out at a different angle.
        Saint-Jean-Pied-de-Port was the last stage before crossing
        into Spain on one of the main routes of pilgrimage to Santiago de
        Compostela — and you can still follow the pilgrims path around the
        ramparts, up a stairway through Porte Saint-Jacques to the ville haute.
        Charming red-sandstone houses line the Rue de la Citadelle, which leads
        to an old bridge across the Nive river with a pretty view of the towns
        Gothic church. For a panorama across the Nive Valley, climb up to the
        citadel, built by Louis XIV as a defense against a potential Spanish
        invasion.
        Pau
        Pau is famous for its views of the Pyrénées and as the
        birthplace of Henri IV, in 1553. In the 19th century, Pau became
        something of a British colony. The British provided two mayors and left
        their mark with horseracing, fox hunting, and the countrys first golf
        club.
        Today, the Château de Pau, more Renaissance palace than
        for­tress and restored in the 19th century, is an interesting museum of
        Gobelins tapestries and paraphernalia from the early life of the
        countrys most popular king. Stroll along the terrace at the foot of
        the château, known as the Boulevard des Pyrénées, for the regions most
        spectacular view of the snowcapped peaks lining the southern
        horizon.
        The chief treasure of the towns Musée des Beaux-Arts is a
        fascinating painting by Degas, The New Orleans Cotton Exchange.
        Saint-Bertrand-de-Comminges
        A pleasant detour off the Pau-Toulouse road, this
        fortified hilltop town has a splendid Romanesque-Gothic cathedral that
        merits an unhurried visit. Inside, the superb 16th-century woodcarvings
        of the choir stalls make up a cheerful compendium of Pyrénées
        characters. The open Romanesque arcades allow the peaceful little
        cloister to take full advantage of the mountain backdrop.
        Toulouse
        Center of the national aerospace industry, with a vigorous
        local culture and bright and breezy street life, this university city
        has an infectious enthusiasm to it.
        The rose-brick old town — with its many Renaissance
        mansions built with the proceeds of the dye, textile, and grain trades
        — is best seen on foot. At the heart is the huge 18th-century Hôtel de
        Ville (Capitole), fronted by a huge open space that hosts an open-air
        market on Wednesday mornings.
        The 11th-century Basilique Saint-Sernin is an undisputed
        masterpiece among Frances Roman­esque churches. The Eglise des
        Jacobins, burial place of the philosopher and theologian Saint Thomas
        Aquinas, is a Gothic fortress church, with a noble tower, elegant
        twin-columned cloister, and a remarkable interior of polychrome beauty
        (subtle dark reds, pink, and buff). At the corner of Rue de Metz and
        Rue dAlsace-Lorraine, in a converted medieval monastery, the Musée des
        Augustins houses one of the richest collections of religious sculpture
        in France.
        Two examples of palatial townhouses funded by pastel (blue
        dye) are the Hôtel dAssézat (Place dAssézat), now home to an art
        gallery that includes 30 works by Bonnard, and the Hôtel de Bernuy (1
        Rue Gambetta).
        La Cité de lEspace (exit 17 or 18 from the ring road;
        métro Marengo) is a huge space complex, with a planetarium and a park
        laid out like the solar system, dominated by a replica of the Ariane
        rocket in whose control room you can prepare for launch and watch the
        deployment of a satellite.
        Albi
        This serene and cheerful town on the river Tarn — built,
        like Tou­louse, with red brick and so known as Albi la Rouge — was once
        the scene of confrontations between the Cathar heretics, also known
        as Albigeois or Albigenses, and the Roman church. The grandiose Gothic
        Cathédrale Sainte-Cécile was started in 1282 in the aftermath of these
        struggles to impress the citizens of Albi with the reasserted power of
        the church. A giant red-brick fortress of the faith, its fierce
        exterior is in contrast with the rich interior.
        In the 13th-century bishops residence, the Palais de la
        Berbie, the Musée Toulouse-Lautrec honors the painter (who was born in
        Albi in 1864) and houses the countrys largest collection of his works
        and sketchbooks.
        A walk along the banks of the river below the museum
        provides good views of the 11th-century bridge and the red-brick mills
        that used the flow of water to power a variety of industries.
        Languedoc-Roussillon
        Carcassonne
        This is a restored medieval town, a town for everyone who
        likes fairy-tale castles. It has served as a fortress for the
        Gallo-Romans, the Visigoths, Franks, and medieval French (you can see
        the layers of their masonry in the ramparts). It is a very popular
        tourist destination, surprisingly full of souvenir shops; try to beat
        the crowds early in the day and return in the evening.
        Carcassonne can be disappointing at first sight; the best
        overall view is from the autoroute and the town is perhaps most
        impressive when illuminated at night. Most people park on the east side
        of the old town (la Cité) and walk over the drawbridge of the Porte
        Nar­bon­naise. But youll get a much better feel for the medieval
        atmosphere of a fortified town, with its ramparts and lookout towers,
        if you park on the western side, by the church of Saint-Gimer, and walk
        up around the old Château Comtal.
        Although much of Carcassonne is authentic, the famous
        19th-century architect who masterminded the restoration work took some
        liberties when he lacked the original plans. A blatant example of this
        is the Romanesque-Gothic Basilique Saint-Nazaire — which Viollet-le-Duc
        thought was originally part of the fortifications and so blithely added
        battlements to the west façade. Inside the basilica, in the choir, you
        can see some fine 13th- and 14th-century sculptures and stained-glass
        windows.
        Montpellier
        In this lively university town, at the Mediterranean end
        of the South­west, the center of city life is around the broad,
        bustling Place de la Comédie.
        For a quieter glass of wine or cup of coffee, try the
        pretty Place du Marché-aux-Fleurs, shaded by plane trees around a Henry
        Moore sculpture. And on the Rue des Trésoriers de France and Rue des
        Trésoriers de la Bourse, youll discover handsome 17th- and
        18th-century mansions that have imposing stairways in the inner
        courtyards. The Musée Fabre (Boulevard Sarrail) has an outstanding art
        collection, including important paintings by Courbet, Delacroix,
        Veronese, and Zurbarán.
        For many, the most enchanting spot in town is the
        late-17th-century Promenade du Peyrou — spacious classical gardens with
        a triumphal arch, an equestrian statue of Louis XIV, and, on a mound at
        the far end, a hexagonal château deau (water tower) that looks more
        like a temple, providing a fine view south to the Mediterranean and
        north to the Cévennes mountains.
        For a refreshing look at modern urban development, visit
        the new, neoclassical Antigone quarter, just on the opposite side of
        the Place de la Comédie from the old town.
        Béziers and the Golfe du Lion
        Montpellier is a good base for visits both south into
        Languedoc-Roussillon and east into the Camargue and Provence. This
        proposed route takes you through the vineyards and beaches of
        Hérault.
        South from Montpellier on the N113, you will get a good
        view over the Bassin de Thau and the oyster and mussel beds near
        Bouzigues. After Mèze, the road turns inland and passes through
        Montagnac, site of an interesting church from the 13th and 14th
        centuries.
        Just a little further south is the little town of Pézenas,
        home to royal governors of the region in the 16th and 17th centuries
        and once called the Versailles of the south.  You can easily spend a
        couple of hours strolling around the town looking at the fine mansions
        (50 or more) and the narrow streets of the medieval Jewish ghetto. A
        brochure from the tourist office gives a suggested walking tour and the
        sights are well marked. Keep your eyes open for Renaissance details,
        grand doorways, and views into lovely courtyards. Among the buildings
        to watch for are the Hôtel des Barons de Lacoste (8 Rue
        Francois-Oustrin) and the Maison des Pauvres (12 Rue Alfred Sabatier).
        The Musée de Vulliod-Saint-Germain (3 Rue Albert-Paul Alliès) has
        collections of furniture, faïences, and tapestries, as well as
        memorabilia of the time Molière spent in the town with his troupe of
        actors.
        Béziers is a busy but compact city, with a delightful
        shady central promenade — lined with cafés and restaurants — called the
        Allées Paul Riquet, named for the engineer of the Canal du Midi. Among
        the sights in Béziers are the ancient Eglise Saint Jacques and Eglise
        Sainte Madeleine, the 19th-century Halles (covered market), and the
        massive Cathédrale Saint-Nazaire, from which there is a good view over
        the river valley. The Canal du Midi crosses the river Orb on a bridge
        (pont canal) at Béziers.
        Turning east from Béziers on the N112 and after 13 km
        (8 miles) briefly onto the D912, your next stop is the ancient port of
        Agde, founded by the Greeks more than 25 centuries ago. Agde presents a
        somber face — many of its buildings were constructed from the local
        volcanic basalt, including the 12th-century Cathédrale Saint-Etienne —
        but the narrow streets on the hill leading up to the market square are
        cheerful and friendly.
        For a total change of pace, continue on the N112 to Cap
        dAgde. Only minutes from Agde itself, this is a modern resort built in
        traditional Languedoc style. Its many quays bristle with luxury yachts
        and there are shops, cafés, and restaurants to suit every taste. It
        also features a large nudist enclave (Port Nature).
        From Agde, take the D51 to Marseillan, another ancient
        port, initially settled by the Phoenicians. The covered market, built
        in volcanic stone from Agde with a timber frame, dates back to the 17th
        century. The harbor, with views across the bay toward Sète, is a
        pleasant walk from the middle of town. Take time to sit at a café and
        watch the fishing boats mix with the tourists in yachts and narrowboats
        headed for the Canal du Midi. Also in the harbor are the Chais Noilly
        Prat, where you can view how the famous vermouth is made, and a small
        château that was once the home of the Noilly Prat family, now a hotel
        and restaurant.
        From Marseillan, our route takes you toward
        Marseillan-Plage and up the N112 along more than seven miles of flat,
        sandy beach — on weekends in August the crowds and numbers of cars can
        make this a slow trip — to the large fishing port of Sète. Although the
        narrow streets and squares above the Grand Canal have lots to offer the
        visitor, most people gravitate to the cafés and restaurants along the
        water. In summer, Sète is famous for its traditional jousting
        competitions on the canal. For panoramic views, visit the hilltop
        Cimetière Marin, burial place of the poet Paul Valéry and singer
        Georges Brassens, before heading back up the N112 to Montpellier.
      
    
  
