
  
  
    
      
        Where to Go
        Guadeloupe
        Proudly styling itself the Caribbeans emerald isle,
        Guadeloupe is actually two islands linked by two drawbridges across the
        narrow, salt-water Salée River. Guadeloupe, from the air or on a map,
        resembles a butterfly.
        This largest of the FWI spreads its wings midway along the
        Lesser Antilles chain. Its major neighbors are volcano-devastated
        Montserrat and Antigua to the north and Dominica to the south, the
        latter separating it from Martinique.
        Columbus named it after his favorite Spanish monastery, Our
        Lady of Guadaloupe, in Estremadura. To the Carib Indians then living
        here, it was Karukera, island of beautiful waters. Youll see why.
        Between the two world wars, President Theodore Roosevelt
        stopped by, was entranced by the beautiful countryside and friendly
        people of Guadeloupe, and predicted that thousands of American
        tourists would soon be visiting each winter. It took the advent of
        jetliners and cruise ships for that to happen.
        Less conservative than Martinique, Guadeloupe of late seems
        to be bidding to become the nudist playground of the Caribbean. Several
        of its beaches are officially designated for nudism (known locally as
        naturisme) — the most popular being Pointe Tarare — and a functionary
        who is a Chevalier de la Légion dHonneur has been appointed to
        supervise all aspects of sunning in the buff.
        Guadeloupes two component islands are notably dissimilar
        and confusingly named. Grande-Terre (Great Land) is smaller (565 sq
        km/218 sq miles), drier, flatter, and more important because it has
        Pointe-à-Pitre, Guadeloupes commercial center and largest city.
        Basse-Terre (Low Land), is higher, bigger (808 sq km/312 sq miles),
        greener, and has the political capital, also called Basse-Terre, which
        is near the famous will-it-or-wont-it Soufrière volcano. The islands
        names refer to the different force winds hitting them, not their
        topography.
        About 410,000 people live on Guadeloupe with some 40,000 on
        its administrative dependencies (Saint-Martin, Saint-Barthélemy,
        Marie-Galante, Les Saintes, and Désirade). Two-thirds are classified as
        mulattoes, including some 16,000 Asian Indians. Blacks form 27 percent
        of the population, and Creole whites born here 8 percent. About 50% of
        the population is still under 20 years of age. The high population
        density constitutes a real problem.
        Scattered around Guadeloupe are some 50 stately
        Creole-style plantation homes of wood and stone, recalling the distant
        days of sugar prosperity. Youre also likely to see modest modern
        houses being transported from place to place on flat trucks.
        Guadeloupeans, who dont always own land, like to move around.
        Sightseeing for tourists is most rewarding by rental car,
        boat, or both. Otherwise, hotels offer guided tours to scenic points.
        Small local buses or collective taxis are inexpensive and useful for
        point-to-point travel (complete with transistor music and an abundance
        of happy humanity), but not for general touring. Guadeloupes ordinary
        taxis may also be hired, but are extremely expensive.
        Pointe-à-Pitre
        When this city was only a tiny fishing village three
        centuries ago, a Dutchman named Pieter is said to have been the most
        popular fish peddler at a jetty on the waterfront. Even though he
        wasnt French, from Pieter the name Pointe-a-Pitre was eventually
        derived.
        Today, weathered banana schooners chug past yachts and
        gargantuan passenger liners to dock in this curious tropical port,
        which is Guadeloupes principal city and gateway to the world. A
        formless amalgam of wooden shacks and modern apartment buildings,
        Oriental-style bazaars and shopping-center supermarkets, Pointe-à-Pitre
        betrays little of its turbulent past. The traffic jams seem
        incongruous, but theyre authentic. Half a day should allow the tourist
        ample time for city sightseeing and shopping.
        Dont miss the open-air market close by the wharves. This
        is the West Indies at their most colorful. Aside from exotic fruits,
        strange roots, land crabs, dried fish, spices, and nuts, you can pick
        up spiritual spray for your house, ointments designed to bring you
        money, lotions and powders for your ailments, or a baby pig. Some of
        the stands under the bright umbrellas are real herbalists heavens, but
        even if you can understand the patois, its difficult to learn the
        precise uses for certain mysterious-looking items.
        Close by (nothing that matters in Pointe-à-Pitre is far
        away) is the center of youthful social action — the Place de la
        Victoire, sprawling in the shade of sandbox trees. During one phase of
        the French Revolution, a guillotine shortened many lives here, though
        the fact is deliberately forgotten by the boys eyeing the girls
        pretending to ignore the boys. Just off this pleasant main square of
        the city, youll find the useful state tourist office (Office du
        Tourisme).
        Pointe-à-Pitres cathedral, the Basilique Saint-Pierre et
        Saint-Paul, features unusual metal columns and balconies. It was the
        creation, in 1873, of a certain Monsieur Trouille (Mr. Jitters).
        Destroyed by three hurricanes in this century and rebuilt each time,
        the church is now said to be almost entirely constructed of pieces of
        iron. Its simple beauty is enhanced by locally designed stained-glass
        windows in red, blue, orange, and yellow. The church is on Place
        Gourbeyre, opposite the modest Palais de Justice and just a few steps
        from the citys main shopping district, which embraces rues Nozières,
        Frébault, and Schoelcher.
        Wandering in these fascinating little streets is best in
        the early morning or late afternoon when the crowds and heat are
        reduced. Youll see dozens of iron-grilled buildings reminiscent of
        that other former French colonial port, New Orleans, Louisiana.
        The almost midtown Massabielle quarter (faubourg de
        Massabielle), is sometimes described as the most picturesque in the
        city. Its a warren of wooden and corrugated-iron cabins, housing a
        remarkable number of people. Discretion when using your camera is
        advisable here.
        Around Grande-Terre
        Three formidable cannon greet you at the wooden drawbridge
        entrance to Fort Fleur dEpée, which commands access to
        Pointe-à-Pitres harbor. Its a 10-minute drive from the city.
        Late in the 18th century, British and French forces fought
        bloody hand-to-hand battles for this strategic hill, considered the key
        to the defense of all Guadeloupe. Today birds chirp in the trees at
        this totally tranquil spot. In the dungeon-like chambers of the forts
        lower reaches, relics and documents relating to the war were kept in a
        decorated room until the humidity destroyed them, and it was then
        closed to the public. Now it is reopened to visitors.
        A little past the small theater built for local dramatic
        performances, theres a fine view across the bay to Basse-Terre.
        A few miles down the coast at Gosier, although its
        difficult to imagine, contingents of fierce invaders used to put
        ashore. Today this is Guadeloupes Riviera, with resort hotels strung
        along the beaches and tennis courts laid out among the coconut
        trees.
        To reach Gosiers attractive offshore islet requires a
        challenging swim or an easy boat ride. Beneath the small lighthouse on
        this uninhabited speck of sand and trees, picnicking and nude bathing
        are popular pastimes. Windsurfers and sailboats on the aquamarine
        waters make a memorable Caribbean snapshot (best from the hillside
        village of Gosier itself). Here, in the heart of the islands tourist
        area, youll find a number of small Creole, French, and Asian
        restaurants and a few discotheques.
        Near the pleasant seaside village of Sainte-Anne farther
        east is what is generally considered to be Guadeloupes best beach. If
        you land by boat, Caravelle beach is yours for the using; otherwise
        youll have to pay a nominal charge to the vacation club that owns the
        acreage. A sizable segment of this long curving beach of white sand is
        devoted to naturisme; almost everywhere else on the entire strand,
        toplessness holds sway in the current French fashion, but nobody
        insists on it.
        Sainte-Anne itself has a long, broad beach used not only by
        fishermen in vividly painted boats, but also by families with small
        children. The village was named after the wife of King Louis XIII,
        Queen Anne of Austria.
        Inland from both Gosier and Sainte-Anne is a peaceful
        region of green hills, or mornes, as theyre known in the West Indies.
        Few of the tiny settlements identify themselves with signs; roads are
        generally unmarked, and it can therefore be somewhat bewildering. But
        you cant get lost for long, and in perhaps half an hour of driving
        around this area of Grands Fonds youll get a real feeling for the
        pastoral simplicity thats typical of Guadeloupe. On the narrow roads
        that tend to twist without warning, youll encounter cows, sheep,
        sugarcane wagons, and little children.
        Back on the coast, Saint-François is a delightful fishing
        village. At any hour of the day youll see lobster traps being put
        together and nets being mended along the shore. An even more
        picturesque scene occurs when the boats come in and jostling housewives
        buy the days catch direct from the fishermen. More recently,
        Saint-François has grown to be a major tourist center.
        From Saint-François, an excessively narrow road heads
        straight to the easternmost point of Guadeloupe (48 km/30 miles from
        Pointe-à-Pitre) and one of the scenic highlights of the entire
        Caribbean. This is the Pointe des Châteaux, a wildly beautiful cliff
        formation with rocks shaped like castles, lashed and eroded by the
        Atlantics waves. You may well get sprinkled by sea spray as you walk
        along the rocky bluff to the large cement cross erected (between 1947
        and 1951) at the summit. Dont fail to go all the way. From this
        spectacular point, the view is outstanding. The large island in the
        distance is La Désirade, the small Petite-Terre islets are much
        closer.
        A short distance away from the road on the way to Pointe
        des Châteaux, the long Tarare beach is another favorite with
        nudists.
        A pre-columbian Arawak Indian village has been unearthed
        near the once-flourishing sugar town of Le Moule. Resort hotels in the
        area take advantage of several sandy beaches protected by breakwaters
        from the heavy Atlantic surf that pounds most of Grande­-Terres east
        coast. Most dramatic is the northern Porte dEnfer (Gate of Hell),
        where the waves have sliced a huge chasm into the limestone shoreline.
        At the innermost point, where the oceans force is completely spent but
        the booming waves can still be heard, is a small beach with shaded
        picnic area adjoining it.
        The sparsely inhabited northern part of Grande-Terre is
        sugarcane and cattle country. Notice the windmills, mostly in ruins,
        that once ground cane.
        At the end of a bumpy dirt road as far north as you can go
        in Guadeloupe is the magnificent Pointe de la Grande Vigie. This spot
        is unbeatable for a picnic, or simply to contemplate natures wonders.
        Follow the signs to the sightseeing point where, on the predictably
        clear day, you can see across 48 km (30 miles) of blue ocean to La
        Désirade, 67 km (42 miles) to Antigua, and even 77 km (48 miles) to the
        ash-covered peaks of Montserrat. Below, youll hear the waves crashing
        into caves worn into the cliff-sides. This is a place where youll
        exult in being alive.
        On a spur-road just a little north of the sleepy village of
        Anse-Bertrand is the Anse Laborde, a public beach of tan sand with
        gorgeous turquoise waters and good snorkeling off rocky promontories.
        Farther south at the fishing village of Port Louis you can drive right
        to one of the islands best beaches, Anse du Souffleur.
        From Port-Louis all the way down Grande Terres west coast
        to Pointe-à-Pitre there extend vast mangrove swamps. Theyre almost
        unreachable except by boat, but rewarding for fishermen and
        bird-watchers. The main highway south passes through the towns of Petit
        Canal and Morne-à-lEau, both characteristic of rural, agricultural
        Guadeloupe, and through Pointe-à-Pitres heavily populated satellite
        district of Les Abymes.
        Around Basse-Terre
        An undulating coastal highway completely encircles this
        mountainous and densely forested island, but its much too long a trip
        to make comfortably in one day. Among the best excursions is one over
        another good road, D 23, directly through the National Park which
        covers more than 74,000 acres of Basse-Terres interior. This
        cross-country highway (La Traversée) continues west just beyond the
        breezy hilltop village of Vernou. Here, overlooking the Lézarde river
        valley with its swaying sugarcane, are elaborate secluded villas which
        seem a universe apart from the small sheds in which most Guadeloupeans
        live. As you drive along the winding road up to Vernou, notice the
        trees with huge, strange roots.
        In Guadeloupes tropical rain forest, its worth stopping
        each time a wooden sign announces a particular attraction. The rustic
        Bras-David picnic area, for example, is set alongside a burbling
        stream. At the House of the Forest (La Maison de la Forêt), theres an
        audiovisual exhibit (in French only), and you can take any of three
        guided walks along discovery trails (sentiers de la découverte)
        lasting 10, 20, or 60 minutes. For serious hikers, there are other
        major trails in the park.
        Its only a few hundred yards from the highway along a
        fern-lined path to the Crayfish Falls (Cascade aux Ecrevisses), a
        paradisiacal swimming hole to splash around in. If youre lucky,
        nobody else will be there to enjoy the waterfall, the rocks and ferns,
        and the picnic site. Youll see a sign announcing that there are 1,500
        types of flora in Guadeloupe and just off the road youll find a
        nursery that sells specimens.
        Reassuring note: Unlike Martinique, Guadeloupe has no
        poisonous snakes or other harmful animals.
        On this road, the highest point comes at the Pass of the
        Two Breasts (LeCol des Mamelles), altitude 600 m (1,969 ft), where its
        worth stopping for the view. For more sweeping panoramas, you can hike
        for less than an hour to either summit — Petit-Bourg (716 m/2,349 ft)
        or Pigeon (770 m/2,526 ft).
        For those not spending the entire day in the park, its
        possible to return to Pointe-à-Pitre by circling the northern section
        of Basse-Terre along the coast road. On the leeward coast, underwater
        sportsmen can head for the simple fishing village of Pigeon to pick up
        a boat to the tiny îlet de Pigeon. Otherwise, you drive north through
        Pointe-Noire (named for its black volcanic hillsides) and Deshaies, an
        unexceptional town on a very beautiful bay. Continuing on, youll reach
        the much-admired surfing beach at Grande Anse, where fine brown sand
        slopes away from palm trees to green-blue water. If youve brought
        lunch, Grande Anse has pleasant shoreside picnic spots.
        Farther on you come to Sainte-Rose. Here in the 17th
        century the first French landing party under Duplessis ran into violent
        and unfriendly Caribs. Today its a drowsily peaceful fishing village.
        On its outskirts the road crosses a river where you may see children
        fishing or swimming off flat rocks, and women and girls washing clothes
        as they do in all 14 of Basse-Terres major rivers.
        While traveling on your way back through Lamentin to the
        Pointe-à-Pitre expressway, youll pass seemingly endless fields of
        unusually tall sugarcane.
        South to Soufrière
        From Pointe-à-Pitre, thick groves of banana trees (with the
        fruit protected from insects by transparent bags) and fields of
        sugarcane stretch away from the southbound coastal highway through
        Petit-Bourg and Goyave. Youre now approaching the spot where Europeans
        first encountered Guadeloupe late in the 15th century. But if youre
        not watching close ly, you may miss the unprepossessing bust of
        Christopher Columbus perched atop a column in a little roadside square.
        The village is Sainte-Marie, named by the explorer when he landed on
        4 November 1493, attracted by the waterfalls and river he could see
        flowing down the green inland mountains. On the base of the white bust
        erected in 1916, theres a declaration in French that it was here that
        Karukera became Guadeloupe.
        Those curious enough to walk down the rural road to the
        seacoast will find pigs, goats, chickens, and children, but no likely
        looking landing place for a boat. Locals shrug and suggest that the
        shorelines topography must have changed in the 500 years since
        Columbus.
        Just past the attractive farming town of Capesterre, the
        highway becomes, for about 21⁄2 km (11⁄2 miles), the so-called Allée
        Dumanoir. Twin rows of majestic royal palm trees line the road. Behind
        them are vast groves of banana trees.
        A bit farther along, youll certainly want to turn off the
        coast road and head up to the Carbet falls. First you wind through
        dense banana plantations, then ferns and tree vines, and then, as the
        road narrows to a cement track, the tropical foliage closes in.
        Civilization here seems very distant. To reach any of the three Carbet
        falls, you must continue walking after the roads come to an end for 20
        minutes, 30 minutes, or two hours respectively. Signs direct you to
        these great waterfalls, which are among Guadeloupes finest, if least
        visited, scenic attractions.
        Just off the road (D4) to the falls is the Grand-Etang, a
        placid lake surrounded by forest with silence broken only by birds,
        insects, and fish that occasionally flip out of the water. It takes
        less than an hour to stroll all the way round the pleasant path
        surrounding the water.
        Back on the coastal highway you wont wonder why the
        village of Bananier has its name. From here to Trois-Rivières is one of
        the loveliest drives in the FWI. At the lookout point, pull over for an
        inviting panorama of the offshore islands of Les Saintes.
        At Trois-Rivières, stop to see fascinating rock engravings
        believed carved 1,600 years ago by the Arawak Indians. A delightful
        archaeological park has been created on the hillside around these huge,
        mysterious rocks. The inscriptions seem to be more than casual
        etchings, but their significance isnt known. Three rocks have been
        removed to museums in Berlin, New York, and Paris; others in the
        Trois-Rivières area outside the park have not yet been classified as
        historical monuments by the French government. Local residents will
        tell you where to find them. Brochures in English, available without
        charge, describe the rocks and vegetation.
        Down the road from the archaeological park is a lively
        covered fish and vegetable market. From the cement jetty here, boats
        leave early every morning for Les Saintes.
        Guadeloupes political capital, Basse-Terre, is much
        smaller and sleepier than Pointe-à-Pitre. Just passing through, you may
        be reminded of a minor town in the French provinces, except for its
        magnificent seaside setting at the foot of Mount Soufrières green
        slopes. The mighty Fort Saint-Charles dates back to 1645 (since renamed
        Fort Louis Delgrès). If you do stop in Basse-Terre, you might like to
        spend some time at the large market just off the capitals broad
        shoreline drive.
        From here its all up: through the charming hillside
        village of Saint-Claude, with its upper-income homes, and on toward the
        summit — or as far as the gendarmes are allowing traffic to proceed
        that day. The higher you go, the more sulphur youll smell; it emanates
        from bubbling fissures in the eerily beautiful landscape. A scenic but
        rather narrow road skirts Soufrières cone and the Carbet falls on the
        other side of the volcano. You can drive almost to the crater, but you
        have to climb the final 305 m (1,000 ft) to the top (dont forget to
        bring along a sweater). On cloudless days, a spectacular panorama
        awaits you. But wherever you are on the mountains upper reaches, the
        views are glorious. To appreciate the hiking trails here, an excellent
        National Park booklet available in English can be obtained from the
        Tourist Office in Pointe-à-Pitre.
        Vacillating Volcano
        It huffs, puffs, and occasionally even blows a bit. No one
        gets hurt. Practically all of Guadeloupes tourist hotels are far out
        of range. La Soufrière, temperamental and magnificent even if its peak
        is almost always shrouded in clouds, is a semi-active volcano. At
        1,467 m (4,813 ft) it dominates the lush and rugged south of Basse
        Terre. When it began acting up with low-grade vapor explosions in the
        summer of 1976, alarming headlines appeared in papers worldwide. Some
        72,000 volcano-zone residents were evacuated at great cost to the
        French government. But nothing more happened, and people gradually
        returned home. Soufrière is a splendid and perfectly safe place to
        visit otherwise the monitoring experts wouldnt let you go.
        From Basse-Terre north, the leeward coast (côte sous le
        vent) has a few small beaches of black volcanic sand and some
        picturesque paraphernalia of the fishermen who favor these waters.
        Outside Baillif is the best preserved of the sugar-mill watchtowers
        erected by the famous militant priest, Père Labat (see page 20). It saw
        bloody fighting between the French and English at the beginning of the
        18th century. One of Guadeloupes prettiest bays is Anse à la Barque
        (Boat Cove) so-named because fishing boats have long ridden out storms
        in its protected anchorage.
        Les Saintes
        You might pack a toothbrush as well as your bathing suit if
        you decide on a one-day excursion to this cluster of little
        islands — theyre hard to leave. Only two of the eight islands of des
        Saintes are inhabited, and one, Terre-de-Bas, just barely. Youll land
        at the main island, Terre-de-Haut, after a 15-minute small-plane flight
        from Pointe-à-Pitre. Ferries also go to Terre-de-Bas, leaving from
        Pointe-à-Pitre, St-François, Trois-Rivières, and Basse-Terre.
        The harbor here, dotted with yachts and fishing boats, is
        reminiscent of a mini-Rio de Janeiro or various Aegean and
        Mediterranean ports. Red-roofed houses nestle on the surrounding hills.
        Under a trim white beacon, a sign says: Terre-de-Haut est heureuse de
        vous accueillir et vous souhaite un agréable séjour (Terre-de-Haut is
        happy to welcome you and wishes you a pleasant stay). They mean it.
        Little children carrying trays offer you coconut tarts — a filling
        treat for a franc or two. And everybody seems to be smiling.
        Youll soon notice that this is first and foremost a
        fishing island — nets, lobster traps, gutting knives, rods, and lines
        are everywhere; its no surprise to learn that the inhabitants, mostly
        descendants of Bretons who settled here 300 years ago, are considered
        the best fishermen in the Antilles. Both they and their long bright
        boats are called Saintois. The islanders often wear a distinctively
        flat hat known as a salako and dont mind being photographed by polite
        visitors.
        To begin with, you can take a guided minibus tour (local
        drivers generally speak French only), that covers all 5 km (3 miles) of
        road on the island. It includes hilltop Fort Napoléon, unscathed since
        it was built after the days of Anglo-French warfare in the region.
        (Some modern art work is displayed inside. ) On the Cabrit islet across
        the way youll see a 19th-century fort named, inevitably, after the
        Empress Josephine.
        After strolling for the five minutes it takes to examine
        the little village, wise tourists head directly for Pompierre beach.
        This might be your idea of paradise: a semicircular sandy strip backed
        by sea grapes and tropical shrubs, gentle aquamarine surf, a coral reef
        close to shore, plus some rocks and seaweed for rewarding snorkeling
        and a view out to some huge pierced rocks (roches percées) that
        partly shelter the entrance to the cove.
        Theres more shade, from coconut trees, at the delightful
        unnamed beach on the little Pain de Sucre peninsula across the island.
        Among other beach possibilities is Anse Crawen, which is a naturisme
        haunt and said to offer the best off-the-beach snorkeling and skin
        diving. Underwater exploring in the transparent depths of the Les
        Saintes archipelago ranges from good to outstanding. For a negotiable
        sum boatmen will take you around the isles, pointing out where the
        great 1782 naval encounter occurred between French and British fleets,
        known as the Battle of Les Saintes (see page 19).
        Terre de Haut has several places to stay, but book ahead,
        particularly on weekends. At the handful of restaurants, the fare
        unfailingly features the freshest possible fish.
        Note: It costs about four times as much to fly to and from
        Les Saintes as to make the round-trip sea journey. Boats set sail from
        Trois-Rivières (48 km/30 miles from Pointe-à-Pitre), Basse-Terre, and
        Pointe-à-Pitre.
        Marie-Galante and La Désirade
        Most tourists wont want to take time on a limited vacation
        to visit these island dependencies of Guadeloupe. There are, however,
        regular small-plane flights to both islands and daily service by large
        rapid catamarans.
        Marie-Galante, large and round and noted for the rum from
        its extensive sugarcane fields, was named by Columbus after the ship
        that brought him across the Atlantic on his second voyage. The island
        has a number of fine white-sand beaches, notably La Feuillère near
        Capesterre, Vieux Fort, and Folle Anse. There is also an attractive
        18th-century residence called Château Murat.
        The atmosphere is simple and relaxed, the people very kind,
        and the Creole food excellent (try bébélé, an African-style soup of
        many ingredients including breadfruit, crabs, bananas, and peas).
        Beautiful beaches lure the determined few off the beaten
        path to La Désirade, its name signifying yearned-for land. This was the
        first of the Antilles spotted by Columbus in 1493. If you like early
        nights and lazy days, youll enjoy La Désirade, home to 1,600 farmers
        and fishermen, but just a few hotel rooms.
        MARTINIQUE
        The Indians called it Madinina, island of flowers, and they
        were right: hibiscus and bougainvillaea, magnolia and oleander,
        anthurium, poinsettia, and more, all compete to make Martinique one of
        the most colorful tropical gardens on earth. When Columbus discovered
        the island late in his career, he called it the best, the most
        fertile, the sweetest, the most charming country in the world and
        named it Matinino, probably after Saint Martin (or, some say, as an
        approximation of Madinina), a name which the French later adapted to
        Martinique.
        This southernmost of the French West Indies lies between
        English-speaking Dominica and Saint Lucia. Its 1,101 sq km (425 sq
        miles) are crowded with almost 400,000 inhabitants. The islanders are
        vibrant, generous, and passionate: the loveliness of Martiniques women
        is legendary, the number of children impressive. Josephine, Empress of
        France and wife of Napoleon, was born here.
        Today, as always, the time-honored occupations of fishing
        and farming support Martiniques fragile existence — the delicious rum
        also helps. But as in Guadeloupe, the economic outlook rarely inspires
        complacency, even with increasing tourism.
        The visitor will most appreciate Martinique by exploring in
        a rented car, or, if three or four people share the cost, a tour by
        regular taxi becomes a reasonable proposition. For tourists at hotels
        and for cruise ship passengers, there are also guided group excursions
        to mayor attractions by minibus or boat.
        Fort-de-France
        Clinging to its superb harbor, Martiniques capital is
        sometimes bustling, sometimes drowsy, but always captivating. Awesome
        green mountains form the backdrop while strikingly tall palm trees
        dwarf all but a very few buildings.
        In the great bay where flying fish rise at dusk, sloops and
        ketches, ferry boats and freighters, cruise ships and fishing boats
        never have a parking problem. Ashore its another matter, with
        peak-hour traffic jams and midtown parking woes.
        This is a city to savor on foot. Best is the teeming
        shopping area centered on the rue Isambert market. In this cavernous
        emporium youll have your pick of fresh Martinique pineapples, coconut
        slices, or the pungent baby limes so loved in the West Indies. Among
        the bananas and Caribbean sweet potatoes youll find bottles of
        old-time patent medicines for sale. This delightful marketplace has its
        own snack bar featuring a fresh vegetable repas (meal) for a relatively
        modest amount by French West Indies standards.
        The streets nearby are filled with shops selling bright
        material, including the madras prints so typical of the FWI, ready-made
        clothing, shoes, and jewelry. Bargaining here could well be
        worthwhile.
        When you reach the canal, technically the Levassor River
        (the propeller, or hélice, was invented by a Martiniquais, Gilbert
        Canque, and tested for the first time in this rather murky stream),
        youll want to cross over the stone footbridge. Small boats tie up here
        with batches of crayfish, fresh fish, and eel, and housewives clamor
        for the fishermen to weigh their choices on rudimentary scales. The
        formal fish market is farther along the fascinating canalside Boulevard
        Allègre. In this enclosed but airy building, youll find ladies with
        large machetes expertly chopping off hunks of kingfish, tuna, or shark
        for eager buyers.
        Tourists and Martiniquais alike tend to gravitate toward
        the landscaped park called La Savane near the waters edge in the heart
        of the city. Beyond the outdoor shopping pavilions here, youll come
        across a white marble statue of Napoleons Josephine, holding a rose
        and facing the direction of her birthplace across the bay. The statue
        was beheaded several years ago by islanders, who blame Josephine for
        her role in the slavery in Martinique.
        Pierre Belain dEsnambuc, the Norman adventurer who first
        claimed Martinique for France, also has a statue here, but cast in less
        regal bronze. Though youd never guess it, the French fought bloody
        battles on La Savane against the English and Dutch. Near the park, note
        the New Orleans-style iron grillwork on the buildings.
        Alongside La Savane runs rue de la Liberté, and at No. 9 is
        Martiniques excellent Musée départemental. In the three stories of
        this little air-conditioned museum you can see displays of prehistoric
        Indian artifacts, skeletal bones found locally, and a wealth of items
        chosen to evoke a feeling for the islands history over the past three
        centuries. Napoleon and Josephine get top billing, of course, as does
        the eruption of Mount Pelée (see page 53). There are slave irons,
        traditional island costumes, and an interesting French map of 1778
        showing the théâtre de la guerre (theater of war) between the Americans
        and the British. The museum is open from 9am to 1pm and 2 to 5pm Monday
        to Friday (with audio-visual shows in the afternoon), and on Saturday
        mornings.
        Farther along rue de la Liberté is the startling Schoelcher
        Library (bibliothèque). This odd but attractive town-house, with its
        collection of Arawak and Carib relics, was on display at the 1889 Paris
        Exposition, then dismantled, brought to Martinique, and reconstructed.
        Victor Schoelcher, the philanthropist who donated most of the librarys
        books, is credited with abolishing slavery here. Another midtown
        landmark in Fort-de-France is the imposing Saint-Louis Cathedral, which
        dates from 1895.
        Youll have to confine your viewing to the outside of the
        old citadel in the harbor, Fort Saint-Louis, unless youre able to
        obtain special visitors permission from the French military (true of
        all Martiniques forts), or happen by during recently authorized — but
        infrequent — visiting hours.  In the 17th century this fort was all
        there was to the town, but dwellings were gradually built up around it
        on reclaimed marshland. The fort, which held off a savage Dutch attack
        in 1674, was known as Fort-Royal, later corrupted in Creole to Foyal.
        Napoleon named it Fort-de-France and that name was taken over for the
        town. Fires and hurricanes during the last century subsequently reduced
        its importance. Had it not been for the volcanic disaster that all but
        wiped Saint-Pierre off the map in 1902, Fort-de-France would never have
        become Martiniques leading city.
        Venture Into the Interior
        If you have time for only one road trip on the island, be
        sure it includes the Route de la Trace, more prosaically known as Route
        Nationale 3. La Trace is one of the Caribbeans great roads, with
        gorgeous views down into ravines and up at the deep green Carbet peaks
        that dominate north-central Martinique. Along the way, near the hamlet
        of La Donis, there are two thriving nurseries which sell local foliage
        species but note that these are closed on Sundays.
        Caution: Unlike other islands of the French West Indies,
        Martinique has poisonous snakes, and walking off a marked forest trail
        is not recommended.
        For that out-of-this-world feeling and superior tropical
        mountain scenery, try first gear on the road to Fond Saint-Denis.
        Precipitous turns lead to the observatory of the University of Paris,
        strategically perched to monitor the Pelée volcano. To visit this
        establishment, which resembles a private residence. you must make
        arrangements three days in advance. Up here, gazing out at strikingly
        lush mountains, you may find yourself higher than the clouds, which
        adds to the extraordinarily eerie atmosphere of the place.
        Saint-Pierre and the Volcano
        It was a lovely seaside town, the first French settlement
        on Martinique, and, by early 1902, so culturally and economically
        thriving that it was nicknamed the Paris of the West Indies.  When
        1,397-m (4,584-ft) Mount Pelée began belching smoke and cinders far
        above Saint-Pierre in late April, which it had done harmlessly before,
        authorities professed no concern. Evacuation was unthinkable since an
        election was coming up.
        On 4–5 May a mass of mud and rocks was swept down by
        Pelées White River (Rivière Blanche) over a factory, killing 25
        people. At the same time, a tidal wave lashed the shores near
        Saint-Pierre. Flames began spouting from the mountains peak. On 7 May
        the governor of Martinique arrived with his wife to calm the
        residents — Saint-Pierres total population was about 30,000.
        At 8:02am on 8 May, Pelée erupted titanically. A vast
        burning cloud of gas and steam bearing rocks and ashes roared down the
        mountainside onto the town. In just three minutes Saint-Pierre was
        totally wiped out. The only survivor was a prisoner in a thick-walled
        dungeon, who for years afterwards was displayed abroad as a circus
        attraction. He didnt die until 1955.
        The eruption of the volcano is documented in the excellent
        Franck Perret museum. Perret lived in Saint-Pierre from 1929 to 1943.
        Perched near the crater during the 1929 eruption, he studied the
        composition of Pelées volcanic gases, then founded the museum that he
        donated to the municipality. He died in New York shortly after leaving
        the island.
        French-, English-, and Spanish-speaking guides at the
        one-room museum help explain the sobering display of relics of the once
        lively city. Particularly graphic are blown-up old photographs, a
        burned and twisted sewing machine, and a mass of scissors soldered
        together by the intense heat. One curiosity is a charred electric light
        fixture and bulb that somehow continued to work for 62 years until it
        suddenly stopped one day in 1964. The museum is open every day
        (including Christmas and Carnival) from 9am to noon and 3 to 5pm.
        Just outside, glance over the cannon parapet for a view of
        the remains of devastated beachside buildings. About 915 m (100 yards)
        up the street youll see the ruins of what was Saint-Pierres
        glittering theater and, nearby, the rubble of the old prison.
        Today Saint-Pierre is a little town of some 6,500 people.
        If you ask, natives will probably concede that they always worry a
        little about that mountain up there, but since the minor eruption in
        1929 there has been no smoke and only occasional earth rumblings.
        The Far North
        History buffs will have to ask along the road north of
        Saint-Pierre for the unmarked location of the so-called Caribs
        Grave, where Indians pursued by French colonists hurled themselves
        from a cliff in the 17th century, vowing that Mount Pelée would avenge
        their deaths. Farther on is the unassuming village of Le Prêcheur,
        where another island girl who made good spent her childhood
        years — Madame de Maintenon, second wife of Louis XIV. Beyond Le
        Prêcheur youll go through the fishing hamlet of Anse Belleville with a
        remarkably tall, vine-like fig tree and a nice little beach.
        The coast here is all but uninhabited. Normally youll
        find no one at all on the delightful volcanic sand beach at Anse Céron.
        This idyllic spot is as far as you should attempt to drive — the
        tropical track ahead will defeat most vehicles.
        Instead, to reach Martiniques northernmost villages of
        Grand-Rivière and Macouba, drive inland from Saint-Pierre, skirting
        Mount Pelée. This route takes you through Morne Rouge and Ajoupa
        Bouillon. Driving in this region, as elsewhere, you may be surprised to
        see brightly painted tires hanging outside houses. These are only for
        decoration and not intended to ward off evil spirits — volcanic or
        otherwise. For such purposes, some Martiniquais resort to different
        means.
        As you reach the Atlantic coast, youll become almost
        engulfed in vast groves of banana trees, with bunches hanging
        temptingly close to the road. But its best to steer clear of these
        groves because they harbor a poisonous snake called the fer de
        lance.
        At Macouba, its worth stopping at the simple cliffside
        church, where Père Labat spent some time, to examine its cemetery
        jutting out over the ocean. The lively little fishing settlement far
        below on the waters edge is an easy walk down, but very tiring coming
        back up on a hot day. If you do descend, youll see some rather curious
        caverns in the limestone cliffs where, on occasion, local people sing
        and dance to stringed instruments.
        Persevering along the bumpy cobblestone road with its
        hairpin bends youll cross two green, modern, metal bridges. Then you
        arrive at Grand-Rivière. This end-of-the-road village is famed for its
        skilled and dauntless fishermen. Youll probably see boys surfing the
        high, somewhat dangerous Atlantic waves on the smooth trunks of balsa
        (langue de bœuf) trees. This lightweight wood, cut to the size of the
        boy intending to use it, makes unexpectedly good surfboards.
        Saint-Pierre to Fort-de-France
        Just off the gray sand Anse Turin beach near Le Carbet, a
        roadside sign reports that Paul Gauguin sojourned here in l887. The
        sign points through an arched aqueduct of crumbling stone to the Musée
        Gauguin, displaying some original works by the great French painter,
        though only copies of his paintings. Also in Le Carbet: the Amazona
        Zoological Garden, with alligator-like caimans, snakes, armadillos, and
        other delights.
        Farther down the coast road youll come to Martiniques
        most-photographed fishing village, Bellefontaine, with a beach
        cluttered with nets and the distinctive gommier fishing boats invented
        by the Carib Indians. Schoelcher, formerly a small fishing village just
        north of Fort-de-France, has expanded to become an extension of the
        capital city. Named after the abolitionist, Schoelcher is proud of its
        reconstructed Benedictine monastery.
        From Fort-de-France, the inland road through the
        agricultural towns of Saint-Joseph and Gros Morne meanders over hills
        thickly planted with bananas, pineapple, and sugarcane. You wont envy
        the men and women you see working in the fields under the blazing sun,
        but theyre never too tired to return your wave with a smile. At
        Saint-Joseph ask to be shown a travelers tree (arbre du voyageur)
        from Madagascar, which has a reserve supply of water within its
        trunk.
        South Along the Caribbean
        By any standards, Trois-Ilets seems an unlikely hometown
        for an empress. The village is named after the three small islands it
        overlooks in a corner of Fort-de-Frances huge bay. Dont miss the
        neatly white-washed church with a pale blue ceiling above its cool
        interior. Here Josephines parents were married and she was baptized,
        though the plaque notes merely that the village celebrated the 100th
        anniversary of Napoleons death on 5 May 1921.
        About five minutes away in the unspoiled countryside,
        youll jolt over the 200 rockiest yards of road in Martinique to get to
        the Musée de la Pagerie. Contained in the restored kitchen and prayer
        room of Josephines family estate, the tidy little museum is a shrine
        to the one-time empress. Youll see period furniture, slave chains, and
        old paintings, but the greatest attractions are a photocopy of Napoleon
        and Josephines wedding certificate and an emotional love letter he
        wrote her in 1796 from Italy (an English translation is displayed).
        Guides will shyly tell you that visitors to this out-of-the-way
        memorial have included Queen Margrethe of Denmark, King Leopold of
        Belgium, Lady Clementine Churchill, and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
        (Also in Trois-Ilets: the Sugarcane Museum. )
        Just down the road from the museum lie the rolling
        fairways of Martiniques 18-hole golf course, and a little farther on,
        the Pointe-du-Bout resort with its cluster of hotels, beaches, and a
        marina. If you continue by boat around this most attractive peninsula,
        youll notice several secluded little coves scooped out of the often
        steep coastline. By car or ferry from Fort-de-France, you can reach
        Anse à lAne which has a pleasant brown-sand beach with sea grapes
        providing shade, plus picnic tables, childrens slides, and
        restaurants.
        Even better is Les Anses-dArlet, as delightful a village
        as there is anywhere in the French West Indies. You may have to share
        the three fine little beaches with a few cheerful fishermen. The
        Caribbean here is usually placid and always inviting, and the
        atmosphere is utterly relaxed, the tiny village quiet and clean.
        Motorboats from the capital will bring you out here in record time.
        After a stop to contemplate Diamond Rock (see box below),
        most tourists continue south over winding roads through Sainte-Luce,
        Rivière-Pilote, and Le Marin without stopping until they reach
        Sainte-Anne. The best beach, one of the best on the entire island, is
        nearby, fronting a private vacation club. The beach is public property,
        but anyone can simply walk there from Sainte-Anne. The neighboring
        public beach, perfectly acceptable, has, unfortunately, very little
        shade. (Though the equator is only a mite closer here in the rather
        arid south of Martinique, the sun does seem hotter. )
        Having reached Sainte-Anne, you should certainly drive
        south for perhaps ten minutes, as far as the road permits, to the
        string of beautiful, deserted beaches known as Les Salines. Take your
        lunch; this is wild, far-out Caribbean beach territory with no
        facilities of any kind, although some islanders keep tents here
        permanently for weekend camping. The area is named after the large salt
        pond youll see.
        This is also the site of a strange — but a little
        disappointing — petrified savanna forest (la savanne des
        pétrifications), rather difficult to reach over rutted automobile
        trails of rock and sand. Here, as far south as you can go on
        Martinique, the landscape is desolate. Only cacti seem able to grow
        amid bleak rocks that on inspection turn out to be petrified wood. Its
        speculated that aeons ago this may have been a forest extinguished by
        the eruption of some volcano now deep under the sea.
        The Atlantic Coast
        Much of the rugged windward coast is accessible only by
        boat. The only worthwhile beach area is near Tartane on the mid-island
        Caravelle peninsula, where theres also a park with walking trails.
        Youll enjoy visiting Le Vauclin, a consummate fishing
        village with more than its share of friendly, weatherbeaten people.
        Much evidence of a major Carib Indian settlement has been unearthed in
        this region.
        The views of the whole of southern Martinique from Mount
        Vauclin are spectacular.
        Up the coast, Le François is a curious blend of typical
        wooden homes and modern apartment buildings spreading down toward a
        pretty bay and a lazy marina. The nearby, historic Rhum Clément
        distillery offers tours and tastings.
        Sainte-Marie houses a Rum Museum with documents and
        equipment going back to 1765, as well as a fascinating new Banana
        Museum. 
        Saint-Martin
        Its an island with a dual personality, each side trying
        to outsmile the other. Whatever you call it, Saint-Martin as the French
        do, or Sint Maarten with the Dutch, it is part of both the French West
        Indies and the Netherlands Antilles.
        Columbus named the island after St. Martin on that saints
        feast day in 1493, or did he? Given the inexact state of the geography
        along the confusing Antilles chain, some experts suggest that he
        actually gave the name to Nevis, an island to the south, and that
        subsequent cartographers somehow awarded it to Saint-Martin. The
        similarity to Matinino — Martinique — only confuses things more.
        Certainly this island can qualify as having one of the
        worlds longest-running governmental love affairs: since 1648 the
        French and the Dutch have shared sovereignty in almost total harmony.
        When the two nations divided it up, France got 54 sq km (21 sq miles)
        and Holland agreed to take just 41 sq km (16 sq miles), but that
        included the important salt pond near the Dutch capital of
        Philipsburg.
        (Legend has it that the division was accomplished by
        having a Frenchman and a Dutchman start back to back pacing off
        territory: some say the Frenchman got more of the island because he had
        a longer stride, or that the Dutchman stopped too often for a snort of
        gin. )
        Another thing those early French and Dutch settlers agreed
        upon was that their island should be free of levies on any imported
        goods. That still means completely duty-free shopping today and
        therefore, together with nearby Saint-Barthélemy, the Caribbeans
        lowest prices for many items (see page 86).
        Theoretically there should be a frontier hut, but there
        isnt a single customs official and the border has been unguarded for
        over 300 years. On the main highway youll know youve passed crossed
        over by a stone monument commemorating the partition and signs reading
        Bienvenue Partie Française in one direction, Welcome to Sint Maarten
        in the other — thats all. (Before the islands telephone service was
        boldly upgraded, it used to be easier to drive across the border than
        to put through a call to the other side. ) So near, yet worlds apart,
        the two sides maintain their separate identities: the Dutch side,
        despite such hold-outs as thin cigars, gin, and Indonesian rijstafel,
        has begun to resemble an American beachhead, after years of landings by
        hordes of cruise-ship shoppers.
        On the French side of the island, a sub-prefecture of
        Guadeloupe, every schoolchild learns the mother tongue. There is a
        Creole patois, heavily influenced by immigrants from Haiti, but its
        essentially based on French. Here, on the northernmost of the FWI,
        youll find such familiar trappings as boulangeries, restaurants
        featuring delicate wine sauces, and gendarmes (if only a mere handful).
        Around 35,000 people live on the French side, the same amount on the
        Dutch.
        Marigot
        Whereas Dutch Sint Maarten is one of the more upbeat
        places in the Caribbean, much of the French sides charm is that it
        seems content to slumber in the sun. Marigot, the modest capital on its
        wide bay, is so quiet that very large fish venture in surprisingly
        close to shore. Youll also see plenty of yachts, but cruise ships
        rarely enter; Philipsburg gets nearly all of them.
        When Marigot livens up early in the day at the quayside,
        youll want to be there. Like their Guadeloupean and Martiniquais
        counterparts, Saint-Martins fishermen invariably chug home with their
        catches to a clamorous welcome. Nearby, ladies with broad smiles sit on
        little stools selling breadfruit and cinnamon. Things become almost
        chaotic, by Marigot standards, when an inter-island cargo scow arrives
        with haphazardly tethered livestock and straw-hatted voyagers.
        The Dutch hav e a fort, so the French have a fort. For the
        view over Marigot Bay, its worth the four-minute climb up to deserted
        old Fort Saint-Louis. This 17th-century bastion looks its age and then
        some. Sheep graze alongside a rusty, disused cannon, standard armament
        of FWI forts.
        A few minutes up and over the hill by car is Grand Case, a
        delightful village strung unpretentiously along a long, curving beach.
        Much smaller than Marigot and even lower-key, it has numerous
        restaurants and places to stay. At salt flats nearby is tiny Espérance
        airport, a one-strip, one-shed affair used for flights to and from
        Pointe-à-Pitre and Saint-Barthélemy.
        The Beaches and the Sea
        Counting little coves youll reach only by boat,
        Saint-Martin has 36 beaches of fine, sometimes dazzling white sand with
        hotels located on some of the best. Following the avant-garde lead of
        big sister Guadeloupe, Saint-Martin has introduced a nudist beach.
        Elsewhere on the French side of the island, toplessness is
        optional.
        Churning or serene, deep blue or aquamarine, the water is
        clear and clean. Snorkeling and skin diving are particularly rewarding
        at a number of isolated inlets and nearby islets, and boats to take you
        there are readily available. The 1801 wreck of a British warship on a
        reef 5 km (3 miles) offshore is a divers dream: for the non-scuba set
        theres a glass-bottomed boat you can take to see big groupers and
        perhaps sea turtles swimming around the sunken ships cannon.
        Sailboats of various sizes are offered for rent around the
        island. Beginners appreciate the calm waters of Simson Bay, the largest
        lagoon in the West Indies. Old salts may want to skipper their charter
        craft across open sea to the smaller Dutch islands of Sint Eustatius or
        Saba, or to French Saint-Barthélemy. If you dont do-it-yourself
        theres a choice of one-day group excursions by motor launch or
        sailboat. Hotels will be able to arrange for deep-sea fishing and
        waterskiing.
        Touring the Island
        Without seriously disrupting the leisurely pace of your
        vacation, you can see the highlights of Saint-Martin in one day,
        breaking for a swim and a relaxed lunch. Theres a great deal of
        pastureland with stone walls. Traffic can be heavy, though; count on 40
        minutes between Marigot and Philipsburg. Rental car firms offer
        descriptive tape cassettes for your own guided tour; otherwise,
        agencies run bus tours and taxi drivers are pleased to drive you
        around.
        Probably the most exciting things to see on the island are
        other islands. Outside Philipsburg from a roadside lookout point youll
        make out four islands rising out of the sea in the distance: Nevis, St.
        Kitts, Sint Eustatius, and Saba. More dramatically, from the high,
        serpentine road to Oyster Pond from Philipsburg, youll be stunned by
        the beauty of Saint-Barthélemy across a royal blue swath of the
        Atlantic.
        Saint-Barthélemy
        This just might be the best piece of France anywhere.
        Known fondly as St. Barts, Columbus bestowed his brothers name,
        Bartholomew, on the island when he sailed past in 1493. Its an
        absolutely peaceful, absolutely beautiful little island of roller
        coaster hills, rocky coves, and powdery beaches lining a limpid,
        emerald sea.
        Twittering in the shrubbery of its 21 sq km (8 sq miles)
        are countless thousands of yellow-breasts, red-throats, and
        hummingbirds. They greatly outnumber the 6,500-odd human
        inhabitants — mostly white, many the descendants of Huguenots — from
        Brittany and Normandy.
        These unusual Frenchmen and the relative handful of black
        families that have also lived here for generations strike visitors as
        extremely kind, open, and simple. Among themselves they speak a nasal,
        old-fashioned French, accented in a way that reminds visiting Parisians
        of French-Canadian speech. Sprinkled through it are bits of English and
        Swedish. (For nearly a century, until 1878, St. Barts was the only
        possession Sweden ever had in the Caribbean; see page 22. ) The result
        is a patois baffling to anyone not brought up on St. Barts.
        Now that the island has a modern international airport,
        people are making their way to St. Barts in ever-increasing numbers.
        Swelling the ranks of American vacationers are trendy young Frenchmen
        from the métropole. They like the relaxed, low-key atmosphere and
        Gallic flair of the place. The tourist influx has triggered a building
        boom around the island and in the tiny capital of Gustavia, situated on
        a picture-postcard harbor. Some new hotels have opened, but so far, St.
        Barts has lost little of its former charm.
        The most popular way to get there is by scheduled flight
        from Saint-Martin or Guadeloupe. Unless you arrive by yacht, the other
        option is a motor-launch ride from Saint-Martin, 15 — sometimes very
        choppy — nautical miles away.
        Gustavia
        When you see it, youll understand why Gustavias
        rectangular harbor is a favorite with the Caribbean yachting set. From
        this ideal anchorage you can rent small excursion or fishing boats.
        Caution: Owing to the risk of ciguatera in the Caribbean (see page
        117), youd be wise to check with local experts before eating any fish
        you catch in offshore waters.
        In one morning you can get to know just about everybody in
        this unassuming island capital. The Swedes named it after King Gustav
        III and, in 1785, declared it the free port that it remains today.
        Shopping is therefore duty-free, as in Saint-Martin (see page 86).
        Liquor and tobacco are good buys. There are also several French
        boutiques that stock merchandise from the Continent, though the
        selection of items for sale is rather limited.
        When sightseeing, youll find the two thriving churches
        somewhat more interesting than the three ruined forts overlooking
        Gustavia. St. Barts, of course, is completely undefended. But then this
        very particular island is hardly in danger of being invaded except, of
        course, by tourism.
        Around the Island
        Sightseers have their choice of taxi or rental vehicles,
        including the ubiquitous Minimoke and beach buggy, ideal for local
        conditions. To spend more than four hours covering every paved and
        unpaved road, most of which terminate in unannounced dead ends, would
        be a difficult task. If youre stranded anywhere, hitch-hiking is
        accepted behavior and youll surely get a ride. In recent years the
        number of motor vehicles on St. Barts has escalated to something like
        two per inhabitant.
        The seascapes and panoramas on this island are enough to
        tempt any driver to glance away from the serviceable but
        never-wide-enough roads. From the highest point on the Vitet road,
        youll want to stop to take in the sweeping view over a bay called
        Grand-Cul-de-Sac, which is favored by windsurfers, and out to Tortue
        islet in the Atlantic. Not far away is Pointe Milou, a wild,
        breathtaking headland from which on a clear day you can count nine
        isles or rocks in the sea. The strange cactus-like plants growing here
        in great profusion are called Tête-à-lAnglais. They have prominent red
        protuberances and may have been named after the British redcoats.
        The French West Indies may be matriarchal, but on St.
        Barts the father runs the family. Practically everyone goes to church,
        the Catholic majority either on Saturday evening or Sunday, when mass
        is celebrated at different churches. Its worth going to church or
        visiting the fishing hamlet of Corossol just to see the ladies wearing
        the starched white bonnets called quichenottes, a St. Barts trademark
        that dates back to the time of the original Huguenot settlers.
        Beaches
        The very best are difficult to get to, as is often the
        case with superior beaches in the Caribbean. Coconut trees and sloping
        cliffs ring the tranquil waters of Le Grand Colombier. This northern
        beach of magnificent tan sand is most agreeably reached by boat.
        Otherwise, if the road gives out, youll have to walk for about half an
        hour to this paradise bay, which a noted American banker, David
        Rockefeller, chose as the site of his Caribbean vacation home. Members
        of the Rothschild and Ford families also took up residence nearby.
        Very bumpy roads will take you almost as far as the
        second- and third-best beaches, Gouverneur and Grande Saline, in
        neighboring coves on the south coast. Sea grapes and shrubs provide
        little shade here, but otherwise you should find no fault with either
        of these shores. Legend has it that treasure lies buried hereabouts,
        hidden away by a French buccaneer called Montbars the Exterminator.
        Access to La Baie de Saint-Jean, the most-photographed of
        Saint-Barthélemys 22 beaches, is quite easy. There are actually two
        shimmering crescents of pale sand here, separated by a small rocky
        promontory.
        At Corossol, Anse des Cayes, and Anse de Lorient, youll
        share the shore with fishermen who set out to sea in gaily painted
        boats.
        Currents can be surprisingly strong at the attractive
        Flamands beach — not recommended for children or poor swimmers. At many
        points around St. Barts and its small rocky offshore islets, there is
        fine reef snorkeling.
      
    
  
