
  
  
    
      
        Where to go
        Where, indeed? This subcontinent is so rich and varied that
        the choice of what to see on a first visit can be daunting. Dont even
        think of doing India the way people do Europe. With some judicious
        selection from among the places we suggest, you can most certainly get
        a pretty good feel for the country in the four weeks that most people
        devote to a first trip.
        Even if you have a distinct taste for improvisation and a
        horror of schedules and detailed itineraries, you must accept from the
        outset, if your time is at all limited, that travelling around India
        will demand a certain amount of planning. Remember, there are over 844
        million Indians out there, and a lot of them will be on the move at the
        same time as you will be, therefore competing for plane seats and hotel
        rooms. So you will need to make at least some advance reservations for
        hotels in principal cities and especially for your major plane or train
        journeys. This will still leave you plenty of room for getting off the
        beaten track and staying overnight in new and unexpected places.
        Putting Together an Itinerary
        We have divided the country into five regions — north, west,
        center, east, and south.
        In each of the regions, youll find a city such as Delhi,
        Mumbai, or Chennai which you can use as a starting point, and which
        would also be the best place for phoning home and making other
        practical arrangements. Equally important, each area includes a place
        where, in hallowed and sensible military phrasing, you can go for rest
        and recreation. In this case, youll find a beach resort, nature
        reserve, or one of the old hill-stations of the British Raj, each being
        ideal for a change of pace or climate. Its easy to overdose on the
        many temples, palaces, and museums in India. They are all worth your
        attention, but do take plenty of time to relax, too — youll be
        surprised at how much more you can see and appreciate if youve had
        enough rest.
        If your budget allows you to fly around the country, you can
        design a smorgasbord of places to see in each region, since you will
        not be able to do all of them exhaustively. In any case, we recommend
        that you choose from at least two of them, ideally three, when planning
        your menu. 
        Tourist Information offices can be very helpful. You will
        find their guides are much more reliable than those outside the temples
        or palaces, but one word of warning: different tour guides will give
        contradictory explanations about the significance of statues as well as
        many different versions of legend and historical fact.  It would be
        easy to dismiss these explanations as being nonsense, but youll
        understand India better if you can appreciate that what each guide is
        saying may in its own way be true. When it comes to ideas, there is no
        more tolerant land on earth.
        Practical Hints
        The Handy Travel Tips section at the back of the book
        offers details on how to handle the practical side of your trip, but
        its worth keeping a few points in mind when deciding where youre
        going in the time you have available.
        The climate in India (see page 235) imposes its own
        imperatives and restrictions on your itinerary. Northern India is
        simply impractical in December, Delhi unbearably hot in June, and
        trains uncertain in the monsoon. Think of three seasons, cool, hot, and
        wet, emphasized here because they take on a particular meaning in the
        Indian context.
        The cool season is from October to March, the ideal time
        for seeing most of India ( except in the northern hills and mountains,
        where its bitterly cold). Cool means it is pleasantly warm by day, and
        fresh enough for a sweater in the evening. The temperature begins to
        rise by mid-February. Hot, from April to June, is hot as people only
        rarely experience it. The cities and plains in this season are
        definitely a bad bet, but the hill-stations will be at their best. From
        mid-June to September, wet means monsoon-wet, not all day every day,
        but torrential rains occur often enough to make travel uncertain and
        the mosquitoes and other bugs a real nuisance. However, during this
        time the country is at its most green, and the monuments, especially
        the Taj Mahal, take on a glistening beauty.
        With regard to your health (see also page 241), two
        attitudes herald a miserable time: carelessness and hypochondria. Take
        elementary precautions by sticking to bottled drinks and freshly cooked
        food, and you wont have any serious stomach problems. An occasional
        touch of Delhi belly is unavoidable when youre not used to the spicy
        food, but nothing to worry about; take it easy and drink lots of
        liquids, and itll pass. If you are on a short trip, you may need to
        take a quick-acting remedy to keep you on your feet, but if you load up
        with antibiotics and a host of other patent medicines, your body will
        never build up resistance, and the next attack will just be worse.
        There is one essential: protect yourself from the heat.
        Save your sun-tanning for the beach or the hotel swimming pool.
        Otherwise, stay out of the sun. Wear a nicely ventilated hat and keep
        to the shade in the street. Try to do your open air sightseeing in the
        morning and late afternoon. Take a siesta after lunch. Drink plenty of
        liquids — in the heat, dehydration is more of a risk than an upset
        stomach.
        In all senses of the word, stay cool. In the first few days
        jet-lag, acclimatization, and culture shock may lead you to lose your
        temper when you see the airports, railways, and hotels not organized in
        a way youre used to, but dont forget — John Kenneth Galbraith called
        it a functioning anarchy. Count to ten, and, like Delhi belly, itll
        pass. Airports, railway stations, and hotels can be a pain anywhere in
        the world these days. Indians are mostly cheerful, responding much more
        readily to a smile than a scowl.
        The red tape can at times seem like barbed wire, but this,
        too, can be handled. Part of Indias legacy after several centuries of
        bureaucracy (dont just blame the British civil service — it began long
        before) is an inordinate respect for the written document and the
        rubber stamp. Dont knock it — use it. Vouchers, passes, letters of
        introduction, and printed business cards all work like magic when a
        confirmed reservation has become unconfirmed. 
        If you should be travelling by train (see page 253) and
        rate comfort above improvisation, go first class with an Indrail Pass.
        It saves you time in queues and gets you preferential treatment with
        reservations. Indian Airlines Discover India plan offers 21 days of
        unlimited travel and is less economic than single tickets, but buy them
        en bloc with confirmed reservations that you should reconfirm at each
        new airport.
        Echoing around every office you will hear the cheerful
        sentence: No problem.  Though it rarely means exactly this, interpret
        it as meaning no catastrophe and have a good time anyway.
        THE NORTH
        The region around Delhi embraces the government
        capital — the heart of the old Mughal empire at Agra, and the nature
        reserves of Corbett and Bharatpur. In the Himalayan mountains there is
        the hill-station of Simla — which once served as the British summer
        capital — and the magical but dangerous region of Kashmir.
        Delhi
        On the Yamuna (Jumna) river at the western end of the great
        Ganga valley, the capital seems to have been a coveted place for
        Indias conquerors. Though they each very often destroyed the work of
        their predecessors, the 20th-century city remains a fascinating
        compendium of Indias imperial history.
        Recent archaeological findings suggest that a site on the
        Yamuna river may have been the home of Mahabharata hero, Yudhishthira,
        dating back to 1000 b.c. A rock inscription from Emperor Ashoka
        indicates that Delhi was a major point on the trade route between the
        northwest frontier and Bengal in the third century b.c.
        The Tomara Rajputs made it their capital in 736, with the
        name of Dhillika, and it was a focus of clan wars until the Muslims
        conquered it and Qutb-ud-din Aybak set up his sultanate in 1206. Delhi
        was dismantled to make way for new monuments which then suffered from
        the devastating passage of Timur the Lame in 1398. He took away 90
        elephant-loads of building materials and thousands of skilled Delhi
        stonemasons and sculptors to build his mosque at Samarkand. With the
        advent of the Mughals in 1526, Delhi alternated with Agra as the
        capital, and each ruler asserted his particular taste in architectural
        caprice.
        Under the British, the town took a back seat to the ports
        of Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras until 1911, when it became once more a
        proud imperial capital. No less vain than the Mughals, the new
        conquerors all added their own architectural tastes, which were a
        tribute to Indias past but unmistakably British in overall conception,
        to New Delhi.
        Today, a tour of the capital takes you through a mixture of
        imposing ministries and embassies, modern office buildings and hotels,
        and along the Old Delhi of vibrant Hindu and Muslim communities
        crowding in on the Mughal monuments. For more orientation, visit the
        Tourist Information Office on Janpath.
        Delhi of the Sultans
        Start at the southern end of the city, with the Qutb Minar,
        a symbol of Islams impact on India. Begun by Delhis first sultan,
        Qutb-ud-din, and completed by his son-in-law Iltutmish, the 73-m
        (240-ft) tower was erected to celebrate the Turkish conquest of Delhi.
        The tower comprises four stories, each a tapering cylinder with angular
        and convex ribs, separated by balconies.
        The top of the tower is off limits, due to dangers inherent
        in the narrow staircase that leads to the look-out point, so the best
        bet for a panoramic view of the city is the top floor of one of the
        taller, more recent hotels.
        The ruins of the ancient mosque Quwwatul-Islam-Masjid
        (which means The Might of Islam), was built with the might of the
        Hindus. With no skilled Muslim labor at his disposal, Qutb called on
        local craftsmen to build the mosque from the ruins of 27 Hindu and Jain
        temples, demolished by their own elephants. You can see the results of
        this construction method in the temple-pillars set on top of one
        another. Sculptures have been plastered over, but the Indian carving
        remains. Islamic architecture shows in the five characteristic peaked
        arches of the prayer-hall screen, but even here the decoration, which
        includes the Arabic lettering, is naturalistic and Hindu in style.
        In the mosques courtyard, there is a 7-m (22-ft) Iron
        Pillar, from the fourth century, brought here by the Rajput founders of
        Dhillika, but nobody knows from where. Without rust after 1600 years
        worth of monsoon, this monument to the Hindu god Vishnu is said to have
        special properties: if you stand with your back against it and
        completely encircle it with your arms — no mean feat — good luck is
        yours for the rest of the day.
        City of the Mughals
        Due east of New Delhis India Gate the much-plundered
        16th-century Purana Qila (Old Fort) stands on an ancient mound, now
        believed to mark the site of Indraprastha of the Mahabharata epic.
        The earliest Mughal building, the Qala-i-Kuhna-Masjid,
        with its minutely detailed molding of graceful peaked arches,
        represents an important transition from the Turco-Afghan to the
        sophisticated style of the Persian-influenced Mughals. The mosque was
        built in the year 1541 by Sher Shah, the Emperor Baburs General in
        office. Sher-Mandal, the octagonal tower due south of the mosque,
        served as the Generals pleasure-palace, but it was to be the death of
        his rival and successor, Humayun (see page 39).
        From Humayuns death came the splendid monument located in
        Nizamuddin, the Tomb of Humayun, which was built by his widow Haji
        Begum and the inspiration for the Taj Mahal. It is set back on a raised
        terrace in a set of walled-in tree-shaded lawns surrounded by hedges,
        but without the water once running in its channels (rivers of life),
        or the rectangular pools that were to be the perfect setting for the
        Taj. Humayuns Tomb has a remarkable charm of its own, a site for
        repose and serenity made from a delicate combination of
        materials — buff-and-red sandstone and smart, grey-trimmed white
        marble. With a majestic dome uniting the four octagonal kiosks over the
        terraces latticed arches, this is the first fully-realized masterpiece
        of Mughal architecture. The numerous six-pointed stars set in the
        abutments of the main arches are not the Jewish Star of David but an
        esoteric emblem that youll see all over the country.
        Dominating Old Delhi, the Lal Quila (Red Fort) was built by
        Shahjahan when he transferred the capital back to Delhi from Agra.
        Behind its ramparts, the Delhi citadel is more a palace than a
        fortress, with white marble preferred over the regions red sandstone.
        Its thought he used the same architect who worked on the Taj
        Mahal.
        From south of the Fort, notice the two monumental elephants
        outside the Delhi Gate. Part of the original design, they were
        destroyed by Emperor Aurangzeb, who refused images susceptible to
        idolatry. Viceroy Lord Curzon had these replicas installed in 1903.
        Enter the fort on its west side at the Lahore Gate, and you find
        yourself in a vaulted bazaar street, an idea Shahjahan borrowed from
        Baghdad. Imagine administrators and Rajput princes riding on elephants
        through the arcade as far as the Naqqar Khana (Drum House), where the
        imperial band played and visitors were obliged to dismount.
        Pass with the ghosts of these nobles and commoners through
        the drum house to the Diwan-i-Am (Hall of Public Audience). Here, under
        a baldaquin with 40 pillars, the Emperor sat cross-legged on his
        throne, the Seat of the Shadow of God.  He held audience, surrounded
        by nobles, at midday, while common petitioners attended in the
        courtyard below. As a visitor, you can admire the inlaid stone panels
        of birds and flowers at the back of the hall.
        Entrance to the Diwan-i-Khas (Hall of Private Audience) was
        for the privileged, by ticket only. Youll find it on the left, among
        the palace apartments on the Yamuna river. Beautiful as it is, with
        carved designs on the marble columns and cusped arches, imagine it in
        its full glory before the ravages of Nadir Shah in 1739. His Persian
        troops chipped the gold out of its pillars and inlay off the ceiling,
        and then carted away the fabulous Peacock Throne. Above the arches
        youll see the inscription:
        If paradise on earth there be,
         Tis here, tis here, tis here! 
        The last emperor to enjoy it was King George V, for whom a
        painted wooden ceiling was installed.
        One of the few surviving palace apartments is the principal
        harem, Rang Mahal (Palace of Color). The walls paintings have gone and
        water no longer flows in its indoor Nahr-i-Bihisht (River of Paradise),
        but mosaics made of mirrors ornament the ceiling and walls of six
        boudoirs, making a galaxy of stars when candle-lit (strike a match).
        Southernmost of the palace buildings, Mumtaz Mahal was part of the
        imperial harem and is now a small museum of Mughal artwork.
        To the northwest of the Diwan-i-Khas, the Moti Masjid
        (Pearl Mosque) is the one contribution to the Fort by Shahjahans
        successor, Aurangzeb. Each evening, a sound and light show at the Red
        Fort tells its story; details can be obtained from the Tourist
        Information Bureau.
        Chandni Chowk, the road from the Forts Lahore Gate, was
        once an avenue for processions. Today, it is the main thoroughfare
        linking Delhis bazaars, which sell jewelry, clothes, and traditional
        sweetmeats.
        On an outcrop of rock southwest of the Red Fort,
        Shahjahans other great construction, the Jama Masjid (the great
        congregational Friday Mosque), is the largest mosque in India. The
        inadvisability of a mo rning or late afternoon visit on hot days will
        become apparent when you see the three pyramidal flights of stairs to
        the gate-houses. The 100-sq-m (1,076-sq-ft) courtyard is enclosed by
        long colonnades with a pavilion at each corner. The prayer hall
        highlights the emperors aesthetic, in the lotus calyx on the gateways
        two lantern shafts, the delicately flaring balconies on the minarets,
        and the stripes to emphasize the bulbous marble domes.
        Raj Ghat, the simple memorial to Mahatma Gandhi overlooking
        the Yamuna river, is far in spirit from the Mughals but an integral
        part of Old Delhi. On lawns planted with trees donated by visiting
        heads of state, a square of marble marks the place where Gandhi was
        cremated. The platform has an inscription recording his last words, Hé
        Ram (Oh, God), and nearby, a sign declares that most famous Gandhi
        talisman: Recall the face of the poorest and most helpless man whom
        you may have seen and ask yourself if the step you contemplate is going
        to be of any help to him.  There is also a museum recording the
        highlights of Gandhis life.
        New Delhi
        Those nostalgic for the British Empire please note: Clive
        Road has been named Tyagraja, Queen Victoria Road has become Rajendra
        Prasad, and Curzon is Kasturba Gandhi. Though the statues of British
        leaders have also disappeared, the British spirit remains in the citys
        planning. Faithful to the policy of separating the British cantonment
        from the Indian quarters with a railway as the barrier, the new city
        built for the Empires Indian seat of government is separated from Old
        Delhi by the line running from Amritsar to Agra. British Neo-Classic
        architecture here is mixed with elements of Buddhist, Hindu, and Mughal
        past, and the geometry of its plan exudes the self-confidence of the
        Empire. As a visiting statesman once said of it: What splendid ruins
        it will make! 
        The commercial pivot of New Delhi is the circular arcade
        and bustling roundabout of Connaught Place. With cinemas, banks, travel
        agencies, restaurants, and the better craft emporiums, its a place
        whose new name, Indira Chowk, does not seem to catch on. Connaught
        Place straddles the northeast–southwest axis which links the Jama
        Masjid mosque of Old Delhi to Indias parliament, Sansad Bhavan.
        Designed by the famous Herbert Baker, the rather too massive,
        colonnaded rotunda of the parliament building is at its best
        illuminated at night.
        The Viceroys Residence, now the Presidents house,
        Rashtrapati Bhavan has wings radiating from the great grey-blue dome of
        the central block and the tranquil pools and lawns of its gardens, and
        so bespeaks the grandeur of Britains heyday. It looms from an
        artificial hill along the processional avenue, Rajpath (once Kingsway),
        which is flanked by parklands, where India holds its marches on
        Republic Day, 26 January. At the other end of Rajpath stands India
        Gate, the war memorial designed by Lutyens in the style of a triumphal
        arch that pays tribute to 90,000 Indian Army soldiers who died in World
        War I.
        The Jantar Mantar, set south of Connaught Place, is perhaps
        the strangest monument in New Delhi. It is difficult to believe that
        these bizarre shapes, staircases going nowhere, and windows in walls
        without rooms were built in 1724 by a serious student, rather than in
        the last century by some deranged architect. It is in fact the
        astrologico — that is, the astronomical observatory — of Rajput prince
        Jai Singh II from Jaipur (see page 100). Its centerpiece is the
        right-angled triangle, Samrat Yantra (the Supreme Instrument), with a
        dome acting as a sun-dial, accurate to half a second.  In addition to
        this structure, he built four more — in Ujjain, Varanasi, Mathura, and
        his native Jaipur.
        Near here, surely the liveliest Hindu temple of all,
        Hanuman Mandir (Temple of the Monkey God) is a theatre where you can
        witness the joyous atmosphere of popular Hinduism. Hanuman is a
        beneficent deity predating classical Hinduism, and the reason why no
        one would dream of harming the little lemurs (monkeys) running around
        here.
        Museums
        In what is artistically a predominantly Mughal city, the
        National Museum, on Janpath (Queensway) just south of Rajpath, is worth
        a visit for its collection of old Hindu sculpture, in particular those
        from medieval India of the kingdom of Vijayanagar.
        Railway buffs will surely enjoy the display of the
        countrys early steam engines at the open air Rail Transport Museum. It
        is situated in the diplomatic neighborhood of Chanakyapuri (behind the
        Bhutan Embassy). Adventurous as rail travel in India still is today,
        one exhibit belongs hopefully in the past: the skull of an elephant
        that nearly derailed a mail train in 1894.
        Nehru Memorial Museum is devoted to Independence and the
        life of Indias first Prime Minister. It is located in the house which
        Nehru inherited from the British Indian Army Commander-in-Chief on Teen
        Murti Road (it also houses a planetarium).
        Agra
        Location of the Taj Mahal, Agra is the most popular sight
        in India. Even if the place had nothing else, it would be worth the
        trip, for the Taj, as one calls it affectionately, is a sight that
        awakens the wonder and enthusiasm of the most blasé, world-weary
        traveller.
        But theres plenty more. Agra was the capital of Akbar the
        Great, the site of his fort, of his tomb outside the city at Sikandra,
        and, several miles west at Fatehpur Sikri, of the marvellous deserted
        town he built to celebrate the birth of a son and which he abandoned to
        fight on the northwest frontier. Heirs of the craftsmen originally
        brought here continue a tradition in jewelry, brassware, ivory, and
        inlaid marble.
        The first historical mention of Agra is in 1501, when
        Sultan Sikandar Lodi made it his capital. Babur captured it along with
        the Koh-i-Nur diamond now in the British crown jewels. His grandson
        Akbar chose Agra for his capital over Delhi. In the 17th century,
        Jahangir made it a major focus of the Islamic world. His son Shahjahan
        lost his taste for Agra after finishing the Taj Mahal for his wife
        Mumtaz-Mahal after she had died. He moved the capital back to Delhi
        again in 1648, leaving the citys treasure to vandals (including the
        British) after the 1857 Mutiny, until the viceroys organized its
        restoration. Today it is the effects of pollution that are taking their
        toll on Agras monuments.
        Taj Mahal
        This is truly a monument for all seasons. There are those
        who swear by the sight on the Taj Mahal in the Sharad Purnima, the
        first full moon after the monsoons, a cloudless midnight in October
        when the light is at its clearest and also most romantic. Others love
        to see it in the middle of the heaviest monsoon, its marble
        translucent, its image blurred in the rain-stippled water channels of
        its gardens. But its magic is strong at any time of year, and any
        moment of the day. At dawn, its color changes from milk to silver to
        rose-pink, and at sunset it is golden. Observe it, too, in the
        brilliance of midday, for then it is utterly, dazzlingly white. On
        nights with a full moon, the grounds stay open till midnight.
        The gateway to the gardens of the mausoleum can be admired
        as a masterpiece in its own right, with noble marble arches, the domed
        kiosks on the four corner turrets, and two rows of 11 small chhattri
        (umbrella-domes) just above the entrance. It provides visitors with the
        perfect frame for a first view of the ensemble. You will find that
        long-range photography is allowed, but it is forbidden to take pictures
        inside the monument.
        The chharbagh (foursquare) gardens are an integral part of
        the Taj Mahal, both spiritually, as the symbol of the paradise to which
        Mumtaz-Mahal has ascended, and artistically, to enhance the color and
        texture of the mausoleum. The dark cypresses heighten the brilliance of
        the monuments marble, and the water channels, meeting at a broad
        central viewing platform, not only provide a perfect second image, but
        also, with the reflection of the sky, add at dawn and sunset a subtle
        illumination from below.
        Exquisite harmony and refined symmetry are the keynotes of
        the mausoleum itself. The structure is clad in miraculously white
        marble from the Rajasthan quarries of Makrana, achieving a magnificent
        texture with the subtly alternating broad and narrow slabs. Standing
        protectively at the four corners of the raised terrace, the minarets
        are, deferentially, slightly lower than the sublime central cupola.
        Inside, the octagonal cenotaph-chamber contains the ceremonial marble
        coffins of Mumtaz-Mahal and also Shahjahan, while, as was the custom of
        that time, the actual bodies are entombed in another chamber directly
        below. Youll need to light a candle or use a flashlight in the
        cenotaph-chamber because daylight barely filters through the beautiful
        marble trellis-screens.
        Sadly, vandals removed all the tombs spectacular
        treasures, but they did leave the gentle beauty of roses and poppies in
        rich inlaid stones of onyx, green chrysolite, carnelian, and variegated
        agate. The mausoleum is flanked by two almost identical red buildings,
        to the west a mosque, to the east a guest pavilion — each is a perfect
        viewing-point. Try the pavilion at sunrise and the mosque at sunset.
        But go around the back of the Taj, too, to the terrace which overlooks
        the Yamuna river. This boasts a view as far as the Agra Fort.
        The Agra Fort
        Built by Akbar in 1565, a more embattled period than during
        Shahjahans construction of the Red Fort in Delhi, the Agra Fort was
        conceived as a citadel with a moat on three sides and a river on the
        fourth. Pleasure palaces were a secondary consideration, and were in
        fact mostly additions by Akbars successors.
        The entrance from the south, at Amar Singh Gate, takes you
        up a ridged elephants ramp, sloped to slow down any potential
        attackers. Pass into the long quadrangle of the pillared Diwan-i-Am
        (Hall of Public Audience). It was here that Captain William Hawkins
        handed Emperor Jahangir a special letter of introduction from King
        James I. Due north is Shahjahans Moti Masjid (Pearl Mosque). Climb the
        narrow staircase to the roof of the mosque for a fine view of the
        fort.
        Just off the northeast corner of the Diwan-i-Am, the harem
        had its very own mosque, Nagina Masjid, Hindu temple, and between the
        two a bazaar where merchants sold silks and jewels. Near the hammam
        (baths), the Diwan-i-Khas (Hall of Private Audience) has rich carving
        and inlaid marble. The crack in the marble throne came from a British
        cannonball in 1857. As in Delhis Fort, most of the private palace
        apartments face the Yamuna river. Among the most charming are the
        arcaded loggia and the gilt-roofed pavilions of the Khas Mahal or
        Private Palace. A minute staircase led to the Musamman Burj, the
        pavilion of the emperors chief wife. It is also popularly known as the
        Prisoners Tower for Aurangzeb imprisoned his father Shahjahan here,
        allowing him a view of his Taj Mahal.
        The Palace of Jahangir is built around a square court with
        arches. There are Hindu motifs on the ceiling in the main hall, and in
        one on the west side: peacocks holding snakes in their beaks, for
        example.
        Other Sights
        On the river bank opposite the fort is the Tomb of
        Itimad-ud-Daulah, overshadowed by the Taj Mahal. This was built 15
        years earlier by Jahangirs wife, Nur Jahan, for her father, who served
        as Mughal Prime Minister. Theres a fragile elegance to the white
        marble pavilions graceful silhouette, with a cupola and four octagonal
        turrets, and topped by domed kiosks. The fine lattice-work on the
        arches and windows is superb, but its outstanding feature is the marble
        inlay, which is even more abundant than in the Taj and better
        preserved.
        Akbars mausoleum, located at Sikandra, is 10 km (6 miles)
        north of Agra. The best view is from the top of the gateway. On the
        cenotaph are the 99 names of Allah.
        Fatehpur Sikri
        In a country of crowded cities, it makes a refreshing
        change to travel 37 km (22 miles) southwest to an outcrop on which
        stands the citadel of Fatehpur Sikri, briefly Akbars imperial
        capital.
        Fatehpur, planned as a capital with Agra as a fallback
        position in case of attack, is protected on three sides by ramparts
        measuring about 6 km (4 miles). On the fourth side is an artificial
        lake stretching 8 km (5 miles) to the Rajasthan border, never
        sufficient, apparently, for the needs of the citadel, and so one of the
        probable reasons why Akbar did not settle here permanently.
        Built by the architects working on the Agra Fort, the
        citadel adds the darker red stone of the mountain ridge to the usual
        pink sandstone.
        Entering via the Agra Gate, at the northeast corner, one
        passes on the right the karkhanas (workshops) where carpenters,
        weavers, and stonemasons worked.
        In the Diwan Khana-i-Am, the courtyard used for public
        audiences, Akbar dispensed his justice while attended by an executioner
        with instruments of torture and death. The sight of the two of them was
        felt to be an effective means of getting at the truth. At the foot of
        the colonnade is a big stone tethering-ring for an elephant whose job
        it was to crush capital criminals to death.
        Go through the pavilion to the Daulat Khana (Abode of
        Fortune) on the south side of the courtyard, a palace of which the most
        striking feature is the Hindu nature of its decoration: carved
        pedestals with stylized elephant heads as capitals and sculpted stone
        screens.
        In the southeast corner of the courtyard is the Turkish
        Sultanas House, or Hujra-i-Anup Talao (the Chamber of the Peerless
        Pool); animals covering every wall panel and pillar create the illusion
        of woodwork rather than stone. Fatehpur is the subject of many colorful
        stories in which it isnt possible to establish a historians truth. 
        For instance, in the center of the courtyard is the Pachisi Court, a
        huge chessboard for the game of pachisi, where Akbar and his friends
        are said to have used human pieces —  each player using a team of
        four slave-girls in different costumes.
        Also, Akbar is said to have come to the Astrologers
        Pavilion, in the northwest corner of the court, for a daily dose of
        forecasts from the house-esoteric. The emperor is known to have
        consulted a whole panel of experts from Hindu and Muslim schools of
        astrology. Just behind this is the Treasury Pavilion, where you can
        imagine Akbar seated on cushions under the arches and counting the
        imperial money. The pavilion was known as Ankh Michauli (Blind Mans
        Buff), because it was where Akbar was thought to have played
        hide-and-seek with his wives.
        The purpose of the Diwan-i-Khas is hotly disputed; it is
        not necessarily the hall of private audience that its name implies. It
        is dominated by a great central pillar supporting bridges to a balcony.
        Some claim it was here that Akbar held his famous debates with Jesuits,
        Brahmins, Parsi Zoroastrians, Sufi mystics, Jain, and Buddhist
        monks — the sages arguing while Akbar sat listening atop his pillar, or
        Akbar striding majestically around the bridges and balcony hurling his
        questions at his listeners. Others insist that it was just a storehouse
        for jewels. Truth in India, even more than beauty, is in the eye of the
        beholder.
        Walk across the courtyard to the beautiful five-tiered
        Panch Mahal, a palace with the Persian system of ventilation known as
        badgir (wind tower): without walls on three sides, it is open for the
        breezes to sweep in. Each floor is supported on columns diminishing
        from 84 at ground-level to four on the roof. Notice that no two columns
        on the ground floor are alike. Be careful on the steep climb to the
        top, but youll find it is well worth it for the wonderful view across
        the citadel, particularly the palaces of the imperial harem to the
        southwest.
        The harems principal residence is Jodh Bais
        Palace — built for Akbars Hindu wife, the first royal spouse not
        required to convert to her husbands Islamic faith — and was Akbars
        favorite residence at Fatehpur. It has one side screening out the
        summer heat while the other is open to the cooler breezes. Its most
        cherished feature is the turquoise ceramic tiled roof in the north and
        south wings.
        Fatehpurs Jama Masjid (the Friday Mosque), at the south
        end of the citadel up on its mountain-ridge, was the very first of the
        open courtyard-style mosques to became characteristic of all Mughal
        cities. Notice the carved central mihrab (the recess marking the
        direction of Mecca). The jewel of the red stone courtyard, however, is
        the marble-clad Tomb of Shaikh Salim Chishti. Its façade features black
        calligraphy; in the cenotaph-chamber there are pretty painted flowers.
        Originally a more simple monument, its white marble skin was the
        addition of a very grateful Jahangir who, without the mystic Shaikh
        Salim Chishti, might never have seen the light of day.
        Bharatpur
        Strictly speaking, Bharatpur is in Rajasthan, but
        proximity, just 42 km (26 miles) due west of Agra, makes it logical to
        include here. The marshes of the bird sanctuary of Keoladeo-Ghana offer
        a welcome change of pace. Even if youre not an avid bird-watcher,
        youll enjoy the gentle walks in the woodland, with the chance of
        seeing exciting herds of nilghai antelope, blackbuck, and cheetal
        (spotted deer). A good time to visit is just at the end of the monsoon
        in October — when you can see flocks of storks, egrets, and
        cormorants — and it is ideally combined with a full-moon trip to the
        Taj, but theres plenty to see all year round.
        Among the more than 300 different species of birds here,
        youll find eagles, cranes, pelicans, snakebirds, kingfishers, and a
        host of ducks and geese, as well as a flock of rare wintering Siberian
        cranes between January and March. The Maharaja of Bharatpur used to
        organize formal annual duck-shoots here for British viceroys and other
        top officials as well as for fellow princes. But today hunting is
        strictly banned. In other words, Bharatpur is only for the birds.
        Corbett Park
        Among Indias nature reserves, this is the best known
        because of Jim Corbett, the audacious hunter of the man-eating tigers
        of Kumaon. The park was established in 1935 and was given Corbetts
        name after India became independent.
        Northeast of Delhi, this lovely park of forest and meadows
        by the Ramganga river in the foothills of the Himalayas remains a home
        to the tiger, leopard, and elephant, as well as cheetah, sloth bear,
        wild pig, jackal, and hyena. The river abounds with mahseer and trout,
        as well as two kinds of crocodile and the occasional blind freshwater
        dolphin. Bird-watchers should look out for stork, red jungle-fowl, and
        black partridge.
        The forest is thick with sissoo and tall sal trees; their
        timber is prized for ship-building. An elephant-ride, which allows you
        to swing through the jungle and grassland while reclining on a
        cushioned howdah, is a great joy. Rest at midday in the lodge at
        Dhikala and watch the elephants head down to the river.
        Be sure to plan ahead through the Tourist Information
        Office or a Delhi travel agency, because admission to the park is by
        permit only. Permits are easy to obtain, however, and reserved
        accommodation can be booked either in the lodges or in the official
        campgrounds
        Chandigarh
        The capital of the Punjab is just a stopover en route to
        Simla, or a half-way point en route to Kashmir. Its well worth
        visiting this city, which was planned in 1950 by Swiss-French architect
        Le Corbusier, invited by the Indian government to create a new city for
        the post-Partition Punjab on a windy plain at the foot of the
        Himalayas. With British associate Maxwell Fry designing most of the
        housing, Le Corbusier created the leading public buildings and laid out
        a town of spacious boulevards and sweeping tree-lined avenues, inspired
        at least in part by Lutyens ideas for New Delhi, and blessedly
        uncongested by growing traffic. He planned the town on the principle of
        the human body, with the government buildings of the Capitol and
        university at its head, the commercial town-center at its heart, and
        the outlying industrial districts as its limbs.
        In the Assembly building for parliament, the Secretariat
        administrative block, the vaulted High Court, and the smaller
        Governors Residence, you can see huge slabs of concrete like weathered
        granite from the nearby mountains. The buildings boast both geometric
        and amorphous shapes, with bright colors visible behind the sub-breaker
        grills. Take a walk through the nearby Rock Garden of large concrete
        blocks, or, to the east, take a rowboat on the artificial Sukhna
        Lake.
        Most people visit the holy city of Amritsar for its Golden
        Temple Sikh Shrine. Sikh architecture may also be appreciated at the
        nearby Durgiana Temple. Jallianwala Bagh is an important monument to
        hundreds of martyrs who dies in an Amritsar massacre in 1919.
        Simla
        Similar to Chandigarh, this town, which is now capital of
        Himachal Pradesh, was built back in the early years of the 19th century
        when the British colonial settlers were desperately searching for
        refuge from the heat of the plains.
        At an altitude of 2,130 m (6,755 ft), this was once the
        place where a religious ascetic offered cool spring water to the
        numerous weary and thirsty travelers coming out of the Himalayas. Some
        of these trekkers were British troops returning from the war with the
        Gurkhas of Nepal in 1819. They came back to build mountain retreats, as
        well as regular little cottages or perhaps an occasional mansion. From
        1832 onwards, when governor-general Lord William Bentinck spent a happy
        summer here, it became the most prestigious hill-station. The viceroys,
        including the famous Lord Mountbatten (who pondered the last details of
        Independence and Partition here in 1947), made it their summer
        capital.
        The old reasons to head for the hills still make a trip to
        Simla more than valid, even if the old viceregal glamour has gone. The
        air here is sweet, cool, and clear, and the pleasure of the quaint and
        tranquil English village atmosphere remains, along with some lovely
        walks into the surrounding mountains. You should, however, acclimatize
        to the altitude before attempting any long hikes.
        In town, visitors can retrace the favorite promenades
        along the Mall and see the old administrative offices of the Ridge. The
        place at which these two meet is what Kipling called Scandal Point. 
        At the eastern end of the Mall you can see the Gaiety Theatre, one-time
        home of the Simla Amateur Dramatic Company, which is famous for its
        productions of Victorian drama and Edwardian operetta.
        The Ridge leads past the Neo-Gothic, Anglican Christ
        Church, where the bells are made from the brass of cannons captured
        from the Sikhs. At the end of the Ridge, youll find the baronial pile
        of Viceregal Lodge, nowadays used by the Institute for Advanced
        Studies. You can imagine rickshaws pulling up onto the grounds of the
        ivy-covered grey stone mansion for one of the viceroys banquets. Peer
        into the grand hall, which has an elegant fireplace, a coffered
        ceiling, and a majestic staircase. Then continue to the top of Jakko
        Hill, where you can see a fine view of the town and valley.
        Kashmir
        The Vale of Kashmir, 1,700 m (5,000 ft) above sea level,
        has historically offered much-needed respite for conquerors and
        travelers alike. Passing through the deserts of Sind and the hot and
        dusty plains of the Ganga valley, they have heard tell of its blessed
        meadows, forests, full fruit orchards, and lakes. It remains the
        undisputed treasure of the entire subcontinent. Unfortunately,
        continuing tensions between India and Pakistan in the region have
        rendered Kashmir a dangerous place for travellers.
        In accordance with the U.S. State Departments and British
        Foreign Offices travel advisories, as well as warnings issued by most
        other foreign consulates, we do not recommend Kashmir as a tourist
        destination. The following information is provided only for the sake of
        background on the area.
        Many people in the past, particularly during high summer,
        made Kashmir the principal destination of their visit to India,
        combining it with perhaps just brief outings and day-trips in Delhi and
        Agra. Those making more extensive tours of India, planned to see
        Kashmir at the end, with the intention of relaxing in a houseboat on a
        lake or going on a refreshing hike in the lush surrounding
        mountains.
        Travel to Kashmir used to require bookings and
        preparations far in advance of visiting. But since the increase in
        eruptions of violence over the past ten years, foreign travel to the
        region has greatly decreased. During Kashmirs height of popularity as
        a tourist destination, one of the areas most alluring features was the
        unique accommodation on houseboats. Travel agencies can reserve a
        houseboat for a couple of days, allowing travellers to change around
        once theyve fully settled in. One important and major advantage of
        advance reservations is that the visitor will be met at the airport
        straight away by a representative of the houseboat-owner — its not
        easy for newcomers to find their way among the boats.
        Houseboats are a beautifully preserved tradition of the
        heyday of the British Raj. In the 19th century, when Kashmir was the
        most exotic hill-station of them all, the maharaja forbade the British
        to buy land there, so they then hit on the brilliant alternative of
        building luxuriously appointed houseboats moored on the lakes near
        Srinagar. Equipped with all the Victorian upper-middle class comforts
        the colonials were used to, the more maneuverable, smaller houseboats
        made their way to other lakes for duck-shoots or just for the pleasures
        of the cruise, while the larger ones stayed languidly put.
        With so many new boats having been built in the same old
        style, boasting lovely Kashmiri carvings on the bridge and decks, many
        are too heavy to move around the waters. But the traditional comforts
        are the same: wood-burning stoves, plush armchairs in the living room,
        warm carpeting in the spacious bedrooms, superb personal service, and
        fine Kashmiri cuisine you can enjoy on deck — note that you can arrange
        with the owner what you want to eat each day, Western or Indian
        style.
        Most houseboats are moored on Dal Lake, but for those
        seeking seclusion, there are others on the smaller Nagin Lake to the
        west. They are well serviced by shikaras — gaily decorated and roofed
        canoes somewhat reminiscent of Venetian gondolas — plying their way
        around the lake, ferrying passengers. There is also a floating market
        of fruit and flowers. The shikaras will also show you carpets, silks,
        shawls, brassware, jewels, and carvings — and tailors establishments
        with names like Savile Roy, recalling their old British allegiance.
        Srinagar
        Srinagar, like Jammu and the rest of Kashmir, is still
        considered a dangerous place for foreign travellers. There is a strong
        military presence in the city and a dusk-till-dawn curfew is often in
        effect. The heart of Kashmirs capital is built along the banks of the
        serpentine Jhelum river on the southern shore of the lakes. The many
        bazaars, busy tailors shops, and government-operated emporiums are
        fascinating places to observe the style, panache, and never-ending gall
        of that charming and often shameless scoundrel, the Kashmiri
        merchant.
        Few monuments have survived Kashmirs troubled history,
        but the citys beauty lies in its numerous tranquil lakes and gardens.
        Dal Lake and the adjoining Nagin offer leisurely cruises, with
        passengers lounging on the cushions of a shikara. Lovely floating
        gardens growing melons, tomatoes, cucumbers, and lotus root in a mesh
        of reeds and mud floating in the water and moored in squares by four
        poles stuck in the lake bed, add to the tranquil beauty of the
        lake.
        On the western shore of Dal Lake, is the large white dome
        and minarets of Hazratbal Mosque, famous for its relic, the hair of the
        beard of the prophet Mohammed.
        There are two small squares of land that rise up out of
        the lake: Sonalank, Akbars Golden Island to the north, and Ruplank,
        Silver Island, to the south.
        Two hills, Hari Parbat to the north of town and
        Shankaracharya to the east, offer pleasant walks — with the reward of a
        magnificent view over the lakes and the whole Vale of Kashmir, 134 km
        long and 40 km wide (82 by 25 miles).
        The Mughal Gardens are on the eastern shore of Dal Lake.
        For Jahangir, if the Islamic idea of paradise had any meaning, it was
        here, amid the staggered terraces, tranquil pools, waterfalls, and
        trees, looking out over the lake against the backdrop of the Himalayas.
        In summer, theres a sound-and-light show at Jahangirs favorite, the
        Shalimar Bagh, laid out in the year 1616. Visitors are able to relax
        here as the emperor did, by lingering on the terraces to take in the
        changing scene that surround them. The white marble pavilion on the
        first terrace was used for public audiences, the second was a private
        pavilion, the third — made from black marble — accommodated the harem,
        and the fourth was strictly reserved for the emperors private use.
        Three km (2 miles) to the south, Nishat Bagh was laid out
        in 1633 by Asaf Khan, the brother of Jahangirs wife. It is the largest
        of the gardens, with 12 terraces and lined with fine cedars and
        cypresses. It offers a magnificent view of the lake beyond.
        Tucked away in a small fold of the hills is Chashma Shahi,
        the smallest but in many ways most exquisite of the Mughal Gardens,
        drawing its water from a spring that runs directly down the adjacent
        mountainside.
        Excursions from Srinagar
        The resort Pahalgam is about 95 km (60 miles) east of
        Srinagar. The route there runs through groves of willow, used for the
        local cricket-bat industry, and fields of saffron. If youve ever
        wondered why saffron is so expensive, its because 150,000 of these
        purple or white crocuses (only the stamen is orange) are necessary to
        make up a single kilogram (2 pounds) of saffron proper, the stuff that
        flavors and colors those famous Indian curries and Spanish paella.
        (Spain is the only other place in the world apart from Kashmir where
        saffron is grown extensively. )
        The most popular journey from Pahalgam is 45 km (27 miles)
        up to the Amarnath Cave, which has an altitude of some 3,895 m (12,742
        ft). Sacred to Hindus, it is a destination of devout pilgrimage on
        festive days for the sight of the imposing stalagmite called Shivas
        lingam; this phallic symbol stands for the gods fertility, power, and
        creativity. Just 35 km (22 miles) from Pahalgam, one trek, the most
        strenuous by far, leads to the spectacular Kolahoi Glacier.
        Gulmarg, 52 km (32 miles) west of Srinagar, is about 2,653
        m (8,622 ft) above sea level. It is currently developing its winter
        sports in addition to the golf and tennis already provided. There is
        wonderful hiking here, too, through pine forests and meadows carpeted
        with wildflowers in summer.
        THE WEST
        The West is, above all, Rajasthan, land of the great
        maharajas, with its desert and lake palaces, but its also the bustle
        of Mumbai and the splendor of the cave temples at Ajanta and Ellora.
        There is also the great bonus, further down the coast, of the stunning
        beaches of Goa.
        Introducing Rajasthan
        Rajasthan is undoubtedly one of the most romantic regions
        in India. Known as Rajputana, and stretching from Delhi to the
        Pakistani Sind and the Punjab, this land is where the Rajput warriors
        erected their desert and mountain redoubts. The palace-fortresses were
        built with granite from the surrounding hills, and with the same
        dazzling marble used for the Taj Mahal.
        The great cities of Jaisalmer and Jodhpur are on the
        ancient caravan routes from the Indus Valley to the Thar Desert, for
        this is a land of cattle-herders too. One of their most spectacular
        monuments is the annual market-festival at Pushkar held each year in
        November (see page 209).
        Probably descendants of the invading Scythians and Huns,
        the Rajputs were a formidable opposition met by the waves of
        invaders — Turks, Afghans, and Mughals. Despite the Rajputs foreign
        origin, their claimed descendancy from the Aryan dynasties of the sun
        and moon was accepted by the Brahman priesthood and they were duly
        inducted retroactively into the Kshatriya warrior caste, a caste to
        which the Rajputs of today continue proudly to belong .
        While the nearby Malwa and Gujarat came under Muslim rule,
        Rajputana remained Hindu. Towns with the suffix -pur had Hindu rulers;
        -abad is the Muslim suffix. Some Rajput princes pursued an independent
        line. Others sent their daughters to the harem or their sons to serve
        as officers in the imperial army. They enjoyed a privileged position
        during the time of the British Raj.
        Jaipur
        The capital of Rajasthan was built according to
        astrological precepts. Raja Jai Singh II, that scholar of the stars who
        dotted northern India with his collections of instruments for observing
        the heavens, chose an exact date for moving his capital from Amber — 17
        November 1727 — as auspicious. He then laid it out according to the
        disposition of the stars and planets.
        But lets begin at Amber, 9 km (5 miles) northeast of
        Jaipur, high up on a hill commanding a gorge, which offered military
        advantage but was not right for the expanded city he wanted for his
        capital.
        The road up to Amber takes you through classical
        Rajasthani landscape, its parched hills embracing Lake Maota, where
        water buffalo snooze lazily in the sun. You may also pass an occasional
        camel, that time-honored vehicle of transport known as the ship of the
        desert, hauling his load on a cart fitted with discarded tires from an
        airplane.
        At the fortress, the Rajputs of Jai Singhs Kachwaha clan
        slowed down their enemies with a steep elephant ramp. You can travel by
        elephant up through the Suraj Pol (Sun Gate) to the Jaleb Chauk, a
        garden courtyard swarming with langur monkeys and surrounded by
        elephant stables.
        A staircase zigzags its way to the Temple of Kali (wife of
        Shiva), built for the Hindu mother-goddess. The silver doors have
        bas-relief panels depicting Kali riding various animals. Her statue was
        brought from Bengal, where the cult of Kali is particularly strong. The
        palace is a subtle example of the maharajas opulence: artists banished
        by Emperor Aurangzeb (see page 41) worked on the columns and arches,
        and on the buildings gallery around the Diwan-i-Am (Hall of Public
        Audience).
        The Diwan-i-Khas (the Private Audience Chamber), known as
        the Shish Mahal (Palace of Mirrors), features the Rajputs flamboyant
        taste for covering walls with green, orange, and purple glass, and the
        vaulted ceilings with thousands of little convex mirrors. Strike a
        match to see the effect.
        The most inviting place in the palace is the Sukh Niwas
        (Hall of pleasure), with doors inlaid in ivory and sandalwood. Inside,
        cool water was brought down from the roof through a carved white marble
        chute, and fresh air was brought in through the finely chiselled
        lattice stonework. The color of its sandstone has earned for Jaipur the
        name pink city — although you will see that it changes color with the
        season and time of day, from a rosy pink to warmest amber, bright
        orange, and dull ochre.
        Appropriate for a descendant of the sun dynasty, Jai Singh
        laid out the city on an axis from the Suraj Pol (Sun Gate) in the east
        to the Chand Pol (Moon Gate) in the west, a main street that is today a
        lively bazaar.
        The towns central focus was the most elaborate Jantar
        Mantar observatory, which was the final fruit of his labors and begun
        in Delhi (see page 74). The initiated will appreciate the significance,
        others the mysterious atmosphere of its cream-colored gnomons (the
        uprights of sundials), quadrants, and sextants.
        Chandra Mahal, directly south of the observatory, is the
        Citys Palace, with seven mystically planned courtyards and stories. A
        museum inside the building gives intriguing insight into the life and
        heyday of the maharajas: their rich costumes, their scimitars, and
        rifles inlaid with bright jewels and silver — and a horrible bludgeon
        with a double serrated edge.
        Overlooking the street is the Hawa Mahal, literally the
        Wind Palace, but actually a rather grand, five-storied royal box, in
        which the ladies could sit and watch festive processions. Its airy,
        projecting oriel-shaped balconies are seen as a symbolic image of
        Jaipur style. Theres a fine view from the top of the zigzag
        staircase.
        Jodhpur
        Of all Rajasthans fortifications, Jodhpurs Fort, perched
        high on its sheer cliffs at the eastern edge of the Thar Desert, must
        surely rank among the most imposing. The Rathor Rajputs, always a
        belligerent bunch and bad trouble for Mughal foes and the Rajputs,
        built it in the 15th century. Akbar decided it was better to have them
        on his side than to try to convert them; when he married the Maharaja
        of Jodhpurs sister, Jodh Bai (for whom he built a grand palace at
        Fatehpur Sikri; see page 84) there was no question of converting her to
        Islam.
        Near the east gate, youll see tombstones where soldiers
        died defending the fort, and cannonball scars indicating efforts by
        Maharaja of Jaipur to snatch a promised bride, Princess Krishna Kumari,
        against her will; she took her own life during the battle. On top of
        the ramparts the fort displays its proudest possessions: a set of
        fierce-looking howitzers and a few cannons. From here there is a fine
        view of the blue-and-whitewashed city.
        Behind the ramparts and the gates with sharp iron spikes
        to stop elephants from ramming them, there is a very handsome
        residential palace. Its majesty is most notable in the balconies of the
        Royal Harem, which have screens of the most delicate latticework. The
        palace museum displays a colorful collection of exhibits, giving
        insight into the daily life of those who lived there. There are
        luxuriously embroidered elephant howdahs as well as babies cradles and
        ladies palanquins. A version of a sedan-chair, palanquins were either
        completely closed up so that a promised bride was invisible while
        inside, or constructed with a peep hole to allow her to see out — and
        be seen for — when she was married.
        At the Iron Gate exit, youll see a more poignant side of
        the life of a maharajas wife — 15 scarlet sati handprints on the wall,
        from widows who threw themselves onto their husbands funeral pyres in
        ritual sacrifice, in keeping with the tradition of the era.
        In the bustling old center of Jodhpur itself, you cant
        and shouldnt miss the Saddar Market situated by the old clock-tower.
        Any one of a dozen barbers will be happy to give you a shave and a
        haircut under the banyan tree — and youll get a good deal of local
        gossip in the bargain. In the market proper, spices and grain are piled
        up in multi-colored mountains; merchants chant as they measure out
        separate lots of five kilos each: three, three, three, four, four,
        four, and five, five, five.  And the fort always looms on the
        horizon, a constant reminder of the towns war-torn history.
        Just 8 km (5 miles) due north of Jodhpur, the maharajas
        mausoleum is in a pretty park on the site of the old capital of Mandor.
        Watched over by crows, pigeons, and parakeets — and some rare birds,
        which will doubtlessly be of interest only to ornithologists — are a
        number of temple-like memorials built on the site of the maharajas
        funeral pyres, and a colonnade of Hindu god-heroes.
        If youre going to Jaisalmer by road, its well worth a
        detour to Osian to see the stunning Hindu and Jain temples, many of
        them dating as far back as the eighth century. Somehow this ancient
        sculpted pantheon of Hindu deities and Jain prophets has survived the
        sometimes ferocious weather of India and Mahmud of Ghaznis
        iconoclasts.
        Back on the road to Jaisalmer, one last splash of color
        delights the senses before you plunge into the desert: the fields are
        dotted with mounds of  red hot chili peppers.
        Jaisalmer
        Situated on the route of the ancient caravans that brought
        goods from the Middle East and Central Asia, the sandstone citadel of
        Jaisalmer, protected by an imposing double set of bastions, rises like
        a mirage from the sands of the Thar Desert.
        Jaisalmer, founded by the Maharawals in 1156, is the
        oldest of Rajasthans fortified cities. Though much of the city has
        grown up outside the fort — modern in time, but not in style — 3,000
        people live within its walls. Some of their houses in the side streets
        are from the 12th century. The best view of the whole citadel can be
        had from the terrace of the Jaisal Castle Hotel.
        The elaborate sculpture in four 15th-century Jain temples
        within the fort finds its counterpart in the finely carved façades of
        the Merchants Havelis (mansions), built 200 years later, and sheltered
        from sandstorms on the northeast side. But much more than the
        individual monuments — handsome but hardly grandiose, because of the
        restricted spaces available — it is the general atmosphere of the town
        that gives it its special magic. Everything here is bathed in a serene
        desert light that adds a shimmer to the stone and a translucence to the
        shadows. To see the desert at its best, go out at dawn and at
        sunset.
        Beyond Jaisalmer, youll find the road peters out at the
        village of Sam and the forbidden area of Indian military installations
        on the border with Pakistan. On the way to the village youll come
        across a camel-station, from where you may wish to take a ride. For
        fans of this quaint form of transport, longer camel safaris can be set
        up through Jaisalmer travel agencies. Ask the camel driver to direct
        you to the still uncharted village of Kuldhara — uncharted because it
        was one of 84 villages abandoned over 160 years ago by the clan of
        Paliwal Brahmins, who, after living there for centuries, left suddenly
        during the night, rather than having to face paying the new, arbitrary
        land-tax. It still stands as a ghost town — groups of dilapidated
        square houses made from sandstone — and is visited nowadays only by the
        occasional goatherd, who will play you a tune on his flute in
        traditional style.
        Just 9 km (5 miles) out of town, Mool Sagar gardens are a
        popular place for picnics in the rainy season. There are pretty arbors
        and a monsoon pavilion, but it is in fact pleasant all year round.
        Udaipur
        If Jaisalmer is the city of the desert, then Udaipuri is
        is its opposite: the city of lakes and gardens. The lakes were created
        by the Maharana Udai Singh for his new capital by damming up the Berach
        river after Akbar had ransacked his mountain redoubt at
        Chittorgarh.
        The Maharanas of Udaipur had five palaces in and around
        Udaipur: the City Palace for winter quarters; the Jagniwas in Lake
        Pichola used as a summer palace (now the Lake Palace Hotel); the Jag
        Mandir on Pichola, used for festivals; the Lakshmi Vilas Palace for
        guests beside lake Fateh Sagar; and a monsoon palace up in the Aravalli
        Hills. It was the marble used for them that Shahjahan chose for his Taj
        Mahal.
        Lake Pichola, 4 km (2 miles) long and 3 km (2 miles) wide
        is the largest. Cruises are available from the Bhansi Ghat, which is
        near the City Palace. This will enable you to travel out to the Lake
        Palace Hotel, even if youre not staying there. The southern end of
        Pichola has the best view of the lake, taking in the two island-palaces
        and the City Palace beyond.
        The 16th-century City Palace on the east shore of the lake
        is now part royal residence, part luxury hotel, and part museum. The
        sun symbol of the maharana is everywhere, worshiped during monsoons.
        The armor displayed here includes an outfit for disguising horses as
        elephants. The frescoes illustrate the tragic story of Princess
        Krishnas suicide at Jodhpur. Glass baubles, some as big as golf balls,
        have replaced real jewels in the mosaics.
        North of the City Palace is the handsome Jagdish Temple, a
        rare example of Indo-Aryan style and symbol of its independent spirit.
        The Bharatiya Lokkala Mandal Folk Museum has an excellent display of
        Rajasthani art, which includes bright puppets, costumes, and the whole
        range of turbans worn by the various Rajput clans. A modest puppet show
        is put on every 20 to 25 minutes in the puppet theater.
        Fateh Sagar Lake is reached by boat at the north end of
        Pichola, but you can also get there by a pleasant drive past the
        gardens of bougainvillaea and lilac of Lakshmi Vilas Palace.
        You can visit the Gardens of Saheliyon-ki-Bari (Maids of
        Honor), where the maharana kept the Muslim dancers presented to him by
        the Mughal emperor. The gardens here are famous for their five
        fountains that imitate the many different sounds of the monsoon, from
        light showers to torrential storms.
        Chittorgarh, a fortress, was the site of the Rajputs many
        acts of sacrifice. Making the trip by road or rail from Udaipur, it is
        on a plateau some 150 m (487 ft) in height up in the Aravalli
        Hills.
        Entering the northwestern side, you can go through seven
        gateways to see the remains of the Rajputs heroic exploits. Stones
        mark where each of these brave soldiers fell in battle.
        South of the Main Gate, the 15th-century Palace of Kumbha,
        is built over the cave where Padmini led the first jauhar and to which
        the Rajputs descendants return for an annual celebration. Some of the
        walls in the palace were built with pieces of stone removed from
        Buddhist temples.
        Kumbhas Jaya Stambha (the Tower of Victory), 37 m (120
        ft) high, was built to celebrate his great victory over Sultan Mahmud
        Khalji of Malwa in 1440. The towers nine stories are decorated with
        Hindu deities, but otherwise it seems inspired by the Kirti Stambha, a
        Jain Tower of Fame, built in the 12th century.
        At the southern end, beside a pond with a pavilion in the
        middle, is Padminis Palace, where the princess is said to have passed
        her last days. It is unlikely that the mirror in the room overlooking
        the pond was the very one in which the sultan got his fatal peek at
        her, but the guides tell the story this way to make it more enticing
        for visitors.
        Ranakpur
        Hills and mountains are especially sanctified in the cult
        of Jainism. In fact, in the Aravalli Hills, situated in the
        southwestern part of Rajasthan, you will find one of the Jains leading
        sanctuaries. North of Udaipur, a mountain road takes you past green
        terraced fields and mango groves over the deepest ravines to the
        magnificent white marble temple complex of Ranakpur.
        Chaumukha Temple is known nowadays as the quadruple temple
        because of its four central domes within a complex of 84 domed shrines,
        each one topped by a flag with tinkling bells attached — paying musical
        homage to the many deities worshiped inside. Built in 1438, the
        Chaumukha is dedicated to Adinath, Jainisms original 24 Tirthankaras
        (teachers), whose truths were revealed by the prophet Mahavira (see
        page 85).
        As with all the holy places of Jainism, you must remove
        not only your shoes but any leather you may be wearing. Walking through
        the entrance hall — which is decorated with a number of sensual
        sculptures — and across the half-moon threshold, you penetrate a forest
        of symmetrical pillars, each subtly different in its intricate carving.
        The 15th-century temples rich carvings attest to the wealth of the
        Jain merchant who commissioned it. You can find a sculpture of him in a
        position of prayer facing the statue of Adinath, in the second row of
        pillars, second pillar from the left. His architect, Deepa, is also
        here, in the third row of pillars, first pillar on the right.
        Restoration work on the temple is, amazingly, carried out by the 14th
        generation of Deepas direct descendants. You can climb up to the roof
        for a fascinating perspective of the flags, domes, and trees surrounded
        by the Aravalli Hills.
        The Dilwara Temples are located on Mount Abu, in a former
        hill-station for the British (now used by the Indian bourgeoisie). If
        you go — and the temples are well worth it — you would do best to take
        the train from Jaipur or Ahmedabad.
        Ajanta and Ellora
        The cave temples hewn from the granite of the Vindhya
        mountains in the northwest of Deccan are among the great wonders of
        India. They are considered masterpieces, because the caves are
        actually man-made hollows in solid rock, from which a complex of
        architecturally elaborate temples and monasteries has been carved with
        simple instruments. Even beyond this tour de force, the rock-cut
        sanctuaries of Ajanta and Ellora are superb works of art, boast ing
        sensuous painting and expressive sculpture of the highest order.
        Both temples are within easy reach of the town of
        Aurangabad. Try not to visit both sites on the same day. If you are
        interested in following the historical evolution of the temples, stop
        off at Ajanta first, where some caves are from the second century b.c.
        Reserve Ellora for a tour during the afternoon, when the caves will be
        illuminated by sunlight. Reliable official guides from the office of
        the Archaeological Survey of India offer their services free of
        charge.
        Having remained untouched for 1,000 years, until British
        soldiers discovered it during a tiger hunt in 1819, Ajanta has the
        advantage over Ellora, whose caves were in constant use as dwelling
        places. The use of rock-cut sanctuaries goes back to the time of
        Emperor Ashoka, during the third century b.c. , when itinerant Buddhist
        monks formed a religious order and the emperor provided them with
        rock-hewn cells as a vihara (retreat) during the monsoons. The monks
        added a hall for worship called a chaitya (temple).
        Of the 29 caves, all of them Buddhist, five are chaitya
        temples and the rest vihara monasteries. They are cut from a
        horseshoe-shaped cliff standing 75 m (252 ft) high above a narrow
        gorge, which has a small stream running through it. Originally, each
        vihara had its own stairway down to the stream. The caves have been
        numbered from 1 to 29, west to east. Experiencing just nine of them
        will give an impression of the whole. Start in the middle, at the
        oldest, then work your way east before returning to the historically
        later caves at the western entrance.
        Cave 10 is probably the oldest of the chaitya temples,
        dated at about 150 b.c. Its nave and aisles are divided by 39 octagonal
        pillars leading to a stupa, the domed focus of veneration, with an apse
        beyond, permitting the circumambulation. There is no representation of
        the Buddha in this early era.
        Cave 9, a sanctuary from the first century b.c. , is
        smaller than number 10. It is dominated by the stupa. The two-story
        façade with arched window and Buddha figures in side niches was
        probably added in the sixth century a.d.
        Two elephants in a kneeling position welcome you to Cave
        16, one of the most important of the later caves, created between a.d.
        475 and a.d. 600. The Mahayana school of Buddhism encouraged worship of
        a Buddha image, which is why the stupa was replaced with a sculpture of
        Buddha sitting in a posture used traditionally for teaching. Look for
        the two sculptures of amorous couples on the ceiling.
        With the richness and vigor of its mural paintings, Cave
        17 represents the summit of Ajantas artistry. The walls, from the
        fifth century a.d. , show the 12 stories of Buddhas enlightenment.
        Buddhas steadfast resistance to temptation gave the painters of that
        time a splendid pretext to show the sensual side of court life as a
        foil to the Masters spirituality. We see him taming an enraged
        elephant or appearing as the warrior Simhala attacking the Island of
        Ogresses, while his wife Rani, holding a mirror, languorously prepares
        her toilet with handmaidens holding her cosmetics.
        The sculpted Buddha is seen with the wheel, symbolic of
        his law, and two deer, referring to the park at Sarnath where he held
        his first sermon. Look for two smaller figures on the pedestal, one of
        which is holding a bowl for alms or offerings — they represent the rich
        merchants who financed the caves construction.
        The small chaitya of Cave 19 is notable for the carved
        façade and Buddha statues in its interior and for the graceful figures
        relaxing in the side niches at the entrance. Visit Cave 26 for a riot
        of architectural bravura — the elaborately ribbed vaulting, finely
        carved pillars, and a truly Baroque shrine with seated Buddha.
        Unlike the early, rather austere monasteries, Caves 1 and
        2 are richly ornamented. There are superb murals of bright-eyed deer,
        peacocks, monkeys, and elephants, and also those depicting the opulent
        life, with Prince Siddhartha riding away on horseback. The
        masterpieces, though, are in Cave 1: two spiritual Bodhisattvas on the
        back wall on either side of the antechamber.
        The caves of Ellora are cut out of a whole hillside of
        basalt rock, and conceived on a much grander scale than Ajantas. Local
        villagers have relied on them as shelter during monsoons or epidemics,
        so the murals have disappeared, but the magnificent sculpture has
        survived. Starting where Ajanta left off — some of the Buddhist artists
        may well have moved over to Ellora —  all of the 34 caves were created
        between the seventh and 12th centuries. The first 12 are Buddhist, 17
        are Hindu, and the other five are Jain. They stretch north–south over 3
        km (2 miles), allowing you the option of climbing behind some of them
        as well as approaching from the cave entrance.
        The most important Buddhist excavation (1–12) is the only
        chaitya sanctuary here, the eighth-century Cave 10 with its fine
        rib-vaulted ceiling reminiscent of a western Romanesque cathedral. The
        great Buddha seated in the domed stupa is worshiped by Hindu artisans
        as Visvakarma, carpenter of the gods, so the sanctuary is known as the
        Cave of the Carpenters. 
        Cave 12 consists of a vihara dormitory with three stories.
        Its sensual, feminine sculptures show significant Tantric Hindu
        influence. You must imagine these as they were originally painted, in
        brilliant colors.
        Of the Hindu temples (13–29), Cave 14 is an interesting
        transition from the Buddhist caves, because in the pantheon of Hindu
        gods, Vishnu sits in a meditative pose, suggesting he was converted
        from a Buddha. Another two are similar to the Bodhisattvas of Ajanta.
        The sculpture shows a dynamic Shiva killing demons and playing dice in
        the Himalayas, a group of boys playing with the sacred bull, and mother
        goddesses with children.
        The masterpiece of Ellora is the Kailasa Temple of Cave
        16. With a ground plan the size of the Greek Parthenon and a structure
        half as tall again, this was the work of the eighth-century Deccan king
        Krishna I. In the process of shaping the temple and its shrines in an
        area 82 m (265 ft) long and some 47 m (150 ft) wide, leaving the back
        wall of the courtyard 30 m (97 ft) high, an amazing 200,000 tons of
        rock were cut away from the face of the hill. Whatever was saved in
        hauling the masonry needed to erect such an edifice was more than
        counter-balanced by the seven generations of craftsmen who completed
        their amazing carvings from one piece of rock. The anonymous sculptors
        created a panoply of Hindu tradition — legendary heroes and their
        battles, hunts, and weddings.
        The result is a Hindu temple on a grand scale which can be
        easily compared with its inspiration: the many temples of Mahabalipuram
        (see page 194), built some 50 years before in the southern region. The
        huge gateway leads to the mandapa worship hall, with the tall pyramid
        of the shrine beyond, the whole structure symbolizing the mythical
        Mount Meru, Himalayan home of the gods.
        After seeing the sculpted friezes at courtyard level, you
        can gain yet another perspective of the temples fine detail from
        above, by walking along the stone ledge that leads around the top. Do
        wear good shoes and use the safety railing.
        After Kailasa, the Jain caves (numbers 30–34), excavated
        between the eighth and 13th centuries, will come as an
        anti-climax — and this despite the considerable prowess of their
        sculptors.
        Cave 31 tries to emulate the style of the great Hindu
        temple on a much smaller scale, but the artists here were working on
        much harder rock and so abandoned their effort. The most interesting of
        all remains the two-story Cave 32, known as Indra Sabha, notable for
        the upper floors extravagant carving — the hallmark of Jain
        sculptors — and the great stone elephant, more rigid than
        Kailasas (because of the tougher stone), but somehow more noble.
        Mumbai (Bombay)
         Gateway of India still describes the main function of
        Mumbai, known until 1995 as Bombay. For those who want to work their
        way down to the south, Mumbai is still, as it was for the servants and
        soldiers of the British Empire, the natural gateway.
        An occasional luxury liner still glides past the great
        stone gateway, the harbor promenade of the Apollo Bunder, and the Yacht
        Club to dock at Ballard Pier. For the rest of us landing at Santacruz
        Airport, the old turmoil of dockside porters and rickshaws that once
        submerged the newcomer has been replaced by the equally crazy bustle of
        businessmen and workers going to and from the Gulf. With skyscrapers
        shooting up almost every month, Mumbai is the busiest industrial and
        commercial center in India — cars, textiles, chemicals, nuclear energy,
        and shipping — and a focus for the cinema and the renewal of Indian
        art. But this huge wealth is juxtaposed with abject poverty, epitomized
        by women carrying bricks on their heads to build luxury apartments, and
        sackcloth hovels on construction sites.
        For anyone who is not here on business, three days, at
        most four, should be enough to get a good idea of this exhausting
        city — with the possible exception of nostalgics of the British Raj,
        who will find a wealth of intriguing relics.
        Before exploring the sprawl that stretches in a wide
        crescent over 20 km (12 miles) from north to south, go to the
        Government of India Tourist Information Office, situated opposite
        Churchgate Station. Then begin just where King George V himself did on
        his visit back in 1911, on the promontory at the end of Apollo Bunder.
        This site is marked today by the world famous Gateway of India — a
        monument moving for its symbolism more than its beauty (depending on
        how you feel about the British Empire it was built to celebrate).
        Kipling insisted in his Ballad of East and West that
        never the twain shall meet, but the British have done their best,
        perching four Gujarati domes on this otherwise very Roman concept of a
        triumphal arch. This edifice was inaugurated in the year 1924; the
        Somerset Light Infantry solemnly marched through it to their ships some
        24 years later. They were the last British troops to leave India.
        The Indian equestrian statue of Shivaji faces the gateway.
        It was erected in 1961 to honor the Maratha hero of Hindu nationalism
        who fought against the Mughals (see page 38). Beside him is the Taj
        Mahal Hotel, another monument built by a member of the Tatas, the Parsi
        industrialist dynasty. Architecturally, it is also a mixture of Western
        and oriental styles, and a surviving part of the traditional tour that
        took world travelers from the West to Shepheards in Cairo, Raffles in
        Singapore, the Peninsula in Hong Kong, and the Imperial in Tokyo. You
        can get a whiff of the old romance by taking tea in the Sea Lounge and
        enjoying the harbor view — recall the dizzy ingénue in the bar who
        thought that the mausoleum at Agra was named after the hotel.
        The Raj District
        Northwest from the Taj, in the area around the Maidan that
        was the heart of British Bombay, connoisseurs appreciate the
        architecture that fans call eclectic and foes mongrel. 
        The old Secretariat is mostly described as Venetian
        Gothic, the University Library French Gothic, the Telegraph Office
        Romanesque, and the High Court and the Cathedral of St. Thomas as Early
        English. The architects were British but the artisans were Indian — and
        adept at adding detail reminiscent of Rajput forts and Mughal
        palaces.
        The national mood is stressed on the octagonal spire of
        the Universitys Rajabai Clocktower, with 24 figures representing the
        castes of the Maharashtra State, of which Mumbai is the capital. Even
        the most anti-imperialist may be touched in the Cathedral, by some of
        the poignant epitaphs for those who died in the military or civil
        service for their country. For big Raj-buffs, the supreme example of
        Indo-Gothic style is the Victoria Terminus, affectionately abbreviated
        to VT nowadays, once the railway station that launched adventures
        inland, now handling mostly suburban traffic.
        Northwest of the VT is the bustling Crawford Market (known
        in post-Independence as Mahatma Jyotiba Phule). Behind the brick façade
        with bas-relief friezes by Kiplings father over the gate, the stalls
        retain their original layout: vegetables to the left; fruit and flowers
        to the right; and fish, mutton, and poultry straight ahead.
        The Indians Mumbai
        Beyond Crawford Market, the area that the Indians truly
        call their own — away from the Apollo Bunder and the Maidan and still
        redolent of their old imperial masters — is known in tribute to simple
        reality as the City. This is the heart of Mumbais teeming street life,
        where Indians from the entire subcontinent compete with lively
        Maharashtrans in the bazaars. Among the extravagantly colored Hindu
        temples and subtle mosques in the Muslim neighborhoods, Jain merchants
        sell gold in the Zaveri Bazaar, while others sell silver, brass,
        copper, leather, and lace.
        The Indians Mumbai is also epitomized by the promenade of
        Marine Drive, around Back Bay from Nariman Point to the residential
        area of Malabar Hill.
        One must-see is Chowpatty Beach, not for swimming or
        sunbathing, but because it is one of the greatest people-watching spots
        in western India: fakirs and fakers walk on fire, sleep on nails, climb
        ropes in midair, or bury their heads in the sand; food vendors hawk
        kulfi ice cream as well as pan, betel-chew, and bhelpuri, a spicy local
        specialty.
        Museums
        The Prince of Wales Museum, at the southern end of Mahatma
        Gandhi Road, has a collection of miniatures and seventh-century
        sculptures from the caves of Elephanta, as well as a pottery and stone
        tools.
        The new Jehangir Art Gallery, immediately behind the
        Museum, illustrates trends in modern Indian painting, including works
        by two of the most important artists from Mumbai, Tyeb Mehta and Akbar
        Padamsee.
        In Victoria Gardens, dont miss the stone elephant from
        Elephanta Island; it belongs to the Victoria and Albert Museum nearby,
        a reminder of the old history of Imperial Bombay. More up-to-date, the
        Tourist Information Office can organize a visit to the set of a Mumbai
        film studio if you would like to watch one of their huge, romantic
        productions in progress.
        Elephanta
        The seventh-century cave-temples of Elephanta Island make
        a pleasant boat excursion by ferry from the Apollo Bunder; look for the
        nuclear reactors at Trombay. Known as Gharapuri, Sacred City of the
        Kings, the island was named Elephanta by Portuguese sailors. Although
        their musket practice damaged many sculptures of Hindu gods in the
        caves, enough survived to make it a worthwhile stop. Carved out of the
        rock mountain on the island, the caves may not seem impressive after
        visiting Ajanta and Ellora (see page 115), but the Great Cave is 40 m
        (130 ft) deep and 40 m wide. To the west stands Shivas emblem.
        On the rear wall is the Shiva Mahesamurti, a bust of Shiva
        as the Supreme Lord, while Bhairava the angry destroyer looks to the
        left and his sensuous aspect looks to the right. In a panel to the left
        is Ardhanarishvara, Shiva as both man and woman.
        Goa
        Time to relax — and this former Portuguese colony is the
        perfect place for it. The beaches are superb, offering all the white
        sands and palm trees you could wish for. The cuisine makes use of the
        best seafood in India, and the Goans, of mixed Hindu and Portuguese
        descent, are a lively community. There are also a few glazed-eyed
        latter-day hippies hanging on in the area, like relics of a bygone
        age.
        Instead of flying down, many people prefer to take the
        more leisurely steamer from Mumbai. Embarkation takes place at the
        Alexandra Dock; the steamer boasts deluxe sleeping berths for your
        comfort during the 22-hour trip to the Goan capital city of Panaji
        (formerly Panjim). You will get a great look at the often dramatic
        mountains of the Western Ghats running parallel to the coast during
        your trip.
        After Vasco da Gama landed on the Malabar Coast in 1498,
        the Portuguese invaded the area and seized Goa from the Sultan of
        Bijapur in the year 1510. They held the colony for the next 450 years,
        until finally Nehru l aunched an attack and drove them out.
        Goa was a vital link for Portugals colonial trade in the
        Indian Ocean. It also became a prime base for missionary activity, with
        its succession of devout followers of different faiths — the
        Franciscans, Augustinians, Dominicans, and the Jesuits — which held
        them in line along with a rigorous Inquisition most notably led by
        Francis Xavier, who came to Goa in the year 1542. The traders have now
        gone, but the missionaries ancient churches in Velha Goa still stand,
        and make a fascinating sightseeing trip — that is if you can ever
        manage to tear yourself away from the paradisiacal beaches, which are
        so inviting.
        The most popular beaches of all are Calangute and Dona
        Paula, each of them within reach of the capital, Panaji, and easy
        excursions out to Velha Goa. If you want to get away from the crowd,
        the most secluded and unspoiled white sands can be found along the
        incredible 40 km (25 miles) of Colva Beach, which run immediately south
        of Dabolim Airport, right down to the lovely and inviting Benaulim and
        Betul.
        Velha Goa
        The 16th-century churches to be found in Velha (Old) Goa
        have been beautifully restored, but you will doubtlessly notice that
        without the town buildings that used to surround them, they have
        acquired the strangely melancholic air of old museum-pieces. The town
        once had a population of 350,000 and some 100 churches. Nowadays the
        laterite stonework of many of the remaining churches has been
        thoughtfully and carefully covered with lime plaster to protect them
        against deterioration from the heavy waters of the dreaded Indian
        monsoons.
        Distinguished from others by the harmonious simplicity of
        its rib-vaulted nave, St. Francis of Assisi is the oldest church still
        standing in Velha Goa, perhaps dating as far back as 1521. The fine
        arabesque and floral frescoes are the work of local Indian artists who
        excelled at the themes wholly familiar to them — this in contrast with
        their efforts to paint portraits of the saints, with whose images they
        were, despite the hard work of the missionaries, perhaps not as much at
        home.
        The Tuscan Renaissance façade of Sé Cathedral, the single
        biggest Christian church in India, has a certain elegance to it,
        despite a loss of symmetry when its north tower collapsed in 1776. The
        enormous main altar, which is dedicated to St. Catherine of Alexandria,
        shows some scenes from the saints martyrdom in a series of sumptuously
        gilded panels.
        Sandstone and granite were the materials used to build the
        Baroque church of Bom Jesus, famous for its casket of St. Francis
        Xaviers relics in the mausoleum to the right of the altar. The
        mausoleum was designed in Florence, as a gift from the Grand Duke of
        Tuscany.
        THE CENTER
        Here, at the holy city of Varanasi and the Ganga, you
        touch the very soul of India — and its sensuality as well, in the many
        temples of Khajuraho. You can also escape the preoccupations of
        existence at the wildlife sanctuary of Kanha. However, a reminder of
        the historic reality of the Indian Mutiny at Lucknow is also
        ever-present.
        Lucknow
        As a logical stopover on your way to Varanasi (coming from
        Delhi or from Calcutta), Lucknow is worth a visit for its special place
        in the history of Indias determined fight for Independence — a focus
        of the Mutiny of 1857 (see pages 45–47).
        The British Residency — today preserved as a
        monument — initially commemorated British resistance, but since
        Independence it has been visited by Indians interested in this relic of
        their own struggle for self-assertion, or interested in a family picnic
        on the lawns.
        On a lawn surrounded by 24 palm trees, a cenotaph pays
        tribute to Chief Commissioner Sir Henry Lawrence, who was killed during
        the attack. An obelisk here honors Native Officers and Sepoys, who
        died…nobly performing their duty.  Indians comprised half the 1,600
        troops defending the Residency. A little museum inside illustrates the
        history of the siege, with a model of the first Residency as well as
        rusty cannons and cannonballs, and prints, photos, and letters.
        Down by the river, a short walk away, is the Martyrs
        Memorial, inaugurated in 1957 on the centenary of the Mutiny to honor
        those who fought for Indias independence.
        Lucknow, with its 18th- and 19th-century mosques, used to
        be a Muslim stronghold; although the size of its community has now
        dwindled to only 30 percent of the countrys population, it is one of
        the two single most important Indian centers of Shiite doctrine, the
        other being Mumbai.
        Varanasi
        One thing is certain: you cannot begin to fathom the
        mystery of India without a visit to Varanasi. Not that this old city
        will explain everything — in fact, its dramatic confrontations of
        life and death on the Ganga river, and of scholarship and superstition,
        may only mystify you even further — but the citys aura of sanctity is
        so overwhelming that it supercedes any need for rational explanations.
        Perhaps the Muslim conquerors once perceived the Hindus reverence for
        Varanasi as a threat — there is no temple in this 3,000-year-old city
        dating from before the 18th century — but later it became a holy city
        for Muslims, too, with Emperor Aurangzeb even trying to rename it
        Muhammadabad.
        The name Varanasi, misheard by Europeans as Benares, is
        derived from its site between the tributaries of the life-giving holy
        river Ganga, the Varuna and the Asi. Shiva is said to have poured the
        river down on the plains from the Himalayas; this mythical story leads
        Hindus to believe that Varanasi is the oldest city in the world.
        Probably founded by the Indo-Aryans around 1000 b.c. , the
        city was established from earliest times as a famous seat of learning
        for Hindu thinkers, theologians, philosophers, and poets alike. It has
        remained ever since a center of the Hindu sciences. It was just outside
        Varanasi that Buddhas disciples gathered in the sixth century b.c. to
        hear his sermon at the Deer Park of Sarnath. Since then, Jain monks,
        Muslims, and Sikhs have proclaimed it a holy city, building
        monasteries, mosques, and temples here.
        The Ghats
        The stone-stepped embankments leading down to the Ganga
        river are the gathering place of more than 250,000 pilgrims a year. To
        see the day unfold at the Ghats, you must rise before dawn to join the
        pilgrims. Holy men and women are up and about, busily chanting Ganga
        Mai ki jai!   — Praise be to Mother Ganga! 
        Some are sannyasi, wandering beggars who have abandoned
        their homes and walked from as far as Chennai (Madras) to stand on the
        Ghats and pray, to bathe and drink the waters of the holy river, or
        just to sit and meditate on this supreme moment of their religious
        lives. Even the most aged and infirm travel here to die, for nothing is
        more blessed for a devout Hindu than to die in the great waters of the
        Varanasi and thus be released from the eternal cycle of rebirth.
        Practically all roads in town lead down to the Dasaswamedh
        Ghat, where Brahma the Creator is said to have made a ritual sacrifice
        of 10 horses. At the top of the steps, holy men sit under their bamboo
        umbrellas chanting mantras and offering, for a coin or grains of rice,
        either sandalwood paste, flowers, or water from the Ganga.
        At the waters edge, you can rent a boat and go into
        midstream for a view of the impressive skyline, which features many
        Hindu temples, gopuram towers, Muslim minarets, and Mughal domes. In
        the 5 km (3 miles) between her tributaries, the Ganga inscribes a
        crescent, turning north, as it is suggested, for one last gesture of
        farewell to her sacred home in the Himalayas before descending east
        towards the Bay of Bengal. You can ask your boatman to take you further
        upstream to the Asi Ghat before doubling back as far as the
        Panchganga.
        Notice how the ritual ablutions, which are highly
        elaborate when performed by a learned Brahman, usually involve a kind
        of crouching movement completed at least three times in the water.
        Women, you will notice, bathe in full sari. Youll see plenty of soap
        and shampoo and, on the Dhobi Ghat, laundry-washing, too. After all,
        Mother Ganga, however sacred, is also just a river. Out on stone
        platforms, young men perform gymnastics, part of a devout
        self-discipline known as danda.
        Those people who might at first be reluctant to confront
        the omnipresence of death along the river will be impressed by the
        simple dignity of the funeral rites here. Families bring their dead for
        their cremation to the holiest of Varanasi ghats, Manikarnika. The
        body, in a white shroud, is carried on a bier of bamboo to the rivers
        edge, where a few drops of Ganga water are poured into the lips of the
        dead. The body is placed on a pyre of perfumed sandalwood, which is
        then set alight.
        Jai Singhs observatory and learning temple, the Scindia
        Ghat, is at Man Mandir Ghat. The Alamgir Mosque rises behind the sacred
        Panchganga Ghat, said to be the mythical confluence of four Ganga
        subterranean tributaries.
        The Town
        The Chawk (bazaar) is famous for its perfumes, silks, and
        brassware. Look out for the gilded Golden Temple of Vishwanath, the
        holiest temple of Varanasi, forbidden to non-Hindus. You can view it
        from the building opposite before going behind the temple to see the
        sacred bull, stained deep vermilion by the libations of its
        worshippers.
        The Varanasi Hindu University has an Art Museum with a
        superb collection of 16th-century Mughal miniatures, considered
        superior to the national collection in Delhi.
        Sarnath
        Now a suburb of Varanasi, which is located about 10 km (6
        miles) out of town, Sarnath is where Buddha gave his famous Deer Park
        sermon (the veritable foundation of the religion) to five disciples
        around the year 530 b.c. (see pages 19–21).
        It quickly became a leading pilgrimage site, attracting
        devout Buddhists from many Eastern regions including Japan, China, and
        Southeast Asia as it still does today. Emperor Ashoka commanded his
        edict-pillars to be built within the monasteries and stupas, of which
        he had thousands constructed. But just like Varanasi, Sarnath suffered
        at the hands of Qutb-ud-din in the year 1194. Today the ruins have been
        well restored; they are accompanied by an excellent museum of Buddhist
        sculpture, which you should save to enjoy until last.
        On the western side of the road coming out of Varanasi,
        youll find the Chaukhaudi Stupa, built by a Gupta king in the fifth
        century a.d. With a proud octagonal tower that rises out of the top of
        the structure, it was built to mark the passage of the Emperor Humayun
        after his defeat in the 1540s. The remains of seven red-brick
        monasteries dating from the third century b.c. to the ninth century can
        be discerned among the ruins in a pretty setting of flowers and sacred
        neem trees. Since its attractive bricks were carried off to build
        houses in the town, only a platform of the Main Shrine, which once
        marked Buddhas dwelling place during his stay at Sarnath, remains.
        West of the shrine, surrounded by an iron railing, are the
        stump and fragments of Ashokas Pillar, which was once over 15 m (48
        ft) high. Notice how the shine of the granite has withstood the
        elements for over 2,200 years. Its inscription warns the Indian people
        against the dissidence that could upset the important national unity
        under his leadership: No one shall cause division in the Order of
        Monks. 
        The dominant feature of these ruins is the 45-m- (146-ft-)
        high, cylindrical Dhamekh Stupa, built in the fifth century a.d. ,
        which is believed by many to mark the ancient site of Buddhas most
        famous sermon.
        Immediately below eight empty niches — perhaps they once
        held statues on display in the museum — is a beautiful frieze of fine
        floral and geometrical patterns interspersed with pretty birds and
        small seated Buddhas. If you should have a pair of binoculars, they
        will come in handy here: take a close look at the fine craftsmanship in
        this work of art.
        Visitors will take delight in the Museum, which is a
        treasure-trove of superb early Indian sculpture dating from the third
        century b.c. to the fifth century a.d. Greeting you as you enter the
        museum is its famous masterpiece, the lion-capital of Ashokas pillar,
        a high point of the distinctive art of the Mauryan empire. The lion,
        symbol of power and pride, was an understandable choice as the emblem
        of Indias regained nationhood in 1947. Four vigorous lions stand back
        to back atop a frieze of animals comprising a horse, an elephant, a
        bull, and a smaller lion, each of them separated by a Wheel of Law,
        resting on the inverted lotus that once connected it to the pillar.
        Against the wall is the Wheel of Law that originally rose above the
        lions. As a gentle counterpoint to this, and sculpted some 700 years
        later, a cross-legged Buddha with a finely chiselled halo was added;
        look out for it. The Deer Park to the north of the excavations is just
        a modern afterthought, pleasant to relax in, but not related to the
        original.
        Khajuraho
        This town is famous for the erotic sculptures of its
        medieval Hindu temples; many come expecting to snigger. They leave,
        however, full of admiration, because the sandstone temples are marvels
        of harmony and the sculptures true grace in their sensuality stifles
        any temptation to smirk.
        We have British hunters to thank for uncovering these
        masterpieces, around 1840, half-buried in earth and hidden by the
        overgrown jungle. They didnt see the light of day until their
        excavation in 1923, 600 years after being abandoned during the Muslim
        conquests.
        Khajuraho was capital of the Rajput kingdom of the
        Chandellas, a clan that brought vigour to love and war, as is clear in
        the temples they built from the tenth to the 12th centuries. The
        temples are divided into three groups: western, eastern, and southern.
        The major ones, in the western group, are in a beautifully kept park
        with paths leading easily from one to the other. To see the sculptures
        at their best, go in the morning or afternoon, or both, and then go
        back at night, when the temples are illuminated.
        The lovely Lakshmana temple, dedicated to Vishnu, is one
        of the earliest, and the only one in which each of the four shrines (at
        each corner of the square platform on which it stands) are
        preserved.
        Four sikhara domes rise above the entrance-porch in
        addition to: the mandapa hall for worshippers; a larger hall for
        dancing-girls; and the inner sanctuary, surrounded by an ambulatory for
        walking around the image of the deity. The silhouette seems to suggest
        the Himalayan home of the gods, but this may be more of a Brahmanic
        interpretation than the conception of the architect. The sculptures
        portray not only erotic postures, but also the adventures of Krishna:
        in one he uses all four arms to fend off two wrestlers.
        Visvanartha, built in 1002, is more compact and ultimately
        more harmonious than Lakshmana. Its sculptures include a flute-playing
        maiden and a small nymph pulling a thorn from her foot.
        The most spectacular temple of the western group is
        Kandariya-Mahadeva, with three domes culminating in the great 30-m-
        (98-ft-) high sikhara, composed of row upon row of 84 other, smaller
        sikharas.
        Created at the height of the Chandellas power in the
        mid-11th century, the sculpture inside is the most sophisticated and
        ingenious: apsara dancing-girls and sura-sundari nymphs coquettishly
        yawning, scratching, applying their makeup, or playing with monkeys,
        parakeets, or with their cheerful lovers. The Kandariya is the largest
        of all the Khajuraho temples and adds, with its grand scale, a special
        exuberance to the life-enhancing spirit of the place.
        The eastern group of structures includes three Jain
        temples. The most important is the tenth-century Parsvanatha, built in
        the classical Hindu sikhara-domed style and incorporating the
        sculptural themes of the Vishnu temples. While the religion of the
        Jains prohibits anything too explicit in sexuality, the ambience of
        Khajuraho is clearly contagious, and there are a lot of voluptuous,
        full-breasted ladies here that you dont usually see on a Jain
        temple.
        Kanha
        Kanha is famo us, widely acknowledged as the best place
        for seeing an Indian tiger in the wild. In fact, for the sheer
        abundance of wildlife to be seen, Kanha is probably the best national
        park in India and should not be missed.
        You might think the journey is a little complicated, but
        if you go to the trouble you will find it well worth the effort. You
        can either fly into Nagpur or, if youre coming from Khajuraho, take a
        train to Jabalpur and continue by road. It is, however, best to reserve
        your accommodation in forest rest-houses in advance of your
        journey.
        The best season is February to May, when youll be able to
        see plenty of beautiful cheetal (spotted deer), blackbuck, sloth bear,
        gaur or bison (largest of the wild cattle), wild boar, Kanhas unique
        barasingha (12-pointer) swamp deer, and also monkeys galore.
        The Project Tiger campaign is doing a sterling job here
        to protect the king of Indias jungles without neglecting the elusive
        leopard. Enthusiastic bird-watchers might also spot black ibis and the
        crested serpent-eagle.
        Tracking down the tiger is a subtle affair, and requires a
        degree of dedication, calm, and stealth. On the first morning, you take
        a jeep-safari at dawn to scout the terrain. The forest of sal trees and
        bamboo is a truly sweet-smelling delight, interspersed with rolling
        green meadows where the deer and gaur graze. Game-trackers will be out
        by this time in an attempt to locate the tigers hunting ground for the
        evening safari.
        A team of jungle-wise mahouts with elephants set out in
        the afternoon to seek the tiger in the most likely areas; you will be
        following in a jeep, keeping a watch out for any tell-tale signs that
        the tiger is near. The things to listen and look out for could be any
        one, or perhaps several, of the following: the alarm bark of the deer,
        a noisy screech from the monkeys, and — the most telling sign of
        all — vultures waiting for the tiger to abandon the leftovers of what
        he caught for lunch. When the elephant has located a tiger, the mahout
        signals and you hop aboard his howdah to penetrate the jungle. Et
        voilà!
        Sanchi
        About one hour away from Bhopal, the stupas of Sanchi are
        the most admired Buddhist monuments in the whole of India. The site,
        from the third century b.c. , when Emperor Ashoka ordered stupas
        containing the Buddhas relics to be built, is on a 91-m (300-ft) hill
        on the Vindhya plateau.
        Stupas were originally burial mounds; Buddhists developed
        them into shrines of plaster-covered stone, inside which are caskets
        containing relics of Buddha. Crowned by a chhattra (umbrella) made of
        stone, the stupa was erected on a terrace with a fence to enclose the
        path. The stupas of Sanchi lay in the jungle until they were uncovered
        by the British in 1818, but delay in their restoration led to their
        plunder. Three stupas and the temples and monasteries from the fifth to
        the 12th century a.d. can still be seen.
        The Great Stupa, Stupa I, built in the first century b.c.
        , envelops a smaller mound erected some 200 years earlier. It is
        surrounded by stone railings; in the terrace railing are four torana
        gates, off north–south and east–west axes, perhaps in order to deceive
        evil spirits. Formed by square posts with finely sculptured panels, the
        gates are topped by three architraves (crossbars), one placed above the
        other with dwarfs or animals.
        At the time Stupa I was built, Buddha himself was not
        represented in human form, but symbolized by the horse on which he rode
        away from his palace, by the wheel of law, by his footprints, and by
        the pipal tree under which he found enlightenment.
        The rest of humanity is present in the form of his
        worshippers, his adversaries, dancers, and yaksi nymphs. Despite the
        strict asceticism preached through Buddhism, its clear that the
        craftsmen employed were given free rein regarding their joyous
        sensuality.
        The smaller Stupa III, to the northeast of the Great
        Stupa, has one torana gate; it was originally built to contain the
        relics of the two disciples of Buddha, which are preserved in a casket
        with pieces of bone and jewels. The Stupa II mound is down on the
        western slope of the hill. Its circular balustrade has four L-shaped
        entrances with a simpler decoration of flora, fauna, and Buddha
        symbols. Historians have noted that the horsemen are using stirrups,
        the earliest known example of their use in India.
        THE EAST
        The east of India encompasses the birthplace of Buddhism
        at Bodh Gaya, the great Hindu temples of Bhubaneshwar, and the
        challenge of Calcutta, a huge confrontation of vitality and hardship.
        You can cool off in the green tea plantations of Darjeeling or in the
        mountains of Sikkim.
        Calcutta
        The towns reputation for squalor has so deeply imbedded
        itself in the worlds imagination that it comes as a surprise to find
        the Calcuttans to be the liveliest bunch of people in the country.
        Bengalis are irrepressible; perhaps the challenge of coping with daily
        life in this city of 10 million has sharpened their wit.
        Survival here is a creative art; it is no accident that
        Calcutta remained the countrys intellectual and cultural capital long
        after it relinquished government to Delhi. Calcutta was the home of the
        writer Rabindranath Tagore, Indias first Nobel Prize winner, and of
        the philosophers Ramakrishna and Vivekananda. Creative people still
        make their name here.
        After the establishment-minded press of Delhi, the
        newspapers in Calcutta seem bright, ebullient, and vitriolic; while
        Mumbais filmmakers are masters of melodrama, Calcuttas cinema is
        known for its sensitivity and poetry, producing faithful mirrors of
        village and city life in the hands of such directors as Satyajit Ray
        and Mrinal Sen. It is the proper home for the countrys best museum,
        which is simply and aptly named the Indian Museum. 
        For all their ardent nationalism, Calcuttans retain a
        strong, if sometimes sardonic, attachment to things British; in
        particular they have an affection for the English language, which
        youll find spoken here with the most British of accents — and often
        with a good deal more style and elegance than the British themselves
        can muster.
        The West Bank
        Even if youre not arriving in the city by train, start
        your visit at Howrah Station. The crowds in and around the station will
        douse you in something of a baptism by fire; youll soon realize that
        only a small fraction of them are actually there to take a train. The
        station is a home for many: its entrance hall and platforms are
        dormitory and kitchen.
        Head next for the restful Botanical Gardens, laid out in
        the 18th century, boasting 35,000 species of flowers and shrubs. The
        first tea cuttings were brought to these gardens from China to found
        the plantations of Darjeeling (see page 158) and Assam. The gardens
        pride is a 200-year-old banyan tree, the Ficus bengalensis, or
        strangling fig tree. Some fungus destroyed its central trunk, but it
        still thrives, having aerial roots and a circumference of 400 m (1,300
        ft).
        The Howrah Bridge, itself a national monument, conveys you
        across the river to the city center. This massive steel suspension
        bridge stages the most magnificent traffic jams; it is a great place to
        gauge the Bengali temperament.
        The City
        Another park, the Maidan, is in the center of the city;
        landscaped to allow for a clear line of fire from all around Fort
        William, it was rebuilt by Robert Clive on a more easily defended site
        than its predecessor. Like Britains Hyde Park, the Maidan attracts
        ferocious soapbox orators predicting the end of the world, but it is
        also visited by the most wonderful charlatans peddling medicine and
        other questionable substances.
        The Ochterlony Monument — originally named after an
        obscure British warrior — is one of many Calcutta landmarks which has
        not exactly taken on its new name (Shahid Minar). It is the focus of
        the citys boisterous political rallies. Eden Gardens, with pond and
        pagoda and the venerable Calcutta cricket grounds, are by the
        river.
        The Victoria Memorial offers a history of the bygone Raj,
        Anglo-Renaissance in style with a touch of Mughal influence. Its white
        marble was brought from the Rajasthani quarries used for building the
        Taj Mahal. Commissioned by Viceroy Lord Curzon, it was paid for by
        voluntary contributions from the maharajas and nawabs.
        Catch up on the Indian avant-garde — and the bohemian
        people of Calcutta —  at the Academy of Fine Arts on the southeast
        corner of the Maidan.
        Running along the eastern edge of the Maidan, the
        Chowringhee Road (Nehru Road) marks the old European neighborhood whose
        mansions once won Calcutta the wishful name of City of Palaces. 
        These days it is a busy shopping street with big hotels and cinemas,
        gigantic film billboards featuring actresses in wet saris, and a
        roadway that is so chock-a-block with cows, rickshaws, pedestrians, and
        bicycles that cars are often seen going backwards.
        The Indian Museum, by Chowringhee and Sudder Street, makes
        an excellent home for art treasures from the ancient Maurya and Gupta
        eras which had been disintegrating after centuries of exposure to the
        merciless natural elements. The great Buddhist carvings on the railings
        from the Bharhut stupa (second century b.c. ), comparable to those of
        Sanchi (see page 143), are preserved in the Bharhut Gallery. The
        Gandhara Room displays the earliest sculptures representing Buddha in
        human form (first century a.d. ).
        Dalhousie Square (also called BBD Bagh), on the site of
        the original Fort William north of the Maidan, was once the center of
        Britains imperial bureaucracy. Here, scribblers of the East India
        Company — babus to friend and foe — duplicated and triplicated
        everything they could lay their hands on in the Writers Buildings. It
        now serves just the Government of West Bengal, but with an undiminished
        number of babus.
        It takes a detective to find the original site of the
        Black Hole at the domed General Post Office on the west side of
        Dalhousie Square, since most Indians arent interested in helping you.
        They generally see the incident (see pages 43–44) as having been a
        piece of elaborate British propaganda thought up to justify Clives
        retaliation. A plaque marks the spot in an arch at the northeast corner
        of the post office.
        Most of the major British Indian buildings prior to the
        20th century were built not by an architect but by a soldier-engineer
        copying existing plans of buildings back home. The magnificent Raj
        Bhavan (Governors Residence), which you can find due north of the
        Maidan, copied famous Kedleston Hall in Derbyshire. The nearby St.
        Johns Church, Calcuttas first cathedral, is an Indian version of
        Londons St. Martin-in-the-Fields; look in the south aisle for John
        Zoffanys amusing painting of The Last Supper. Zoffany used the East
        India Company men as models, with the painters sworn enemy, Mr. Paull,
        as Judas. The tomb of Job Charnock, the Company official who founded
        the city of Calcutta, is in the church cemetery.
        The Marble Palace, a bizarre tribute to Western art and
        architecture, can be found on tiny Muktaram Babu Street northeast of
        Dalhousie Square. Built by the hugely wealthy land-owning family of
        Raja Majendra Mullick Bahadur, this huge Palladian villa-turned-museum
        has a park and menagerie of exotic birds. It recalls William Randolph
        Hearsts castle in California, with its imaginative juxtaposition of
        ancient Roman and Chinese sculpture, fine Venetian glass chandeliers,
        Sèvres porcelain, old Flemish masters, and naughty French erotica. The
        odd Mullick still hangs around to play Chopin in the ballroom or
        billiards in the parlor.
        Bhubaneshwar
        As you fly down the coast from Calcutta, youll suddenly
        spot a small forest of tall domes in a town with a lake at its center.
        These are the temples of that most holy city, Bhubaneshwar.
        The capital of Orissa is a center for easy day-trips to
        the ancient Jain cave monasteries of Udaigiri, the chariot-temple of
        Konark, and the sacred pilgrimage town of Puri. Once there were
        thousands of Hindu and Jain sanctuaries in and around Bhubaneshwar.
        Some 500, mostly ruins, can still be traced, but only 30 are visitable.
        Three or four are masterpieces of Hindu architecture.
        The oldest temples, dating from the seventh and eighth
        centuries, are grouped around the sacred Ocean Drop lake of Bindu
        Sagar, the focus for bathing and purification ceremonies before the
        annual festivals. East of the Bindu Sagar, the tenth-century
        Muktesvara, is a rust-colored stone temple dedicated to Shiva, with a
        small bathing tank and gracefully arched torana gate. There is great
        peace and dignity in the temples proportions; the low curved pyramid
        on the hall of worship and ribbed sikhara dome over the sanctum repeat
        the classic silhouette of Orissa temples.
        The Rajarani, standing on a platform at the end of a
        pleasant garden, is a more robust structure than that of the
        Muktesvara, with a more pronounced pyramid over the worship hall, and a
        powerful sikhara behind it.
        The greatest of the citys many temples is the
        late-11th-century Lingaraja, south of the Bindu Sagar. Off limits to
        non-Hindus, it can be viewed from an observation platform specially
        erected for the purpose by Lord Curzon. A pair of binoculars will be
        particularly useful here, in order to appreciate the splendid detail of
        the carving on the soaring central tower dominating a whole complex of
        temples. It is dedicated to the Lord of the Three Worlds,
        Tribhuvanesvara, who gave the town of Bhubaneshwar its modern day
        name.
        Udaigiri
        The cave monasteries of Udaigiri are close to Bhubaneshwar
        airport. Excavated from a sandstone hill in the third and second
        centuries b.c. , the Udaigiri (Sunrise Hill) caves were dwellings for
        priests and monks when Jainism was the state religion in the kingdom of
        Kalinga.
        Ranis Monastery (Cave 1) has carvings of elephants,
        maidens, and court dancers, but unlike the caves of Ajanta and Ellora
        (see page 115), there are no temples or central halls for worship.
        Further up the hill, Ganesha Gumpha (Cave 10) is set back
        on an esplanade and guarded by two sturdy stone elephants holding
        branches of mangoes. The friezes are more sophisticated, showing
        archers riding elephants and a king of Kalinga reclining with his
        queen. Cave 14, Hathi Gumpha (Elephant Cave), is important for the
        inscription above the entrance, which details the conquests and
        irrigation projects completed during King Kharavelas 13-year reign,
        around 50 b.c.
        Konark
        The Sun Temple of Konark was conceived as a gigantic
        chariot for the great sun-god Surya cantering inland from the Indian
        Ocean. The sikhara that once towered 60 m (200 ft) into the air like
        some symbolic and divine charioteer has gone, but the grandiose pyramid
        of the Jagmohan (Hall of Audience), where the priests used to
        officiate, still soars above 12 pairs of huge stone wheels sculpted
        into its huge platform and drawn by numerous galloping horses. The
        temple was built in the 13th century, but the sikhara toppled, its
        porous stone ruined by storms and plunderers — and by the ambitious
        concept of its architect. As you climb over the remains, youll find
        they have a decidedly secular air. Surya was given his due with
        dignified green chlorite statues of parsva-devatas (sun-deities) set in
        niches facing the four points of the compass, and much of the sculpture
        profusely decorating the walls emphasizes his life as a king — his
        battles, the royal hunt, and life at court. The sensuality of the
        aristocratic lovers recalls Khajuraho (see page 139).
        The wheels of the chariot themselves, symbols of the Hindu
        cycle of rebirth, have beautifully carved spokes and hubs decorated
        with kings and gods. Beneath the wheels, there are lively carved
        friezes of elephants playing with children. Look out as well for a
        giraffe, which indicates the Indian west coasts early contact with
        Africa. The masterpieces among the free-standing statuary, though, are
        the war-horses trampling the kings enemies and the splendid elephants
        crushing the demons.
        European sailors, for whom the temple was an importa nt
        landmark, enabling them to keep out of the dangerous shallows of the
        Orissa coast (they nearly had it turned into a lighthouse), called it
        the Black Pagoda — in order to be able to distinguish it from the
        White Pagoda of Puris whitewashed Jaggannath Temple further down the
        coast. After the huge sikhara tower had collapsed, however, the British
        saved the pyramidal Jagmohan by pouring concrete into its core; now the
        Archaeological Survey of India is heroically performing massive
        restoration work on the important sculpture.
        Puri
        Even if you cant be in Puri for the tremendous Rath Yatra
        Festival in June/July, the town is worth a visit just to see a
        community devoted almost entirely to the industry of its great Temple
        of Jaggannath, either directly or by trading with the pilgrims.
        Non-Hindus are not permitted within the temple precincts,
        but you can get a good view from the roof of the Raghunandan Library
        near the temple wall. Some 6,000 priests, artisans, and other workers
        are employed within the grounds. Of the four main buildings, all of
        them whitewashed and decorated with bright painted sculptures, the
        first is where the worshippers bring offerings of flowers and fruit,
        the second is for sacred dances, and the third for viewing the divine
        effigies, which are enshrined in the sanctum of the fourth and tallest
        edifice.
        Puri also has a beautiful beach, southwest of town, which
        is ideal for cooling off — but those arent sandcastles the Indians are
        making, theyre miniature temples, for this is the Swarga Dwara
        (Heavens Gateway), where the faithful wash away their sins.
        Darjeeling
        Before you overdose on the countless temples or even just
        on the heat of the plains, follow the wise example of the long-gone
        British of Calcutta and get up into the hills and greenery which lead
        to the lush cool of the celebrated Darjeeling tea gardens.
        At 2,185 m (7,100 ft), its a bit hard to breathe in the
        rarefied air, but take in the splendor of the Himalayan
        mountains — mount Kanchenjunga situated in Sikkim (see page 162), and,
        if youre lucky on a clear day in April and May or in late September
        and October, Mount Everest itself, up in Nepal.
        In the year 1835, the raja of the then-independent kingdom
        of Sikkim was pressured into ceding Darjeeling to the British. The
        Brits believed it would be a healthy place for soldiers and East India
        Company employees to recover from the ills of the plains, but above all
        they found the area strategically useful for controlling a pass into
        much-contested Nepal. With tea from seeds smuggled out of China and an
        influx of plantation labor from Nepal, the little village of 100 souls
        grew to a community of 10,000 by 1849. Now Darjeeling is part of West
        Bengal, but Nepali remains the official language and most residents are
        of Nepalese and Tibetan origin. Buddhists account for 18 percent of the
        population.
        A major part of the pleasure of Darjeeling is in getting
        here. Although youre driving along narrow mountain roads, youll feel
        much safer than in the plains, because everyone takes infinitely more
        care; lorry and bus drivers are clearly subdued by the deep
        ravines.
        But the best way to travel up — at least part of the way,
        if youre too impatient to take 6 hours for the whole 80 km (50
        miles) — is by the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, more popularly and
        humorously known as the Toy Train, which starts out at Siliguri, not
        far from Bagdogra. Built in 1881, the tiny steam-train on a 60-cm
        (2-ft) track climbs, loops, and zigzags through dense forests of sal,
        Chinese cedar, and teak which are alive with jungle birds and mountain
        streams. Watch for Pagla Jhora, the Mad Torrent, just after Gladstones
        Rock (shaped like the statesmans head). Also keep your eyes open for a
        first view of Kanchenjunga, 8,586 m (28,168 ft) high and the worlds
        third highest peak, after Mount Everest and Pakistans K2.
        The railway builders admitted it might have been safer to
        dig some tunnels, but they preferred to go round the mountain to
        allow for a better view of the terraced tea gardens and the valleys
        plunging down to the Bengal plains. Certainly when you reach the
        railways high point, 2,257 m (7,407 ft), at Ghoom, the view as you
        hover out on the loop over Darjeeling is in every sense of the word
        breathtaking.
        The only relics of the British Raj are the (now)
        all-Indian, and still very private, Darjeeling Club, and a couple of
        tea rooms and Edwardian hotels such as the Windermere (with
        coal-burning fires and hot water bottles at night). The real British
        legacy is in the tea gardens, all Indian-run, which offer a beautiful
        green setting for the town and insight into tea growing and processing
        methods (see page 218). Makaibari and Happy Valley are among those open
        for visitors without obligation to buy. Your hotel will book for
        you.
        A drive to Tiger Hill before dawn is a popular excursion
        which Indians and Westerners go on for different reasons, though both
        show the same almost religious excitement as the night fades. From an
        observation platform, you can get a terrific view, away to the north,
        of Mount Kanchenjunga and, on a good day, just a small jagged peak in
        the distance — yes, Mount Everest. But youll notice the Indians are
        facing east. What matters is not the rare opportunity of seeing the
        worlds tallest mountain, but seeing the sunrise.
        For a closer look at the true roof of the world, consider
        a seven-day camping trek, on foot or pony, to Sandakhpu (3,650 m/11,700
        ft). Youll get better views of Mount Kanchenjunga and Mount Everest
        and pass through lovely forests of chestnut, magnolia, and
        rhododendron. During April and May, the orchids will be in bloom.
        Armchair mountaineers invariably enjoy the excellent
        museum at the Himalayan Mountaineering Institute in Darjeeling. It has
        on display some fascinating memorabilia of Himalayan expeditions, in
        particular the equipment used by local Sherpa Tensing Norgay (here
        Indianized as Shri Tensingh), when, with Edmund Hillary, he was the
        first to conquer Everest in 1953.
        Sikkim
        Once again, a great part of the joy of the place is the
        journey itself, by road to the capital, Gangtok (1,768 m/5,800 ft), in
        eastern Sikkim through the most spectacular scenery: rivers roaring
        through gorges, deep valleys outlined by terraced rice paddies, and
        forested hills. To protect Indias border with China and put an end to
        the unrest over the Rajas autocratic rule, the region of Sikkim was
        incorporated into the Indian Union in 1975. The people of Sikkim are
        mostly made up of Nepalese and Lepchas — the countrys original
        settlers known also as Rongpan, the people of the ravines — and Bhutias
        from Tibet.
        The colorful Tibetan Buddhist monasteries are the most
        attractive sight in the valleys near Gangtok. The most easily
        accessible of them is Rumtek, built in 1968 after China drove the
        maroon-robed Tibetan monks of the Karmapa sect into exile. Other, older
        monasteries from the 18th century, based 150 km (92 miles) west of
        Gangtok at Pemayangtse and Tashiding, are well worth visiting, but
        access to them may be restricted at times by the military
        authorities.
        Patna
        The capital of Bihar serves as a base for visits to the
        sanctuaries of Bodh Gaya, Rajgir, and Nalanda, but its bazaars,
        first-class sculpture museum, a major Sikh temple, and the views of the
        Ganga river make it worth at least a day of your time.
        Patna was already in existence 2,500 years ago, when
        Buddha and Mahavira were active here. It later became the capital of
        the Mauryan emperors, in the third century b.c. , and one of the
        largest cities in the world at 3 km (2 miles) across and 12 km (7
        miles) along the Ganga. The British used Patna for manufacturing and
        distributing opium in the 19th century, to keep China supplied with its
        favorite drug. The old warehouses can still be seen by the river in the
        Gulzarbagh district, now housing a printing press.
        The Golghar, on the west side of town near the river, is
        evidence of the more altruistic side of British activity in Patna. This
        great flat-topped dome, a granary some 27 m (87 ft) high, was erected
        in 1786 by Captain John Garstin for the perpetual prevention of
        famine, after the terrible famine of 1770. Climb to the top for a fine
        view of the town and river.
        The open ground on the edge of the Maidan is where Mahatma
        Gandhi held mass prayer-meetings. Stand in the middle of the new Ganga
        Bridge to get a sense of the effect the river has on the lives of the
        Indians; it is 3 km (2 miles) wide here.
        Har Mandir Takht in old Patna will give you a sense of the
        Sikh community. It was built on the birthplace of Gobind Singh
        (1666–1708), who called on the Sikhs to defend their faith with armed
        force (see pages 18–19). The well that served Gobind Singhs house is
        now a marble shrine. The sanctuary exemplifies piety and militancy. A
        priest will explain the faith and show you, among the gurus relics,
        his cradle, shoes, and weapons. Above the sanctuary, priests and
        neophytes chant from the scriptures of the Adi Grant in a hall, now a
        museum to history and a record of the tortures suffered by Sikhs. The
        bazaar nearby sells cheap bamboo and leather goods.
        Patna Museum offers Mauryan sculpture: a stone yaksi
        (symbol of fertility), a maiden and Buddhas, a four-armed Padmapani,
        and a reclining Avalokitesvara.
        Bodh Gaya
        The site of the pipal tree or bodhi — the tree of wisdom
        where Gautama Siddhartha became the Enlightened One, Buddha — stands
        for one of the four great pilgrimages of his life. The others are those
        of his birth at Lumbini (Nepal); his first sermon at Sarnath (see page
        138); and of his death at Kushinagar. The sanctuary is just outside
        Gaya, south of Patna.
        E. M. Forster fans can undertake their own private
        pilgrimage 25 km (15 miles) north, to the Barabar Caves, which were the
        setting for the Marabar incident in Forsters famous novel Passage to
        India. As Forster commented, however, they have no artistic merit in
        themselves.
        The towering structure of the Mahabodhi Temple, built in
        the sixth century, evokes the gopuram gateways of south India. In
        keeping with other early Buddhist tenets, there is no figurative
        representation of Buddha here, However, there is a large gilded statue
        from a later period inside, and behind the temple are the spreading
        branches and trunks of the sacred Bodhi Tree, which is said to have
        grown from a sapling of the first one that stood here 2,500 years ago.
        Pilgrims visiting the temple reverently drape its branches with white
        and saffron-colored veils. A platform marks Buddhas seat and a set of
        large footprints symbolize his presence, while stone bowls mark where
        he walked. Hindus and Buddhists still bathe where he bathed. The museum
        has stupa railings, and the granite Buddhas date from the ninth
        century.
        The importance of the Bodh Gaya pilgrimage is evident in
        the Japanese, Thai, Tibetan, Burmese, and Chinese temples nearby.
        Rajgir
        This ancient city is due northeast of Bodh Gaya, out on
        the road to Naland, and it has been holy to both the Buddhists and
        Jains since the sixth century b.c. As Rajagriha, the capital of the
        Magadha kingdom, the town was frequented at different times by both
        Buddha and his contemporary Vardhamana Mahavira, the founder of the
        Jain religion.
        The surrounding green hills are topped by numerous temples
        of both religions, the best known being on Gridhakuta (Vultures Peak),
        where Buddha is believed to have converted the once fierce Mauryan
        warrior king Bimbisara to the peaceful doctrine of non-violence. The
        Japanese have built a great white stupa on Rajgirs principle hill,
        which you can reach by aerial ropeway — a pleasant way to survey the
        rugged countryside.
        Nalanda
        In order for you to get the most out of the fascinating
        ruins of the great monastery and the University of Nalanda, it is
        recommended that you use the services of a guide from the
        Archaeological Survey of India.
        In the third century b.c. , Ashoka founded the first
        monastery in the town of Rajgir, which became a center of learning
        under the Gupta kings 600 years later. By the time the Chinese sage,
        Hiuen Tsang, came here in the seventh century, it was a thriving
        university for teaching philosophy, logic, grammar, medicine, and
        Buddhist theology. It also sent missionaries to spread Buddhism to
        Tibet and attracted scholars from China, Burma, Thailand, and Cambodia.
        It was destroyed by the Muslims at the end of the 12th century and the
        monks fled to Nepal and Tibet.
        The museum has a good model of the original university and
        its monastery buildings, worth studying before you go out to the site.
        It also has a fine collection of bronzes from the ninth to the 12th
        centuries. On the excavation site, you will see remains of dormitories
        in addition to the refectory, kitchens, baths, lecture halls,
        libraries, and temples.
        THE SOUTH
        Travelling between Delhi, Mumbai, and Calcutta, its easy
        to forget that southern India exists. The attitude of northern Indians
        tends to be rather disparaging towards it, but a tour of the peninsula
        reveals a bright and cheerful people with a culture as rich and varied
        as their greener landscapes — the beautiful Malabar and Coromandel
        coasts.
        The Dravidians who make up most of the southern
        populations dont mind being seen as different from northerners, but
        they dont want to be disregarded. Archaeologists can trace their
        origins to the builders of the first cities, Harappa and Mohenjodaro,
        in the Indus valley. Their religion included elements of Hinduism such
        as Shivas phallic lingam and his sacred bull, Nandi, before the
        Brahmanic Indo-Aryans arrived. Driven south, the Dravidians remained
        not only geographically separate, but also politically independent,
        impervious to the waves of foreign invaders.
        Since Hindus battled Muslims until the end of the 16th
        century, they were by no means united. The Hoysalas of Karnataka, the
        Cheras of Kerala, the Cholas, Pandyas, and Pallavas of Tamil Nadu all
        fought among themselves until the kingdom of Vijayanagar (Hampi in
        Karnataka) emerged as dominant in the 14th century. Each of these
        kingdoms showed cultural vitality, exporting temple-builders together
        with their spices and ivory to Burma, Malaysia, Cambodia, and Java.
        Suffering less than the north from the ravages of Muslim iconoclasts,
        their temples have survived in profusion and in much better
        condition.
        Bangalore is in the vanguard of Indias modernization, and
        Chennai, though without the self-promotion of Mumbai, easily produces
        twice as many feature films as Mumbai.
        Madurai, Thanjavur (Tanjore), Belur, and Halebid are
        custodians of the peninsulas ancient art treasures. The strong
        regional identity of the south has repeatedly foiled attempts to spread
        Hindi and make it the national language here. On the east coast they
        point out that Tamil literature is much richer than Hindi. On the west,
        the people of Kerala, who speak Malayalam, boast the highest literacy
        rate in the country: 90 percent for the whole State, compared with 81
        percent for the next highest (the district of Mizoram); and this with a
        national average of just over 52 percent.
        Much better served by the rains, with some parts
        benefitting from the peninsulas two monsoon seasons, in the summer and
        early winter, the souths vegetation is luxuriant and colorful. There
        are coconut groves on the Malabar west coast, palmyra palms on the
        Coromandel east, and in between, a more barren landscape of rugged
        mountains and dramatic rocky outcroppings, relieved here and there by a
        patch of Flame of the Forest trees, hibiscus, or deep green jungle,
        as well as plentiful trickling streams, lotus ponds, and lakes covered
        with scarlet lilies.
        Bangalore
        Modern and efficient, the capital of Karnataka is a
        convenient gateway to the western half of the peninsula.
        Under the former British Raj, Bangalore, at an altitude of
        930 m (3,000 feet), was the summer refuge for its Madras-based
        officials, who with their parks and greenery had made Bangalore the
        garden city.  The spectacular growth of India s boom town in
        electronics, aviation, telecommunications, and machine tools has
        noticeably changed the climate since the 1970s; it is several degrees
        hotter here now than it was thirty years ago. There are still pleasant
        walks to be had, however, in Cubbon Park and in the terraced greenery
        of the botanical gardens of Lal Bagh.
        Bangalore-Mysore road is a delightful introduction to the
        verdant and pleasant land of the south. Leading you along tributary
        streams of the Cauvery river, past groves of mango trees, sugar cane
        fields, and rice paddies, it is suddenly broken by the soaring mountain
        of solid granite which director David Lean made the location for the
        fateful picnic in his film of E. M. Forsters novel Passage to India.
        You can visit Srirangapatnam and Somnathpur (page 175) on the way.
        Mysore
        The home town of the maharajas regains a flicker of its
        old glory every October during the Dussehra festival, when the heir of
        the old rulers of Mysore State is paraded through the streets on his
        golden throne, surrounded by gorgeously caparisoned elephants (see page
        209).
        Mysore remains a pleasant, airy city, famous for its
        sandalwood and frangipani, jasmine, and musk. The maharajas palace is
        a museum by day and lit up at night. It was constructed in 1897 (after
        its predecessor was burned down, because the maharaja wanted a new one)
        and represents all the excesses of Mughal nostalgia and undigested
        Victoriana. Doors of solid silver open onto the multicolored, stylish
        décor of marble, mahogany, and ivory. The highlight is an art gallery,
        with paintings of the maharajas in very British, landed-gentry poses,
        and a glass case featuring a rolled gold replica of the British crown
        set between a tea kettle which is noticeably bigger than the coffee pot
        near it.
        On the summit of the Chamundi Hill, the Sri Chamundeswari
        Temple offers a fine view of Mysore. On your way back down the hill,
        take a look at the massive black Nandi bull, Shivas sacred mascot,
        with chains and bells that are a mixture of both real and sculpted
        items hung around its neck.
        Another popular sight are the Brindavan Gardens, in Mughal
        style, some 19 km (12 miles) north of Mysore, worth visiting at night
        when the fountains are flood-lit.
        Srirangapatnam
        The names of many southern towns are longer than their
        main streets. Situated due east of Mysore, Srirangapatnam was the site
        of the battles against the Muslim ruler Tipu Sultan in the 1790s, in
        which the British gained control of the peninsula.
        The fort, which was taken by Lord Cornwallis and Colonel
        Arthur Wellesley (the Iron Duke with the rubber boots), no longer
        stands today, but the sultans summer palace, Darya Daulat Bagh, has
        been preserved and made into a museum honoring the brave resistance of
        Tipu and his father, Haidar Ali.
        Somnathpur
        The Kesava Temple, built in 1268, is a tiny, shining jewel
        in the crown of Indian architecture. The structure is small, no more
        than 10 m (30 ft) high, and its vimanas (shrines) are set on a low,
        modestplatform, but the temple achieves a grandeur in miniature,
        peacefully enclosed in its courtyard and isolated from the rest of the
        village.
        The temple has been dedicated to Vishnu in his various
        aspects: as Janardana the Punisher, shown as a rigid, solemn-looking
        statue on the north vimana; as Kesava the Radiant, after whom the
        temple is named but whose statue is missing from the central shrine;
        and as Venugopala, the Krishna on the south shrine, with another
        Krishna as cowherd listening at his feet.
        With a domed sikhara on each shrine, the temples overall
        effect remains horizontal in the style of the Hoysala kingdom,
        emphasized by the layers of narrow, parallel carved friezes running
        around the walls. Every square centimeter of the temples surface is
        sculpted. An unusual feature in the Hoysala temples is that their
        carvings are signed by the sculptors.
        Like the statues of Romanesque and Gothic cathedrals
        portraying events from the Bible, the carvings were intended to be read
        like a book by those who had no access to the scriptures, which were at
        that time reserved for the Brahmins. They tell the stories of the
        gods — of the mischievous tricks of Krishna, as a child stealing butter
        from his mother and later as a young man stealing saris from girls
        bathing in the river — and of the adventures of the epic
        Mahabharata.
        Belur and Halebid
        The most comfortable way to see these important Hoysala
        temples is to visit them on either side of an overnight stay at Hassan,
        120 km (75 miles) northwest of Mysore.
        The Chenna Kesava Temple in Belur is also dedicated to
        Vishnu the Radiant, but it was built in 1117, 150 years before the
        Kesava. Legend has it that all Belur, Halebid, and Somnathpur temples
        designed by the same architect. The Belur temples silhouette makes for
        an unfinished look, but its not certain that towers or domes were ever
        planned. Here too, it is the sculpture rather than the form that gives
        the temple its impact.
        The friezes bring the building to life with the legends of
        the gods, Shiva the demon-killer, or scenes from the
        Mahabharata — including Prince Arjuna shooting a fish while looking at
        its reflection in an adjacent bowl of water. The bracket figures are
        masterpieces: a huntress, girls dancing or singing, and a woman about
        to spray her lover with rose-water. By the south doorway, on a vine
        chiselled beside the head of a girl dancing with a demon, you can find
        a lizard hunting a fly.
        Hoysalesvara Temple in Halebid 16 km (10 miles) from
        Belur, dedicated to Shiva and his wife Parvati, is the biggest of the
        Hoysala temples. It suffered some destruction by the hands of Muslim
        iconoclasts, so its worth visiting the Archaeological Museum, too,
        where some of the best of its statues are now kept. Look at the
        surprisingly fine carving of the bracket figures in the dancing hall,
        achieved by the craftsmen working with soft steatite soapstone which
        subsequently hardened to the texture of granite.
        Sravanabelagola
        Fifty km (30 miles) east of Hassan, the Vindhyagiri Hill
        rises 140 m (463 ft) above the plateau, with one of the most dramatic
        monuments in all India, the statue of Gommatesvara, on its top. To get
        to it, you must climb barefoot — the hill is holy ground — up 644 steps
        cut in the rock. Take it easy, and youll find the trip well
        worthwhile.
        Erected in a.d. 983, the statue crowns a sanctuary erected
        in the village of Sravanabelagola 1,400 years earlier by the Digambara
        sect of Jains, who regarded nakedness as part of the abnegation
        necessary to achieve true enlightenment (see page 22). It is believed
        that in the fourth century b.c. Chandragupta converted to Jainism at
        Sravanabelagola and fasted to death.
        Coming upon the statue at the top of the hill, even though
        you may have already seen it from a distance, is still an awe-inspiring
        experience. This Jain saint looms 171⁄2 m (57 ft) tall, carved from a
        granite monolith polished by centuries of libations with milk.
        Gommatesvara, the son of the prophet Adinath, is entirely
        naked except for a single vine-creeper winding itself around his legs
        and arms. The creeper symbolizes the impassiveness he is said to have
        observed in this upright position of pratimayoga, which he adopted for
        one whole year in response to his brothers lust for worldly power. An
        anthill and serpents at his feet symbolize the mental agony that his
        smile shows he had conquered.
        Cochin
        One of the most charming towns in India, where Christians,
        Jews, Muslims, and Hindus live in much greater harmony than they seem
        to manage elsewhere, Cochin makes a delightful gateway to the Malabar
        coast and the relaxed life of Kerala.
        On a peninsula separated from the mainland by islands, the
        old part of the town is known as Fort Cochin, where Vasco da Gama set
        up Portugals first Indian trading station. He was finally buried in
        the Church of St. Francis, the only Portuguese building still standing
        here. It has been subsequently converted by the Dutch to a Protestant
        church. The great navigators remains were returned to Portugal in 1538
        but his tombstone can still be seen on the south side of the church,
        set in the floor with a brass rail.
        At the waters edge on the northern tip of the peninsula,
        you can see the fishermens beautiful Chinese dipping nets, a system
        imported from the China seas: fishermen sling the nets over a pyramid
        of four poles which was then lowered into the water and hoisted out
        again by a system of rock weights and pulleys.
        The Jewish quarter, referred to as Jew Town, is in
        Mattancheri, south of the fort. In the narrow streets lined with
        merchants and tailors shops, the Star of David, menorahs, and Jewish
        names are actually more plentiful than Jewish people themselves. At
        Indian Independence there were a few thousand, but when the State of
        Israel was founded, a massive emigration left only dozens behind. The
        Synagogue, with its red tabernacle and Chinese tiling, was built in
        1568. You can see the copper plates giving land rights to a Jewish
        community on the coast back in a.d. 379.
        Take a backwaters trip through the lagoons and around the
        island villages. The local Government of India Tourist Information
        Office can help you rent a motorboat with a crew. Youll see fishermen
        working their dipping-nets or flinging hand-nets out with a whirling
        motion. On another island, women clean their shrimp at the waters
        edge; you can see the ecumenical peace of a church surrounded by palm
        trees, with a Hindu temple on one side and a mosque on the other.
        On the way back, stop off at Bolghatty Island in the
        Cochin lagoon to take tea in the elegant Dutch governors mansion, now
        a hotel. Wildlife enthusiasts should visit the nature reserve at
        Periyar, a drive of 194 km (120 miles) from Cochin, where elephants,
        bison, and birds can be seen from the unique vantage point of an
        artificial lake. Look for the elephants with their trunks raised like
        snorkels. Take two or three days — anything less is likely to be a
        waste of time.
        Kovalam
        Trivandrum is a big town with an international
        airport — mostly for migrant workers going to and from the Gulf — 15 km
        (9 miles) from the best beaches in India. Coconut palms, papaya,
        bananas, white sand, and surf (beware of the strong currents) make
        Kovalam the ultimate in happy-go-lucky dolce farniente. It is not a
        temple, not a shrine or museum, and theres no palace in sight.
        Enjoy.
        For people visiting Kashmir who want to go on a trip down
        to the other end, Indias southernmost point is Cape Comorin (two hours
        from Kovalam), where the Arabian Sea and Indian Ocean meet. There is
        nothing between you and Antarctica here. If your timing is right,
        youll see the seas bright colors when a full moon rises at the same
        time that the sun is setting.
        Madurai
        The ancient capital of the Pandya kings and one of the
        worlds oldest cities, Madurai is still an important repository of
        Tamil culture. Today it is a bustling university town, Tamil Nadus
        second largest after Chennai.
        The feverish religious activity around the 11 towering
        gopurams of the Great Temple, 17th-century in its present form, may
        give you a sense of the intensity of Hinduism. Its Minakshi Devi Shrine
        is dedicated to a pre-Hindu fish-eyed goddess taken into the pantheon
        with her husband, Shiva — his Sundaresvara Shrine is next door. The
        Madurai festivals in April and May celebrate their marriage as a grand
        reconciliation with the Indo-Aryan invaders.
        Entering the temple, walk to the Minakshi shrine. Since
        the interior of the shrines is off-limits to non-Hindus, you can get a
        view of the entire temple and the golden roofs by climbing the slippery
        stairs to the top of the south gopuram. At ground level, you can see
        the arcaded Golden Lotus Tank and the temples bathing-place. At the
        west end is a detailed model of the whole temple complex.
        The Kambattadi Mandapa, the ambulatory to the Sundaresvara
        shrine, is the busiest place in the temple. Worshippers in procession
        prostrate themselves, bringing offerings of coconut and fruit, and toss
        tiny balls of butter onto blackened statues of Shiva. The Hall of 1000
        Pillars (in fact only 997) is in the northeast corner, full of carved,
        bizarre lion-elephants, and the Pandava brothers, the heroes from the
        Mahabharata from whom the Madurai Pandyas claim descent.
        Outside the eastern wall of the temple is the Pudhu
        Mandapa, the Hall of Audience of Tirumalai Nayak, who built the temple.
        Its now a bustling bazaar of tailors, metal-workers, and other
        artisans.
        Stop off at Tirumalais Palace, about a kilometer
        southeast of the Great Temple. An elegant relic of former splendor, the
        palace boasts cusped arches and massive pillars modeled on the style of
        the great Rajput palaces of Rajasthan, but also some unmistakably tubby
        Dravidian gods on a frieze running around the courtyard.
        Trichy
        The official, Indianized name of this town is
        Tiruchchirappalli, City of the Sacred Rock, but the place is still
        identified by its colonial name, Trichy, a short form of the equally
        European name Trichinopoly. Today it is a base for pilgrims visiting
        Tamil Nadus great temple complexes, but every schoolchild, at least
        those from the old school, knew Trichy for the British defeats of the
        French here in the 1750s.
        The famed Rock Fort, the main focus of these battles,
        looms over the city from atop the great solid granite hill that gave
        the town its name. From early days, the impregnable Rock served as a
        sanctuary, graced by temples and cave-shrines. Steep steps bring you up
        to the Hall of a Thousand Pillars, as well as the shrine of Shiva and
        the Temple of Ganesh, from which there is a fine view over the Cauvery
        river, the towers of Srirangam, and the plains beyond. On the way up,
        look for the seventh-century, stout-pillared Pallava cave-shrines.
        The French have maintained their presence in Trichy, with
        the Jesuit College of St. Joseph and the adjoining red-and-buff
        Neo-Gothic church of Our Lady of Lourdes.
        Srirangam
        The numerous temple precincts of Sri Ranganathaswami, set
        on an island formed by two arms of the Cauvery river a few kilometers
        (3 miles) from Trichy, enclose a complete township of busy shops,
        booths, and dwellings. Beyond the towns outside wall are the temples
        farmland and the coconut plantations — and a large, square,
        lotus-covered bathing tank.
        The temple itself, dedicated to Vishnu and already a
        theological center by the 11th century, was founded a couple of
        thousand years ago — tradition takes it back to the Flood. Its present
        form comprises a total of seven concentric rectangular walled courts,
        culminating in an inner sanctum, and dates from the 15th and 16th
        centuries, after it had been liberated from Muslim invaders who had
        previously used it as a fortress. However, many of the sanctuaries are
        in fact much older than this.
        Enter on the south side and proceed through an ornamented
        gopuram gate-tower characteristic of south Indian architecture. Next,
        pass under a series of soaring gopurams, where you can witness religion
        as a full-time daily occupation. The streets are crammed with vendors
        selling shrine offerings of sweets, curds, and coconut, as well as
        garlands and holy images. Elsewhere, men are cleaning the stables for
        the temple elephants and the storehouses for the chariot-shrines that
        carry the deities through the streets during the festivals. Look out
        for the handsome pillared verandas of the dwellings.
        Non-Hindus are allowed as far as the fourth courtyard.
        Here, on the south side, look for the shrine of Venugopala Krishnan,
        with its charmingly sculpted figures in the famous Hoysala style of the
        temples at Belur and Halebid — notice the girl with the parakeet, which
        served in Indian literature as a bearer of messages between passionate
        lovers. Climb up to the terrace overlooking this shrine for an
        excellent view over the gopurams beyond the fourth courtyard to the
        golden vimana, the inner sanctum, and its arched roof with the god
        Vishnu portrayed on each side. Binoculars will be espe cially useful
        here.
        Most spectacular of all, though, set in the eastern
        courtyard of the fourth enclosure, is the Sesharyar worship hall with
        eight carved pillars of rearing horses bearing proud warriors. The
        energy of these minutely detailed sculptures from the 16th century,
        which honor the military prowess of the then-great Vijayanagar kingdom,
        is a zenith of south Indian art.
        Thanjavur
        Known to the British as Tanjore, this was the historic
        capital of the great Chola kingdom that spread Tamil culture to Burma,
        China, and Southeast Asia. Its artful sculpture and architecture can be
        seen to this day in the temples of Cambodia, Thailand, and Java.
        Commercial enterprise, military power, and religious
        fervor went together. More than the divinity of Shiva, the 11th-century
        Temple of Brihadisvara boasts architecture celebrating the victory of
        the great Chola kingdom over the Pallavas of Kanchipuram and the Cheras
        of Kerala. The accent is on the grandiose: the temples main vimana
        shrine consisting of a massive, 13-tiered pyramid some 66 m (222 ft)
        high.
        Shivas sacred bull, Nandi, is built on a similarly
        colossal scale, as is the phallic lingam, believed to be the biggest in
        India. Frescoes insist (in gory detail) that head-chopping was
        necessary to achieve victory. However, a much more graceful
        architectural touch can be seen in the panels of Shiva demonstrating
        the 108 basic poses performed in the sacred dance, bharatanatyam (see
        page 206).
        Chennai (Madras)
        Chennai, known until 1996 as Madras, is easy-going,
        pleasant, and remarkably uncrowded. The beach here is an amazing 12 km
        (7 miles) long, but Chennai is also the place for banking and mailing
        packages, and for picking up letters from home at the poste restante
        counter of the General Post Office.
        Chennai was set up in 1642 as the East India Companys
        first east coast trading station for shipping cotton and sugar. After
        the defeat of the French, it took a grateful back seat in Indian
        affairs, far away from the turmoils of northern India. These days,
        fiercely independent-minded Tamil politics make the place much more
        lively and alert at election time, but less heated than, say, the
        cities of Calcutta, Mumbai, or the Punjab.
        Fort St. George is the home of Tamil Nadus State
        government and the Indian Navy. There is a Military Museum and a
        British relic inside the Fort: St. Marys Church, in the style of
        Wren. The most picturesque street in the old town, across the railway
        tracks north of the Fort (an area once known as Black Town), is
        Armenian Street. Still the center of a small Armenian community,
        theres a busy street market and, in a cool, tree-shaded garden, an
        open air colonnaded church.
        The State Museum situated on Pantheon Road possesses
        excellent Buddhist bronzes and a detailed collection of Dravidian
        sculpture and architecture. From ninth-century Pallavas and Cholas to
        the rich style of the Vijayanagar kingdom (1336–1565), the exhibits
        make a fascinating demonstration in stone of the glory of south
        India.
        The two main arteries of the city are the busy shopping
        center along Mount Road and Beach Avenue, where youll find the
        University, Cricket Club, and San Thomé Cathedral. This simple, even
        austere Neo-Gothic Catholic church houses what is claimed to be the
        tomb of St. Thomas.
        Mahabalipuram
        The ancient port of the Pallava kings, a high point in any
        tour of south Indian monuments, is only 60 km (36 miles) south of
        Chennai, but stay there overnight, rather than making a day-trip from
        Chennai, if possible. It has accommodations on the beach, enabling you
        to see the cliff-carvings, ratha shrines, and Shore Temple by the sea
        in the early morning and at night.
        Originally the town was known as Mamallapuram, named after
        King Narasimha Mamalla (630–668), the great wrestler, in whose reign
        its many extraordinary temples and shrines were begun. Like the
        cave-temples of Ellora (see page 118), most monuments are carved,
        rather than built, from solid rock, in this case the last cliffs and
        boulders of the vast granite plateau that ends at the Coromandel
        coast.
        South of the village is a set of rathas, monolithic
        shrines hewn from one table of rock. Imitating elements of the regions
        wood-and-brick construction, some have the same arched and domed roofs
        as the inner vimana sanctuaries that you can see at Srirangam and at
        Thanjavur (see page 191). The largest shrine, the three-storied
        pyramidal Dharmaraja, at the southern end, has 50 figures, including
        gods, heroes, and, fascinatingly, modest subjects such as temple
        servants.
        Of the rock-carvings north of the rathas, the most
        celebrated is The Great Penance. The narrative sculpture panels cover
        an entire cliff-face, in which a natural split in the rock has been
        assimilated as the Ganga river as it descends through the hair of
        Shiva.
        The Shore Temple, which has withstood the wind and the
        waves for 12 centuries, is made up of two shrines. Shiva the Destroyer
        faces dangers at sea while Vishnu the Preserver watches over the town.
        The temple is clearly inspired by the styling of the monolithic
        Dharmaraja shrine, but it is more tapered because originally it had to
        double as a lighthouse, a bright beacon burning at its apex.
        Kanchipuram
        Kanchi (Golden City) has scores of temples — hundreds,
        if you include the shrines — dedicated to Vishnu and Shiva, and it is
        highly revered as one of the seven holy cities of ancient India. (The
        others are: Varanasi, Mathura, Hardwar, Dwarka, and Ayodhya. ) Its an
        easy trip to make from Mahabalipuram and you can stop off to shop in
        Kanchipuram for silk.
        Kailasanatha is one of the most important Shiva
        sanctuaries dating from the eighth century. The sandstone temple on a
        granite base houses some graceful sculptures of Shiva and Parvati as a
        celestial king and queen receiving homage from their subjects at their
        home on Mount Kailasa. Vaikuntaperumal is a Vishnu temple of the same
        period, famous for its elevated colonnade of lively sculpted reliefs
        showing the many exploits of the Pallava kings.
        Pondicherry
        The most visible Gallic touch in this bastion of the
        French colonial adventure in India is the scarlet képi worn by the
        white-uniformed traffic police waving you on as you drive into town.
        Many of the street names are still French — Rue Suffren, Rue Lauriston,
        Rue Dumas (Alexandre), and Rue Dupleix, today known as Rue Jawaharlal
        Nehru. However, only few people speak French here today. The French War
        Memorial on the coast road stands opposite a monument to Gandhi. After
        250 years of French rule in Pondicherry, the Indians were fortunate to
        have the decolonizer Pierre Mendès-France to deal with when it was
        retrieved in 1954.
        Apart from the pleasant white sandy beach, for nostalgics
        of the 1960s theres a pilgrimage to be made to the inspirational
        Mecca, Auroville. This spiritual retreat, 10 km (6 miles) north of
        Pondicherry, was started in 1968 by a French disciple of the teachings
        of the Indian sage, Sri Aurobindo. It lost some of its dynamism because
        of squabbles following the death of the founder, The Mother. But the
        organic forms of the buildings, with names like Hope, Fraternity, and
        Aspiration, still have an impact on the landscape. As Scandinavians and
        Bavarians cycle by, 1968 seems as remote as when the first
        cattle-herders came here from the other side of India some 3,500 years
        ago. The Dravidians were already here to meet them.
      
    
  
