
  
  
    
      
        Where to go
        Los Angeles has many different sides, which means youre in
          for the ideal vacation whether youre a tranquil beach-loving type, a
        city slicker, a born shopper, a celebrity chaser, or simply a
        pleasure-seeker who goes with the flow. While theres much to see
        wherever you go, the essence of a Los Angeles vacation is experiencing
        the southern California vibe, which means all you really have to do
        is explore and watch life unfurl.
        To savor the abundant flavors of L.A., you need a taste for
        adventure, a car (ideally), and a good map. Add savvy plans that keep
        you off the freeways during rush hour (generally weekdays from 7am to
        9:30am and 3:30pm to 7pm) and a dash of patience for the guaranteed
        gridlock traffic nightmare, and you will discover firsthand why
        Angelenos consider their home the center of the universe.
        HOLLYWOOD
         Hollywood, as it is perceived by the world, is no longer
        an actual place but, rather, a lifestyle unique to Los Angeles. While
        the city of Hollywood might once have had a glamorous reputation, for
        the past few decades the neighborhood, which stretches along the base
        of the northern hills emblazoned with the landmark Hollywood sign, has
        deteriorated like a faded movie star.
        Hollywood first became the center of the film industry in
        the 1920s, after Cecil B. DeMille set up the towns first movie studio
        near Highland and Sunset in a horse barn and filmed The Squaw Man, the
        first feature-length film, in 1913.
        For the next four decades, Hollywood was the film industry.
        As home to such entertainment royalty as Marilyn Monroe and Judy
        Garland and host of the first public Academy Awards at the historic
        Roosevelt Hotel in 1928, the city was genuinely the epicenter of
        entertainment and celebrity stardom.
        But today the areas golden history has been tarnished by
        abandonment and an ongoing parade of hustlers and lost souls wandering
        Hollywood Boulevard. In fact, the only stars here now are those inlaid
        into the mildly interesting Walk of Fame (or headed to the Church of
        Scientology); the rest of the commotion is caused by thousands of
        tourists shuffling from one attraction or cheesy T-shirt shop to the
        next.
        Still, while the celebrities in their Ferraris and
        chauffeured town-cars today steer clear of Hollywood, the city is
        indeed attempting a bonafide comeback. There are plans to sink hundreds
        of millions of dollars into the community to develop new attractions,
        shops, hotels, and restaurants. However, the curtain has not yet gone
        up for the citys encore performance.
        Tinseltown Triumphs
        The Hollywood sign over Beachwood Canyon is perhaps the
        most recognized landmark in Los Angeles and a favorite photo
        background. Originally constructed in 1923 to promote real estate sales
        in the neighborhood then called Hollywoodland, the 50-foot (15-m)
        letters were abbreviated in later years and replaced due to age in
        1978. Even though you cant get close to the sign (it has a security
        system surrounding it), its still a powerful and beloved symbol,
        reminding visitors of Los Angeless status as the center of the fast
        and glamorous world of movie making.
        Youll certainly get a kick out of the Hollywood Walk of
        Fame, even if it does keep your interest for only a few minutes. The
        walk refers to the legwork youll need to do to check out the 2,174
        (as of Feb 2001) bronze-and-terrazzo stars embedded in the pavement to
        honor celebrities in the music and entertainment industries. Stars
        stretch for a total of 31⁄2 miles (51⁄2 km) along Hollywood Boulevard
        from Sycamore Avenue to Gower Street, and along Vine Street from Yucca
        Street to Sunset Boulevard. Among the most sought-after stars are those
        of Marilyn Monroe (in front of McDonalds at 6774 Hollywood Boulevard),
        Charlie Chaplin (at 6751), and John Wayne (1541 Vine).
        What does it take to get ones name on a star? Its not as
        difficult as you might think. To attain such concrete notoriety, you
        must be nominated to the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce and then, if
        selected, come up with $15,000 to pay for your star.
        Manns Chinese Theater (6925 Hollywood Boulevard), which
        you cant miss due to its flashy Chinese temple-style architecture and
        the swarms of tourists out front, is one of the other worthwhile stops
        on Hollywood Boulevard. While current films are still shown here, the
        real attraction is the exterior courtyard, where autographs,
        hand-prints, and foot-prints in cement commemorate Hollywoods greatest
        celebrities.
        This Art-Deco picture palace, originally called The
        Graumann, was built by the great showman Sid Graumann in 1927. The
        courtyard tradition allegedly began at the grand opening, when actress
        Norma Talmadge accidentally stepped in wet cement. Among the famous
        signatures, you can also spot such unusual impressions as Jimmy
        Durantes nose and the hoof prints of Gene Autrys horse, Champion.
        While Manns is undoubtedly the hot spot for your
        Thats-me-in-Hollywood!  snapshots, the areas other landmark cinemas
        deserve a peek as well. Citizen Kane premiered in 1941 at the
        Moorish-style El Capitan Theater (6838 Hollywood Boulevard), which
        today is a primary venue for Disney films. The Egyptian (6712 Hollywood
        Boulevard) was Hollywoods first movie palace, built by Graumann in
        1922 after the discovery of King Tuts tomb. Its just undergone major
        renovation.
        Also noteworthy is the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel (7000
        Hollywood Boulevard), which established itself as the hotel of the film
        world when it opened in 1927. Just two years later, in 1929, the
        landmark building hosted the first public Oscar ceremony; it was also
        home to Marilyn Monroe for eight years. Its lobby features hand-painted
        ceilings and Spanish-revival décor of wrought-iron grillwork. On
        display on the mezzanine floor are historic Hollywood photographs and
        other memorabilia.
        For a fascinating look at the nuts and bolts of movie and
        TV production, visit the Hollywood Entertainment Museum (7021 Hollywood
        Blvd. ), where hi-tech interactive exhibits reveal the history of the
        entertainment arts.You can go on a guided tour of a mock movie studio
        back lot, put your own Foley sound effects into a short film, walk onto
        the sets of Cheers and Star Trek, have your picture taken with
        green-screen technology backgrounds, and see relics of early movie and
        TV technology. They also have rotating special exhibits that change
        every two months.
        Strictly Tourist
        Ripleys Believe It or Not! offers lightweight
        entertainment, starting with the Tyrannosaurus rex towering above the
        entrance (6780 Hollywood Boulevard at Highland Avenue). Robert Ripley
        was a cartoonist who traveled the far corners of the globe in the 1930s
        and 1940s, searching for the bizarre. His first Odditorium opened at
        the Chicago Worlds Fair in 1933, and the cartoon features based on his
        collection are still syndicated worldwide. Here youll see a shrunken
        head, a two-headed goat, and a statue of Marilyn Monroe made of
        shredded money, among other curiosities.
        Next door to Ripleys is the Guinness World of Records
        (6764 Hollywood Boulevard) offering two floors of displays about
        bizarre facts, feats, and achievements. Across the street, the
        unimpressive Hollywood Wax Museum, which features a collection of
        superstars from Jesus Christ to Sylvester Stallone, can also be visited
        on a joint ticket.
        Further along youll spot the flashy pink exterior of
        Fredericks of Hollywood (6608 Hollywood Boulevard), the shop renowned
        for glamorizing trashy undergarments. Behind the racks of feathery,
        satin bras and panties is their renowned Lingerie Museum, where you
        can peek at the intimate apparel of celebrities such as Marilyn and
        Madonna.
        The intersection of Hollywood and Vine was once touted as
        the heart of Tinseltown, but now it is rather nondescript, save for the
        landmark Capitol Records Building, which is shaped like a stack of
        records. The buildings distinctive design is credited to recording
        stars Nat King Cole and Johnny Mercer.
        Movies-in-the-Making
        Paramount Studios (5555 Melrose Avenue) is the only major
        motion picture studio still physically located in Hollywood. If peeking
        in through the wrought-iron gates isnt enough shoulder-rubbing with
        stardom for you, you can view the back lot on a walking tour. The tour
        takes you through the studios, film sets (when not in use), sound
        stages, and props department, and offers a glimpse of other
        behind-the-scenes activities. It reveals a peek at such tricks of the
        trade as the B-tank, where Moses parted the waters in The Ten
        Commandments, and New York Street, a façade of brownstones made of
        fiberglass that has been aged to look like real brick.
        If you drive west on Melrose from Paramount Studios, youll
        arrive at the trendy section of Melrose Avenue (between La Brea and
        Fairfax), where young tourists, local hipsters, and fashionable freaks
        populate the funky boutiques, restaurants, and cafés.
        THE WILSHIRE DISTRICT
        Wilshire Boulevard began as an Indian trail connecting the
        downtown area with the La Brea tar pits and later was developed as an
        upscale shopping and business district. Today it is one of the widest
        and longest boulevards in North America, showcasing the many faces of
        Los Angeles. Stretching 16 miles (25 km) from downtown to the sea, it
        passes through a variety of ethnic neighborhoods and financial
        brackets — from the very poor to the ridiculously wealthy. The stretch
        of Wilshire between La Brea and Fairfax avenues, known as the
        Mid-Wilshire district or Miracle Mile, is slowly being restored after
        years of neglect. Until restoration is complete, the main reason to hit
        the area is to check out cultural sites, including the museums.
        A Peek at Prehistoric Times
        A curious and fascinating attraction is the La Brea Tar
        Pits, one of the worlds richest sources of Pleistocene fossils that
        date back 40,000 years. In the large pit in front of the Page Museum
        (see below), life-size replicas of mastodons are shown trapped in the
        tar. From viewing stations alongside other pits, you can watch on-going
        excavations and view the amalgamated bones of the unfortunate
        prehistoric beasts that perished here.
        The adjacent George C. Page Museum of La Brea Discoveries
        (5801 Wilshire Boulevard) provides fascinating insight into Ice Age
        life in southern California. The 15-minute La Brea Story is an
        introductory film illustrating how the animals became trapped in the
        asphalt as they edged down to a pool of water to drink. Skeletons of
        such extinct creatures as the saber-toothed cat, imperial mammoth, and
        giant ground sloth have been reconstructed from the fossils. The wall
        display of 400 wolf skulls brings a startling realization of just how
        many animals have been unearthed here.
        Of the 420 animal species found in the area, only one human
        fossil has been unearthed: the 9,000-year-old La Brea Woman. Killed by
        a blow to the head, she was perhaps L.A.s first murder victim. The
        museum also features a fishbowl laboratory where visitors can see
        fossils being cleaned and catalogued. The peaceful atrium nurtures
        primitive plants, several of which have evolved over a period of 100
        million years.
        Museum Row
        The Los Angeles County Museum of Art (5905 Wilshire
        Boulevard), the citys largest museum, is located next door. Among the
        treasures housed in this six-building complex are a collection of
        pre-Columbian artifacts that were found in Mexico and Peru, European
        modern and contemporary art, American colonial art and furniture,
        Japanese masterpieces, and what is generally regarded as the finest
        Indian and Southeast Asian art collection in the West. There are also
        ever-changing special exhibits.
        The small but significant Craft and Folk Art Museum, at
        5814 Wilshire Boulevard, rotates exhibitions from around the world.
        Nearby, at 6060 Wilshire, at Fairfax, the Petersen Automotive Museum
        celebrates the towns love affair with cars, showcasing over 160
        distinctive motor vehicles, with special exhibits on automotive
        themes.
        Local Color
        A few blocks north on Fairfax is the lively Farmers Market
        (6333 West Third Street). In the 1930s a small group of Depression-era
        farmers gathered here, in what was then a field at the edge of town, to
        sell produce directly to the people. Its popularity as a meeting place
        has kept it busy all these years, with crowds perusing the fruit and
        vegetable stands for the best bargains, a maze of shops selling
        foodstuffs and gifts, and inexpensive food stalls serving up a variety
        of tasty cuisines.
        THE WESTSIDE
        Several communities make up the area known as the
        Westside.  They are linked not only by geographical location but also
        by image: here are the upmarket and fashionable neighborhoods, with
        affluent residential sections, trendy restaurants, and L.A.s fabulous
        shopping areas.
        West Hollywood
        While Hollywood is more remembered than experienced
        nowadays, its neighbor West Hollywood — a separate, incorporated
        city — defines the new cutting edge. Within its tiny 2 square miles (5
        sq km) you will find over 100 restaurants, many of L.A.s best known
        nightclubs, unique interior design shops and art galleries, swank
        hotels, and the high-powered offices of the entertainment and music
        industries.
        Melrose Avenue and Beverly and Robertson Boulevards are
        known as the Avenues of Design.  The streets here are lined with
        design showrooms, fashion boutiques, and a growing number of art
        galleries, including the notable Pacific Design Center (8687 Melrose
        Avenue), a gigantic, blue-glass building designed by Cesar Pelli in
        1975. Some 200 showrooms are housed here and in the adjoining Green
        Center, which displays an impressive range of traditional and
        contemporary home and office furniture created by famous designers. The
        showrooms are for trade only, meaning the only way you can make
        purchases is to buy through an interior designer. Visitors are welcome
        to browse weekdays from 9am to 5pm.
        Spanning the length of West Hollywood is Santa Monica
        Boulevard — the center of L.A.s gay and lesbian nightlife. Every year
        in June, the city holds the Christopher Street West Gay and Lesbian
        Pride Celebration, a lively two-day festival and parade which has grown
        into the third largest in California. The street also goes wild each
        Halloween as the lively residents parade around in crazy costumes.
        Sunset Strip
        West Hollywoods most famous thoroughfare is the Sunset
        Strip, stretching from the 8200 block of Sunset Boulevard west to
        Doheny Drive. Since the 1920s it has been the stomping grounds for
        L.A.s partying celebrities. With many renovations dating from the 90s
        economic boom, its hotels and clubs remain spectacularly impervious to
        the curent downturn. Many top comedians started here in clubs such as
        The Comedy Store, while rocknroll legends were born in the dance
        halls of The Roxy and Whisky-A-Go-Go. On weekends the strips traffic
        still slows as the young and the hip traipse from one happening night
        spot to the next. But even if you never leave your car, the huge
        billboards beaming with the faces of celebrities promoting their latest
        movie or recording (or simply themselves) announce this is the towns
        wild play palace. Among the landmarks that youll pass is The Argyle
        (8358 Sunset Boulevard), a stately Art-Deco masterpiece built in 1931.
        Formerly called the Sunset Tower, it was the first all-electric
        apartment building in California. Clark Gable, Errol Flynn, and Jean
        Harlow were three of the many stars who once lived here. Further west
        is the Mondrian hotel (8440 Sunset Boulevard), which Ian Schrager made
        trendy again with sleek modern décor by Phillippe Starck and a parade
        of celebrities who frequent the beautiful outdo or SkyBar cocktail
        lounge.
        Sunset Plaza (8600-8700 Sunset Boulevard at Sunset Plaza
        Drive) has been an elite shopping area since 1934. This cluster of
        Georgian-style buildings designed by Charles Selkirk was once home to
        the legendary Mocambo and Trocadero nightclubs. Today the plaza is
        lined with upmarket, one-of-a-kind specialty shops, pleasant
        European-style sidewalk cafés, and swarms of the wealthy and the
        wannabes.
        Beverly Hills
        Hip gives way to chic at Doheny Drive, where the Strip ends
        and Sunset Boulevard enters Beverly Hills. Here, luxurious homes and
        landscaped lawns sit on some of the most expensive real estate in the
        world. Its worth sidetracking into the hills just to marvel at how
        much money some people actually have. On this stretch of Sunset youre
        bound to find hawkers on street corners selling Maps to the Stars to
        lead you to the homes of the rich and famous.
        This millionaire mecca is a testament to the regions
        unparalleled success. At the turn of the century the land was
        practically worthless, covered with failed oil wells and fields of lima
        beans. But in 1912, when a group of developers built the Beverly Hills
        Hotel (9641 Sunset Boulevard), everything changed. The Spanish
        Colonial-style building was soon dubbed the Pink Palace and fast became
        popular with the movie set. Its Polo Lounge is now a notorious watering
        hole for Hollywoods power-brokers. Marilyn Monroe and John Kennedy
        were said to be among the celebrities who met secretly in the private
        bungalows. The hotel is now owned — appropriately — by one of the
        richest men in the world, the Sultan of Brunei, who restored it to its
        blatant grandeur for a whopping $100 million.
        In 1920, silent screen stars Mary Pickford and Douglas
        Fairbanks built their opulent estate, Pickfair, just up the hill (at
        1143 Summit Drive). Charlie Chaplin, Gloria Swanson, Rudolph Valentino,
        and others also flocked in to establish one of the most concentrated
        celebrity enclaves in the world. (The homes in the hills are regarded
        as somewhat more prestigious than those in the flats.  )
        Its not surprising that the highest number of business
        licenses in Beverly Hills are issued to gardeners. Those who are not
        busy manicuring the residential lawns are often to be found working in
        the lovely Beverly Garden Park, which borders Santa Monica Boulevard
        for 2 miles (3 km) from Doheny to Wilshire.
        Another stretch of beautiful gardens can be seen at
        Greystone Mansion (905 Loma Vista Dr.), the spectacular neo-Gothic
        estate of oilman Edward Doheny. The grounds are open daily May-Oct.
        10am to 6pm; Nov. -Apr. 10-5; but the mansion, now city property and a
        frequent film set (Witches of Eastwick), is closed to visitors.
        The most renowned section of Beverly Hills, however, is
        open to the public. Take a walk through the elite shopping strip known
        as Rodeo Drive (pronounced Ro-DAY-oh), where top designers showcase
        their fashions to a glamorous, sophisticated, and of course rich
        clientele. While the shopping is still world-class, real estate prices
        and corporate chains have forced out most of the independent retailers
        who gave the place character in the past, making it almost impossible
        to find that one-of-a-kind treasure.
        At least one historically fashionable establishment still
        resides here in all its glory. The Regent Beverly Wilshire (9500
        Wilshire Boulevard) has been a landmark since 1928. The luxury hotel is
        still a favorite of celebrities and visiting royalty, some of whom have
        been known to rent entire floors for their stay. Its more publicly
        renowned, however, as the setting where Julia Roberts and Richard
        Geres characters found love in the film Pretty Woman.
        The quaint Beverly Hills Trolley offers a 40-minute guided
        tour of landmarks and residential areas for $5 ($1 under 12). It runs
        on the hour summer afternoons and during the Christmas season; other
        times, Saturdays only. Catch it at the corner of Rodeo Drive and Dayton
        Way. For more information, call 310-285-2438.
        Century City
        Though there is not much to see at Century City, its worth
        noting that this complex of buildings was built on 180 acres (73
        hectares) of what was once Twentieth Century Foxs enormous back-lot
        studio. The motion picture studio, now relegated to a huge compound on
        Pico Boulevard, is still active. But the surrounding area is a sleek
        Westside business center of high-rise office towers, high-flying
        corporations, and theaters and shopping to support the affluent
        residents on its periphery.
        Opened in 1993, the Museum of Tolerance (9786 West Pico
        Boulevard) is a chilling and provocative experience, with impressive
        high-tech, exhibits exploring racism and prejudice in America and
        elsewhere. Of particular note are the interactive video stations
        exploring the 1992 L.A. riots. A major part of the museum is devoted to
        Hashoah, the Holocaust. This tour alone lasts a full hour, and at least
        equal time is necessary to appreciate the other collections and the
        multi-media learning center on the second floor.
        Westwood, Bel-Air, and Brentwood
        The sprawling campus of the University of California at Los
        Angeles (UCLA) dominates the area known as Westwood. The grounds, with
        lovely Romanesque-style Royce Hall dating from 1929, Powell Library,
        Franklin Murphy Sculpture Garden (with works by Matisse, Rodin, and
        Miró), and the Mathias Botanical Gardens, offer a welcome respite from
        the motor metropolis. Maps and information are available from the
        kiosks at the main entrances and at the visitors center; ask for the
        free 90-minute campus tours during the week (Tel. 310/825-4321).
        To the south of the campus, Westwood Village is an area
        that was once the hub of social activity but suffered a decline due to
        the revitalization of Santa Monicas Third Street Promenade. Today its
        still a popular place to catch the latest film at any of the enormous
        theaters or cruise the shops and restaurants. At the villages southern
        tip, the UCLA/Armand Hammer Museum of Art and Cultural Center (10899
        Wilshire Boulevard) presents a small, exquisite collection of artworks
        gathered over the past fifty years by Armand Hammer himself. Its
        galleries display masterpieces by painters from Rembrandt to Van Gogh,
        with an extensive collection of lithographs by Honoré Daumier. Check
        out what else is on display while you are here, as the museum regularly
        hosts special exhibitions.
        To the north of UCLA, across Sunset Boulevard, is the
        exclusive neighborhood of Bel Air. As the tight-knit community is an
        enclave of old-money estates for such royalty as the Reagans, you wont
        get to glimpse more than big front gates and lawns. You can, however,
        get a peek into the good life at Hotel Bel Airs restaurant, lounge,
        and gardens (701 Stone Canyon Road), where celebs often linger.
        The L.A. art worlds most hyped new attraction is the Getty
        Center, the long-awaited visual-arts complex designed by Richard Meier
        and perched on a bluff high above the 405 freeway in Brentwood, just
        west of UCLA. The cost: a whopping one billion dollars. Several
        attractions in one, the Center comprises the J. Paul Getty Museum plus
        institutes for arts education, conservation, and research. The Museum
        boasts a major collection of Greek and Roman antiquities, European
        paintings (by Rembrandt, Monet, Renoir, and Van Gogh, among others),
        drawings (including a few by Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and
        Raphael), illuminated medieval manuscripts, photographs, sculpture, and
        French decorative arts displayed within five two-story pavilions. After
        2002, the Greek and Roman antiquities will return to their renovated
        home, the Getty Villa at Malibu, for permanent exhibition (see page
        49).
        The impressive architecture, sculpture gardens (one of
        which was designed by southern California artist Robert Irwin), and
        panoramic views of city, mountains, and ocean are awesome attractions
        in themselves.
        COASTAL LOS ANGELES
        From Malibu in the north to Long Beach in the south, the
        shoreline communities of Los Angeles County stretch for 72 miles (115
        km) along the striking edge of the ocean.
        Driving north on Pacific Coast Highway 1 (often marked
        PCH) from Santa Monica to Malibu is an excellent introduction to
        southern Californias seductive beach life. Palos Verdes Drive is
        another eye-catching stretch, hugging the cliffs along the southern tip
        of Santa Monica Bay. But to really appreciate the allure of the
        California lifestyle, you must ditch the car and hit the sand and
        experience the natural beauty of the beaches first hand.
        Santa Monica to Marina del Rey
        Ever since it was founded in the 1870s, Santa Monica has
        been thought of as the perfect seaside town. Nonetheless, in the 1930s
        poker games, bingo parlors, and a casino barge anchored offshore
        brought such notoriety to the area that author Raymond Chandler used
        Santa Monica as the model for the freewheeling Bay City of his
        detective novels. Today, with trendy boutiques, blue-chip art
        galleries, a buzzing nightlife scene, and some of the finest
        restaurants in the county, Santa Monica looks as if it is set to
        continue forever as L.A.s most popular playground.
        Santa Monica Pier, site of the famous carousel as well as
        the La Monica Ballroom, was built in 1908. Much of this historic
        structure was demolished by storms in 1983, prompting restoration to
        its original look. While the arcades and amusement park rides lining
        the pier lure tourists with their wonderfully tacky old-world ambiance,
        locals also come here to rent fishing tackle at the end of the pier or
        check out the festive free concerts held each summer.
        Beneath the pier and as far as the eye can see to the north
        and south youll find beachgoers at play on the widest band of sand on
        the Pacific Coast. The busy path running alongside the beach to Venice
        is a coveted track for bicyclists and rollerbladers, who either bring
        their own gear or rent from the numerous establishments nearby.
        Above the sand is Palisades Park, a pretty, palm-lined
        stretch that runs for a mile (11⁄2 km) along Ocean Avenue. The broad
        walkway offers spectacular views of the ocean, especially at
        sunset.
        Just inland youll find Santa Monicas Main Street, which
        is awash with unusual shops and excellent restaurants. Looming over its
        southern end at the intersection with Rose Avenue is a giant sculpture
        by Jonathan Borofsky known as Ballerina Clown. As its name implies,
        this is a giant clowns head on a tutu-clad body.
        The Edgemar complex, located in the 2400 block, exhibits
        the work of L.A.s favorite postmodern architect, Frank Gehry (a Santa
        Monica resident). Inside is a restaurant, retail shops, and the Santa
        Monica Museum of Art, which showcases the avant-garde and performance
        art of contemporary artists from Southern California.
        Santa Monica artists also mount shows in the second-floor
        galleries of the California Heritage Museum (2612 Main Street). This
        former American Colonial home was moved to Main Street, and its lower
        floor has been completely restored to reflect a turn-of-the-century
        lifestyle. Upstairs rooms are reserved for exhibitions.
        Dozens of prominent art galleries have set up shop in Santa
        Monica, with the result that it is now a major center of the
        contemporary art scene. Many shops are situated along a stretch of
        Colorado Avenue between 9th and 10th streets.
        Aside from the beach, the Third Street Promenade has become
        the most popular destination in Santa Monica. This three-block
        pedestrian mall, with its street performers, dinosaur topiaries, shops,
        movie houses, and restaurants, is perennially teeming with tourists and
        locals, especially on weekend evenings, when the pubs, pool halls,
        cafés, and shops guarantee an action-packed night out.
        Curiously enough, Santa Monica has a large contingent of
        British residents, evident in the authentic pubs such as Ye Olde Kings
        Head (complete with dart boards), just off the Promenade, and the tea
        room at the Tudor House British Centre. Roughly 10 to 15 percent of the
        citys residents are of British descent, making up, perhaps, the
        largest British community outside the UK.
        Further inland is the chic shopping street of Montana
        Avenue, where celebrities living in the coastal enclaves come to shop
        (see page 81). Santa Monica Airports Museum of Flying displays vintage
        planes, and Bergamot Station (2525 Michigan Avenue), a converted
        trolley car station, hosts a number of art galleries including the
        Santa Monica Museum of Art (tel. 310-586-6488)
        Just south of Rose Avenue, Main Street abruptly enters the
        bohemian community of Venice Beach. While cottages are scattered along
        small, quaint residential side streets, the Ocean Front Walk is an
        explosion of exuberance, with an ongoing parade of outrageous
        characters exhibiting their only-in-southern-California individualism.
        Its worth a stroll just to check out the freaks and muscle-men pumping
        iron at the open-air beachside gym known as Muscle Beach, but the
        sidewalk artists, snack shacks, T-shirt vendors, and Tarot readers also
        contribute to the local flavor. The show is at its best on weekend
        afternoons, with everything from beach boys on unicycles to rock
        musicians on roller blades. Make time for this California happening if
        you possibly can.
        Everything mellows out at Mothers Beach to the south, a
        lagoon specifically preferred by families, and becomes ultra-civilized
        at the vast man-made harbor of Marina del Rey, where harbor cruises and
        fishing trips can be arranged. Fishermans Village on Fiji Way attracts
        tourists with its collection of gift shops and cafés. But if you just
        want to watch the boats, you should be able to find a shady spot along
        Mindanao Way at Burton Chase Park.
        To the north, PCH meets the western terminus of Sunset
        Boulevard. Follow this winding road into the hills and you will enter
        the well-to-do residential enclave of Pacific Palisades. A few miles
        farther is the turn-off for Will Rogers State Historic Park(1501 Will
        Rogers State Park Rd, Pacific Palisades), a 186-acre (75-hectare) ranch
        that belonged to the late cowboy humorist. Tours of the ranch house
        reveal some of Rogers eccentricities, namely a porch swing in the
        living room and a raised ceiling that allowed him to practice rope
        tricks indoors. Rogers was an enthusiastic horseman and an experienced
        polo player. Weekend games are still held on the polo field in the
        front yard. A good system of hiking trails extends into the park (tel:
        310-454-8212).
        A deeply centering experience comes free with a stroll
        through the Self-Realization Fellowship Lake Shrine,(17190 Sunset Bvd.
        , a few blocks before PCH). Adjoining the temple (founded by Swami P.
        Yogananda) is a beautiful gardenwith gazebos, lakes, and waterfalls
        (tel. 310-454-4414).
        Malibu
        Malibu is best known for its exclusive beachfront colonies,
        home to movie stars since the 1930s. Youll get to see only the
        backsides of these expensive bungalows as you travel the ribbon of
        highway that lies between the mountains and the sea. Sadly, many homes
        were destroyed by the brush fires and mudslides of 1993–1994, but there
        are several beach access points where you can still admire the rolling
        surf and idyllic beach life that have done so much to make Malibu
        famous.
        One such place is Malibu Pier, a popular spot for fishing.
        Constructed in 1905, rebuilt several times since, and getting ready for
        another million-dollar facelift, this was the main connection with the
        south until the state highway was built in 1929.
        Another is Malibu Lagoon State Park, one of the few
        remaining wetlands in California. Several boardwalks extend into the
        marsh, where you can see shorebirds such as the great blue heron and
        American avocet. A popular surfing beach adjoins the lagoon.
        One of the coastlines most visited attractions in the past
        was the J. Paul Getty Museum (17985 Pacific Coast Highway), now called
        the Getty Villa at Malibu. It first opened in 1954 to house the
        billionaires personal collection. The museums 1974 addition was a
        re-creation of Villa dei Papiri, a Roman villa destroyed by the
        terrible eruption of Mount Vesuvi us in a.d. 79. The museum was closed
        in mid-1997 for more renovation and to move part of the collection to
        the new Museum at the Getty Center in Brentwood (see page 39).
        Scheduled to reopen in 2002 or 2003, the Malibu site will house only
        the Getty holdings in Greek and Roman antiquities, some of which date
        as far back as 3000 b.c.
        DOWNTOWN
        For the majority of Los Angeles residents, Downtown is
        not a hub but a distant skyline visited a few times a year when
        attending the opera or going to the Museum of Contemporary Art. But
        thats not to say the region east of Hollywood, defined by three
        freeways and the river, doesnt have its merits. A core of beautiful
        historic buildings, good restaurants, and colorful ethnic enclaves
        makes for excellent daytime exploration. Several stellar performing
        arts venues and the centers of politics and finance also draw
        attention. But if its Los Angeless infamous glitter and glitz youve
        come to experience, you wont find them here. What you will find is a
        lively workaday business world, hotels overflowing with conventioneers,
        and an atmosphere that is a refreshing diversion from the celluloid
        images to the west. Come nighttime, however, the place can be all but a
        ghost town.
        By day, downtown is best explored on foot and on the DASH
        buses, which run through the area during the day for just 25 cents a
        ride. By nightfall, when thousands of commuters flee to the suburbs and
        the streets are deserted — save for a few homeless begging for
        change — its best to drive or take a cab. As in any large city, simple
        precautions are recommended.
        One of the best ways to appreciate the area is to take one
        of the excellent walking tours given on Saturdays by the Los Angeles
        Conservancy. The Pershing Square Landmark Tour is highly recommended:
        in addition to providing a wealth of historical information, it
        includes access to the stunning interiors of such edifices as the
        Guarantee Trust and Edison buildings, with their marble pillars and
        flooring, Hugo Ballin murals, and Art-Deco styling. A variety of
        special-interest tours are also offered. For information, call (213)
        623-2489 on weekdays between 9am and 5pm.
        Bustling Commerce
        The Los Angeles Visitor and Convention Bureau, on Figueroa
        Street between 7th Street and Wilshire Boulevard, offers extensive
        information on attractions throughout the city. Two blocks north, at
        5th and Figueroa, the five cylindrical towers of glass at the Westin
        Bonaventure Hotel form the citys most futuristic-looking skyscraper.
        You can survey the area from the revolving restaurant and bar on the
        35th floor.
        To the east at 630 West 5th Street, between Grand Avenue
        and Flower Street, is the beautiful pyramid-topped Central Library. A
        devastating fire caused by arson destroyed the building in 1986, but
        the library reopened in 1993 after a $221 million reconstruction.
        Across from the library is the 73-story Library Tower, (an
        office building), the tallest building on the West Coast, designed by
        I. M. Pei. Running alongside the building, the majestic Bunker Hill
        Steps lead to California Plaza, forming a symbolic link between the old
        downtown and the new.
        The Biltmore Hotel (506 South Grand Ave. ), which opened in
        1923, is the grande dame of all the downtown hotels. The prestigious
        Academy Awards were originally launched here in a private ceremony in
        the Crystal Room in 1927. It is said that the award acquired its name
        after Bette Davis glanced at a sketch of the statuette penciled on a
        napkin and remarked, It looks like my Uncle Oscar.  The majestic
        Rendezvous Court near Olive Street was originally the hotel lobby; from
        here, you can climb the Spanish baroque staircase leading up to the
        galleria, with its coffered ceiling. On the other side of Olive Street,
        the landscaped Pershing Square is the oldest public park in Los
        Angeles. Its history as a public commons dates back to 1781.
        Art Deco is at its best in the nearby Oviatt Building (617
        South Olive Street). In 1927, merchant James Oviatt was entranced with
        the new architectural style that he saw in Paris. He subsequently
        commissioned René Lalique to design all the decorative glass for his
        building, which was home to his haberdashery and penthouse suite.
        From its terminal situated on 3rd and Hill Streets, the
        Angels Flight inclined railway carried downtowners up and down Bunker
        Hill beginning in 1901. Dismantled in 1969 due to redevelopment,
        Angels Flight has been reconstructed and plans to activate the
        original cable cars next year. Its new terminus will be the Watercourt,
        a 11⁄2 acre (1⁄2 hectare) urban garden along Olive Street that features
        outdoor stages for the performing arts and high-tech synchronized water
        fountains. Both the Watercourt and the funicular railway make up part
        of the $1.2 billion California Plaza urban renewal project.
        Civic Center and Broadway
        The streets around the Civic Center (the area bordered by
        First and Temple streets, and North Main Street and North Grand Avenue)
        are the heart of Los Angeles culture and politics. City Hall (200 N.
        Spring Street), built in 1928, was the tallest building in the city
        until height restrictions were lifted in 1957. Best known as the Daily
        Planet building of the Superman TV series, its observation deck is open
        weekdays from 10 am-4pm.
        The historic theater district on Broadway has evolved into
        a bustling Hispanic shopping street good for bridal gowns and
        electronic equipment. However, one monument to its past is the Million
        Dollar Theater (307 South Broadway) with its whimsical terra-cotta
        ornamentation. This famous 1917 vaudeville and movie theater, newly
        renovated, now features live Hispanic acts (variadades), after
        briefly serving as a church.
        Built in 1893, the Bradbury Building (at 304 South
        Broadway) is Los Angeless oldest commercial building. It is also one
        of the grandest, with its Victorian wrought-iron balconies, marble
        staircases, and open-cage elevators surrounding a skylit atrium court.
        Tours are given on Saturdays by the Los Angeles Conservancy
        (213-623-2489).
        Since 1917, Grand Central Market (at 317 South Broadway)
        has provided the city with a daily cornucopia of enticing fresh
        produce, fish, poultry, meat, and exotic foodstuffs. Today, dozens of
        stalls display a wonderful ethnic diversity: you can sample everything
        from fresh tortillas to Chinese herbs. Its a great place for browsing
        and a quick snack or inexpensive lunch.
        Historic Los Angeles
        The citys first settlement in 1781 was at El Pueblo de
        Los Angeles, now a state historic park at North Main Street and Paseo
        de la Plaza. The heart of the district is Olvera Street, a festive
        marketplace brimming with piñatas (hanging decorations filled with toys
        and candy), masks, and Mexican handicrafts, and surrounded by numerous
        Mexican restaurants and food stalls. The visitors center (685 South
        Figueroa, 213-689-8822) provides information on the historical sites of
        the district, including the Avila Adobe (the first house in Los
        Angeles), the Old Plaza Church, and the shady plaza with its
        wrought-iron gazebo. Mariachi singers and folk dance groups can usually
        be seen here on weekends.
        In a region that long ago eschewed train travel, railway
        romance still permeates Union Station (800 N. Alameda St.). This
        handsome 1939 Spanish Mission-style building has a massive waiting room
        with arched corridors and a 52-ft- (16-m-) ceiling. The station once
        served nearly a million passengers a day; now, it is L.A.s new Metro
        Rail system hub.
        L.A.s Asian Communities
        Although Asian Americans live throughout Los Angeles
        County, there are several special cultural and shopping enclaves that
        deserve visitors special attention.
        Chinatown is bounded by the 1000 block of North Broadway
        and bordered by Ord, Alameda, Bernard, and Yale streets. Here
        restaurants, souvenir shops, dim sum parlors, and Chinese grocers fan
        out from the central pedestrian mall (Gin Ling Way) with its ceremonial
        gates and exotic Oriental dragons.
        The Japanese counterpart, Little Tokyo, is situated east
        of downtown on the streets around 1st and Central. A medieval fire
        tower marks the entrance to the Japanese Village Plaza shopping mall
        (335 East 2nd Street). Other community highlights are a cultural
        center, a theater, and the Japanese American National Museum (369 East
        First Street).
        A third Asian neighborhood, Koreatown, lies west of
        downtown along Olympic Boulevard between Vermont and Western avenues.
        All the signs here are in Korean, and there are a multitude of
        restaurants and a large shopping mall of Korean stores at Koreatown
        Plaza (Western and San Marino). This area was badly damaged during the
        riots of 1992.
        Downtown Museums
        The Museum of Contemporary Art, known as MOCA (250 S.
        Grand Ave. ), is one of Los Angeless most exciting museums, presenting
        major contemporary shows and a rotating permanent collection by such
        artists as Piet Mondrian, Mark Rothko, and Franz Kline. Theres a
        superb gift shop on the premises. The celebrated Japanese architect
        Arata Isozaki designed the attractive red sandstone building with
        pyramid skylights. The museums annex, the Geffen Contemporary, is a
        few blocks away in Little Tokyo (at 152 North Central Ave. ) and
        features zany installations, multi-media, and the last 60 years of the
        museums permanent collection.
        Exposition Park, south of the central downtown area near
        the campus of the University of Southern California, is the site of
        several museums and attractions, including the Los Angeles Memorial
        Coliseum and Sports Arena.
        The Natural History Museum (900 Exposition Boulevard) is
        popular for its dinosaur skeletons and other prehistoric fossils. Among
        the highlights of some three dozen galleries are dioramas of animals in
        their natural habitats, an impressive mounted megamouth shark, a
        collection of pre-Columbian artifacts, major exhibits on American
        history, and the Hall of Birds,with an animated rainforest. The
        excellent Discovery Center is a hands-on museum for children (see page
        97). The California ScienceCenter andIMAX Theater (700 State Drive)
        presents technological exhibits from robotics and fiber optics to a
        miniature winery. At the Aerospace Complex there are rockets,
        satellites and an impressive IMAX Theater (see page 43). Rotating
        exhibitions on the African- American experience in the United States
        are offered at the California African-American Museum (600 State
        Drive), which has become a showcase for black history and culture.
        THE MOUNTAINS AND VALLEYS
        When Angelenos refer to The Valley, they are talking
        about the San Fernando Valley, a chain of communities north across the
        mountains from western and downtown Los Angeles. Although its also
        home to such major film and television studios — in Burbank and
        Glendale — as Universal, Warner Brothers, and NBC, the Valley is
        forever battling its reputation as a boring and actionless suburbia.
        Nearby San Gabriel and Santa Clarita Valleys, also separated from the
        Los Angeles basin by ranges of mountains, suffer from the same
        monotonous landscape of suburban sprawl.
        One reason to head north is to do as the Harley Davidson
        motorcycle enthusiasts do: cruise Mulholland Drive, a scenic road that
        twists and turns through the mountains from Highway 101 to Ventura
        County. It is especially beautiful at night, when the lights of the
        city shimmer below.
        Griffith Park
        An equally enticing reason to head to the hills is to
        visit the countrys largest urban park, Griffith Park, which separates
        Burbank and Glendale from Hollywood and covers over 4,000 acres (1,620
        hectares). There are several entrances to the park; you can pick up a
        free map at the visitors center near the eastern entrance, off the
        Golden State Freeway (Highway 5).
        Perhaps the best view of Los Angeles can be seen on clear
        days and nights from the Griffith Observatory on Mount Hollywood, a
        location also featured in the James Dean classic Rebel Without a Cause.
        Exhibits include the Hall of Science, with a Foucault Pendulum and a
        Cosmic Ray Cloud Chamber. Evening visitors can look at the heavens
        through a 12-inch (30-cm) telescope. The Planetarium Theater presents
        dramatic astronomical shows several times daily. Evening shows are
        followed by Laserium light concerts.
        The Los Angeles Zoo, on the northeastern side of the park,
        harbors more than 400 different species of animals, birds and reptiles,
        grouped according to their continental region. The zoo is known for its
        extensive breeding program for endangered species.
        Environmentally-friendly Californians are justifiably proud of the
        zoo.
        Adjacent is the (Gene) Autry Museum of Western
        Heritagefounded by the king of the balladeer cowboys, who rode the
        range in films from the 1930s to the 1950s. His tribute to the wild
        West features an impressive collection of historical artifacts,
        furniture and art as well as examples of how the West was romanticized
        in the arts, literature, film, and advertising.
        San Fernando Valley
        In addition to seeing one of Californias original
        missions, youll want to visit this valley to see the movie
        studios.
        Universal Studios Hollywood (off the Hollywood/101 Freeway
        at either the Universal Center Drive or the Lankershim Boulevard exits)
        is the areas biggest draw; it combines a real working studio and
        behind-the-scenes tours with amusement park attractions. Visitors can
        board a tram that travels through famous film sets. Along the way you
        are threatened by King Kong and attacked by the killer shark from Jaws;
        if thats not enough, you then survive a collapsing bridge, a flash
        flood, and a bone-shaking simulated 8.3 earthquake. You are then free
        to explore the magic of Hollywood in attractions such as Jurassic Park:
        The Ride, a water ride with a big bite; Backdraft, a firestorm of
        special effects; and the ever-popular Back to the Future
        motion-simulator ride that sends you rocketing through avalanches,
        molten volcanoes, and the jaws of a dinosaur. Although the linesfor
        major attractions are often long, musical street shows are always at
        hand to entertain you.
        Universal Citys CityWalk (Universal Center Drive,
        Universal City) gets its fair share of tourists. Few residents venture
        to this fantasy mall, where whimsical shops and fun, informal
        restaurants vie for tourist dollars, though some undesirable characters
        often loiter around the courtyard.
        Nothing is staged just for guests at the nearby Warner
        Brothers Studios (4000 Warner Boulevard). Here the two-hour VIP tour
        changes every weekday, depending on shooting schedules, as small groups
        of 12 guests over eight years of age walk through the back lot past
        familiar TV and movie sets and tour production facilities. If
        scheduling allows, guests are permitted to watch rehearsals and the
        filming of TV shows.
        One of Californias finest missions lies in northern San
        Fernando Valley. Mission San Fernando Rey de España (15151 San Fernando
        Mission Boulevard, Mission Hills), built in 1797, was named for
        Ferdinand III, King of Spain. The beautifully restored grounds and
        buildings include the workshops, the convent with its Roman arches and
        painted Indian motifs, and the church with gold-leafed reredos
        (ornamental screens) from the 16th-century at the back of the
        altar.
        Pasadena and the San Gabriel Valley
        Should you venture east of Downtown, youll find that
        although the lush orange and lemon groves that blossomed in the San
        Gabriel Valley 100 years ago have all but disappeared, this prosperous
        suburban area still has a wealth of botanical delights. The Arboretum
        of Los Angeles County (301 North Baldwin Ave. ) is here, nurturing
        plants from every part of the world. Stretching along the lower slopes
        of the San Gabriel Mountains, Descanso Gardens (1418 Descanso Drive at
        Verdugo Boulevard, La Cañada) are known for their vast camellia
        displays and historic collections of roses.
        The wealthiest of Californias missions was the fourth to
        be built in the chain, Mission San Gabriel Arcangel (428 S. Mission
        Drive, San Gabriel). The chapel, museum, winery, gardens, and cemetery
        are still ope n to the public daily.
        Just south of the often snow-capped San Gabriel Mountains
        is the charming city of Pasadena, which has remained true to its Native
        American Indian name meaning Crown of the Valley.  Attracted by its
        balmy weather and luscious orange groves, Midwesterners flocked here in
        the 1880s. Development was fast and, by the turn of the century, grand
        mansions and hotels had been built for those vacationing during the
        winter. Pasadena soon became a popular resort area.
        This legacy is apparent in the handsome homes strung along
        the wide, shaded boulevards and in the grand dome of Pasadena City Hall
        (100 N. Garfield Ave. ), built in 1927. The stretch of Colorado
        Boulevard nearby forms the heart of Old Town Pasadena. These eleven
        blocks are full of historic Victorian buildings that have been
        restored, and the area has been converted into a bustling shopping and
        dining district.
        Pasadena is famous for the Rose Bowl stadium where, at
        full capacity, 103,000 spectators watch the annual college football
        game on New Years Day. Prior to the game, one million people line
        Colorado Boulevard to see the fabulous floats in the Tournament of
        Roses Parade, a tradition for over 100 years. The stadium also comes
        alive one day a month during the swapmeet, or flea market.
        Of Pasadenas highly reputed architecture, no building is
        more famous than the Gamble House (4 Westmoreland Place). Built in 1908
        by the architects Greene and Greene, it is an internationally
        recognized masterpiece of the Arts and Crafts Movement that flourished
        at the turn of the century. Every detail of the house, from the
        hand-rubbed fine woods and original furniture to the beautiful Tiffany
        windows and light fixtures, was custom designed by the architects for
        David and Mary Gamble (of Proctor and Gamble fame).
        Pasadena Areas Treasures
        Nearby San Marino is home to a few of the countys very
        best museums. The Huntington Library,Art Collections and Botanical
        Gardens comprise a 207-acre (84-hectare) estate once owned by railroad
        tycoon Henry E. Huntington. Its respected library is one of the most
        complete research facilities in the world. Among the rare books and
        manuscripts here are a Gutenberg bible and the original illustrated
        Ellesmere manuscript of Chaucers Canterbury Tales.
        The three art galleries contain one of the most
        comprehensive collections of British and French 18th- and 19th-century
        art in the United States. Gainsboroughs Blue Boy and Lawrences Pinkie
        are the showpieces of the Huntington Gallery. In the Virginia Steele
        Scott Gallery you can view American paintings from the 1730s to 1930s,
        while the Arabella Huntington Collection features Renaissance paintings
        and 18th-century French decorative arts.
        The lovely Botanical Gardens offer 130 acres (50 hectares)
        of changing landscapes. Among the highlights are the Desert Garden,
        with a vast maze of mature cacti; the Japanese garden, with its ponds,
        fish, and drum bridge; and the much-praised Rose Garden, showing the
        history of the rose over 2,000 years.
        The equally reputed Norton Simon Museum (at 411 West
        Colorado Boulevard) is considered to have one of the worlds finest
        European art collections, with masterpieces by Rembrandt, Goya,
        Picasso, and the Impressionists. In addition, there are an extensive
        collection of Dégas sculptures as well as works by Rodin. An
        outstanding selection of sculpture from India and Southeast Asia
        spanning a period of 2,000 years is a perfect complement to the Western
        art.
        The Pacific Asia Museum (46 North Robles Avenue) has been
        designed to resemble a Chinese imperial residence. It houses galleries
        of traditional and contemporary Asian art as well as a Chinese
        courtyard garden.
        THE SOUTH COAST
        Palos Verdes to San Pedro
        The coastal bluffs of the Palos Verdes peninsula offer
        some of the loveliest views of the ocean — best enjoyed from winding
        Palos Verdes Drive, which hugs the coast just south of Redondo Beach.
        The Point Vicente Lighthouse, with its adjacent Interpretive Center, is
        a good place to stop and stretch your legs and admire the rugged beauty
        of the region. Its also a prime spot for whale-watching during the
        winter migrations, a popular activity for tourists and locals
        alike.
        Youll find the pretty Wayfarers Chapel (5755 Palos
        Verdes Drive South) sitting on the top of the southern cliffs. This
        intriguing glass structure nestled amidst the trees was created by
        Frank Lloyd Wrights son as a memorial to the Swedish philosopher
        Emanuel Swedenborg. It is open daily for meditation.
        Amidst a bevy of beach towns is gritty San Pedro, a
        working seaport that borders Los Angeles Harbor and the largest
        man-made port in the world. The shipyards, stretching for miles, are
        most impressive from the top of the soaring arch of the Vincent Thomas
        Bridge. From here, you can watch the giant cranes as they unload the
        cargo ships from Ports OCall Village, one of those quaint shopping
        centers for the tourist trade. You can also take harbor cruises from
        here.
        Long Beach established itself as a premier seaside resort
        by the early 1900s. Visitors took the old electric Red Car trolley from
        Los Angeles to spend a day at the beach, while silent film stars built
        lavish summer homes on the bluffs overlooking the Pacific. Local legend
        has it that Elizabeth Taylor spent her wedding night here with Nicky
        Hilton, husband number one, at the old Hilton Hotel (now called The
        Breakers).
        Long Beachs rebirth as a tourist destination started in
        1967, when the city purchased Cunards former luxury liner, the Queen
        Mary. The worlds largest cruise ship was docked in the harbor and
        converted into a hotel and tourist attraction. Originally launched in
        1936, the Queen Mary carried royalty, statesmen, and celebrities on its
        trans-Atlantic voyages. You can wander around the grand staterooms,
        promenade deck, bridge, and other exhibits that portray life in the
        working and living quarters of the ship.
        Looking across the harbor from the ship, youll see
        Wylands Planet Ocean, a 10-story mural on the 16,000 sq ft (1,485 sq
        m) exterior wall of the Long Beach Arena depicting whales, dolphins,
        and sea lions. Long Beach boasts some 50 murals, many dating from the
        New Deal era of the 1930s. Next to the Arena is the Long Beach
        Convention and Entertainment Center.
        The seven-block Promenade walkway (near Pine and Long
        Beach Boulevard and First and Third Streets) that leads from the
        business district to the marina is the heart of the citys revived
        downtown area, featuring new restaurants and jazz and comedy clubs. The
        Long Beach tourist office can recommend a historical walking tour of
        landmark buildings along Ocean Boulevard and Pine Avenue. In April the
        downtown streets become a race track for the Toyota Grand Prix (see
        page 87).
        With several miles of sandy beach, Long Beach is an
        excellent watersports center (see page 90). Gondola Getaway (5437 East
        Ocean Boulevard) offers gondola cruises through the canals of Naples
        Island. The restaurant and gift shop complex at Shoreline Village is an
        attractive remake of a typical New England harbor town.
        EXCURSIONS
        With a car, you are no more than a couple of hours from
        deserts, beaches, mountains, and any number of outstanding southern
        California attractions. Here are some of the key sites a short distance
        from Los Angeles for that special daytrip.
        Orange County
        Orange County adjoins Los Angeles County to the south, but
        it has developed an altogether different identity. In fact, some
        Angelenos refer to the county as being behind the orange curtain, due
        to its substantially more conservative lifestyle. Along with its 42
        miles (67 km) of sandy beaches and pretty beach communities, it is best
        known as the home of two major theme parks — Disneyland and Knotts
        Berry Farm — and one of the nations top convention sites. The Anaheim
        Convention and Visitors Bureau has a wealth of information on the area
        (see page 123).
        Disneyland
        Since 1955, when Walt Disney opened the doors of his Magic
        Kingdom, Disneyland has become one of the worlds most popular tourist
        attractions. As you pass through the gates, you enter a land of
        animated characters and technological wizardry, created by one of the
        most delightful imaginations that ever lived.
        The magic of Disney comes to life in its themed lands,
        each of which offers rides and other entertainments. Adventureland
        re-creates the exotic areas of Africa and the South Pacific on its
        Jungle Cruise. Here, you can try out one of Disneylands newest rides,
        the Indiana Jones Adventure, based on Steven Spielbergs popular films.
        New Orleans Square has two of the best attractions, namely, Pirates of
        the Caribbean and the Haunted Mansion. At the backwoods setting of
        Critter Country youll find the exciting Splash Mountain log flume
        ride, while Frontierland takes you to the realm of the pioneers, along
        with steamships and runaway mine trains.
        Fantasyland, whose entrance is through Sleeping Beautys
        castle, is pure storybook enchantment. Dont miss Its a Small World,
        everyones favorite cruise around the globe, and Mickeys Toontown, a
        three-dimensional cartoon world where children can explore Mickey
        Mouses neighborhood. Tomorrowlands futuristic world of rocket jets,
        Star Tours, and Space Mountain (a terrifying roller-coaster ride in the
        dark) has been enhanced with such new items as the 3-D film Honey, I
        Shrunk The Audience; a high-speed sled ride called Rocket Rods, and an
        interactive fountain, Cosmic Waves.
        The parks finest attractions, however, begin after dark.
        Main Streets Mulan Parade is a dazzling cavalcade of Chinese acrobats
        and Disney film characters. Later, Tinkerbell soars above the castle to
        ignite a splendid fireworks display. The most fantastic show of all is
        Fantasmic! , an awesome interaction of special effects, animation, and
        performers. The unique technology projects film images onto giant
        water-mist screens that are 30 ft (9 m) tall and 50 ft (15 m) wide.
        This year Disney has added California Adventure, a
        separate 55-acre (22-hectare), 22-attraction park, celebrating the
        state in microcosm. Here you can try your hand at animation or be a TV
        star; hang-glide over fabulous desert landscapes; sample wines,
        tortillas and sourdough; visit the Muppets or a boardwalk; ride a
        looping rollercoaster or thrilling river rapids.
        Disneyland is huge and can be very crowded in summer.
        Expect long waits (30-90 minutes) for popular attractions, and heavy
        crowds on Main Street two hours before the parade. During high season,
        arrive when the park opens and hit the most popular attractions before
        the lines get too long.
        Knotts Berry Farm
        Knotts Berry Farm, the nations oldest theme park,
        started as a berry farm on 20 acres (8 hectares) of rented land along a
        dusty road in Buena Park, just west of Anaheim. In the 1930s Walter
        Knott began growing a new strain of berry, the boysenberry, and it soon
        became a booming enterprise. His wife, Cordelia, saw an opportunity to
        boost the family income and began serving chicken dinners on her
        wedding china. Soon people waited for several hours for her delicious
        dinners and boysenberry pies.
        Walter had a keen interest in the old West and, in order
        to create a diversion for the ravenous patrons, began building a ghost
        town. It was a slow process; many of its buildings were brought piece
        by piece from abandoned desert towns. Eventually, a theme park was
        born.
        Today the original park, which isnt remotely as fantastic
        as Disneyland, has expanded to six themed areas in an attempt to
        attract audiences of all ages and interests. The Ghost Town features a
        GhostRider roller coaster. Fiesta Village is a tribute to Californias
        early Spanish heritage, with The Jaguar! (a roller coaster) and a rare
        turn-of-the-century Dentzel carousel with hand-carved animals. Indian
        Trails explores Native American legends, music, and dance. The
        Boardwalk, a recreation of a California amusement park from the 1920s,
        features a penny arcade. The highlight of Wild Water Wilderness is
        Bigfoot Rapids, a whitewater river ride. Camp Snoopy, home of the
        Peanuts cartoon characters, has rides and amusements for young
        children.
        There are also thrill rides for the older crowd, notably
        the high-speed roller-coasters Montezoomas Revenge and Boomerang.
        Entertainment, from music to old-time melodrama, is offered all around
        the park. Whats more, Mrs. Knotts chicken dinners remain in great
        demand; they are served at the restaurant at the park entrance.
        Attractions near Anaheim
        Down the road from Knotts is the Movieland Wax Museum
        (7711 Beach Boulevard, Buena Park), where film stars from the 1920s to
        the present are immortalized in wax on authentic stage sets, often in
        their original costumes. These figures, more realistic than the ones in
        the Hollywood Wax Museum, are accompanied by entertaining Wax Facts. 
        With a Wax Museum ticket, you can also visit the adjacent Ripleys
        Believe It or Not! (see page 26 for the Hollywood version).
        If by dinnertime youre still in the mood to be
        entertained, you can join the crowds of families at Medieval Times
        Dinner and Tournament (7662 Beach Boulevard), where diners eat with
        their hands in a castle-like dining room while actors fight with
        swords, joust, and do all they can to amuse.
        At the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace,(18001Yorba
        Linda Bvd. , Yorba Linda), the life of the 37th president of the United
        States — who died in 1994 — is showcased in amazing detail. The only US
        president to resign, Nixon is recognized for his contributions to
        foreign affairs during the Cold War years. Although it helps if you
        have an interest in American politics, the displays allowing you to
        listen to a Watergate tape or interview Nixon on foreign affairs are
        nevertheless interesting.
        The Crystal Cathedral (at 12141 Lewis Street, Garden
        Grove) is a monument to its time, having been built over the past
        quarter century by television evangelist Robert Schuller. This majestic
        structure is something like a four-pointed star, with 10,000 panes of
        glass forming translucent walls that are supported by a steel truss
        frame. Dont miss the chapel in the cathedral tower, where youll find
        a stunning glass cross and beautiful marble walls.
        Coastal Orange County
        The coastline south of Los Angeles is the ultimate
        California dream: the beach is always a few steps away, the pace is
        slower, and dress is more casual. Its the kind of place where the big
        decision of the day will be where you go for sunset cocktails. Life is
        all about the beach here, but for those antsy for action there are also
        some worthwhile attractions on the side and even some high culture
        performance venues.
        Lying to the north of Huntington Beach is the Bolsa Chica
        Ecological Reserve, a salt marsh that harbors more than 300 types of
        birds, which you can see along a 11⁄2-mile (21⁄2-km) loop trail.
        Newport Beach, a fashionable beach community that
        surrounds Newport Harbor, hosts the upscale (and aptly named) Fashion
        Island shopping mall. Thousands of small boats are docked here, and on
        weekdays the dory fishermen still sell the morning catch on the beach
        at Newport Pier.
        Separating the marina from the ocean is the Balboa
        Peninsula. A paved walkway used for cycling, skating, and strolling
        runs along the beach in front of beachfront homes. At the southern end
        of the marina is the Victorian-style Balboa Pavilion, which was built
        as a bath house in 1902 and hosted big-band dances in the 1940s. Today
        it is the center of a small arcade and shopping/dining area. Harbor
        cruises depart from here.
        Laguna Beach is one of the south coasts most attractive
        towns. Its history as an off-beat artists colony during the 1950s and
        1960s earned it the nickname SoHo by the Sea, but today it is
        surrounded by wealthy homes perched along the hillsides and canyons.
        The bustling town center across from Main Beach is full of galleries,
        with several arts festivals taking place each year in July and August
        (see pages 82­–83).
        Mission San Juan Capistrano, founded in 1776, lies inland
        near Dana Point. Although the Great Stone Church that earned it the
        nickname Jewel of the Missions was destroyed in an earthquake in
        1812, the beautiful grounds and adobe buildingswith displays of mission
        life have been restored. The Serra Chapel is the oldest building still
        in use in California, and the only remaining chapel where Father
        Junipero Serra, founder of the mission chain, celebrated Mass. The spot
        is perhaps best known, in legend and song, for the cliff swallows that
        return every spring on St. Josephs Day to rebuild their mud nests.
        If youre eager for a bit of culture after a day in the
        sun, check out the Orange County Performing Arts Center (600 Town
        Center Drive, Costa Mesa), which sponsors frequent symphony, chamber
        music, and opera performances by visiting international and local
        groups. The award-winning South Coast Repertory Theater is also based
        here, and the adjacent South Coast Plaza shopping plaza hosts many of
        the most fashionable department stores.
        Catalina Island
        One of the most popular excursions for both Angelenos and
        tourists is a trip to Catalina Island, the most developed of
        Californias eight Channel Islands. Thousands of daytrippers come here
        each year to enjoy its beaches and watersports; there are also hotels
        for longer stays. It is easily reached byferry from San Pedro or Long
        Beach, or the Catalina Flyer catamaran from Newport Beach. A helicopter
        service also runs to the island. Advance reservations should be made in
        summer.
        The islands only town, Avalon, clusters around the bay
        below stunning mountains that separate it from the rugged interior.
        Since no cars are allowed on the island, it has the feel of a bustling,
        old-fashioned beach community.
        The landmark Casino building stands at one end of the
        harbor. It was built in 1929 by William Wrigley, the chewing gum
        magnate. For the next two decades boatloads of people came from San
        Pedro to dance all night in the grand ballroom with its huge circular
        dance floor. The buildings fine Art-Deco features, from murals to
        gold-leaf ceiling frescoes, can be seen on an organized tour.
        A number of boat trips leave from the pleasure pier. These
        include coastal cruises and a glass-bottomed boat trip to view the
        colorful fish and marine plant life. In addition, Catalina Island is a
        good location for scuba diving and snorkeling, and several companies
        offer rentals and lessons. If you like exploring on foot, the Wrigley
        Memorial and Botanical Garden can be found 2 miles (3 km) inland.
        Most of Catalinas rugged interior is owned by the Santa
        Catalina Island Conservancy, a nonprofit foundation that preserves the
        islands natural resources. A herd of buffalobrought here during the
        filming of a movie in 1924 now numbers around 400. Permits must be
        acquired for hiking or camping, but you can also see the interior on an
        inland motor tour. The views climbing up the steep, narrow road are
        breathtaking.
        Lakes, Mountains, and Desert
        Los Angeless closest mountain retreats are Big Bear Lake
        and Lake Arrowhead, which lie east of the city less than two hours
        away. They are connected by Rim of the World Drive, a scenic highway
        reaching elevations of 8,000 ft (2,440 m). These resorts are a welcome
        escape from the heat of the city in summer and offer many activities.
        In the winter, of course, Big Bear is an excellent downhill skiing
        area.
        A fashionable way to experience the desert is by visiting
        one of the resort communities in and around Palm Springs, about two
        hours drive east of L.A. This haven for film stars and golf pros since
        the 1930s now caters to a broad spectrum of visitors. You can relax at
        the pools or tennis courts, explore the desert landscape in a jeep,
        take the aerial tramway for a view of sand and hills for miles,
        and — in the evening — dine at any number of fashionable,
        international-class restaurants. Palm Springs forms a major winter
        retreat for Angelenos as well as for visitors from the Midwest and East
        Coast, but it is less popular in July and August, when average daytime
        temperatures sore well over 100°F (38°C).
        Nearby Cities
        If you want to explore other coastal cities, tranquil
        seaside Santa Barbara to the north and sunny but bustling San Diego to
        the south can both be reached in about two hours from Los Angeles. Such
        world-famous attractions as the San Diego Zoo, the San Diego Wild
        Animal Park, the Globe Theater, La Jolla, the Scripps Institute of
        Oceanography, and Horton Plaza have made San Diego (Californias
        second-largest city) a major tourist destination.
      
    
  
