
  
  
    
      
        Where to Go
        Finding the most suitable Greek island for your style of
        vacation is important, as each group of islands, as well as each
        individual island, is unique. Do you want sun-kissed beaches, nonstop
        nightlife, ancient sites to explore, or traditional Greek family life
        around you?
        Most islands will have a little of each of these elements,
        but some, such as Ios, have given themselves over to party tourism
        almost completely. In summer, there is little traditional activity for
        you to enjoy. Equally, islands such as Lesvos or Chios have few
        nightclubs. Here youll find much more evidence of the rural life, with
        olive groves and livestock farms in the hilly interiors.
        In this edition, we have divided the Aegean Islands into
        five groups. The odyssey starts with the Cyclades islands, the most
        accessible island chain from Athens, the capital of Greece. Next,
        traveling counterclockwise, we reach the Dodecanese islands in the
        southeastern Aegean (excluding Rhodes, which is covered in its own
        Berlitz Pocket Guide). We then move on to the eastern Aegean islands of
        Samos, Chios, and Lesvos, which sit parallel to the Turkish mainland,
        and the northern Aegean islands of Samothraki, Limnos, and Thasos. We
        conclude with the Sporades islands.
        We have concentrated on the major islands in each group.
        However, youll also find concise information about some of the smaller
        or more remote islands within the larger island groups, such as the
        Cyclades and the Dodecanese, to help you plan any island-hopping you
        might want to undertake.
        Getting Around
        Connections among the island chains are poor, with the
        exception of the ports of Piraeus and Rafina on the Greek mainland,
        which serve as transportation hubs for those who wish to travel from
        one chain of islands to another. However, within each chain
        (particularly the Cyclades, the Dodecanese, and the Sporades), ferry
        connections are regular and journey times are relatively short. Car
        ferries are the slowest of the transportation options, but their
        stately progress allows you to enjoy the sun and sea air from their
        promenade and sun decks. Both hydrofoils and large, powerful catamarans
        will cut ferry journey times in half; however you will sit in an
        air-conditioned interior cabin for the duration of your ride.
        Once on a particular island, you can easily get around on
        foot or rent a car for more in-depth exploring. Also, most towns on
        smaller islands are linked by a good bus system.
        Within the Cyclades, Dodecanese, and Sporades island groups,
        there are certain towns that serve as hubs for travel to and from other
        islands within each group. Below is a list of the hubs and the islands
        that can be reached by ferry from them within two hours. From Mykonos,
        you can travel to Delos, Paros, Naxos, Tinos, Andros, and Syros. From
        Skiathos, you can reach Skopelos, Allonissos, and Skyros. From Kos, you
        can reach Patmos, Kalymnos, Nyssiros, and the medieval citadel at
        Rhodes (covered in the Berlitz Pocket Guide to Rhodes).
        The overseas offices of the Greek National Tourist
        Organization (GNTO) carry current schedules for the major ferry
        services. The web site (www.gtpnet.com) also lists this information.
        Note that extra ferries always run during peak season.
        When to Go
        When to go is a decision of equal importance. The Aegean
        has a short, wet spring when walking, hiking, and mountain biking are
        extremely enjoyable activities, because the weather is pleasant but not
        too hot. The air is bright and clear — perfect for photography.
        However, travel arrangements can be difficult early in the season.
        The traditional opening time for many hotels is the
        Orthodox Easter, although some do not open until the end of April. The
        ferry timetable runs on a winter (read curtailed) service until the
        first week in May.
        Summer is long and hot, but the heat is tempered (or
        disguised) by the sometimes blustery Meltemi winds, which blow from the
        heart of central Asia, south through the Aegean. The summer season is
        also marked by an influx of backpackers and package vacationers from
        all across Europe. The islands are busy, but all facilities such as
        hotels and restaurants are open, and extra ferries and small boats
        (caiques) mean more opportunity to travel between islands.
        Autumn is warm and the pace less frantic — perfect for such
        watching activities as the harvesting of the olives. By the middle of
        October, the season is over and many hotels and restaurants will close
        for the winter. Most of the staff youll see in bars and hotels during
        the summer return to their homes on mainland Greece until the following
        year.
        The Cyclades
        Lying closest to Athens and the Attic peninsula, the
        Cyclades is the island chain most people would think of as typically
        Greek. Its islands have small fishing harbors replete with azure water,
        whitewashed houses with brightly colored trim, small domed chapels, and
        donkeys in their fields.
        Originally named many centuries ago because its islands
        formed a circle or cyclos around the island of Delos — one of the most
        important sites in the ancient world — the Cyclades was first composed
        of a dozen islands. Twenty islands have since been added, making the
        Cyclades the largest of the Greek island groups.
        You will definitely be sharing the main islands with many
        other visitors, although this has not yet spoiled their charms. For
        those who look for solitude, there are still quiet islands to be
        explored, off the beaten track.
        Mykonos
        A tiny, treeless rocky island regularly swept by summer
        winds has become one of the most popular vacation destinations in the
        Mediterranean. Why? Mykonos is a state of mind as well as a place. Its
        hedonistic and funky, and tolerant of alternative lifestyles. A mecca
        for gay travelers and nude sunbathers, Mykonos is also a trendy spot
        for the fabulous and well-connected, who come to shop in its designer
        boutiques (open almost around the clock) and go clubbing till
        sunrise.
        Amazingly, the island retains its Greek character. The
        capital, Mykonos Town, is one of the most beautiful in the Aegean. The
        island happily caters to families in addition to single travelers, and
        backpackers as well as the wealthy. It offers a stepping stone to the
        sacred island of Delos, with all its archaeological treasures, yet has
        a variety of beaches for those who want to do little but soak in the
        sun.
        Mykonos Town is the only large settlement on the island.
        Its built on undulating land that radiates out from a fishing harbor
        where a small fleet still moors and sells its catch. You will probably
        find the island mascot Petros, a pelican (the older Petros now has two
        young apprentices, both also called Petros) waddling among the boats,
        hoping for a fishy tidbit. Beside the port sits the quaint, round-domed
        Paraportiani Church, a favorite backdrop for fashion photographers.
        Behind the port is a maze of narrow alleys and whitewashed
        houses with overhanging balconies resplendent with potted plants and
        masses of bougainvillea. Art galleries, jewelers, and fashionable
        eateries can be found on every corner; but early in the morning, youll
        have the streets to yourself, so enjoy every detail of the pretty
        Cycladic architecture. Brightly painted doors hide cool courtyards and
        white paint outlines the stone pavements of the alleyways.
        A small bay bounding the north side of town has Venetian
        balconies overhanging the water. Known as the Alefkandra Quarter or
        Little Venice, it is the place to come for a sunset cocktail or
        dinner by the waters edge. From here, youll get a full view of the
        line of five windmills that sit above the town.
        Walking from the fishing harbor north toward the commercial
        port will take you past the small Folklore Museum, with exhibits of
        traditional Greek household items. Nearby, next to the southern bus
        station, is the archaeological museum. Among its many exhibits, there
        are funerary statues and other items from the island of Rhenia, the
        burial ground for the inhabitants of Delos.
        The interior of Mykonos is barren and dusty. The only
        buildings that break the monotony are the more than 300 small white
        chapels that dot the hillsides. Center of worship on the island is the
        red-roofed Tourliani Monastery with its 16th-century bell towers. It is
        situated at the center of the inland village of Ano Mera, whose small
        square makes a peaceful place for a leisurely lunch.
        The beaches of Mykonos rival those of St. Tropez in their
        reputation for bohemian activities; however, there are enough stretches
        of sand and little coves that you can find somewhere that suits your
        own tastes. Paradise Beach, a clothing-optional beach, is probably the
        most famous, with nonstop music that lasts well into the early hours of
        the morning. Super-Paradise, in the next bay, is a gay,
        clothing-optional beach. Families head out to Platis Gialos or Psarou,
        but they can be crowded. Farther east, Elia and Agia Anna offer the
        promise of a little more space.
        Delos
        It is difficult to overestimate the importance of the
        sacred island of Delos during ancient times. According to Greek myth,
        it was the birthplace of Apollo, God of Light. It was believed to be
        free floating until Apollos birth, after which huge columns rose up
        from the sea bed to anchor the island. Perhaps because of its
        geographical location at the center of the islands in the surrounding
        Cyclades chain, it also inspired the name for the island chain.
        (Cyclades, you may remember, comes from cyclos, or circle. ) Delos was
        not only an important religious center, but also a major meeting point
        for trade between East and West during the Hellenistic and Roman eras.
        It was designated the home of the treasury of the Delian League in 480
        b.c. , an act which encouraged its growth as a center for banking and
        commerce. As a result, Delos is now one of the most important
        archaeological sites in the world. Its remains reflect its dual roles
        in ancient Greek life, a holy place and a center of trade.
        Today, Delos has no modern settlement or tourist
        infrastructure. Visitors must travel here, by boat, as an excursion
        from a surrounding island, alighting at a small jetty beside the
        ancient port, now silted up. From here, the vista of the whole town can
        be seen, with a fine residential quarter to the right, and the remains
        of a series of magnificent temples to the left. The temples were the
        last stop on a long pilgrimage for ancient Greek believers. Here, you
        could make offerings to the god Apollo at his birthplace, or consult
        the powerful oracle in residence.
        From the ferry jetty, turn left and walk down the Sacred
        Way. In the distance, you will see a fine palm tree, a symbol of
        Apollos birthplace. Surrounding it are the remains of the Sacred Lake,
        drained in the 1920s to prevent mosquitoes from breeding in the
        stagnant water. Walking through the site toward the palm tree will take
        you past the Sanctuary of Apollo, comprising a series of once fine
        colonnaded stoas and temples, including one to Apollos sister,
        Artemis.
        A number of lion statues, the Terrace of the Lions, form a
        honor guard on the approach to the sacred lake. They are perhaps the
        most photographed symbol of Delos, and are believed to date from the
        seventh century b.c. Their numbers have dwindled over the centuries
        from 16 to only 5. Today, an attempt is being made to recreate the
        statues in their prime, with modern materials. At present, only one is
        in its natural aged state.
        On higher ground behind the lake is the Museum of Delos.
        Although it has the dour look of a barracks building, it houses many of
        the finest statuary and artifacts found at the site, and they bring to
        life the bare bones of the temple buildings and houses. Fine pottery
        and exquisite jewelry show that daily life was enhanced by quality
        possessions, which were taken for granted by the population.
        To the left of the temple area is perhaps one of the most
        exciting parts of Delos, the Theater Quarter, although the theater
        itself (third century b.c. ) is not the highlight of the site. It is
        the labyrinth of family houses in its shadow that brings the city to
        life. Streets that have felt the footfalls of ancient Greeks and Romans
        still lead to the front doors of their homes and shops. Some are meager
        square boxes, but behind a number of strong stone walls, magnificent
        homes are revealed. Interior courtyards were beautified by some of the
        most ornate mosaic floors and wall frescoes in the ancient world.
        Search out the House of Dionysos and the House of the Trident with
        their simple floor patterns, and the House of Dolphins and the House of
        Masks for more elaborate examples, including Dionysos riding a panther,
        on the floor of the House of Masks. The House of Cleopatra is also
        worthy of note, named for the lady of the house who left behind
        headless statues of herself and her husband, Dioskourides. The statues
        in situ are reproductions — the originals sit in the Delos Museum.
        Behind the Theater Quarter is an area with a number of shrines
        dedicated to foreign gods, an indication of the numerous cultures that
        influenced Delos. Syrian and Egyptian gods were worshipped here.
        Above the town, the slopes of Mount Kynthos rise to a
        height of 112 m (367 ft), offering a view across the whole site. The
        climb — along a narrow and sometimes steep path — will lead to scant
        remains of third-century b.c. temples, although the site was occupied
        as early as the Stone Age.
        Lying a few hundred meters to the west, the island of
        Rhenia was both a birthplace for Delians and their burial ground. Delos
        was a sacred island and its soil had to be kept pure; therefore, birth
        and death were prohibited human activities. Even today this ancient
        code is still being kept by modern archaeologists. Funerary artifacts
        found here are displayed in Mykonos.
        Andros
        The nearest Cyclades island to the Greek mainland, Andros
        is a short ferry ride from the port of Rafina, and is therefore very
        popular with Athenians for weekends and summer vacations. Wealthy
        shipping families own large houses along the coast and in the hills,
        which are more verdant than those of other islands in the group, and
        its red soil contrasts with the dull earth of Mykonos or Paros.
        The major port of Gavrion on the west coast serves the
        whole island, but the main town is Chora (which simply means town,
        and is often used on islands with only one main settlement). Off the
        tourist route, on the east coast of the island, it is also known as
        Andros Town. Much of Chora has remained unchanged for decades, as
        Athenian weekenders have refurbished the charming old townhouses, and
        it has a very genteel air.
        The cultural heart of Andros owes much to the generosity of
        the Goulandris shipping family. They funded the Modern Art Museum, just
        to the north of the main square, which features the work of a selection
        of European modernist painters. They were also instrumental in the
        creation of the archaeological museum that houses the Hermes of Andros,
        a second-century copy of a statue originally sculpted by
        Praxiteles.
        The main resort is Batsi on the west coast, just south of
        Gavrion. The small center still retains vestiges of its heritage as a
        fishing village, but modern hotels and apartments have been built on
        the outskirts.
        The Monastery of Zoodohos Pighi (Life-giving Spring) lies
        in the hills above Batsi and guards what is considered to be the most
        sacred of several freshwater springs found on the island.
        Tinos
        Tinos is a surprise because it is a center of Roman
        Catholic worship in an Orthodox land. This is in part because the
        island remained under Catholic Venetian rule far longer than other
        islands in the Aegean — from 1207 to 1714 — but also because it was t
        he scene of a blessed miracle, ensuring its fame throughout the
        Catholic community in Greece. In 1823, a nun from the Convent of
        Kechrovouni had a dream in which the Virgin Mary told her that a sacred
        icon could be found in land nearby. The nun went out and found the
        portrait just as her dream had foretold. Since that time, the icon has
        been held responsible for many feats of healing, giving Tinos the
        epithet Lourdes of Greece.  The island is a delight, because it has
        few foreign visitors and retains its strong Greek character.
        The capital of the island, Tinos Town, houses the icon in
        the Panagia Evangelistria, a church that sits at the top of a gentle
        slope rising up from the port 1 km (0.6 miles) away. The icon has a
        powerful influence over pilgrims, who crawl up the church steps on
        their hands and knees to pray for divine intervention. Two major
        festivals, Assumption Day on 15 August and Annunciation Day on 25
        March, see thousands of believers crawling up the hill from the port to
        worship the icon. Dont travel to the island at either of these times
        without a reservation.
        Travel into the countryside and youll soon see how hilly
        Tinos is. Hundreds of terraces cover the hillsides, giving them a
        textured look. Today, many lie overgrown and unused, but during
        Venetian times, they brimmed with crops and grew fodder for livestock.
        They are made accessible by thousands of narrow donkey tracks, which
        are used by hikers and ramblers.
        Scattered across the land are hundreds of dovecotes, which
        were introduced throughout the Aegean by the Venetians, who enjoyed
        pigeon as a part of their diet. On other islands, the towers have been
        allowed to decay, but on Tinos they stand proud, many with birds still
        in residence. Some of the most accessible can be found near the village
        of Tarabados, 8 km (13 miles) north of Tinos Town.
        The ground rises dramatically behind Tinos Town to a rocky
        peak called Exobourgo. Here the remains of a massive Venetian fortress
        destroyed by invading Ottoman forces can be found. Wander, at your own
        risk, among the walls, crumbling turrets, and caves, and look out
        toward the surrounding islands of Mykonos and Andros. In the shadow of
        the peak is a network of villages, unspoiled both by the influence of
        tourists and the excesses of modern life. One of the prettiest, Dyo
        Chorio, has fresh spring water fountains which are still used by hill
        farmers to collect water for their homes. Village households still wash
        their laundry in these waters.
        The central section of Tinos has little of interest, but
        make your way over the hills to the pretty village of Pyrgos, famed for
        its school of marble carving. The village, nestled into a narrow
        valley, is one of the prettiest in the Aegean. A number of craftsmen
        have studios fronting onto the narrow streets. From Pyrgos, head down
        to the fishing port of Panormos 3 km (2 miles) away, where you can
        enjoy delicious fresh fish at one of the many tavernas.
        Sifnos
        In ancient times, Sifnos was famed for its gold and silver
        deposits. The islands treasury, stored at Delphi (the most important
        sanctuary in ancient Greece) was said to be the richest of the many
        deposited there. In more recent times,wealth has passed the island by,
        but it still produces some jewelry and has a reputation for
        particularly fine pottery, which can be seen outside the workshops
        drying in the sun. The island also claims some 365 churches and
        monasteries nestled among its abundant olive groves.
        The main port, Kamares, lies 5 km (3 miles) from the
        capital Apollonia, and its sister town Artemon (both named for the
        brother and sister god and goddess of ancient Greek mythology). The
        oldest continually occupied settlement on the island is Kastro, where
        most of the buildings date from the 14th century and were laid out in a
        circular pattern atop a rocky outcrop 100 m (300 ft) above the east
        coast. The town is a fascinating mixture of crumbling grandeur and
        renovated splendor. An archaeological museum is housed in a building of
        Venetian origin and contains finds from the Mycenaean and Archaic
        periods.
        The main beaches of Sifnos lie on the south coast. Platis
        Gialos is popular with a range of bars and tavernas, but Vathi is
        perhaps the most visually stunning, with the now de-consecrated
        17th-century Hrysopighi Monastery set on a small offshore island
        reached by a bridge.
        Paros and Antiparos
        A veritable Grand Central Station of ferry services, Paros
        is an island with something for almost everyone. Across a narrow
        channel sits Antiparos (translated as opposite Paros), with a main
        settlement which takes you back to the Greek Islands of twenty years
        ago.
        The capital of Paros, Parikia, serves the port, and
        although it is extremely busy throughout the peak season, it still
        retains the feel of a Greek town. Away from the port, a maze of narrow
        streets disguise the remains of a kastro, or castle, dating from the
        13th century, which recycled marble from Greek and Roman temples on the
        island.
        To the left of the port, beside the new medical center, is
        the Panagia Ekatontapiliani, known as the Church of 100 Doors. The
        present buildings are based around a fourth-century structure that is
        said to have been commissioned by St. Helen, mother of Constantine the
        Great (founder of Constantinople and the leader who converted the Roman
        Empire to Christianity), and the sixth-century chapel uses columns from
        an earlier Roman temple.
        Nearby, the archaeological museum has a section of the
        Parian Chronicles, a history of ancient Greece enscribed on marble
        slabs, along with other examples of Paros marble, which was coveted
        throughout the ancient world for its fine translucence.
        Leave Parikia behind and Paros has a number of villages to
        explore. In the north, Naoussa has one of the prettiest fishing harbors
        in the Mediterranean. Although popular with visitors, it has not lost
        its traditional industry. Boats in daily use lie within feet of the
        fashionable bars and restaurants. Its no surprise that the harbor has
        some of the best seafood restaurants in the Aegean, including several
        traditional Greek ouzeries. To the west of Naoussa is Kolymbithres, a
        growing resort whose beaches are surrounded by strange rock features
        that are folded by immense natural forces and eroded by the wind. The
        resort has a large park featuring water slides and a childrens play
        area.
        Along the eastern coastline are several fine beaches with
        perfect windsurfing conditions in their wide, shallow bays. The World
        Windsurfing Championships have been held here in August for the last
        several years. Golden Beach is perfect for soaking up the sun and
        watching the sport. Farther along the east coast is the pretty port of
        Piso Livadi.
        The interior of the island has a number of interesting
        attractions. Lefkes village occupies high ground in the interior, and
        its narrow streets are perfect places to explore. Look out for the
        remains of a marble-covered Byzantine road (fourth- to
        century–14th-century) that once connected Lefkes with the nearby
        village of Karampoli down in the valley.
        Near the village of Marathi you will find the ancient
        marble quarries that sent stone to all parts of the Greek and Roman
        empires. The stone was mined rather than cut from the surface, and the
        tunnels can be explored with a flashlight. The building remains youll
        see once housed French workmen who came here in 1844 to cut marble for
        Napoleons tomb in the Hôtel des Invalides in Paris.
        If you visit Paros in July or August, be sure to take a
        trip to Petaloudes or the Valley of the Butterflies south of Parikia, a
        breeding ground for giant tiger moths. Here you can see tiger moths
        clinging to the leaves of trees, sometimes in vast numbers.
        Until 5,000 years ago, Antiparos was attached to Paros, but
        seismic activity and climatic change have produced a narrow sea channel
        with several tiny islands between the two. Antiparos can be reached by
        a 20-minute ferry ride from Parikia, or a five-minute car ferry trip
        from the small port of Pounda on Paross western coast.
        The town of Antiparos seems to move at a slower pace than
        Parikia; in fact, the town can be almost somnolent out of season. At
        its heart is a Venetian kastro that still retains original dwelling
        houses along its interior walls.
        The main attractions on the island are the caves under the
        mountain of Agios Ilias in the south. The interior is cavernous, but
        the caves have suffered from centuries of vandalism. The number of
        steps built down into the interior means that it is unsuitable for the
        infirm or those with heart problems.
        Naxos
        The largest island in the Cyclades, Naxos is a place of
        contrasts. It has ranges of barren hills and mountains as well as green
        fertile valleys that produce grapes and olives in abundance. The island
        has a long history; its marble deposits were coveted around the ancient
        world. In fact, the Lions of Delos were made from Naxos marble. The
        wonderful beaches along the western coast were, until recently, a
        secret, but they have now been discovered. Tourism has grown over the
        last ten years.
        The capital of Naxos, Hora, sits on the western coastline
        and is served by a rather breezy but extremely busy port. There is a
        wide promenade along the seafront with cafés and restaurants, but the
        heart of the magnificent old town lies just above this, overlooking the
        harbor. It comprises a labyrinth of alleyways and narrow streets around
        a Venetian citadel, which caps the highest point. Small Byzantine
        churches sit on street corners, side by side with family homes. The
        church of Panagia Theoskepastos houses a fine 14th-century icon, and
        the Catholic Cathedral has a tenth-century Madonna and Child. Next door
        to the cathedral is the archaeological museum with finds from every era
        of Naxoss long history.
        On a rocky promontory beside the town is the site of the
        Temple of Apollo, dating from the sixth century b.c. It was planned as
        the largest temple in the Aegean, but was never completed. Only the
        giant portal, 5.5 m (18 ft) tall, was in place when work stopped, but
        it gives an indication of how immense the whole task would have
        been.
        The interior of Naxos offers a range of environments not
        found on other islands of the Aegean. Fertile valleys with precious
        water supplies offer a cool and fragrant break from the heat of the
        towns and beaches. The valley between the towns of Chalki and Filoti
        (known as the Tragea Valley) is perhaps the most beautiful, and easily
        reached by bus from Hora. Ancient olive groves play host to donkeys and
        herds of goats, and low-growing vines cover the ground under tall
        Cypress trees — the archetypal Greek landscape. The heart of Chalki
        hides a Venetian tower and the whole valley has a number of small
        Byzantine chapels.
        Filoti sits in the shadow of Mount Zas, a treeless brown
        rock rising from the green valley below. Although you cant climb to
        the summit, there are beautiful walks or cycle paths on its lower
        slopes, with caves to explore and cooling streams to enjoy.
        Traveling north out of the Tragea Valley past villages
        seemingly clinging to the valley sides, Keramoti, Koronos, and Korinada
        are all fascinating places to explore. All give glimpses of traditional
        family life. A small resort on the northern coast, Apollon, holds a
        fascinating artifact from the past. A giant block of marble, formed
        into a kouros (male statue) over 2,600 years ago lies prostrate on the
        ground. The marble cracked before the figure was finished and it was
        abandoned where it lay.
        The best sandy beaches of Naxos lie on the sheltered west
        coast to the south of Chora. Agia Anna, and the long sandy spit of
        Agios Prokopios are two of the most popular.
        Santorini
        The island of Santorini (Thira) is one of the must-see
        places of the world, for no other reason than because it frames the
        earths largest volcanic caldera. Santorini looked exactly like many of
        the other islands in the Cyclades until around 1500 b.c. , when a
        massive eruption of its volcano carried the whole interior of the
        island high into the atmosphere, changing the climate of the earth for
        years afterwards. In place of land came water, surging in to fill the
        11-km (7-mile) long void and causing massive tidal waves around the
        Mediterranean Sea.
        What remains today is the outer rim of the original
        circular island. Sheer cliffs up to 300 m (984 ft) high bound the
        caldera, and a number of whitewashed settlements nestle along their
        crests, looking from a distance like icing melting down the sides of a
        cake.
        Another section of the original island sits to the west.
        Thirasia now has separate settlements that can be visited by ferry from
        Santorini. In the center of the caldera are two low-lying areas of land
        that appeared after the 1500 b.c. eruption: Nea Kameni and Palea
        Kameni. Because the volcano is still active — although dormant at
        present — these areas continue to grow, and experience earthquakes. The
        last major one, in 1956, inflicted a great deal of damage to the towns
        on the main island.
        Once on Santorini, visitors are usually surprised to see,
        beyond the high steep caldera to the east, coastal plains that are
        covered in a blanket of vines. Indeed, more than 100,000 bottles of
        wine are produced here every year and shipped worldwide.
        The main town of the island is Fira, set atop the high
        cliffs in the center of the long interior curve. Its buildings tumble
        down toward the water with stunning views. A narrow cobbled trail of
        587 steps leads from the town to the small port below, now the domain
        of a fleet of donkeys that wait to carry cruise ship passengers into
        town. For those who would prefer a quicker method, there is a cable car
        that wings you from sea level to the cliffs in a couple of minutes.
        Most commercial ferries arrive at the new port of Athinios farther
        along the coast.
        Fira is a shoppers paradise, a series of narrow alleys
        where you can wander free from the fear of traffic, although keep your
        eyes and ears open for donkeys. You can buy anything from a
        reproduction icon to a genuine Fabergé egg, plus jewelry of the finest
        quality and designer clothing by the most desirable names. Find a spot
        for a drink at sunset (which has to be one of the most spectacular on
        earth).
        Among the boutiques and bars are two places of cultural
        interest. The archaeological museum on a square next to the cable car
        station (a new building is under construction near the main bus
        station, which will eventually house the collection) features pottery
        and other artifacts found on the island. The Megaron Gyzi Museum to the
        north of the cable car station is housed in a beautiful 17th-century
        fortified house. Most exciting of its varied collections is a display
        of photographs showing island scenes from before the devastating 1956
        earthquake.
        Fira is beautiful, but it can get oppressive when visitors
        crowd the narrow streets. A little way north is another smaller town
        where the pace is less frantic. Ia (pronounced Oya), set on the
        northern cliffs, became home to a number of artists early on, and it
        maintains a more bohemian atmosphere than Fira. There are many homes
        built into the hillsides; some have been converted into art galleries
        and shops selling collectibles. The architecture is typical of the
        Cyclades, and the buildings multicolored façades make it one of the
        most photographed villages in the world.
        Aside from the stunning views, Santorini has much more to
        show its visitors. In the center of the island is the village of
        Pirgos, with the remains of a Venetian fortress at its heart. On a
        rocky bluff beyond the village you will find the 17th-century Monastery
        of Profitis Ilias. As the road climbs toward the entrance, youll pass
        fields full of Santorinis famed tomatoes growing on the steep slopes.
        The monastery is only open when the priests inside take liturgies
        (mornings and early evenings), but it is well worth taking the time to
        visit. Pride of place goes to a 15th-century icon of the prophet
        Elijah. The monastery also has a museum, which conveys the flavor of
        monastic life along with icons and manuscripts. Unfortunately, the hil
        ltop is also shared by the Greek military, and it bristles with
        satellite and digital technology, prohibiting photography of the
        beautiful panorama.
        On the northern slopes of this rocky outcropping is the
        site of the ancient capital of the island, also called Thira, which
        dates from the third century b.c. (when the Aegean was under Ptolemaic
        rule). The site sprawls over a wide area, but unfortunately, some
        remains are in poor condition, a situation which causes the site to
        close intermittently because of the danger of falling masonry. Check
        with the tourist information authorities in Fira before setting
        out.
        In the south of the island is one of the most important
        ancient sites in the Mediterranean. Near the modern village of
        Akrotiri, a complete city dating from before 2000 b.c. was discovered.
        It was covered by several feet of ash during the eruption of c.1500
        b.c. , but unlike the tragic city of Pompeii in Italy, no human remains
        have been found. This has led scientists to believe that the population
        escaped before the disaster took place.
        Since 1967, the site has been painstakingly excavated to
        give a picture of daily life before the great eruption. A society of
        complexity and sophistication has been unveiled, one that had urban
        planning, heating, sanitation, and a standard script. However, much of
        the beautiful artwork found here is, for the moment, in the
        archaeological museum in Athens. The site is still an active dig and
        new discoveries are being made all the time. The remains, which include
        streets with houses and pretty communal squares, have been placed under
        a protective, corrugated roof that gets hot and crowded, so try to
        visit as early in the day as possible.
        The beaches of Santorini are made of fine black or red
        volcanic sand, which heats to a ferocious temperature in the summer
        sun. Kamari and Perissa are growing resorts with a range of hotels,
        bars, and restaurants. Both make pleasant retreats after a day of
        sightseeing in Fira or Akrotiri.
        Some of the best views of Santorini are from the water. Try
        taking a trip around the caldera, with stops at the new volcanic
        islands of Nea and Palea Kameni. Allow time in Thirasia to explore
        Santorinis smaller sibling islands.
        Ios
        Ios is hands-down the party island of the Aegean; its bars
        and clubs boom out the latest dance tunes 24 hours a day. Traditionally
        a poor island, the native population has happily embraced the new
        seasonal lifestyle that has brought them prosperity, and the old ways
        have almost completely disappeared.
        Arriving by boat gives you splendid views of the
        magnificent unspoiled, treeless landscape, which bears scant evidence
        of the hand of man. Only the southeastern corner has any real
        development, and the road system comprises less than 10 km (16 miles)
        from the pretty, narrow streets of Chora, the islands only town, to
        the beach at Milopotamos in the neighboring bay. Milopotamos is one of
        the best and busiest beaches in the Aegean. This leaves a whole island
        to explore on foot, or by 4-wheel-drive vehicle. Residents of Ios will
        tell you that an ancient tomb in the north of the island is that of
        Homer, author of The Odyssey and The Iliad. (His mother was born on
        Ios. ) Unfortunately, no positive proof has ever corroborated the
        claim.
        The Dodecanese
        The Dodecanese islands take their name from the Greek
        phrase dodeka nisi, meaning twelve islands, although the group
        incorporates far more than one dozen in its number. The islands did not
        become part of Greece until 1947. From 1912 to 1947, they were ruled by
        Italy; before that, they were part of the Ottoman Empire. The major
        islands exhibit faded remains of a Muslim influence, though this was
        just one of several cultures to leave its mark on the islands.
        Kos
        Now the second most populated island in the Dodecanese, Kos
        has seen human settlement since ancient times. With safe harbors and
        wide fertile plains, it could both protect and feed its people. Today
        it is very popular with package vacationers, particularly high-spirited
        young Europeans. Try to visit early or late in the season to avoid the
        crowds and their worst excesses.
        Kos Town on the western coast is the main settlement, and a
        fascinating place to explore. Settled for many centuries, it suffered
        an earthquake in 1933 that damaged much of the modern town center, but
        allowed Italian archaeologists to excavate a large section of the Roman
        city which lay directly underneath. Today it is possible to walk
        through the old agora (marketplace) and stroll along Roman roads.
        Later, after the fall of Jerusalem, the town became a
        stronghold of the Knights of St. John. In the 15th century, they built
        the Castle of the Knights of St. John at the waters edge. It still
        forms an impressive backdrop for photographs of Mandraki Harbor, and is
        filled with historical litter, including carved marble plaques,
        statuary, and cannons.
        Ottoman forces ousted the knights in 1522, and evidence of
        their stay can be found just inland from the castle. The minaret of the
        Loggia Mosque, built in the 18th century and the largest on Kos, now
        stands silent and closed, but it is matched by a number of smaller
        examples throughout town, some still in use by the small Muslim
        population.
        Beside the mosque — in fact, almost overshadowing it — is
        a large plane tree. Its branches extend so far that it has had to be
        supported for many years by a framework of scaffolding. The local
        people will tell you that this is the Hippocrates Tree, under which the
        father of medicine, a native of the island, lectured to his students
        over 2,500 years ago. Sadly, although the tree has been proved to be
        among the oldest in Europe, most experts believe that it is only 2,000
        years old and therefore not of Hippocratess era.
        In the main square of the town (walk inland from the
        mosque on the south side of the agora) is the archaeological museum,
        which features finds from ancient Kos, including mosaics and domestic
        utensils. On the outskirts of town, on E Grigorou Street, is a small
        Roman Odeon or theater, used in summer for performances. Nearby is Casa
        Romana, a Roman villa recreated in every detail. It really brings to
        life the daily routines of a wealthy Roman family.
        If you dont want to walk around town, a small motorized
        train runs past all the major sites. It operates several times a day
        during the summer.
        Four kilometers (2 1⁄2 miles) outside Kos Town are the
        remains of a medical school founded in the fourth century b.c. , just
        after the death of Hippocrates. The Asclepium was a major center of
        healing. Many of the largest remains date from the Roman, rather than
        the Classical Greek era, and the site was damaged by the Knights of St.
        John when they removed marble from it to build their castle in Kos
        Town. The main Doric temple rested on the upper level of the three
        terraces that make up the site. There are fine views across to Turkey
        from here.
        Resorts outside Kos Town include Kardamena on the south
        coast, a young, energetic resort; Tigaki on the north coast, a quiet
        resort more suited to couples and families; and Kamari, which sits the
        farthest from Kos Town. All offer a selection of hotels, bars, and
        restaurants.
        The flat landscape, especially in the east, is ideal for
        cycling, where you can get away and explore such inland villages as
        Pyli (and the older Paleo Pyli high in the hills), Asfendiou, and
        Kefalos, with the last working windmill on the island. Here you can
        still find a quiet spot to enjoy authentic Greek island life.
        Patmos
        This small, barren island in the northern Dodecanese may
        have remained the deserted outpost it once was, had it not been for a
        decision in the first century a.d. to use it as a penal colony for
        political and religious dissidents. It was here in 95 a.d. that one
        resident received divine inspiration in the form of an apocalyptic
        vision while he sat in his small cave high above the harbor. The words
        which John the Theologian (Evangelist in Greek) recorded became the
        Book of Revelation (Apocalypse in Greek), the last book of the New
        Testament.
        In 1098, the Byzantine Emperor ceded land on the island to
        a monk, Christodoulos, who founded a monastery here in honor of the
        saint. It soon became a place of contemplation, learning, and
        pilgrimage — a role it still performs for thousands of believers to the
        present day.
        Since there is no airport on the island, all visitors must
        arrive at the port, Skala, where most of the hotels are located and all
        commercial activity is carried out. Despite the number of visitors
        passing through, Skala is still a Greek village at heart, with a number
        of traditional tavernas to be found in the streets around the small
        main square. A new yacht basin to the east allows safe harbor for
        independent travelers.
        Everyone who arrives at the port can look up and see their
        first view of the Monastery of St. John the Theologian, surrounded by
        the town of Chora atop a nearby hill. The monastery was built at a
        tumultuous time in Christian history and its design was based on that
        of a castle, to act as a protection of the faith and its treasures, as
        well as for worship. It stands high above myriad whitewashed walls.
        Historically, a narrow cobbled track transported pilgrims
        from the port to the monastery, either on foot or by donkey. The path
        still exists, and in the cool of the early morning, it is a pleasant
        uphill walk. Others can take one of the regular buses or a taxi for the
        ten-minute ride.
        Halfway up the hill is the Convent of the Apocalypse, at
        the site of the cave where St. John received his divine revelation. Now
        tended by nuns, it is regarded as holy ground (follow the same rules of
        dress expected at other holy places). The small Cave of St. Anne has a
        silver band where it is said St. John laid his head each night, and a
        simple rock ledge is said to have been his desk. Two chapels now grace
        the grounds.
        On reaching Chora, you will need to walk through the
        pedestrian-only town to reach the monastery. The streets have an almost
        eerie emptiness, although in summer small kittens scamper away as you
        approach, disappearing into cracks in the thick, high walls. Eventually
        the signposts will lead to the strong stone archway that signals the
        entrance to the Monastery of St. John.
        Immediately on entering the cobbled main courtyard, you
        will find a small church on the left, built on the site of an ancient
        temple of Artemis. Inside you will find the marble sarcophagus of the
        monasterys founder Christodoulos and icons that date from as early as
        1190. Behind the chapel is the 11th-century refectory where it is
        possible to gain an insight into the daily lives of the generations of
        monks who made this monastery their home. The utilitarian communal
        tables and simple decorations offered no distractions from their
        serious vocation.
        Take the staircase in the eastern corner of the courtyard
        to find the treasury, which displays only a fraction of the wealth
        accumulated by the monastery. Beautifully displayed are a range of
        icons dating from the 12th century, silver altar pieces and bejeweled
        vestments. The monastery received bequests from nobility throughout the
        Orthodox world, and was not averse to making money from commerce,
        particularly shipping. In this way, it amassed vast fortunes still kept
        under lock and key.
        The library was once one of the most important in the
        Byzantine world. Large numbers of volumes were evacuated from here
        before the fall of Constantinople, comprising the best in early
        Christian decorated manuscripts and books of the Bible. However, the
        library is only open to scholars and requires prior written permission
        for research.
        Despite the importance of the monastery, a great deal of
        ordinary life can be seen around Patmos. Small holdings abound, and
        traditional houses sit low on the treeless hillsides. The beaches on
        the northern coastline beyond the village of Kambos are said to be the
        best, although some are difficult to reach. Most accessible is Lampis
        Bay, with a couple of good tavernas. South of Skala is the small resort
        of Grikos Bay.
        Kalymnos
        For centuries, the natives of Kalymnos were renowned for
        their diving prowess. They developed it in order to harvest the sponges
        that grew abundantly in the seas all around the island. However, the
        early 20th century saw several catastrophic changes that ruined the
        commercial sponge industry on Kalymnos. Many families emigrated to the
        United States and Australia to make new lives, and the natural
        population dropped dramatically.
        Although the traditional industry is a great deal smaller
        than it once was, tourism has taken up the slack; in summer, Kalymnos
        is busy with vacationing families from several European countries.
        Kalymnos has a barren interior with dramatic cliffs and
        caves all around its coastline. The capital, Pothia, is a splash of
        bright color climbing a hillside on the south coast. With a population
        of around 11,000, it is one of the largest towns in the Dodecanese and
        is the major port on the island. Today, a small fleet of sponge
        fishermen still sets sail every summer, although the crop remains in
        decline. The statue of a mermaid sits on the breakwater as a lucky omen
        for the sailors, and families turn out to perform a religious ceremony
        to guide and protect their loved ones.
        Beyond Pothia, the castle (Pera Kastro) at Horio, the
        medieval capital, is clearly visible. The beach resorts of Mirties and
        Massouri on the west coast take the bulk of visitors. Massouri has
        fleets of boats that offer day trips to the island of Telendos only a
        mile or so offshore.
        To the east of Pothia, the road leads to a fertile
        fruit-producing valley near Vathi. In the clear waters offshore are the
        remains of an Italian naval vessel sunk by British forces in World War
        II.
        Karpathos
        Karpathos is a rugged and wild island lying between Rhodes
        and Crete, almost at the foot of the Aegean. During the last one
        hundred years a large percentage of the population, tired of fighting
        the hard economic conditions, immigrated to the United States.
        The remaining population is based mainly in the south,
        around the capital, Pigadia, which is relatively modern by Greek
        standards (built since the mid-19th century). Around it lie fields of
        fertile soil supporting orchards and grain crops.
        The middle of the island has mountains that rise over
        1,200 m (4,050 ft), separating the northern part of the island, and
        protecting it from the effects of development in the south. From
        Pigadia to the small southern port of Diafani, where vehicles find it
        difficult to travel, boats move people and goods. From here it is a
        steep journey up to the village of Olimbos, which still holds fast to
        its traditional way of life. The houses are built to a long-standing
        design and are filled with embroidery, lace, and crochet work. Older
        women in the village still dress in colorful traditional costumes which
        the younger women and children wear on feast days.
        The remaining parts of the north, although enticing, are
        difficult to explore. One exception is the hike north from Olimbos to
        the shrine to St. John the Baptist at Vrykounda, site of a major island
        festival on 29 August every year.
        The Eastern Aegean
        Close to western Turkey, three large islands lie aligned
        from north to south: Lesvos, Chios, and Samos. These islands, known as
        the eastern Aegean Islands, have been at the forefront of waves of
        invasion from the east. Phoenicians and Persians came here to attack
        the kingdoms of the ancient Greek mainland; later, the Ottomans used
        this region as a base when they forced the Venetians and the Genoese to
        flee back to their homelands. The populations of all three islands
        played a major role in the fight for Greek statehood at the beginning
        of the 19th century. They also saw a wave of Greek immigrants from the
        Turkish mainland during and after the proclamation of the Turkish state
        in 1923.
        Despite hostile feelings in the past, relations between
        Greece and Turkey are now genial, at least on a day-to-day basis. One
        of the most exciting facets o f a trip to the eastern Aegean Islands is
        the possibility of taking a day trip to Turkey, where you can
        experience the contrasting (though sometimes surprisingly similar)
        culture, and see the majestic ancient archaeological sites of old Asia
        Minor.
        Lesvos
        Lesvos is the third-largest Aegean island (after Crete and
        Evia), and it has a long and independent cultural tradition. Music,
        poetry, and dance have always been important parts of the islands
        identity. It was the birthplace of the ancient poet Sappho, said by
        Homer to be the tenth muse, and the musician Alcaeus, the father of
        Greek music. The Ottoman Sultans held Lesvos in high esteem for its
        fertile lands and the fine olive oil produced here, however, following
        the creation of the Turkish state in the 1920s, it lost its main market
        and became a backwater of the Aegean.
        The islands capital is Mytilini (and you may sometimes
        hear Greeks call the island Mytilini, rather than Lesvos). A trading
        town and port, its main shopping street, Ormos Ermou, still throngs
        with the energy of an eastern bazaar. Fine 18th-century villas can be
        found along the seafront, both north of the port and south toward the
        airport. The villas were built for Ottoman traders and overseers, but
        were abandoned in the exchange of populations in the 1920s.
        But the most impressive structure is the medieval castle
        built atop Roman, Hellenistic, and more ancient settlements. One of the
        largest fortifications in the Aegean, the interior Venetian walls were
        later expanded by the Ottomans. Resting in the shadow of the castle
        walls is the Lesvos Archaeological Museum, with one of the finest
        collections of artifacts in Greece. A new, air-conditioned,
        state-of-the-art building has been added on to the original museum, a
        fine old mansion. Throughout the two structures there are finds from
        all eras of Lesvoss history. Intricate mosaics depicting scenes from
        Menenders comedies are displayed beautifully, with clear glass tile
        walkways allowing close access to the detail. Greek and Roman statuary,
        jewelry, and daily utensils are all thoughtfully arranged.
        Around the island, Lesvos offers wonderful impressions of
        Greek village life. Its economy depends far less on tourist earnings
        and much more on agricultural production (re-established since the
        problems of the 1920s); therefore, traditional lifestyles are much more
        common here.
        The east of the island has most of the estimated ten
        million olive trees which produce the islands major crop. They blanket
        the hills with their silvery leaves, shimmering in the breeze. Small
        villages with narrow cobbled streets sit among them, built inland to
        offer protection against pirate raids.
        North of Mytilini, stop at the village of Moria, where you
        will find the remains of a huge Roman aqueduct surrounded by grazing
        goats. Mandamadhos village in the far north still carries on a
        traditional pottery industry on a small scale. On its outskirts, the
        Monastery of Taxiarhis has a revered black icon that is believed to be
        fashioned from soil wet with the blood of monks slaughtered at the
        abbey. Continue along this road to reach the pretty coastal town of
        Molyvos (also known by its ancient name, Mithymna), a popular spot for
        tourists. The medieval streets and Ottoman houses have been transformed
        into galleries and cafés and a small castle sits proudly above the
        town. A small harbor below is the place to enjoy lunch.
        South of Molyvos, the resort town of Petra has an
        18th-century townhouse museum and a pretty church built on a large rock
        at its center. The northwest area offers a complete contrast to the
        olive groves of the east, with a volcanic landscape totally devoid of
        trees. The Monastery of Ipsilou sits in this minimalist panorama,
        reaching up toward the sky as if for inspiration.
        Just west of the monastery lies one of the geological
        wonders of the world. In ancient times, this land had a forest of giant
        sequoia trees. Volcanic ash covered some of the trees while they were
        still alive, and over time, their trunks turned to stone. Now known as
        the Petrified Forest, a number of these trees can be seen, some with
        every growth ring visible. To the southwest of the Petrified Forest,
        take the road to Eressos and its beach resort of Skala Eressos,
        birthplace of the poet Sappho.
        The southern coastline is split by the large inlet of
        Kolpos Kallonis, but beyond this, in the south of the island, the olive
        is king, especially around Mount Olimbos, the highest point on Lesvos.
        Aghiasos village lies in its shadow. A traditional settlement, Aghiasos
        holds a major festival at its Panagia Vrefokratoussa church on 15
        August every year. Plomari on the south coast is a center for fine ouzo
        production, and both Plomari and neighboring Vatara have good beaches,
        now being developed for tourism. From Lesvos, there are regular summer
        excursions to the Turkish coastal town of Ayvilik, a base for trips to
        the sites of ancient Troy and Pergamum.
        Chios
        On arrival at the port of Chios Town, its tempting to
        pass through quickly, for it is a dreary welcome to the island.
        However, Chios island (also known as Hios) has some very beautiful
        secrets to reveal to those who venture further.
        During the 14th century, Chios enjoyed a period of wealth
        and stability under the Genoese. When the Ottomans took control in
        1566, they continued to allow the population privileges unknown on
        other islands. In part, this related to the gum mastic produced here (a
        rare and valuable commodity, highly prized for its use in medicine).
        However, the population of Chios has also experienced very turbulent
        times, particularly in 1822, when an estimated 20,000 people were
        massacred by Ottoman forces, following an unsuccessful uprising against
        Ottoman rule just after the creation of the Greek state in 1821.
        Behind its concrete façade (a result of rebuilding after
        numerous earthquakes), Chios Town has a number of clues to its past.
        Remnants of a medieval kastro and a fine archaeological museum housed
        in a mosque are two of the highlights. Theres also the splendid
        Argenti Museum and Korai Library on Odos Korai Street, with its
        collection of costumes and folk art dating from two thousand years
        ago.
        Out in the countryside, Chios has other attractions to
        offer. Travel south from Chios Town to reach the mastic groves.
        Collecting and processing the crop is still a profitable industry. Look
        out for a number of fine Italian mansions in the plains around Kambos.
        Many still lie in private hands. The twenty mastic villages known
        collectively as mastihohoria were built by the Genoese in the 14–15th
        centuries. Their intricate and confusing maze of narrow alleyways was
        deliberately created to confound invaders. They now often do the same
        to strolling visitors. Most of the villages remain practically
        unchanged since their creation — save for a plethora of TV
        antennae — and offer a fascinating view of Greek village life, where
        tomatoes hang from every window and old folks discuss todays news on
        their doorsteps.
        Pyrgi village, with its walls marked by the incised black
        and white geometric pattern known as xysta, is probably the most
        visited, although Mesta is also beautiful. Following your explorations,
        head toward the coast and the black pebble beach of Emborio to enjoy a
        cooling dip in the sea.
        To the west of Chios Town is a graphic reminder of the
        bloodbath of 1822. High on a rocky bluff is the village of Anavatos,
        which lost much of its population at the time of the massacre. The
        women and children of the village chose suicide rather than the Ottoman
        sword and threw themselves from the rocky precipice at the top of the
        village. Wander along the empty streets to take in the somber
        atmosphere.
        Nearby is the Monastery of Nea Moni, founded in 1049, and
        one of the most beautiful Byzantine religious sites in the Aegean. The
        monastery rests in a fertile valley and is surrounded by plane and pine
        trees. Mosaics inside a small chapel are of the finest quality and show
        scenes of the life of Christ. The monastery also suffered damage in
        1822. Its more portable treasures were stolen, but a lasting memorial
        to the massacre is an ossuary, or depository for the bones of the dead.
        Despite this gruesome reminder, the site is perfect for quiet
        reflection, and is tended now by a couple of elderly nuns. Beyond
        Anavatos and Nea Moni are wonderful beaches around the coastal town of
        Volissos, where you will find a quiet place to acquire (or burnish)
        your suntan.
        Samos
        A fertile island of vines, olive groves, and pine forest,
        that lies just 3 km (2 miles) from the Turkish coast, Samos has taken a
        back seat in Aegean history since its golden age in the fifth century
        b.c. Today it is growing in popularity with tourists, and resort
        facilities are expanding.
        The main town Vathi, or Samos Town, lies on the
        northeastern coastline in a very sheltered harbor. It has few
        facilities for tourists, but a friendly atmosphere and a good
        archaeological museum that exhibits a giant kouros 5 m (16 ft) high.
        Ano Vathi — the older town — sits on the hillside behind and is now
        bypassed by the new road system.
        The much smaller town of Pithagorio on the southeastern
        coast is the site of the ancient capital. It was a center of power in
        the seventh century b.c. when the Samians were the leading maritime
        nation on the Aegean. In 538 b.c. , power fell into the hands of
        Polycrates, a ruthless but brilliant leader. He accumulated untold
        wealth through trade and piracy, funding an extensive construction
        program and a court which attracted such luminaries as Aesop, the
        storyteller, and Pythagoras, the mathematician (a local Samian, who
        later fled the island to escape Polycratess cruelty). Following the
        death of Polycrates, Samos was plunged into a sudden and deep
        decline.
        Pithagorio has a very pretty harbor and the ruins of a
        Frankish castle. The only evidence of Polycratess time is the giant
        mole which, now strengthened, still stands on the ancient foundations.
        Two more massive projects can be found in the surrounding countryside.
        To the west, beyond the airport, are the remains of the Temple of Hera,
        or the Heraion. It would have been the largest temple in the world at
        the time, but it was never completed. In the hills above Pithagorio is
        perhaps the most amazing example of Polycrates wealth and power. He
        funded the cutting of a tunnel over 1,000 m (3,333 ft) long to bring
        water to the ancient capital. The Tunnel of Eupalinos can be explored
        but its not for the claustrophobic.
        On the northern coast, the village of Kokari has a
        picturesque harbor, and is a magnet for visitors. Small villages in the
        interior remain unspoiled, particularly because of their remote and
        hilly location. Among the prettiest is Marathokambos, nestling in the
        shadow of Mount Kerkis. The beaches of Samos provide some of the best
        conditions for windsurfing in the Aegean, particularly on the western
        coast. From Samos, it is only a short ferry trip east to the Turkish
        port of Kusadasi and the site of ancient Ephesus.
        The Northern Aegean
        Like Lesvos, Chios, and Samos, the islands of the northern
        Aegean have been influenced by their proximity to the Turkish
        coastline, with Limnos in particular playing an important strategic
        role on shipping lanes to and from the Dardanelles.
        The islands also lie close to the northern Greek mainland
        and the Balkans region, giving their history different influences than
        that of their neighbors farther south in the Aegean.
        Thasos
        This small, round tree-covered island is a favorite
        vacation spot for families from the cities of northern Greece, being
        only 12 km (8 miles) from the coastline of Macedonia. It has until
        recently seen fewer foreign visitors, although package flights from
        Europe now land at the airport of Kavala on the mainland for the short
        ferry crossing.
        In ancient times, Thasos was renowned for its sweet white
        wine, but today its beaches are the major draw. They are considered
        some of the most beautiful in the Aegean.
        The capital, Thasos Town or Limin, is a modern port built
        on the site of a medieval fortress and a classical Greek settlement.
        Large areas of the site have been excavated and the archaeological
        museum houses a comprehensive collection of finds from the site. (As of
        this writing, the museum is closed for refurbishment, but it is
        expected to reopen in mid-2000. ) There are a number of individual
        buildings to explore. They include a shrine to Pan built on a rocky
        outcrop and the Gate of Parmenon, reached by way of a steep run of
        steps — the last remaining ancient port of entry to the town.
        Beyond Limin, Thasos is mountainous and covered with pine
        forest. Tourism has spread throughout the island, but does not
        overpower its natural charms. The island is famed for its nuts, honey,
        and fruits, which traditionally have been preserved to last through the
        Aegean winters. The closest resort to the capital is Makriamos. Hotels
        and tavernas also line the fine beaches at Krissi Amoudia and Skala
        Potamias.
        Inland settlements offer fascinating insights into life in
        bygone ages. Theologos was the Ottoman capital of Thasos, and has many
        preserved mansions. Even higher up in the mountains, Kastro was built
        to evade the attention of marauding pirates, and still proves elusive
        to all but the most determined visitors.
        Limnos
        Limnos lies closest to the Dardanelles, and for this
        reason the island is dominated by the Greek military, which keeps a
        watchful eye on activity through the straits. It has long been a
        military station for the dominant nation of the area, and was a major
        staging point for British and Commonwealth troops before the disastrous
        Gallipoli campaign of World War I. A cemetery for 900 of these gallant
        men can be found at Moudros, near the harbor where they set forth to
        their fate.
        The capital of the island is Myrina. Small stone houses
        crowd the town center with fine Ottoman houses along the northern edge
        of town. A small archaeological museum displays finds from the island,
        including the eastern site of Polyohni, which was a thriving city
        before its destruction by earthquake in 2100 b.c. The remains of the
        Byzantine kastro can also be explored. The coastline north and south of
        Myrina has some fine stretches of sandy beach, and there is a small
        resort at Akti Myrina. Unfortunately, poor roads and limited public
        transportation hinder exploration of other parts of the island.
        Samothraki
        A series of rocky cliffs line the shoreline of Samothraki
        which, unlike other islands, has poor natural anchorages. Inland, Mount
        Fengari, the Aegeans highest peak at 1,610 m (5,000 ft), dominates the
        landscape. It was from here, according to Homer, that the God Poseidon
        watched the Battle of Troy taking place, looking east across the water.
        The capital, Chora Town, is a classic example of a settlement built out
        of sight of pirate forces. It nestles in a valley 5 km (3 miles)
        inland, unseen by passing ships.
        Today, the island is little more than a forgotten
        backwater with few ferry connections to other islands, but its strong
        natural defenses gave it advantages in ancient times. Until the advent
        of Christianity, Samothraki was a very important island indeed.
        From the late Bronze Age, a center of religious worship
        developed on the northern coast, which was later dedicated to Castor
        and Pollux, the patron saints of sailors. It was also home to the
        powerful Cult of the Underworld. Many, including Philip of Macedon,
        Alexander the Greats father, traveled here to be initiated into its
        inner circle.
        The remains of the center, the Sanctuary of the Great Gods
        near the town of Paleopoli, now form one of the major archaeological
        sites in the eastern Aegean. The site ruins, mostly from the
        Hellenistic period, lie almost overgrown, but they are perfect for
        exploring at your own pace.
        Highlights include the Arsinoion rotunda built for
        Egyptian Queen Arsinoe in the third century b.c. from marble brought
        from Thasos. At the time it was the largest circular building in the
        world, measuring 20 m (65 ft) in diameter. A hill above the theat er is
        where archaeologists found the Winged Victory of Samothraki, now in the
        Louvre in Paris. The more modest museum at the site has many finds,
        including a fine carved Temenos (fourth century b.c. ) frieze of
        musicians and dancing girls.
        Therma on the north coast is still an active spa offering
        treatments for ailments from rheumatism to infertility. It is also the
        starting point for three-hour treks to the summit of Mount Fengari,
        where you can clearly see the Turkish coast — just as Poseidon did.
        The Sporades
        Sporades means scattered, and this group of four islands
        lies off the Greek mainland in just this fashion. Part of Greece from
        the moment of statehood, the Sporades islands see many Greek mainland
        visitors, and were once the exclusive domain of an independent sailing
        fraternity. Today, a rental fleet makes it possible for almost anyone
        to enjoy a sail in this dreamy place.
        Skiathos
        Skiathos is the smallest of the main Sporades islands and
        lies closest to the Greek mainland. Skiathos Town, the only settlement
        on the island, is a bustling resort, rebuilt after severe damage in
        World War II. Urbane Athenians spend summer weekends here, rubbing
        shoulders with the foreign tourists who crowd the bars and clubs. A
        fleet of rental sailboats uses this port as a base, and commercial
        ferries ply their regular routes to other islands from here.
        The commercial ferry port is separated from the
        picturesque fishing harbor by Bourdzi islet, where you can sit under
        pine trees and admire the view. The small fort built on the islet now
        hosts open-air concerts in the summer months. A series of restaurants
        lines the harborside and the narrow cobbled streets behind. Numerous
        small boutiques make the old town a good place for souvenir
        hunting.
        However, the lure of Skiathos has always been its
        beaches — more than 60 along its 44-km (27-mile) coastline. A regular
        bus service runs along the southern shore, terminating at perhaps the
        most famous, Koukounaries Beach. A long arc of fine sand backed by pine
        trees, Koukounaries is perhaps the epitome of everything that beach
        lovers enjoy. Shallow waters, sports, and refreshments add to the fun.
        Perhaps the only problem is that you will be fighting for sand space
        with just about every other tourist on the island. A short walk over
        the hill brings you to Krassi Beach, renowned as a nude beach and
        renamed Banana Beach by local people, for obvious reasons!
        Beaches along the northern shore are better reached by
        caique (a small, brightly painted ferry). Lalaria Beach is among the
        most beautiful, with cliffs and natural arches flanking the pebbled
        bay. The boat trip will also take you past Kastro, the long abandoned
        16th-century capital. Now in ruins, it sits atop a rocky
        promontory.
        Skopelos
        The population of Skopelos is renowned for its
        friendliness and hospitality, and the natural beauty of the island is
        equally inviting. Skopelos Town is one of the most impressive towns of
        its size in the Aegean, in part because it is also among the most
        original — little damaged either by war or earthquakes. Its gray-tiled
        roofs cascade down an amphitheater-shaped hill toward the tiny port.
        Round church towers topped with tiny crosses punctuate the skyline. The
        ruined Venetian castle atop a small hill offers panoramic views over
        the whole town, while the roof of the particularly beautiful Church of
        Christ along the harbor stands out from the open sea.
        The interior of the island is a wonderful mixture of
        mountainous dark pine forest and farmland. There are fewer beaches than
        on other islands in the Sporades, but yachts moor in the numerous rocky
        inlets around the coastline where there is excellent snorkeling and
        swimming. Panormos and Agnondas on the south coast attract tourists, as
        does Stafylos Beach, where the tomb of an ancient king of the same name
        was found in 1927.
        Alonissos
        Alonissos has been settled longer than any other Aegean
        island, estimated by archaeologists to date from 100,000 b.c. , and was
        valued by many leaders in classical Greek times. Yet, in this century,
        the island has suffered a number of severe setbacks that, until
        recently, made it a backwater of the Aegean. The wine produced on the
        island was prized for many centuries, but a bout of Phylloxera disease
        killed the vines, and a large earthquake in 1965 destroyed the islands
        major settlement.
        Today, people visit Alonissos for its natural beauty. Much
        of the sea around the island has been designated as a marine
        conservation area called the Sporades Marine Park, which includes
        several small islands offshore. This protects a population of monk
        seals and other marine life, as well as archaeological remains on the
        seabed.
        Palea Alonissos, destroyed in the earthquake, is a
        five-minute bus ride inland from the port of Patitiri, and its old
        houses are slowly being revived with outside investment. Views from its
        Byzantine walls are spectacular. The road network is limited, but there
        is a bus service to the Kokkinokastro Peninsula where the most popular
        beaches lie. Fleets of small caiques travel to more remote beaches that
        lie all around the coastline.
        Skyros
        The largest and most remote island in the Sporades — a
        two-hour ferry journey southeast of Skiathos — Skyros has been little
        affected by tourism. It is a mountainous island and its inhabitants
        have a rugged individuality that matches the landscape. The whole
        island takes part in the Skyros Carnival, an annual event that takes
        place in the days leading up to Lent. Grotesque animal costumes are
        worn, bawdy jokes are exchanged, and ritual dances are performed.
        The main settlement, Skyros Town on the east coast, is
        topped with a Byzantine/Venetian kastro. Legend says that Theseus was
        thrown to his death here, many generations ago. In the north of the
        town, a local artist, Manos Faltaïts, has developed a museum of Skyrian
        folklore and tradition. The Faltaïts Museum is housed in an old mansion
        and features costumes, arts and crafts, and photographs. There is also
        an archaeological museum that displays older relics, including examples
        of Mycenaean pottery. To the north is the long, sandy Magazia
        Beach.
        The south of the island is mountainous and barren and
        traveling there is difficult. British poet Rupert Brooke is buried at
        Tris Boukes, a bay in the far south. He died in 1915 while on his way
        to fight in the Dardanelles during World War I.
        To the north, wooded hillsides and olive groves surround
        the airport. Ferries arrive at Linaria on the east coast, and in
        pastures around the village it is possible to see the last examples of
        the famed Skyrian miniature horses. This species, about the same size
        as Shetland ponies and found only here, is descended from the ancient
        Pikermic breed.
      
    
  
