
  
  
    
      
        Where To Go
        A good introduction to Jerusalem is a ride on the number 99
        bus, which makes a circuit that includes many of the most important
        sights. After that, youll want to explore the Old City, magnificent
        and mysterious behind its walls, and filled with the most venerated
        sites of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. You can wander on your own
        or join a guided walking tour (for routes and times, check with the
        Tourist Information offices at Safra Square and Jaffa Gate). The walk
        atop the walls that surround the Old City is highly recommended.
        There is also much to see outside the Old City, including
        the bustling downtown districts of East and West Jerusalem; the ancient
        sites and vistas on the Mount of Olives and in the Kidron Valley; and,
        on the western hills of the city, the dynamic Israel Museum, the
        powerful Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial and Museum, and the contemporary
        buildings that house the Knesset and the Supreme Court of the State of
        Israel.
        The Old City
        The Old City is Jerusalems most endlessly fascinating
        attraction, and it is easy to cover on foot. Its streets are narrow,
        full of twisting lanes (Arabic souk or suq), steep stairways, and dark
        covered passageways. It will take several days to familiarize yourself
        with the maze, several more before the principal landmarks become
        easily identifiable. Nobody ever seems to be able to pass from one holy
        place or historical site to another without stopping along the way to
        browse through boxes of broken Roman-era glass at an antiquities shop,
        bargain for figs and grapes in the markets, sample Arabic desserts, or
        examine old Hanukkah menorahs and hand-embroidered Bedouin caftans.
        Enjoy the experiences and give yourself plenty of time.
        The area of much of the present-day Old City began to be
        included inside the walls of Jerusalem only about 2,200 years ago in
        Hasmonean and (later) Herodian times. The original City of David, where
        Solomon reigned and where the Old Testament prophets walked, was
        located on a lower ridge just to the south of the present Old City. As
        warfare became more sophisticated, Jerusalem slowly moved northward and
        uphill to more defensible ground. In fact, Calvary (the site of the
        Crucifixion), which today is deep inside the Old City, was probably
        just outside its walls in Jesuss time.
        The present city walls that make the Old City so impressive
        and give it architectural coherence were built in 1538, on the
        foundations of ancient walls that had been demolished at the end of the
        Crusades. They were constructed by Suleiman the Magnificent, the
        Ottoman Turkish sultan, who never visited Jerusalem but (according to
        tradition) had a dream that he would be devoured by lions unless he
        rebuilt the walls of the city. The city walls, like much of the Old
        City, are composed of stones from many parts of the citys long
        history.
        Jaffa Gate and the Armenian Quarter
        As you approach the walls near Jaffa Gate, look for flat,
        Herodian-era stones with slightly recessed borders among the rougher
        square stones from other periods. There are also beautiful carved
        stones, probably from the ruins of a Crusader church, high in the wall
        just to the left of the gate itself. Facing the direction of both the
        port city of Jaffa and Jerusalems New City, Jaffa Gate is the
        traditional entrance for Western visitors to the Old City.
        Just through the Gate is a Tourist Information Office, and
        beside it are two 16th-century Ottoman tombs behind an iron fence.
        According to one tradition, these are the tombs of the Ottoman
        architects who were commanded by Suleiman the Magnificent to rebuild
        the long-ruined city walls. Some say the architects were executed for
        failing to include the entire area of ancient Jerusalem inside the
        walls, as the sultan had decreed. They were buried at this busy public
        place as a warning not to try to outsmart the sultan. Another legend
        claims these are the graves of two lovers who chose death over
        separation by their powerful families.
        Follow the road inside Jaffa Gate around to the right. The
        best way to enter the Citadel of David is through the ceremonial gate
        built by Suleiman the Magnificent in 1531–1532. A pair of massive
        medieval towers form part of the Citadel, which was the prime bastion
        of the city for over 2,000 years (built almost 1,000 years after the
        time of the legendary king). It bears inscriptions in three varieties
        of Arabic script and leads to a bridge over the remains of the
        Citadels moat. Take time to mount the stairs to the battlements for
        views of the city; you can also explore the ruins and excavations.
        Inside the Tower of David, the Museum of the History of Jerusalem has
        displays outlining the history of the city (see page 81). In the
        evening, a dramatic sound-and-light show is held under the stars in the
        courtyard (see page 93).
        Across the street from the moat entrance to the Citadel is
        Christ Church, the first Anglican church built in the Middle East
        (1849). There are also a few cafés as well as public services including
        a post office, a telephone kiosk, and a police station.
        Jaffa Gate and the Citadel of David are in the Armenian
        Quarter, which has been inhabited by Armenians (the first nation to
        accept Christianity) since the early fourth century. A short walk up
        the road past the police station, along the Street of the Armenian
        Patriarchate, brings you to the Armenian Cathedral of Saint James
        (11th–12th centuries) and its convent. Visitors are allowed into the
        ancient and mysterious church only during afternoon services.
        David Street to the Temple Mount
        The most direct route from the Jaffa Gate and the Citadel
        to the Temple Mount is by way of the intriguing bazaars along David
        Street (as you come through Jaffa Gate, just walk in a straight line to
        the descending steps that begin beside the once-grand 19th-century
        Petra Hotel). These markets are always fascinating. Souvenir shops
        abound, their façades draped with carpets and cloths, their interiors
        piled high with treasures and trash. After examining the tourist
        establishments, dont miss a look into the many shops aimed at locals.
        Arabic spice shops are filled with sacks of fragrant powders and seeds,
        and at the butchers bazaar your eyes will meet those of a dozen
        disembodied sheep heads ready for the pot. Tailors, cobblers,
        pita-bread bakers, and metalworkers all ply their trades amid the din
        of hagglers in the endless labyrinths.
        As you continue your descent on the steps of David Street,
        youll pass a gateway on the right that leads to the Cardo, which is
        worth a detour. Originally the main street of Roman and Byzantine times
        (cardo means heart in Latin), it was once a broad colonnaded market
        and ceremonial street that went through the center of Jerusalem, from
        the Damascus Gate in the north to the southern edge of the city. In
        Crusader times, the wide, Classical Cardo was re-shaped into the
        narrow, parallel bazaars that still lead northward (to the left) to the
        Damascus Gate. During the 1970s, the southern portions of the Cardo,
        long covered by the ruins of the Jewish Quarter, were excavated.
        Sections of the Cardo just south of David Street have been renovated
        with modern shops and galleries, but some shop-fronts have been left in
        their original state from the time of the Crusades. Further south,
        Byzantine columns and Corinthian capitals found in situ were
        re-installed to give visitors an idea of how the original Cardo
        looked.
        David Street continues into the Street of the Chain
        (Es-Silsila), which leads straight toward the Gate of the Chain (Bab
        es-Silsila). This is only one of several entrances to the Haram
        es-Sharif, the noble enclosure atop the Temple Mount. As you approach
        the Temple Mount along the Street of the Chain, youll notice the
        imposing doorways of the great Mameluke-style mansions of Jerusalem
        from the 14th century, with their stalactite-like ornamentation. You
        can visit the Temple Mount from Saturday through Thursday, but on
        Fridays (the Muslim Sabbath) and on major Islamic holidays, including
        the entire holy month of Ramadan, the Haram is closed to
        non-Muslims.
        The Temple Mount (Mount Moriah), where King Solomon built
        the First Temple and where later generations returning from the
        Babylonian Captivity built the Second Temple, is holy ground to both
        Jews and Muslims. So sacred are the confines of the Temple site that
        strictly observant Jews dare not even come here, for fear of walking on
        the unknown spot where the Holy of Holies (sacred chamber) of the
        Jerusalem Temple once stood. The beautifully ornamented First Temple
        was completed about 960 b.c. , built on what had been the ceremonial
        high point of earlier Canaanite Jerusalem. According to Jewish
        tradition, in even earlier times this site had been the altar where
        Abraham prepared to sacrifice his son Isaac and where the voice of God
        proclaimed such sacrifice was not necessary, an episode that forms one
        of the theological foundation stones of Judaism and of Western
        monotheism. The Babylonians destroyed Solomons Temple in 587 b.c. and
        led the Jews into captivity. But by 539 b.c. the Jews (under the rule
        of Cyrus of Persia) were allowed to return from Babylonia and to build
        a modest Second Temple in about 515 b.c. It was to last for 600 years
        (lavishly renovated by Herod starting in 18 b.c. ) until it was
        destroyed by the Romans in a.d. 70.
        The magnificent Dome of the Rock is one of three sublime
        holy places for Muslims (the others are Mecca and Medina). Built by
        early Islamic rulers in a.d. 691 on the approximate site of the First
        and Second Temples, it commemorates the spot to which the Prophet
        Muhammad came from Mecca on a winged horse in a miraculous night
        journey described in the Koran. From this rock, the Prophet began his
        journey to paradise. The Dome of the Rock (Kubbet es-Sakhra) is
        Jerusalems most strikingly beautiful holy place; it is indeed one of
        the most extraordinary buildings in the world. Panels of brilliantly
        colored tiles (added by Suleiman the Magnificent in the mid-16th
        century) and bands of Koranic inscriptions surround the upper part of
        the octagonal shrine, while marble panels in muted colors offset this
        brilliance from below. In 1994 the Dome was restored and gilded with 80
        kg (176 pounds) of 24-karat gold as a gift from King Hussein of
        Jordan.
        After purchasing a combined entrance ticket from a nearby
        stone kiosk for all the major structures on the Temple Mount, climb the
        steps to the Dome of the Rock. You must leave your shoes, bags, and
        cameras on the shelves near the door as you enter. If you visit with a
        partner, plan for one person to stay outside and guard valuables.
        The richness of the exterior of the Dome is echoed, even
        excelled, inside. The rock is surrounded by a richly worked wooden
        screen, and above it are stained-glass windows and black-and-gold
        mosaics, breathtaking in their beauty. Look carefully at the rock to
        find Muhammads footprint, and inspect the small tabernacle at its
        southern extremity, which holds several hairs from the Prophets beard.
        Underneath the sacred rock is a grotto where, according to tradition,
        great prophets and kings of the past came to pray and where the souls
        of the dead travel for their devotions.
        Surrounding the Dome of the Rock are smaller Islamic
        buildings built at different times. The Dome of the Chain is a
        miniature copy of the Dome of the Rock. Sabeel Qait Bey, an ornate
        little 15th-century kiosk, shows the fine design and craftsmanship of
        the Mameluke period; from this kiosk, fresh water was served to
        visitors in earlier times. By the arches and stairs leading down to
        El-Aksa Mosque is the exotic Minbar of Kadi Burhan el-Din, a pulpit
        used in the summer when prayers are said outdoors. Pass under the
        arches and down the steps that lead to the El-Aksa Mosque. Note the
        sundial at the center top of the archway. Its accurate to within about
        five minutes and has the advantage of needing no winding, though it
        does stop on cloudy days. Further down the steps, you pass two places
        reserved for ritual ablutions required before Islamic prayer. One is
        called El-Kas (The Cup), a circular fountain with a pool fitted at
        the bottom with spigots and seats.
        The caliph El-Walid built the El-Aksa Mosque as the Temple
        Mounts great place of prayer in approximately 715. Unlike the Dome of
        the Rock, the El-Aksa has been heavily reshaped and rebuilt a number of
        times. The Crusaders used it as a palace and a church, but El-Aksa
        became a mosque once more after Saladin conquered Jerusalem.
        The structure is especially imposing once youve slipped
        off your shoes and entered the great cool interior. Mammoth marble
        pillars support the beams and ceiling, which is painted in colored
        arabesques; the floor is graced by carpets with intricate patterns.
        Stained-glass windows add to the calm and peaceful atmosphere,
        especially when worshippers are at quiet prayer: be careful not to walk
        in front of those at prayer. At the far (southern) end of the Mosque
        facing Mecca, toward which Muslims pray, youll see pillars made of
        precious breccia and chalcedony; the stone-work in the mihrab (niche
        for prayers) is delicately carved.
        East of El-Aksa is a large open pavement beneath which lie
        tremendous vaulted chambers called Solomons Stables (actually the
        structures hold up the vast artificial platform of the Temple Mount
        originally built by Herod 2,000 years ago). This entire area of the
        Temple Mount is currently off-limits to tourists. From the eastern side
        of the Temple Mount is a marvelous view of the Mount of Olives and the
        Garden of Gethsemane. Biblical tradition says that the southeastern
        corner of the Temple Mount is the Pinnacle of the Temple, where Jesus
        was tempted by Satan.
        Beneath the western edge of the Temple Mount, just below
        the Dome of the Rock and El-Aksa, is the Western Wall (Wailing Wall),
        the most revered holy place in Judaism. Since the Second Temples
        destruction and the exile of the Jews by the Romans in a.d. 70, Jews
        have come here to worship, to mourn the loss of the House of God, and
        to pray the city would one day be restored to them. When that hope was
        realized in June 1967, old buildings that had crowded the Wall were
        demolished and a wide plaza was constructed for the hundreds of
        worshippers who arrived daily.
        The Western Wall is one side of the Herodian retaining
        walls that support the vast ceremonial plaza built by Herod around the
        Second Temple to accommodate hundreds of thousands of Jewish pilgrims
        who visited the Temple in ancient times. No part of the Temple building
        once surrounded by these walls still stands. The giant ashlars (square
        stone blocks) represent for the Jewish people their past glory, as well
        as a promise and a dream come true.
        Only the lower portions of the Walls great ashlars, with
        carefully recessed borders, date from the time of Herod; smaller stones
        higher up represent later constructions and repairs. What you see at
        the Plaza is only a small section of the complete Western Wall,
        extending from the southern side of the Temple Mount to its northern
        end, sunk deeply in the rubble-filled earth. A tunnel has been
        excavated along the entire western side of the Temple Mount, so that
        visitors can see the extent of the Western Wall.
        There are separate sections of the prayer area facing the
        Wall reserved for male and female worshippers. Men must have head
        coverings and women must not have bare shoulders or short skirts when
        entering the prayer enclosure. Skull caps and shawls are lent free of
        charge to those who need them.
        The gate in the city walls nearest the Temple Mount has the
        unusual name of Dung Gate, probably due to the activities of the citys
        waste collection men in earlier times. Outside the Dung Gate lies the
        Arab village of Silwan, on the site of the original City of David.
        The Jewish Quarter
        Across the plaza from the Western Wall is the Jewish
        Quarter, virtually destroyed during the fighting in 1948. The Old City,
        including the Jewish Quarter, was in Jordanian hands and off limits to
        Jews until reclaimed by Israeli forces in 1967. Since then, the Jewish
        Quarter has been rebuilt. Reconstructed older buildings are
        interspersed with new houses, shops, and synagogues, and throughout the
        area you can see archaeological finds uncovered during excavations in
        the 1970s.
        The Ramban Synagogue on Rehov HaYehudim is the oldest house
        of worship still standing in the quarter, its site consecrated by Rabbi
        Moshe Nahmanides when he re-established the Jewish community here in
        1267 after the Crusader wars had left Jerusalem depopulated and in
        ruins. Next to the Ramban is the Yehuda HeHasid Synagogue, also known
        as the Hurva (ruined) Synagogue. This synagogues construction was
        begun by members of Jerusalems Ashkenazi community (Jews of central
        and eastern European ancestry) around 1700. Soon afterward, permission
        to build the synagogue was revoked and the partially completed building
        fell into ruin; only in 1864 was it finally completed. The synagogue
        was the center of Ashkenazi worship until the fighting in 1948, when
        the building was destroyed and the site became a ruin once more.
        The Yohanan Ben Zakkai Synagogue is actually four
        synagogues in one; the largest room gives the complex its name.
        Completed in 1586, it was the center of Sephardic worship for
        centuries. Heavily damaged in 1948, its interior was refurbished after
        1967 with objects from Italian synagogues whose communities had
        immigrated to Israel.
        The Tiferet Israel Synagogue, also called Nisan Bek, was
        dedicated just over a century ago at a spot off Misgav Ladach and
        Chayei Olam streets. Although not as venerable as its neighbors,
        Tiferet Israel was the tallest and perhaps the grandest synagogue in
        late-19th-century Jerusalem. Destroyed in the 1948 war, it is now being
        rebuilt. For a look at domestic life in the Jewish Quarter during the
        19th century, pay a visit to the exhibit at the Old Yishuv Court Museum
        on Rehov Or Hayyim (see page 82).
        The Via Dolorosa and the Muslim Quarter
        A stroll through the Muslim Quarter provides a glimpse of
        some of Jerusalems most ancient sites as well as the vibrant
        contemporary Arab life of the city. You will also find here the start
        of the Via Dolorosa, where the Stations of the Cross hold a fascination
        for visitors no matter what their backgrounds or beliefs.
        Begin at Damascus Gate (Arabic: Bab el-Amud; Hebrew: Shaar
        Shechem) in the Old Citys northern wall, the most impressive of all of
        Jerusalems gates and the work of Suleiman the Magnificents
        16th-century masons and builders. Recent excavations allow you to see
        the present gates second-century predecessor, which is just below it
        to the left and, today, the focus of the Roman Gate Museum.
        Always a center of business activity, the area inside
        Damascus Gate bustles with activity and contains many Arab
        moneychangers shops. Their heaps of silver coins and delicately
        balanced scales have long been replaced by paper notes and pocket
        calculators.
        Inside the gate, a stepped street leads downhill. At the
        fork, bear left onto Al-Wad (the valley) Road. Continue through this
        bazaar until you pass the fortress-like Austrian Hospice on the left.
        Turn left into the Via Dolorosa and continue to the Lions (or St.
        Stephens) Gate at the end of the road. This is the traditional site of
        the martyrdom of St. Stephen, and one of the more modest gates in the
        walls erected by Suleiman the Magnificent. Just outside the Lions
        Gate, look back at the city walls and note the two bas-relief lions.
        These derive from Suleimans dream that he would be devoured by lions
        unless he rebuilt Jerusalems walls; they were designed by Suleimans
        ill-fated architects to symbolize the hope that by restoring the walls,
        Suleiman would avoid such a grisly demise. Stop here to admire the view
        of the Kidron Valley and the Mount of Olives on its far side: the
        Garden of Gethsemane is a green patch on the mountain side, and the
        white stones of ancient Jewish cemeteries are ranged on the slopes to
        the south.
        Re-entering the Old City through the Lions gate, and
        entering the churchs gardens through a doorway on the right side of
        the road, you come to the purest example of Crusader architecture in
        Jerusalem: the Church of St. Anne. According to tradition, saints Anne
        (Hannah) and Joachim, the parents of the Virgin Mary, lived on this
        site when Mary was born; you can visit the grotto beneath the church
        where St. Anne gave birth. Built in approximately 1140 in a spare,
        unornamented style that combines Frankish Romanesque with local
        traditions, the church was turned into an Islamic seminary after 1187,
        when the Crusaders lost Jerusalem. Over the centuries, the building was
        abandoned and fell into ruin until Napoleon III completely restored the
        church in the mid-19th century and presented it to the Order of the
        White Fathers (Pères Blancs). The churchs acoustics are exquisite;
        visiting groups and individuals are welcome to test the acoustics with
        religious songs of all denominations.
        Next to St. Annes are excavations of the Pool of Bethesda,
        where sacrificial sheep were washed in the Second Temple period, and
        where it is believed Jesus cured the crippled man (John 5:2–9). The
        site is a microcosm of Jerusalems history: the lowest level of the
        pool dates from Hasmonean times, the Romans subsequently built a pagan
        shrine here, the Byzantines built a large church to commemorate Jesuss
        miracle, and the Crusaders constructed a chapel — all swept away over
        the centuries.
        After leaving the church, rejoin the Via Dolorosa and walk
        up the street to the Convent of the Flagellation, a Franciscan
        monastery. This is the starting point for the walk along the Stations
        of the Cross, which commemorate the route that Jesus took to his death.
        Franciscan monks have been retracing Jesuss steps and caring for the
        holy sites along the Via Dolorosa since the 15th century. Organized
        walks are usually offered on Fridays; check with the Christian
        Information Centre inside Jaffa Gate.
        The Stations of the Cross (also known as The Way of the
        Cross) are marked with Roman numerals on the walls of buildings along
        the way and with a sunburst made of paving stones on the street itself
        at each station. Some of Jerusalems historians and Christian
        communities have mapped out other possible routes, based on alternative
        traditions and archeological evidence. The original route cannot be
        precisely followed because the Herodian city of Jesuss time was
        destroyed by Rome in a.d. 70; it was rebuilt in a.d. 135 by the Roman
        Emperor Hadrian with a different town plan and pattern of streets,
        making accurate identification of sites in the earlier city difficult.
        Whatever their exact locations, the Stations of the Cross on the Via
        Dolorosa have been an itinerary of faith and reverence venerated by
        most Christian pilgrims since late medieval times.
        The Stations of the Cross
        The details of the Biblical account of Jesuss final days
        can be found in the Gospels of John, Luke, Mark, and Matthew.
        Station I (Condemnation): Jesus was condemned in Herods
        Antonia fortress, the site of which is now covered by modern buildings.
        It is thought that Pilate delivered Jesus to his soldiers at a spot now
        in the courtyard of El-Omariyah School, across the street from the
        Franciscan monastery.
        Station II (Jesus receives the cross): After being
        condemned, Jesus was taken away by soldiers who beat and mocked him in
        the fortress courtyard, put a crown of thorns on his head, and led him
        away to be crucified (Mark 15:16–20). The Franciscan Church of the
        Condemnation and the Chapel of the Flagellation (a medieval building
        that contains a Biblical museum) mark the sites of these events. Before
        being given the cross in the courtyard, Jesus was presented to the
        people by Pilate, who said Behold the man!  (John 19:5). This site is
        likely to have been near the fortress entrance, or somewhat past the
        arch, which was built in a.d. 135 and now named Ecce Homo Arch. 
        Station III (Jesus falls): The Gospels carry no word of
        this event, but according to tradition Jesus fell under the weight of
        the cross just around the first corner you reach. A Polish chapel, with
        a relief on its outer wall showing Jesus bearing the cross, marks the
        spot.
        Station IV (Jesus meets his mother): A small shrine near
        the entrance to Our Lady of the Spasm Armenian Catholic Church
        commemorates the meeting of Mary and Jesus.
        Station V (Simon carries Jesuss cross): In the Gospels, a
        man from Cyrenaica (Libya) was forced by the soldiers to carry the
        cross when it appeared that Jesus couldnt go on (Matt. 27:32). A small
        19th-century Franciscan chapel marks the spot.
        Station VI (Veronica wipes Jesuss face): Your guide may
        have a door in the wall opened to reveal the little Church of St.
        Veronica, built in the restored vaults of a Crusader monastery.
        Tradition says that a woman wiped the sweaty, bloody face of Jesus here
        and an imprint was left on the cloth. The Latin for true image has
        given us the name Veronica, and since the womans name is unknown she
        is revered as St. Veronica.  The legend has been a part of Jerusalem
        lore since the seventh century; the cloth bearing the image is now kept
        at St. Peters in Rome.
        Station VII (Jesus falls again): At the intersection of the
        Via Dolorosa and the market street called Souk Khan ez-Zeit is the spot
        where, according to traditional belief, Jesus fell under the weight of
        the cross a second time.
        Station VIII (Jesus speaks to Jerusalems women): A cross
        in relief on the stone wall marks the site. The Gospel of Luke reports
        that Jesus stopped along the way to Golgotha and told the women who
        were following him that they should weep for themselves and their
        children rather than for him (Luke 23:28). Jerusalem was destroyed by
        Roman troops 36 years after Jesuss crucifixion; its citizens were
        starved, killed in battle, executed, or sold into slavery.
        Station IX (Jesus falls a third time): Jesuss third fall
        under the weight of the cross is legend, and therefore the exact
        location is disputed. A guide can lead you south along Khan ez-Zeit
        from Station VIII and up a stairway to the Ethiopian convent on the
        roof of the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. A bit of column embedded in a
        wall is now marked as Station IX, though it is of less interest than
        the convent itself. Stately Ethiopian monks from one of the worlds
        most ancient Christian communities share the churchs roof with a rival
        Egyptian Coptic convent.
        The Way of the Cross now leads into the Church of the Holy
        Sepulcher itself, which shelters the five final Stations. There has
        been a Church of the Holy Sepulcher on this spot for some 1,650 years,
        ever since Queen Helena (the mother of Emperor Constantine, who made
        Christianity the state religion of Rome) visited Jerusalem in a.d. 326
        and identified Golgotha, the site of the crucifixion itself.
        Constantine then had a magnificent Classical basilica and rotunda built
        to house the tomb of Jesus. This, the grandest and richest of all
        churches to stand here, was destroyed in the year 614 by invading
        Persians. It was rebuilt in 629 but partially destroyed by an insane
        Egyptian caliph in the early 11th century. The form it has today dates
        mostly from Crusader times, but successive changes were drawn more by
        the tides of history than by a single architect, and bickering among
        clergy of various sects over rights within the church often added to
        the confusion. Disagreement was so bad in the 19th century that the
        Ottoman sultan ruling Jerusalem had to step in and adjudicate Christian
        disputes. The portal through which visitors enter the church is from
        Crusader times (1149). The western door of the pair is open; the
        eastern door was bricked up after the Crusaders lost Jerusalem in 1187
        and has remained shut ever since.
        Station X (Jesus is stripped): After entering the church,
        turn right and climb the narrow staircase. The platform here rests
        partly on the rock of Golgotha itself. The soldiers stripped Jesus of
        his clothes (Matt. 27:35), which they later divided among
        themselves.
        Station XI (Jesus is nailed to the cross): The Franciscan
        chapel on the platform — the one to the right — is where tradition
        places the spot at which Jesus was nailed to the cross.
        Station XII (Jesuss death): To the left of the Franciscan
        chapel is a Greek Orthodox altar, profusely decorated with hanging oil
        lamps. Under the altar, a silver disc surrounds a hole marking the
        place where, tradition says, Jesuss cross was raised alongside those
        of the two thieves on either side.
        Station XIII (Jesus is taken down from the cross): Between
        the Franciscan and Greek altars is a small shrine containing a wooden
        figure of Mary in a glass case. In the Gospels, Mary was present at
        Jesuss death (John 19:26).
        Take the right-hand stairs down from the platform to the
        ground floor. Just in front of you will be the Stone of the Unction,
        where Jesuss body was anointed with spices and myrrh and then interred
        a few steps away in Joseph of Arimatheas family tomb.
        Station XIV (The Holy Sepulcher): Joseph of Arimathea, a
        follower of Jesus, donated the tomb, which was a two-room crypt cut in
        the rock of Golgotha. Most of the rock was cut away with the
        construction of earlier Churches of the Holy Sepulcher; all that
        remains is the stone shelf on which Jesuss body lay, now covered in
        polished marble. The present structure enclosing the tomb was designed
        by an Greek Orthodox architect in the 19th century. The tiny chamber in
        which Jesus was buried holds only six people at a time, so there might
        be a few minutes wait.
        Over the centuries each corner and nook inside the Church
        of the Holy Sepulcher has taken on significance, and small chapels have
        been dedicated to the different people and events related to Jesuss
        crucifixion and resurrection. Opposite the entrance to the tomb is the
        Greek Orthodox Katholikon, a brilliantly decorated nave. If you stand
        facing the tomb with your back to the Katholikon, the Franciscan Chapel
        of Mary Magdalene is on your right. This is the spot where Mary
        Magdalene is believed to have discovered the resurrection of Jesus. A
        Franciscan convent, seminary, and church are grouped around the
        chapel.
        Mount Zion and the Mount of Olives
        Directly south of the Old City, just outside its walls, is
        Mount Zion, revered by millions and visited by hundreds daily. Leaving
        the Old City, pass through Zion Gate, which is pitted with bullet holes
        from the 1948 war. For a good look at Mount Zion, the Old City, and
        surrounding Judean hills, take a walk along the top of the walls near
        Zion Gate. Stairways and railings just inside the gate make a tour of
        the battlements safe.
        Mount Zion is dominated by the Dormition Abbey of the
        Benedictine monks. Coming from Zion Gate, you should bear right to
        reach the entrance; note that no visits are allowed between noon and
        2pm. Built in the Neo-Romanesque style during the first years of the
        20th century, consecrated in 1910, the abbey contains a sanctuary
        ornamented with beautiful gold-and-polychrome mosaics in the Byzantine
        style. But the Abbeys spiritual center is beneath the sanctuary,
        marked by a crypt where the Virgin Mary is said to have fallen into
        eternal sleep (dormition).
        On the opposite side of the Abbey from its entrance are two
        more sites of great religious significance. A low-ceilinged room in one
        of the buildings has been venerated for centuries as the Tomb of King
        David. Biblical references are not precise, but they do indicate that
        Davids burial place was inside the walls of the City of David, which
        most archaeologists believe did not extend this far up Mount Zion.
        Directly above the tomb in the same building is the Coenaculum (dining
        room). This is believed to be the place where Jesus and his disciples
        shared the Last Supper, in celebration of the first night of Passover.
        The Crusaders built the Gothic archwork, and Turkish rulers of
        Jerusalem added a prayer niche and inscriptions. Its a small and
        humble room, hardly the grand hall of Leonardo da Vincis famous
        painting.
        Before you leave Mount Zion, visit the Chamber of the
        Martyrs, an independent memorial commemorating the sacrifice of
        millions of Jewish lives in the Nazi Holocaust. The plaques on the
        walls give the names of the communities that were destroyed. Oscar
        Schindler, whose struggle to save Jewish slave laborers from death
        during the Holocaust was made famous by the film Schindlers List, is
        buried in a Christian graveyard on Mount Zion; his interment was
        arranged by the many who owed their lives to his courage and
        ingenuity.
        The Mount of Olives and Gethsemane
        The best way to visit the Mount of Olives is to take a taxi
        or bus (number 75 to Et-Tur, from the Damascus Gate bus station) to the
        top of the Mount, visit the points of interest there, and then walk
        down the hillside through the Garden of Gethsemane and the Jewish
        cemeteries to the Kidron Valley.
        Driving through the Wadi Jodz valley and up the slopes of
        the Mount of Olives takes you past the Augusta Victoria Hospital; after
        you turn at the crest of the hill, the Greek church of Viri Galilei
        (Men of Galilee) is on the right. Farther along is the imposing tower
        of the Russian Church of the Ascension. The towers apex is the highest
        point in the city, marking the spot from which Orthodox Russians
        believe Jesus ascended to heaven. The nuns in the convent here preserve
        their seclusion; visitors must have special permission to enter.
        Most other Christian denominations accept the Chapel of the
        Ascension as the place of Jesuss ascension. Down the road from the
        Russian church, the chapels dome is now in the grounds of a mosque.
        The modest structure is built over a rock said to be the last upon
        which Jesus stood. Despite its significance, the chapel is very plain.
        Near it youll find relief for weary feet: several camel drivers often
        wait around the mosque entrance and will be glad to order their huge
        beasts to kneel so that you can climb aboard. Depending on how much
        youre prepared to pay, they will trot you down to the Seven Arches
        Hotel, with its spectacular vistas, or just wait while you have your
        photo taken.
        Just south of the chapel is the Pater Noster Church,
        thought to be built on the spot where Jesus taught his disciples the
        Lords Prayer. The present church dates from the late 19th century.
        Inside, wall decorations include the Lords Prayer in dozens of
        languages. In the same compound youll find the Basilica of Eleona,
        finished in 1923 on the site of a Byzantine church. From the Pater
        Noster church compound, a road heads to Bethphage, the traditional
        starting-point for Jesuss triumphal ride into Jerusalem on the first
        Palm Sunday.
        The views of the Old City from here are spectacular. A
        short distance along the main road from Pater Noster Church is the
        Seven Arches Hotel and, in front of it, an observation point that
        offers a breathtaking view of Old Jerusalem. Looking across the Kidron
        Valley, ones eye is immediately drawn to the golden Dome of the Rock
        and its brilliantly colored tiles. Youll also see the eastern city
        wall, with a Muslim graveyard at its foot. The wall there is broken by
        the graceful Golden Gate (the Gate of Mercy), which has been walled in
        for centuries; many believe it will not be reopened until the Messiah
        appears and enters Jerusalem. The Byzantines built the splendid gate on
        the ruins of earlier ones. The Crusaders enlarged and embellished it in
        the 12th century, and Sultan Suleiman repaired it in the 16th century.
        The Lions (St. Stephens) Gate is to the right of the Golden Gate. At
        the southern end of the Old City, the hill of Mount Zion stands out,
        crowned by the conical roof of the Dormition Abbey. This sweeping vista
        of Jerusalem has changed greatly over the centuries, but has never
        failed to dazzle millions of pilgrims who have made the long journey to
        the Holy Land.
        A narrow road from the observation point descends into the
        extensive Jewish cemetery on the slope, one of the oldest and most
        venerated Jewish burial sites in the world — some graves date back to
        biblical times. The pebbles placed on gravestones symbolize a visit by
        a mourner.
        On the way down the hill, the 19th-century church of
        Dominus Flevit (The Lord Wept) commemorates Jesuss weeping over his
        vision of the destruction of Jerusalem. During construction of the
        church, workers found artifacts, tombs, and ruins from Jerusalems
        history, some dating from late Bronze Age times (about 1600 b.c. ).
        The Garden of Gethsemane occupies the lower part of the
        slope, and various plots are cared for by different sects. The Russian
        Orthodox Church of Mary Magdalene, with its gilded onion-shaped domes,
        is in the first section of the garden. This exquisite church was built
        by order of Czar Alexander III and his brothers during the late
        nineteenth century in memory of their mother. Russian Orthodox nuns
        oversee the church and its grounds. Entering the churchs one large
        room, you are immediately struck by the lustrous white marble of the
        icons on display. The body of the Russian Grand Duchess Elizabeth
        reposes in the churchs crypt; British-born Princess Alice of Greece
        (mother-in-law of Queen Elizabeth II) is buried nearby. Princess Alice,
        who lived much of her later life in religious seclusion, was
        posthumously honored by the State of Israel for saving the lives of a
        Jewish family by hiding them at the Greek royal palace during World War
        II.
        On the lower slopes of the Garden of Gethsemane, leading to
        the Jericho Road, is the Basilica of the Agony, also called the Church
        of All Nations. The tympanum of its façade shines with gold mosaics
        depicting Christ as he prayed in Gethsemane. The church was built on
        the site of Byzantine and Crusader ruins, paid for by donations from
        all over the world, and dedicated by the Franciscans in 1924. Glass
        plates in the church floor allow you to see fragments of the Byzantine
        floor mosaics left from the floor of an earlier church. The highlight
        of a visit to the Basilica is a walk in the garden, which harbors
        gnarled and ancient olive trees. Well-tended olive trees never die but
        sprout new wood when an old trunk decays, so these ancient trees might
        have been here when Jesus walked in the garden. The word gethsemane
        comes from the Hebrew gat shemen, meaning olive oil press. 
        A few steps from the Basilica of the Agony, at the head of
        the Kidron Valley, is Marys Tomb. Through a Crusader arch, stairs lead
        down a long passageway to the Orthodox Church of the Assumption. In the
        gloomy subterranean church is a rock-hewn sepulcher. Hundreds of smoky,
        scented votive lamps hang from the ceiling. Ancient traditions mark
        this as the place of Marys burial and assumption into heaven (while
        the site of the Dormition Abbey on Mount Zion is the place of Marys
        death). Traditions also identify the complex structure containing
        Marys Tomb as the burial places of Joseph and of Marys parents, St.
        Anne and St. Joachim.
        The Franciscan Grotto of Gethsemane, entered by turning
        right before reaching the Crusader arch, is a less somber place. Jesus
        might well have gathered here with his disciples during the years of
        his teaching. Visiting hours here are slightly shorter than at the
        Basilica of the Agony.
        In Jerusalem, every stone and structure has its
        significance. The little Muslim shrine by the road near Marys Tomb is
        the grave of the 15th-century Muslim judge and historian, Mujr el-Din.
        Nearby, at the head of the Kidron Valley, the Greek Orthodox Church of
        St. Stephen commemorates the first Christian martyr, and up the Jericho
        Road toward the city is a small but dramatic monument to Israeli
        soldiers killed in the 1967 Six Day War.
        The Kidron Valley (Valley of Jehoshaphat)
        The valley between Temple Mount and the Mount of Olives
        holds traces left by Jerusalems earliest inhabitants. The original
        settlement of Jerusalem, founded before 3000 b.c. , was on the western
        side of the valley, and tombs and monuments have been built here ever
        since.
        Gravestones with crosses and Arabic inscriptions at the
        head of the valley remind visitors that many Arabs are Christians. Most
        of the graves are recent, barely a century old, but the cone-roofed,
        timeworn monument seen down the valley dates from the Second Temple
        period over 2,000 years ago. Legend calls this the Tomb of Absalom, the
        ill-fated and rebellious son of David. Behind it is the smaller Tomb of
        Jehoshaphat, dating from the same period. Just beyond is a carved tomb
        with a pyramid-shaped roof, known as both the Tomb of the Pharaohs
        Daughter and the Tomb of Zechariah. Most archaeologists agree that this
        extraordinary ensemble of monuments represents the tombs of wealthy
        Jewish families from Jerusalems Hellenistic period.
        South of the city walls is the site of King Davids city,
        which would have been only the size of a village by todays standards.
        It occupied the slope of the hill south of El-Aksa Mosque, a
        neighborhood called the Ophel (or the City of David). This area is
        partly the present-day Arab village of Silwan and partly open to the
        public as an archaeological park.
        Modern excavations here have brought to light several
        historic sites, including the support wall of Davids citadel (which is
        itself vanished) and Warrens Shaft, a portion of the pre-Davidic
        Canaanite water system. A later tunnel, built by King Hezekiah in 701
        b.c. , from inside the city walls to to the hidden Gihon Spring in the
        valley outside the walls allowed Jerusalem to survive the onslaught of
        Assyrian armies that had already destroyed the northern Kingdom of
        Israel and swept its ten tribes from the annals of history. Without
        this wildly curving water tunnel, cut through the bedrock under
        Jerusalem by frantic teams who worked from both ends to meet in the
        middle, Judaic monotheism would have been destroyed and the development
        of Western civilization would have been considerably altered. Legend
        says that — long afterward — the Virgin Mary brought her infant sons
        clothes here to wash them. The collection point for the tunnels water,
        the Pool of Siloam, is believed to be the place where Jesus restored
        sight to a blind man. A church was once built over this spot, but today
        the minaret of a small mosque is the best landmark for finding the
        pool.
        Under present political circumstances, it is best to
        explore Silwan and surrounding areas with a guided tour. Visitors can
        wander the hillside and wade waist-deep in waters of the Gihon Spring
        that still flow through the tunnel. Soon to go on view in the
        archaeological park are reconstructed houses from various periods,
        including Canaanite dwellings built 5,000 years ago.
        The lower reaches of the Kidron Valley are now part of
        Silwan. The town tumbles down the southern end of the Mount of Olives,
        which is known here as the Mount of Offense, a name acquired in the
        time of Solomon. The great king had built altars to pagan gods
        worshipped by his non-Jewish wives on this slope, an offense against
        the God of Israel. Today nothing remains of those altars.
        East Jerusalem
        Although Jerusalem was reunited after the Six Day War in
        1967, East Jerusalem and other parts of the city previously held by
        Jordan retain their Arab way of life. East Jerusalem has both modern
        streets and ancient monuments, just as West Jerusalem does. And because
        East and West were separate cities in earlier years, you will find a
        central post office, bus station, YMCA, and even consulates duplicated
        in both parts of the city. The Arabs of East Jerusalem (whether
        Christian or Muslim) welcome foreign visitors of all religions.
        If you are not staying in one of East Jerusalems hotels,
        spend at least one morning in this part of the city, perhaps with a
        return in the evening for an Arab dinner and a performance of local
        entertainments. Remember the Sabbath difference: Muslims have Friday as
        their day of rest (beginning at sunset on Thursday and ending at sunset
        on Friday). Many shops and offices are closed for the Sabbath, but
        restaurants are open all week.
        A good place to begin your touring is Damascus Gate. Walk
        north on the Nablus Road (Derech Shechem), past parked buses, and look
        for a lane on the right with a sign pointing to the Garden Tomb, a cave
        venerated by Protestants since General Gordon, British hero of China
        and Khartoum, visited Jerusalem in 1883. He found that Protestant
        denominations had come into being far too late to have been allotted
        rights in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. He noted that this
        rock-hewn cave matched very well the description of Jesuss tomb; a
        skull-like hill nearby strengthened Gordons belief in its
        authenticity. An association of British Protestants owns and maintains
        the attractive grounds and gardens, welcoming all visitors. Whether
        this is Jesuss burial place or not, the tomb is relatively unspoiled
        compared to the one in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher.
        At the intersection of the Nablus Road and Saladin Street
        is the American Colony, named after the late-19th-century benefactors
        who started a suburb here as modern Jerusalem expanded beyond the
        ancient city walls. The imposing church tower is that of St. Georges
        Anglican Cathedral, seat of the Anglican Archbishop of Jerusalem and of
        a school and seminary. You may stroll into the close if the gates are
        open. Just east of the intersection, in Saladin Street, is the entrance
        to the eerie Tombs of the Kings, which is actually the first-century
        tomb of Queen Helena of Adiabne (in Mesopotamia), a convert to
        Judaism.
        The Nablus Road takes you past the famous and atmospheric
        American Colony Hotel, once the palace of a Turkish pasha, to the small
        Sheikh Jarrah Mosque which gives this part of the city its name. Turn
        right past the mosque and then left to reach the Tomb of Simon the Just
        (Shimeon Hazadik), a high priest during the Second Temple period. Jews
        hold the site sacred, although an inscription attributes the grave to a
        Roman owner. As this is Jerusalem, both accounts of the ownership might
        be true.
        Northeast of Simons tomb rises Mount Scopus. From here,
        Roman armies looked down upon besieged Jerusalem until they conquered
        and destroyed the city in a.d. 70. The Hebrew University and the
        Hadassah Medical Centre were built on Mount Scopus beginning in 1925
        and became the pride of the Jewish community in Palestine under British
        control. During the 1948 war, the Jewish defenders of this enclave were
        surrounded by Jordanian armies but refused to surrender. Under terms of
        the cease-fire, Israeli forces were allowed to remain in position on
        Mount Scopus, resupplied once a month by a United Nations convoy of
        food and medicine. With the partition of 1948, Mount Scopus and other
        places in East Jerusalem became inaccessible to Israelis, but a new
        university campus and Hadassah Hospital were built in West Jerusalem.
        With the reunification of the city in 1967, branches of the university
        and hospital were reopened on Mount Scopus. The Harry Truman Research
        Institute is among the striking new university buildings, and the
        university library serves as Israels National Library. Youll need to
        go by car, taxi, or bus to reach the heights of the Mount. From the
        crest of Mount Scopus, the views of Jerusalem, the Judean hills, and
        the desert are spectacular.
        On your return to the center of East Jerusalem from Mount
        Scopus, you will pass the British War Cemetery, a resting place for
        soldiers who fell fighting for Jerusalem in 1917 and another reminder
        of the citys turbulent history. You can make a diversion to the Tombs
        of the Sanhedrin, the supreme rabbinical court of Second Temple times.
        The impressive rock-hewn tombs are in the Sanhedria quarter.
        You can explore the central area of East Jerusalems modern
        business district, on Saladin Street, by tracing your steps back to the
        Old City Walls and Herods Gate. Across the road from Herods Gate is
        the Rockefeller Archaeological Museum, which is perched on a hill (see
        page 82). John D. Rockefeller Jr. provided th e money to build this
        wonderful Art Deco/Neo-Byzantine edifice in 1927. The museums dramatic
        treasures include intricately carved ninth-century wooden panels from
        the El-Aksa Mosque; Crusader stonework from France that once covered
        the entrance to the Church of the Holy Sepulcher; and richly ornamented
        early-Islamic architectural details from the eighth-century Palace of
        Hisham in Jericho. The museum was in the path of hundreds of bullets
        during the 1967 war, as youll notice by the pitted surface of its
        stone exterior.

        Two curiosities exist in this area, both underground. Find
        the bus station on Sultan Suleiman Street between Nablus Road and
        Saladin Street. A narrow alley runs along the eastern edge of the
        station to a rocky outcrop. Within the outcrop (which is actually the
        Skull Hill of the Garden Tomb) is a cave called Jeremiahs Grotto; it
        is believed that the Prophet Jeremiah wrote the Book of Lamentations
        here and was then laid to rest.
        On the opposite side of Sultan Suleiman Street, signs
        direct visitors to a garden and the entrance to Solomons Quarries,
        from which the stone used to build Second Temple Jerusalem was cut.
        This cavern is also known as Zedekiahs Cave, recalling the story of
        how King Zedekiah and his army escaped from a siege of Jerusalem in 587
        b.c. via this route.
        West Jerusalem
        West of Damascus Gate and Highway 1 is the new city of
        West Jerusalem. You can tour the center of this modern half of
        Jerusalem on foot. To reach the sights of the outlying districts you
        have a choice between city buses and taxis; there you will find the
        Israel Museum, the Knesset (Israels Parliament), and the ministries
        and government offices all spread over the hilltops beyond West
        Jerusalems business and residential sections.
        Downtown
        A good starting point for a walk in West Jerusalem is
        Zahal Square, at the northwest corner of the Old City walls. In the
        late 19th century the growth of modern Jerusalem was so great that the
        Ottoman monarch in 1887, Sultan Abdul Hamid II, decided to open a New
        Gate in the city walls just east of Zahal Square to serve the new
        neighborhoods to the west. Across the street from New Gate is the
        enormous hospice and monastery of Notre Dame of Jerusalem, also built
        in 1887. Once administered by the Augustinian Fathers of the
        Assumption, it is now a guesthouse and pilgrimage center.
        To the west on Jaffa Road is the large new municipal
        government center, Safra Square. Farther along, beyond the Central Post
        Office, are buildings now housing the Law Courts; formerly, they were
        part of the Russian Compound, a walled area built in the late 1800s to
        house the 10,000 Russian pilgrims who flooded Jerusalem each Easter
        until the Russian Revolution. Look right when passing the compound to
        see the beautiful, Renaissance-style Russian Cathedral of the Holy
        Trinity, topped by a green dome.
        Continuing your walk on Jaffa Road soon brings you to Zion
        Square, the heart of downtown West Jerusalem. From the square you can
        continue along Jaffa Road to reach the colorful marketplace of Mahane
        Yehuda, which is especially crowded before the Sabbath and holidays.
        Fresh fruit and vegetables are piled high, hunks of meat are displayed,
        and the air is filled with the scent of exotic spices; vendors announce
        their wares with loud chants. Continuing along Jaffa Road, youll find
        Jerusalems Central Bus Station and across from it, Binyanei Haooma,
        Jerusalems convention and exhibition center capable of accommodating
        gatherings of 3,500 people.
        Another direction to take from Zion Square is up the Ben
        Yehuda Mall, a pedestrian road lined with shops and open-air cafés. The
        area becomes liveliest around sunset, with folk-singers, portrait
        artists, jewelry salesmen, and other diversions competing for the
        attention of the crowds. Nearby is the newly renovated Nahlat Shiva, a
        charming area of restaurants, cafés, and shops.
        At the top of Ben Yehuda Street, turn left into King
        George V Street. Farther down is the semicircular headquarters of the
        Jewish Agency. Offices are here also for Keren Hayesod (United Israel
        Appeal) and Keren Kayemet (Jewish National Fund). Just past the Jewish
        Agency compound, near the corner of Agron, Ramban, and Aza streets,
        rises the massive façade of Hekhal Shlomo, Jerusalems great synagogue.
        The Wolfson Museum is upstairs, exhibiting an exceptional collection of
        Judaica.
        Across the street is Jerusalems Independence Park. The
        vast Mamilla Pool, near a small Muslim cemetery at the eastern end of
        the park, is thought to have been a reservoir that was part of the Old
        Citys ancient water system. Wander through the refreshing greenery to
        the intersection of Agron, King David, and Mamilla streets, then climb
        the hill along King David Street past the modern Hebrew Union College.
        On the right, youll come to the Art Deco Byzantine-style tower of the
        YMCA, designed by the firm that also planned New Yorks Empire State
        Building. This landmark was completed in 1933 and contains a fine
        restaurant and hotel as well as the citys first swimming pool. The
        view over Jerusalem from the top of the buildings 46-m (150-ft) tower
        is magnificent.
        The imposing bulk of the King David Hotel (1930),
        Jerusalems grandest hotel, is across the street from the YMCA. In 1946
        the south wing, occupied by British Mandate personnel, was destroyed by
        bombs; 91 people died in the attack by the Irgun, an underground Jewish
        terrorist group. After reconstruction, the hotel still attracts VIPs
        from all over the world.
        At Plumer Square you are at the center of a district of
        public gardens. Make your way to the stone Windmill looming across the
        park to the left. The mill and the neighborhood around it were built in
        the mid-1800s through the initiative of Jerusalems great 19th-century
        patron, Sir Moses Montefiore. The English philanthropist visited the
        city several times and organized the construction of Mishkenot
        Shaananim, a row of dwellings built to encourage Jews to move from the
        overcrowded Jewish Quarter of the Old City to more modern and healthy
        places outside the walls. The complex now serves as a guesthouse for
        visiting creative artists. Near Mishkenot Shaananim youll find the
        restored 19th-century Yemin Moshe Quarter, which not only is
        architecturally captivating but contains several interesting art
        studios and galleries.
        Outlying Neighborhoods
        Farther west from Zion Square, but still accessible by
        city bus (routes 9 and 17), are many more points of interest. The
        Knesset, Israels parliament, meets in a modern building decorated with
        major works by Chagall and other artists. To tour the legislators
        domain, bring your passport or identity card. Nearby is the new,
        architecturally inventive Supreme Court Building.
        Amid the modern and often daring architecture of this area
        is the fortress-like Monastery of the Cross, which is over a thousand
        years old. According to legend, the trees which once grew here were
        planted by Lot after he fled Sodom, and one of them was later used to
        fashion Jesuss cross.
        Spread along the hillside above the Monastery of the Cross
        are the pavilions of the extraordinary Israel Museum, which comprises
        museums of art, archaeology, and ethnography as well as a special
        pavilion devoted to the Dead Sea Scrolls (see page 80). The new,
        state-of-the-art Bible Lands Museum, with its collection of beautiful
        ancient artifacts from neighboring countries, is next door. On the next
        hilltop to the west is the Givat Ram campus of the Hebrew University
        (1954), a sprawling collection of contemporary buildings constructed
        after the original campus on Mount Scopus became inaccessible in 1948.
        The university is one of Israels proudest achievements, where you will
        find the Jewish National University Library and the landmark
        mushroom-domed University Synagogue.
        Even farther west are several impressive monuments to
        people and events in Israels history. Mount Herzl is named after
        Theodore Herzl, the Viennese journalist and founder of modern Zionism
        whose vision aided the eventual establishment of the State of Israel
        (see page 21). Herzls tomb is here, along with a small museum; in the
        gardens nearby are the burial sites of other modern Israeli leaders,
        including Prime Ministers Yitzhak Rabin and Golda Meir.
        Not far from Mount Herzl is the powerful complex of Yad
        Vashem, dedicated to the memory of the millions of Jews murdered by the
        Nazis. Memorials, a documentation center, and a detailed historical
        exhibit showing the horrors of the Holocaust create an outcry against
        human suffering caused by hatred, leaving a lasting impression on all
        who visit.
        After Mount Herzl, the road divides: the upper branch goes
        to Hadassahs Ein Kerem Medical Centre, the lower to the picturesque
        village of Ein Kerem, lying in a valley surrounded by olive trees and
        vineyards. Ein Kerem is thought to be the birthplace of John the
        Baptist and the site where Mary visited her cousin Elizabeth. Two
        Franciscan churches built over Crusader and Byzantine ruins are said to
        be the sites of these events; today there are also Russian and Greek
        Orthodox convents in the village. Ein Kerem is named after a spring,
        which is also called Marys Fountain. 
        The upper road to Hadassah Medical Centre leads to the
        Street of Henrietta Szold, named after the Baltimore-born founder of
        Hadassah, the Organization of American Women Zionists. The famous
        Chagall stained-glass windows grace the hospitals small synagogue, and
        many visitors come merely to admire the designs of these twelve
        masterpieces, each signifying one of the twelve tribes of Israel.
        Audiovisual shows are presented in the hospital complex.
        Several miles down a side road that winds through the
        Judean mountains are two unique memorials to non-Israelis: the Kennedy
        Memorial, like a tree stump, representing a life cut off in its prime;
        and a piano keyboard motif honoring musician Artur Rubinstein. Another
        road south from Mount Herzl leads to the popular Model of Herodian
        Jerusalem on the grounds of the Holyland Hotel.
        Excursions
        Outside the city of Jerusalem are sites of such historical
        and religious interest that you might want to consider visits to one or
        more of them.
        A security note: Unless you are with a tour group, it is
        prudent to ask about the political and security situation before
        setting out for Bethlehem, the West Bank, and other nearby areas.
        Bethlehem
        Five miles south of Jerusalem is Bethlehem, birthplace of
        Jesus and, about a thousand years earlier, of David. At the northern
        entrance to the city lies the Tomb of Rachel. Revered by Jews,
        Christians, and Muslims, the tomb of this biblical matriarch (wife of
        Jacob and mother of Joseph and Benjamin) who died in childbirth has
        been visited for thousands of years by women who come to pray for
        fertility.
        Bethlehems population, mostly Arab, is divided between
        Christians and Muslims, and its church towers and minarets are spread
        dramatically along the Judean hilltops. Under the Palestinian
        Authority, both the fascinating Old Town and the bustling Manger Square
        are being beautifully restored for the year 2000. Manger Square is in
        front of the Church of the Nativity, built by Constantine in 325. One
        of the oldest churches in the world, it was the only church in the Holy
        Land not destroyed during the Persian invasion of 614 — the invaders
        noticed an icon of the Magi (who were fellow Persians) and spared the
        structure. Enter through a small, low door: according to one legend,
        the door was designed to keep aggressors from riding in; another legend
        claims it was designed to make visitors bow in humility. The church is
        situated above the Grotto of the Nativity, a small subterranean chamber
        in which a silver star marks the place of Jesuss birth. A side chapel
        is said to be where the manger stood. The Church of the Nativity, like
        the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, is divided into zones of possession
        among Christian sects, but visitors are free to wander from one to
        another.
        In Beit Sahour, the eastern side of Bethlehem, youll find
        Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholic sites commemorating the Shepherds
        Field, where it is believed the Star of Bethlehem was first seen by
        Bethlehemites tending their sheep. The fields at the edge of the city
        are also the site of the romance between Ruth and Boaz (ancestors of
        King David), described at the end of the Book of Ruth.
        On the road south toward Hebron, you will see a strange
        conical hill off to the east. Now a national park, this is the
        Herodium, a stupendous 91-m (300-ft) mountain with a fortress carved
        out of it by King Herod; it was once topped with his lavish palace,
        defensive towers, and battlements. According to tradition, Herod was
        buried here.
        To the Dead Sea
        Highway 1 from Jerusalem to the Dead Sea descends into the
        barren, softly sculpted mountains of the Judean Desert. After you pass
        the large new town of Maaleh Adumim and the Inn of the Good Samaritan,
        a side road and footpath to the left lead to the dramatically situated
        Greek Orthodox Monastery of St. George, built into the cliffside of the
        gorge of Wadi Kelt. This ancient, remote monastery was once inhabited
        by hundreds of monks. Today, only a handful live here, remaining true
        to the timeless disciplines of simple living and prayer. For security
        reasons today, the 40-minute uphill walk to the monastery should be
        done only with a large group or on an organized tour.
        Highway 1 ends at Highway 90, which runs along the
        shoreline of the Dead Sea southward to the Negev desert and the city of
        Eilat, and northward to Jericho and the Jordan Valley and up to the
        beautiful Sea of Galilee.
        The Dead Sea is by far the lowest point of land in the
        world. This eerie lake, shimmering in the heat, is so heavy with salt
        and other minerals that nothing lives in its waters; swimmers find it
        almost impossible to sink or even to submerge themselves. Your eyes
        will be burned if a drop of the Dead Sea touches them, and you will
        feel the sting of salt and iodine if you have cuts or abrasions on your
        skin. Nonetheless, since ancient times the Dead Sea has been known for
        its healing powers. Its dense, oxygen-rich atmosphere helps those with
        heart and respiratory problems; the low altitude permits psoriasis
        sufferers to expose their skin to the sun for longer periods of time
        because the rays are less intense. Mineral-rich mud and waters here are
        the basis for skin and beauty treatments. Toward the southern end of
        the Dead Sea, a major health spa center has developed, with luxury and
        moderate hotels offering unique Dead Sea programs for relaxation,
        health, and beauty.
        Among the historical sites along the shore of the Dead Sea
        is Qumran, believed to have housed a community of Essenes, an austere,
        mystical Jewish sect that existed 2,000 years ago. Many scholars
        believe the Dead Sea Scrolls (see page 83), found in caves not far from
        Qumran, were hidden by a group of Essenes as Roman armies swept through
        the area during the Jewish revolt against Rome in a.d. 68. Others are
        not convinced Qumran was an Essene outpost; instead, the Dead Sea
        Scrolls might represent a collection of ancient Jewish writings brought
        to the caves from Jerusalem before its destruction in a.d. 70. Ruins at
        Qumran are clearly marked for easy touring.
        To the south along the shore is the popular Dead Sea
        resort of Ein Gedi, a good place for lunch, a swim, or a walk on the
        nature trails. Three thousand years ago, the young David hid from the
        rage of King Saul in the canyon of Ein Gedi, and until its demise in
        early Islamic times, the isolated Jewish town of Ein Gedi was famous
        throughout the ancient world for the balm, incense, and perfumes
        produced from its rare plants. Today you can visit the ruins of the
        Byzantine-era Ein Gedi Synagogue, with its naive mosaic floor. You can
        also stay overnight at Ein Gedis modern kibbutz hotel, set in a
        botanical garden of exotic trees and plantings.
        Even farther south along the Dead Sea you come to Masada,
        now a national park. As you approach it, you can see that this
        flat-topped mountain stands apart from its neighbors, making it
        virtually impregnable. It was at Masada, formerly Herods desert palace
        and fortress, that the last group of Jewish fighters held out in the
        rebellion against Rome. Three years after the fall of Jerusalem in a.d.
        70, the Romans besieged the fortress. On the night before the final
        Roman onslaught, over 900 Jewish defenders committed mass suicide
        rather than give the Romans the triumph of capturing them.
        A youth hostel (good for overnighting in order to
        experience sunrise at Masada) and kosher restaurant are at the foot of
        the mountain near the cable-car station. If you decide to climb to the
        442-m (1,450-ft) summit, the Snake Path facing the Dead Sea is long and
        hard (an hour or so for the climb up), but the Bank Path on the western
        side of the mountain is much easier. Most hikers start the climb before
        dawn because of the extreme heat here even in spring and autumn. Even
        if you take the cable car, drink much more liquid than normal;
        dehydration and sunstroke are common throughout the Dead Sea region.
        You can hire an official guide on Masada or follow the park maps and
        carefully labeled site explanations.
        The Sea of Galilee
        Highway 90 northward through the Jordan Valley leads to
        the lyrical shores of the Sea of Galilee, a good destination for an
        excursion of one or more days from Jerusalem. Enclosed by the mountains
        of the Galilee and the Golan, this azure freshwater lake is surrounded
        by orchards, banana plantations, kibbutzim, and Old and New Testament
        sites. The often bustling resort town of Tiberias dominates the western
        shore. South of the hotel district at Hammat Tiberias, you will find
        the mosaic floor of an elegant Byzantine-era synagogue as well as the
        tomb honoring Maimonides, the great 12th-century Jewish
        philosopher.
        On the rustic northern and eastern shores of the Sea of
        Galilee are some of the sites where, according to New Testament
        tradition, Jesus preached and taught. At Tabgha is the Church of the
        Multiplication of the Loaves and Fishes, where it is said that Jesus
        fed the multitudes. The mosaic floor of the original Byzantine church
        is especially charming. About 4 km (21⁄2 miles) from Tabgha on the road
        to Capernaum, a glance at the small Mount of Beatitudes shows why Jesus
        might have chosen it as the place for the Sermon on the Mount: the
        small hill is a perfect natural pulpit.
        Jesus chose his first disciples from among the fishermen
        of Capernaum (Kefar- Nahum), and the foundations of a house
        there — later enlarged into a church — are said to be the site of the
        house of Simon Peter. Capernaums most impressive ruins are those of a
        large and richly ornamented synagogue in the Roman style, built in the
        centuries after Jerusalems destruction on the site of an earlier
        synagogue in which Jesus might have prayed. Simon Peters house and the
        synagogue are adjacent to one another.
        Also in Galilee, halfway between Tiberias and Haifa, is
        Nazareth, the town where Jesus grew up. A hamlet in Jesuss day, today
        Nazareth is the major Arab city in Israel; its population comprises
        both Christians and Muslims. The Church of the Annunciation is a
        tremendous modern monument built for the Franciscans in the 1960s. It
        is constructed over the grotto where it is believed that Mary received
        the news that she would bear a son and should call him Jesus. 
        Nazaret Ilit, on a hill above the city, is a new Jewish suburb.
      
    
  
