
  
  
    
      
        Where to Go
        Setting your priorities in Malaysia before you start out is
        essential to making your trip both pleasant and satisfying. Happily,
        many destinations in Malaysia offer a key activity travelers will be
        searching for, such as exploring Malaysias culture and history or
        engaging in a sport like fishing, but often there is an added bonus: a
        nearby jungle for trekking or a beachside resort — and this is true
        throughout the country.
        Malaysias well developed transportation
        infrastructure — both road and air — also offers the chance to step
        away from rigid planning if you desire to stay an extra day by the
        beach or want to do some more extensive shopping. Caution is needed if
        you are not used to a hot and humid climate (a constant but not
        necessarily hostile factor), and often requires a little extra planning
        when heading out on tour, trekking, or just lazing by the pool.
        At the back of the book, our helpful A to Z section provides
        detailed practical information on how to handle your stay in Malaysia.
        Here we provide some general touring strategies before describing the
        places you will be visiting.
        Some Touring Strategies
        Starting in Town
        The towns hold a mirror to Malaysias ethnic blend of Malay,
        Chinese, Indians, and Eurasians, living side by side or in their
        separate neighborhoods. This takes on a metropolitan dimension in Kuala
        Lumpur. (In true Malaysian style, we will refer to the capital by its
        abbreviation, KL. ) The northeast coast of Malaysia, especially between
        Kota Bharu and Kuantan, is one of the best places to see traditional
        Malay life with its rich Muslim culture, particularly evident in the
        kampungs (villages) of the interior. Step back into Malaysias history
        in the port towns of Melaka or Kota Kinabalu, where colonial rivals
        once battled for supremacy, and where princes and sultans dealt in
        palace intrigue. You will also be caught by the beauty of the many
        mosques, temples, churches, and shrines as the countrys faithful
        practice their beliefs, their places of homage often existing within
        steps of each other in harmony. But remember when visiting places of
        worship to dress in an appropriately dignified manner and to slip off
        your shoes before entering a mosque or a Hindu temple. In Melaka,
        observe the way of life of the Babas, the oldest Chinese community, and
        its more modern manifestation in Penang — or indeed elsewhere, as
        Chinatowns throughout Malaysia offer chances to explore, browse, or
        buy.
        The museums, while being few in number, provide an excellent
        chance to gain insight into the path the country has taken, as well as
        offering a sense of the countrys culture and folklore. The major ones
        are in KL, Melaka, Penang, Kuching, and Kota Kinabalu. And the picture
        of life on the peninsula is best completed with a visit to Singapores
        national museum, if you happen to be passing through.
        Heading Out to the Country
        Beyond city limits you will find myriad opportunities to
        enjoy the rural and forested Malaysia. But finding your way around the
        riches of rainforest, coral reef, or marine reserve can be bewildering
        if you plunge in unprepared. Unless you already have some experience in
        the region, we recommend that you use the services of the many
        first-class local tour operators. For jungle tours, they provide
        experienced English-speaking guides, most of them with a good knowledge
        of the rainforest. Offices of the Malaysian Tourist Development
        Corporation in your home country can provide guidance to the most
        reputable companies (see page 190). Most operators have their
        headquarters in KL and organize tours nationwide. They may sub-contract
        to smaller but equally reliable companies in outlying regions.
        Malaysia has done a fine job of giving visitors access to
        its natural treasures without taming them too much. At the heart of
        the peninsula, the huge Taman Negara gives you the most comprehensive
        view of the countrys animals and plants in their wild state. A more
        compact approach is possible on the islands, notably with excursions
        into the wilderness of Tioman or Langkawi. If you are attracted by the
        egg-laying habits of turtles, head for Rantau Abang in July and
        August.
        On the island of Borneo, the great natural attractions are
        Sarawaks caves at Niah and Mulu, river cruises with a visit to tribal
        longhouses, Sabahs national parks of Mount Kinabalu and the offshore
        islands, and the Sepilok wildlife sanctuary. If your desire is to
        escape the coastal heat, highland retreats will refresh and invigorate,
        offering a chance to enjoy what was once the exclusive domain of
        colonial administrators.
        And Then the Beach
        White sandy beaches and gentle sea breezes are for many the
        perfect recipe for a holiday from the stresses of modern life, and in
        Malaysia the offerings are plenty. Whether on the Peninsula or at the
        marine parks of Sabah and Sarawak, youll find many opportunities to
        bask and laze under the tropical sun. (Just remember to use
        sunscreen — sunburn and possible dehydration are never too far away.
        )
        On the west coast the best beaches are at the island
        resorts of Penang and Langkawi. Unspoiled stretches of fine sand can
        also be found on the east coast, from Pantai Chinta Berahi, north of
        Kota Bharu, down to Beserah, north of Kuantan. Farther south are the
        resorts of Tioman Island and Desaru. In East Malaysia, Kuching and Kota
        Kinabalu both have fine hotel resorts.
        Speaking the Language
        Though the official tongue is Malay, or Bahasa Malaysia,
        English is still the common language of communication between Malays,
        Chinese, and Indians. After an initial nationalist resistance to using
        English to accompany Malay road signs, a new effort is being made to
        accommodate foreign drivers. But you may still like to use a few words
        of Malay as a courteous gesture to your hosts.
        You will find a comprehensive list of useful phrases in the
        back of this book.
        The Center
        Malaysias prosperity in recent decades is most evident in
        the central region of the peninsula, where the signs abound. From the
        new international airport to KLs dramatic skyline to the middle class
        seen driving Malaysian-made Proton sedans on six-lane highways — all
        are evidence to the countrys rising economic maturity. But even as a
        new light rail system wends its way through the capital, progress has
        not entirely buried the past under chrome and concrete. Still thriving
        are the old commercial areas which brought so much of the wealth to the
        city and country generally.
        Beyond KL, the British colonial past — whose structures now
        more often stand in the shadow of KLs new skyscrapers — continues to
        echo amid the northern hill stations. Here amid the cool afternoon
        breezes or gentle mountain mists of the Cameron Highlands, the English
        palate for tea (on a plantation scale ) and strawberries still thrive.
        Those retreats within easier reach of the city — the casino of the
        Genting Highlands or theme parks born out of former tin mines — draw
        Malaysian families for holiday entertainment, a far cry from the more
        traditional parks, zoos, and aquariums.
        Commerce and industry line the way to the port city of
        Klang on the coast, while Ipoh is Perak states most flourishing tin
        town, and Kuala Kangsar is the leisurely, royal state capital. The vast
        Taman Negara, which translates as national park, is one of the best
        preserved primary rainforests in the world, at once accessible to the
        public and lovingly protective of its plants and wildlife.
        Kuala Lumpur
        At times Kuala Lumpur — often referred to as KL — appears
        to be a criss-cross of pedestrian-unfriendly overpasses and
        expressways. But the city opens to islands of almost jungle-like
        tree-cover before descending again into lively market centers
        surrounded by the buildings that look down upon the citys busy
        streets. Visitors may initially be drawn to the 88-story Petronas Twin
        Towers or the KL Communications Tower, which are potent symbols of
        modern Kuala Lumpur. But the more fascinating splendors of the past are
        closer to street level, where distinctive Neo-Gothic styles are
        beautifully preserved.
        As in other Malaysian cities, the population is
        predominantly Chinese. The Chinese community is prominent in the modern
        business world. Chinatown itself remains a hive of bustling activity,
        standing cheek by jowl with a Little India of pungent spice shops and
        ornate Hindu temples. Ethnic Malays are present in the upper echelons
        of the government, civil service, and tourist offices.
        The Historic Center
        KLs main historic quarter lies near Jalan Sultan
        Hishamuddin, where on the east side of the broad avenue is the Sultan
        Abdul Samad Building. The handsome crypto-Moorish Federal Secretariat,
        now the Supreme Court, was begun in 1894 (finished in 1897) and capped
        with three fine copper onion-domes. One tops a 40-m- (120-ft-) high
        clock tower that suggests inspiration from Big Ben in London. That is
        perhaps not a surprise, since the building was designed by British
        architect A. C. Norman. At the other end of this building youll also
        find Infokraf, where the Malaysian Handicraft Development Corporation
        has a permanent exhibition of national craftwork, with many exhibits
        for sale. Near this building is the old City Hall, at Lebuh Pasar
        Besar, which now houses the Textile Museum.
        Among the many impressive skyscrapers, one of the most
        striking is the 35-story Dayabumi Complex (1970), southeast of Dataran
        Merdeka. The soaring white tower successfully integrates traditional
        Islamic architectural themes — pointed arches, delicate open
        tracery — with its otherwise modern design. Included in the
        southernmost end of the complex is the adjoining Pejabat Besar Pos
        (General Post Office), in a similar Islamic modern style, and a
        shopping mall.
        On the western side of the boulevard is the Dataran Merdeka
        (Freedom Square). In the colonial days, the sound of a cricket bats
        willow would have been heard as the afternoons sun-rays stretched
        across the field. It was here that members of the mock-Tudor Royal
        Selangor Club (1884), also designed by A. C. Norman, took time off from
        the affairs of the Empire to play cricket. On the wide span of lawn the
        cheers of independence were heard on 31 August 1957. The square now
        hosts National Day state parades. On the squares northern side, the
        Anglican St. Marys Church dates to 1893.
        A. C. Norman was rivaled in commissions by A. B. Hubback,
        whose work is reflected in the Malaysian Railway buildings and
        headquarters, located south on Jalan Sultan Hishamuddin. The main
        station (completed in 1911 and extensively renovated in 1986) resembles
        nothing so much as a gleaming sultans palace and is more attractive
        than the somber brown headquarters building across the street. It is a
        fine example of Moorish architecture, reflecting the Ottoman and Mogul
        glory of the 13th and 14th centuries. The north wing was bombed in
        World War II, and the second floor was gutted by fire in 1968.
        Mr. Hubbock also designed the Masjid Jamek. Since 1909 this
        building has marked the confluence of the Gombak and Klang Rivers,
        where tin miners loaded supplies to be sent upriver and unloaded their
        tin for shipment west to Port Klang, and where the citys roots were
        set down. It was designed in 1907 by Hubback in an Indian Moghul style:
        three-pointed domes over the prayer hall, two minarets and balustrades
        above an arcade of cusped arches — the whole predominantly gleaming
        white, with pink terracotta brick.
        Across the river going east from the Dayabumi Complex is
        the old Pasar Seni (Central Market), set in an attractive Art-Deco
        building (1936) in pastel blue and pink with a bold, bright skylit roof
        over a buff-tiled floor. Clothes and Malaysian arts and crafts have
        replaced the fish, meat, and vegetables that used to be sold here, but
        the fine old marble counters have not been touched.
        Chinatown
        Away from the expressways and southeast from the Central
        Market lie the exotic offerings of Chinatown, within the boundaries of
        Jalan Sultan, Jalan Bandar (now known as Jalan Tun H. S. Lee), and
        especially along Jalan Petaling. You will find everything from Chinese
        apothecaries who display their herbs and medicines in porcelain jars to
        Nepalese traders offering exotic jewelry, from fortune-tellers to pet
        shops.
        At night, when Jalan Petaling is closed to traffic, the
        area comes alive, giving way to peddlers selling watches (bewildering
        replicas of designer brands), music and video cassettes, clothing,
        jewelry, and ornaments. The side streets are full of open-air
        restaurants offering dishes of barbecued pork, duck, and seafood,
        noodles, rice-pots, and do-it-yourself steamboats. 
        Past the Jalan Tun H. S. Lee and Jalan Cheng Lock junction
        is the See Yeoh Temple, founded by Yap Ay Koy, a city leader in KLs
        early days. The largest temple is Chan See Shu Yuen, built in 1906, is
        dedicated to Chong Wah, a Sung dynasty emperor. It also marks
        Chinatowns southern boundary.
        One of the breathtaking displays of color comes soon after
        the Kwoong Siew Association Temple, in the Sri Mahamariamman Hindu
        Temple on Jalan Bandar, on the west side of Chinatown. It was built in
        the style of a south Indian gopuram (temple gatehouse-tower), covered
        with a riot of colorful statuary from the Hindu pantheon. First erected
        in 1873, it was shunted across to its present site to make way for the
        railway station in 1855, and it is from here the annual Thaipusam
        pilgrimage to the Batu Caves (see page 53) commences.
        North and east of the historic center is KLs Golden
        Triangle, which is a newer office, entertainment, and shopping
        district. Nearby are two of the tallest landmarks in the city. Visitors
        drawn to the Petronas Twin Towers, located north of this triangle and
        known officially as the Kuala Lumpur City Centre (KLCC), will be
        disappointed to find that there is no public access to the upper
        stories. It is possible to retreat into the shopping mall next door for
        up-market fashions and food. For the best views of the city try the
        Menara Kuala Lumpur — or communications tower — which opened in July
        1996 and rises to 421 m (1,381 ft) on the western edge of the district.
        The non-stop lift takes 55 seconds from ground to the observatory, but
        offers spectacular views of the city and beyond! For those wanting to
        eat on the move, there is the Seri Angkasa revolving restaurant on the
        level above.
        Cultural and Historical Sights
        Located on Jalan Sultan Hishamuddin opposite the KL Railway
        Station — in what was once the Majestic Hotel — is the Balai Senilukis
        (National Art Gallery) of Malaysian and foreign art. West of the
        railway station and within view is the Masjid Negara (National Mosque),
        a vast, modern complex covering over 5 hectares (13 acres). On Fridays
        and other important religious days it can house 8,000 worshippers under
        the tent-like stone roof of its Grand Hall. Walls of openwork stone
        tracery support a canopy of 18 folds fanning out in a circle. These
        symbolize the 13 states of Malaysia and 5 pillars of Islamic faith. The
        mosque also includes ceremonial rooms, a library, a meeting hall, and a
        mausoleum for national heroes, set around cool pools mirroring the blue
        stained-glass of the Grand Hall and marble galleries. Soaring above it
        all is a 73-m (239-ft) high minaret, with a graceful balcony from which
        the muezzin calls the faithful to prayer.
        The Muzium Negara (National Museum) stands on Jalan
        Damansara south of the Lake Gardens. The building, opened in 1963,
        blends modern and traditional Malay design. Two glass mosaic murals
        flanking the entrance depict themes of Malaysias culture and history.
        There are five main galleries dedicated to such subjects as history,
        national sports, and na tural history.
        Other museums include the National History Museum on Jalan
        Raja south of the Dataran Merdeka, with exhibits on the countrys
        history dating back 520 million years (metamorphic sandstone) as well
        as a 40,000-year-old homo sapiens skull. The older Royal Malaysian
        Police Museum (1961) on Jalan Semarak highlights the war against the
        communist insurgents from 1948 to 1960, known as The Emergency.  On
        the campus of the University of Malaysia is the Asian Art Museum, with
        exhibits of sculptures and textiles from within the region. Given the
        extent of wealth it has brought to the country, it is not surprising to
        have a Natural Rubber Museum, which opened since 1992 at the Rubber
        Research Institutes Experimental Station in Sungai Buloh.
        Taman Tasik Perdana (The Lake Gardens)
        West of the Masjid Negara are the Taman Tasik Perdana (Lake
        Gardens). These 911⁄2 hectares (238 acres) of parkland were landscaped
        in 1888 under British British resident Frank Swettenham for the
        citizens relaxation. It is a popular place for picnicking, jogging,
        and resting beneath the trees, and it features an artificial lake for
        boating, providing a lovely escape from the citys tensions. The
        Gardens are also home to a deer park and a vast expanse of netting
        marking the aviary of the bird park, within which are over 5,000 birds.
        Within the bounds of the Gardens is a Planetarium and exhibition as
        well as space theme park.
        Set on a hill at the northern end of the park across a main
        road, the Tugu Negara (National Monument) commemorates Malaysias
        recent dark history through the years of the Emergency from 1948 to
        1960. The bronze group sculpture stands in an attractive setting of
        reflecting pools and fountains with a mosque at one end. It was
        designed by Felix de Weldon and bears a striking similarity to his Iwo
        Jima Memorial to the Pacific War in Washington, DC. Triumphant
        flagbearers are flanked by armed guards while another soldier helps a
        wounded comrade. Beneath them sprawl the enemys dead. Also on the
        National Monument grounds is a Cenotaph to the British Commonwealths
        dead of the two World Wars. West of the Monument, just outside the
        park, is the 18-story Parliament House, which holds the sessions of the
        Senate and House of Representatives.
        Away From the City Center
        To see the tin magnates mansions that remain standing,
        take a taxi ride on Jalan Ampang some 10 km (6 miles) northwest out of
        town. A few of these grand 19th- and 20th-century residences survive
        tucked away among the skyscrapers, the jungle often invading the
        gardens. They offer insight into the massive wealth amassed by the tin
        magnates during their heyday.
        One of thebest preserved is the Dewan Tunku Abdul Rahman,
        built in 1935 by Chinese tin and rubber mogul Eu Tong Sen. Nowadays it
        is a one-stop center of the Malaysian Tourist Information Complex.
        Most drivers will be able to point out the Bok House,
        transformed into the elegant Coq dOr Restaurant. It is a beautiful
        structure, retaining its porticoed verandas, 18th- century paintings,
        and Italian marble floors. It was the home of Chu Cheng Bok, a
        legendary rags-to-riches entrepreneur who gave up the old iron of his
        bicycle repair shop for a fortune in tin and other business. His will
        decreed the house never to be sold, ensuring the mansions future, even
        as other residences fell into disrepair and demolition, often to be
        replaced by skyscrapers.
        A taxi to the new sports stadium at Bukit Jalil takes you
        to the centerpiece of Malaysias site for the 1998 Commonwealth Games.
        The spectacular partially covered stadium has a capacity of 100,000;
        nearby is a 4,000-seat Aquatic Center. The complex adds to the Negara
        (National) and Merdeka stadiums near the city.
        While there are an ever-increasing number of major
        department stalls and malls, night markets remain a favorite throughout
        Malaysia for good deals, excellent local food, and just plain
        entertainment value. The cheapest of the markets is at Chow Kit, where
        Batu Road crosses Jalang Dang. Another market catering to more
        traditional tastes is the Kampung Bahru (new village), behind the Chow
        Kit area. This market is a Pasar Minggu (Sunday Market), but like so
        many other similar markets throughout the country, it begins late
        Saturday afternoon and trades on into the early hours of Sunday
        morning.
        Day Trips from Kuala Lumpur
        Theme Parks
        As prosperity has taken hold in Malaysia, so too has the
        style of entertainment. Just beyond the city now are several theme
        parks built out of the remains of the gorges created from tin mining.
        The Mines Wonderland has been built on what was the worlds largest
        open-cast mining operation. South of Kuala Lumpur along Jalan Sungai
        Besi, it includes snow-making facilities for a winter feel in the
        tropics. Another park is Sunway Lagoon in Bandar Sunway, located near
        the state capital of Selangor, Shah Alam; it is known for its water
        attractions and rides.
        Batu Caves
        The giant Batu Caves are a popular excursion 45 minutes
        drive north of town just off the Ipoh Road. Set in limestone cliffs
        hidden in the jungle, they were discovered in 1878 by a group of
        explorers, including the American naturalist William Hornaday. The
        caves were a hide-out for anti-Japanese, Communist guerrillas during
        World War II. Now transformed into a Hindu shrine, they receive their
        most attention during the Thaipusam festival celebrated in the early
        months of each year.
        There are in fact dozens of underground limestone vaults
        attracting botanists and zoologists to witness their unique flora and
        fauna, but only three caves are open to the general public. At the top
        of a 272-step staircase is the Cathedral Cave, the most breathtaking of
        the three, with its architectural columns of lofty stalactites and
        stalagmites. At the foot of the hill, a bridge over a pond leads to the
        Art Gallery Cave, with displays of garish statues of Hindu deities, and
        the Poets Cave, where verses of the ancient Tamil poet Thiruvalluvar
        are painted on stone tablets. These two-line kural verses deal
        variously with morals, wisdom, love, and finances.
        Templer Park
        Farther north (another 9 km/6 miles along the Ipoh Road)
        from the Batu Caves is Templer Park, which offers the sights of a
        Malaysian rainforest for those with little time to venture into the
        major national parks and forested areas. Britains last High
        Commissioner, Sir Gerald Templer, conceived the park as a vast jungle
        retreat for the public in 1950. Covering an area of 1,200 hectares
        (3,000 acres), the rainforest comes complete with waterfalls, rushing
        streams, lagoons for swimming, and caves in the Bukit Takum limestone
        cliffs to explore. There are several clearly defined paths, with the
        highest point being Bukit Takum 740 m (2,428 ft) on the western side of
        the river in the parks northern corner. For golf enthusiasts, two
        courses reassure the visitor you are close to civilization.
        The Highlands
        By the time Malaysia came under the British imperial sway,
        colonial officials had fully developed the grand institution of the
        hill station, where they could cool off from the hot and humid lowlands
        in the days before air-conditioning. These havens of relaxation set
        among golf courses, gardens, and orchards still do the mountain ranges
        of the peninsulas interior, but they are now holiday resorts.
        Nowadays, Malaysian families are lured to the highlands closest to
        Kuala Lumpur — The Genting and Frasers Hill — while the Cameron
        Highlands is most popular region for foreign visitors. These retreats
        offer everything from casinos to horseback riding, golf to jungle
        trekking, depending on the location. The jungles, especially in the
        Cameron Highlands, were once the strongholds for rebels during the
        Emergency, so some caution is required when venturing into undeveloped
        areas; good maps are a must, and on occasions a guide would be
        recommended.
        Genting Highlands
        Nearest of the highland resort areas to Kuala Lumpur at 51
        km (30 miles), the Gentings rise to 2,000 m (6,560 ft) and are a far
        cry from the peaceful, misty, forested mountains they were just two
        decades ago. Now, the resort and hotel complex is variously described
        as simply noisy to a one-stop destination for fantasy, excitement, and
        adventure; your conclusion obviously depends on your point of view.
        Youll find a wide range of facilities here, from an 18-hole golf
        course to a theme park with cinemas, a monorail, boat-rides, and
        restaurants — even a 32-lane ten-pin bowling center. The resorts
        casino is Malaysias only such legal gambling house, with strict dress
        codes requiring men to wear ties or long-sleeved batik shirts.
        Frasers Hill
        In contrast to the Genting Highlands, this charming,
        old-fashioned hill station, located 100 km (60 miles) northwest of KL,
        is built across seven hills, its highest point being 1,500 m (4,921 ft)
        in the Titiwangsa mountain range. These days it offers a retreat for
        Malaysias business set. The resort was named after Louis James Fraser,
        an English adventurer and scoundrel, who dealt in mule hides, tin,
        opium, and gambling. But Fraser disappeared mysteriously before the
        hill station came into being, in 1910.
        Road access may be difficult, with the last 8 km (5 miles)
        along a winding, narrow roadway where an alternating, one-way traffic
        system is in place. It was along this portion of road, where youll now
        see a sign Emergency Historical Site, that British High Commissioner
        Sir Henry Gurney was killed during the height of the Communist
        insurgency in 1951.
        The countryside is wilder and less cultivated than that in
        the Cameron Highlands, but the sedate side of colonial life is also
        more recognizable here in the white-and-grey stone bungalows with
        roses, rhododendrons, poinsettias, hollyhocks, and dahlias in the
        gardens. Youll find a range of accommodation on offer, from the Jalai
        Hill Resort and Puncak Inn in the top tier to more middle-range inns,
        bungalows, and even a youth hostel. There are good tennis courts, a
        nine-hole golf course, tennis courts, playgrounds, and even horseback
        riding.
        Several nature trails are also marked out through the
        nearby forests, and the wealth of wildlife makes jungle rambles
        particularly enjoyable. A swim is possible at the Jeriau Waterfall,
        41⁄2 km (2 miles) north of town. Birdwatchers look out for over 270
        species of birds which may be seen in the immediate area. Each June,
        the Malaysian Nature Society supports an international bird race,
        where teams compete to identify the largest number of birds.
        Cameron Highlands
        The finest of the cool hill resorts, 240 km (150 miles)
        from KL, stands on a splendid plateau of rolling green valleys
        surrounded by the rugged granite peaks of the Titiwangsa Range, the
        tallest of which is Mount Brinchang at 2,032 m (6,664 ft). If youve
        been traveling on the coast, or elsewhere in semi-tropical Southeast
        Asia, the Cameron Highlands, located over 1,520 m (4,987 ft) above sea
        level, offer great relief amid morning mists and cool breezes.
        Spread over three districts are the townships of Ringlet,
        Tanah Rata  ( the main township), and Brinchang. Ringlet township, the
        first point of arrival, offers little that is special, apart from
        flower nurseries and access to some tea plantations. Thirteen
        kilometers (7 miles) farther brings you to Tanah Rata, the main
        township. On the road from Ringlet is the Sultan Abu Bakar Lake, an
        artificial lake formed by the damming of the Bertam River. Brinchang, a
        few more kilometers beyond Tanah Rata, is better known for its
        vegetable farms, and of course, the famous tea plantations.
        The hill station was named after William Cameron, a British
        surveyor, who in 1885 reported the finding of the fine plateau.  His
        discovery was soon followed by tea planters and Chinese vegetable
        growers. The Highlands also still hold the answer to the mysterious
        disappearance of wealthy American Thai-silk entrepreneur Jim Thompson,
        who disappeared on an evening in 1967 after going off for stroll while
        on holiday at the hill station.
        The Highlands are best reached by train on the
        KL–Butterworth line to Tapah Road station and then by taxi up into the
        hills. Driving yourself on the narrow winding road with frequent
        back-ups imposed by trucks in a hurry could be a hazardous business.
        Let the taxi driver worry about that, while you admire the magnificent
        scenery changing from lowland mangrove, bamboo, and palms, to denser
        rainforest of lush greenery and, as the heat drops away to the more
        comfortable mountain air, montane oaks and laurels familiar to
        temperate climates.
        Tanah Rata is festooned with hotels, good Chinese and
        Indian restaurants, and a variety of English-style tearooms serving the
        local Cameronian brew together with cakes and servings of locally grown
        strawberries and cream. Stores offer everything from the practical to
        glass-mounted scorpions and butterflies.
        A visit to a tea plantation is easily arranged, with bus
        service readily available to and from the farms. The main plantations
        are the Boh Tea Estate and the Sungai Palas and Blue Valley tea
        estates. Accommodation options in Tanah Rata vary depending on your
        budget, with the upper tier offering international-class resorts such
        as Strawberry Park, to the moderately priced Cameronian Holiday Inn.
        Worth a visit — even if you cant afford the room rates — is Ye Olde
        Smokehouse near the golf course. The ivy-covered, mock-Tudor resort has
        become something of an institution since it was built in the 1930s. An
        afternoon traditional cream tea or English roast lunch or dinner is
        an experience in itself. Nearby is a fine 18-hole public golf course,
        beautifully kept despite the strange hazard of a narrow, concrete-sided
        canal running across the middle of it.
        The cooler climate makes jungle walks here a special
        pleasure, not least of all for the myriad brightly colored butterflies
        around the waterfalls, with almost a dozen officially listed. Several
        of the walks pass through — or close to — the Malaysian Agriculture
        Research Development Institute, just a few kilometers from Tahan
        Rata.
        The two most clearly marked paths from Tanah Rata, easiest
        for the whole family, lead within an hour to a refreshing swim at Parit
        Falls or Robinson Falls. Other, more challenging choices, for which you
        should enlist the help of a guide, take you up to Mount Perdah (1,576
        m/5,169 ft), Mount Jasar (1,696 m/5,562 ft), and Mount Beremban (1,841
        m/6,040 ft). Besides the butterflies, look out for red-bellied
        squirrels, wild pigs, and, if you are lucky, an occasional tapir. The
        local Butterfly Farm is probably your best chance of seeing the grand
        Rajah Brooke Birdwing and other rare species.
        Perak
        A journey to Perak takes the traveler into what once was
        the key region for Malaysias economic prosperity, standing as a lure
        to powerful states and interests as well as (mostly Chinese) migrant
        workers. Tin, the basis for the states wealth, was once taken from
        diggings that claimed to be the largest such mines in the world. The
        wealth from the mines paid for many of the historical structures
        evident through the state. Perak, which means silver in Malay, is
        Malaysias second largest state, reaching from Tanjung Malim in the
        south to the Thai border, covering some 21,000 sq km (13,125 sq miles).
        Its sultans family is also the last to be able to trace its ancestry
        to the 16th-century sultans of Melaka.
        The capital Ipoh may be considered the capital of the
        worlds tin industry. It superseded Peraks other rich mining capital,
        Taiping (formerly known as Larut), in this role in 1937. Ipoh is now
        the second largest city in Malaysia, while Kuala Kangsar is the royal
        capital and has been home to Peraks sultans since the 15th
        century.
        The journey north from KL either by train or car takes you
        through a captivating landscape of jungle reaching back from the
        coastal plains to climb the blue hills of the Barisan Titiwangsa Range.
        Amid this wild beauty, enhanced by spectacular outcrops of limestone
        rock, are the tell-tale scars of the tin mines of the Kinta Valley.
        Ipoh
        Once the harbo r for all incoming junks and sampans from
        the Straits of Melaka through the Perak River, the city is located on
        the Kinta River 220 km (135 miles) north of KL. The town offers good
        accommodations and amenities, including a range of restaurants with
        Chinese specialties, such as steamed chicken with bean sprouts and
        noodles.
        The echoes of colonialism are clearly evident in the
        Railway Station, whose Moorish architecture is reminiscent of KLs
        central station and is locally nicknamed the Taj Mahal; nearby is the
        Majestic Station Hotel. The High Court and Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank
        buildings are also excellent examples of Edwardian architecture. Other
        memories of the British presence are in the clock tower, commemorating
        the first British resident of Perak, James Birch, who was assassinated
        in 1875. St. Michaels School and the Royal Ipoh Club are also
        monuments of the former colonial era.
        Around Jalan Dato Sagor and the nearby streets are some of
        the best preserved examples of Chinese architecture in Malaysia. For
        insight into the local tin mining industry, visit the excellent
        Geological Museum on Jalan Sultan Azlan Shah. In addition to exhibits
        of Peraks rich variety of minerals, ores, and fossils are models of
        tin-mining equipment. Other insights into history are to be found at
        the Darul Ridzuan Museum, housed in the former home of wealthy tin
        miner Foo Choong Yit.
        Outside the city, amid vast caves in limestone outcrops,
        are Buddhist temples. In the south the Kek Lok Tong and Sam Poh Tong
        temples are nestled within high limestone caves and cavities near
        Gunung Rapat. The latter dates back to 1890s, while the present façade
        was built in the 1950s, with the temple still home to a group of monks
        and nuns. Six kilometers (4 miles) north of Ipoh is the Perak Tong,
        built in 1926 by a Buddhist priest from China. Here the main attraction
        is a 13-m (41-ft) sitting Buddha amid the eerie darkened cavern;
        altogether there are more than 40 Buddha statues.
        Saved from the plant over-growth in the past two decades,
        12 km (7 miles) from Ipoh is Kellies Castle, a mansion whose
        construction was halted when its owner, William Kellie Smith, a rubber
        planter, died while visiting Scotland in the mid-1920s. Farther south,
        in Teluk Intan, is Malaysias equivalent of the leaning tower of Pisa.
        The pagoda-like structure, built in 1885, is 251⁄2 m (84 ft) tall and
        was once used for water storage.
        Kuala Kangsar
        Home to the Sultans of Perak for the past 500 years, Kuala
        Kangsar is built on a sweep of the Perak River (Sungei Perak) 50 km (32
        miles) from Ipoh on a newer highway. The town has two royal palaces;
        the brash stone residence Istana Iskandariah, and the more elegant
        traditional timbered Istana Kenangan, now used as a Royal Museum. This
        is also where Malaysias rubber industry started with the planting of
        nine seedlings by former resident Hugh Low in 1877, one of which still
        survives near the district office on Jalan Raja Bendahara. The most
        striking building, up on a grass mound, is the Ubudiah Mosque, with its
        massive onion dome of glowing copper set in a nest of white. Begun in
        1917, its construction was interrupted on several occasions, most
        dramatically when two elephants of the Sultan Idris went on a rampage
        on the imported Italian marble floor.
        Kuala Kangsar has long been famous for Malay College, set
        amid spacious grounds near the center of town, a prestigious and
        exclusive school for the Malay aristocracy since it was founded by the
        British in 1904. It is now open to the best (Malay) scholars of all
        classes.
        Taiping
        Another 30 minutes drive from Kuala Kangsar, this old
        mining town was formerly known as Larut. Its present-day name, meaning
        everlasting peace, was proposed by Britain as part of its diplomatic
        contribution to the end of the bloody feuds between Chinese secret
        societies fighting over control of the tin-mining industry in the
        1870s. They were forced to end their conflict under the Treaty of
        Pangor in 1874 after British intervention.
        Happily boasting the peninsulas heaviest rainfalls,
        Taiping, the former capital of Perak state, is now a sleepy town full
        of large treesoverhanging the wide streets. It was able to landscape a
        magnificent park, Lake Gardens, from an tin mine abandoned in 1890,
        then owned by Chung Keng Kwee. The grounds are now home to a 9-hole
        golf course, a small zoo, and an old Government Rest House (now a
        hotel) combining Neo-Classical Doric columns with a slightly curving
        Minangkagau roof — ideal for shedding the heavy rains.
        Built in 1886, the Perak Museum, housing an interesting
        display of ancient weapons and Orang Asli implements, is the oldest in
        Malaysia. On the way, you will pass the prison, used by the Japanese in
        World War II and then for guerrilla troops captured during the
        Emergency. Built in 1885, these days the prison carries out most of the
        executions of Malaysias drug offenders.
        Beyond the Lake Gardens, the Taiping War Cemetery bears
        impressive witness to the peninsulas early role in the Pacific War
        against the Japanese. The tombs of men of the Royal Australian Air
        Force, Indian Army Corps of Clerks, Ambulance Sepoy of the Indian Army
        Medical Corps, and Royal Air Force reveal that many of them died on the
        very first day of active duty: 8 December 1941.
        Once a tea estate, cool, cloud-enshrouded Bukit Larut
        (Maxwell Hill), 12 km (71⁄2 miles) northeast from Taipin, was
        Malaysias smallest and oldest hill station and the retreat for
        colonial administrators. At 1,035 m (3,400 ft) above sea level, it has
        great views when the misty rain-clouds break. Near the jeep terminal,
        pretty bungalows and rest houses offer rooms for rent, with balconies
        overlooking the valley, but booking in advance is necessary. The walk
        to the summit is signposted, and upon reaching the top on a clear day
        it is possible to view the sweep of the coastline from Penang to
        Pangkor.
        Pulau Pangkor
        One of the few locations on the west coast to offer
        palm-fringed beaches is Pulau Pangkor (Pangkor Island). The beaches are
        a regular holiday retreat, offering swimming and other activities as
        well as jungle walks. The ferry from Lumut, about 50 km (31 miles)
        south of Taiping, to Pangkor Island takes about 45 minutes. Once there,
        youll find the wide sands of the Pantai Puteri Dewi (Beach of the
        Beautiful Princess) along the 122-hectare (301-acre) islands northern
        shore. It is part of Pangkor Laut Resort, one of the most exclusive
        destinations in Asia.
        Taman Negara
        This grand national park provides an ideal setting for
        exploring vast expanses of rainforest, fast-flowing rivers, and
        mountains of the peninsulas Main Range. It covers an area of 4,343 sq
        km (1,676 sq miles), spreading across three states: Pahang, Terengganu,
        and Kelantan.
        Backpackers may want to go it alone, but most are advised
        to plan their visit through a tour operator in KL or before they leave
        for Malaysia. Armed with an entry permit, visitors make first for the
        park headquarters, 300 km (187 miles) northeast of the national capital
        by road via Jerantut and 60 km (37 miles) by motor-powered longboat
        from Kuala Tembeling. (Buy your film, batteries, mineral water,
        insect-repellent, etc. , at Jerantut: everything is more expensive
        inside the park. )
        The boat ride on the Tembeling River is likely to be one
        of the highlights of your visit. Along the way, you will see aboriginal
        Negrito fishermen — the only human residents allowed to stay here by
        park authorities — setting or checking their nets. Keep a look out,
        too, for water buffalo taking a soak, river-lizards slipping in and out
        of the water and looking as large as crocodiles (the latter do not come
        this far upstream), and even an occasional otter. Among the birds, you
        will see the flash of a kingfisher or hornbill. Wear a hat and bring
        along plenty of mineral water. The journey usually takes three hours,
        even longer when short stretches of the river dry up, forcing
        passengers to walk along the riverbank while the boatmen push the
        launch through the shallows.
        The headquarters at Kuala Tahan have a good range of
        accommodation — chalets, a hostel, and a rest house — plus washing
        facilities, restaurants, and a grocery store. Payment is strictly in
        Malaysian currency. (For your trekking requirements, see page 181. )
        The park headquarters organize evening slide-shows as a general
        introduction to the features of the surrounding rainforest.
        Jungle Trails
        There are marked trails leading from the parks
        headquarters into the jungle. Guides use them for organized walking and
        boat tours, but you can, of course, go off in your own group. There are
        both day trips and overnight tours to observation-hides, from where you
        can watch for wildlife visiting nearby salt-licks and watering holes.
        Overnight stays are organized at several observation-hides in the
        region, namely at Kumbang, Yong, Tabing, Belau, and Cegar Anjing.
        Headquarters will provide sheets if you do not have a sleeping bag. You
        should be in the hide by the afternoon and out again the next morning
        at around 9:30am. From park headquarters, day trips leaving in the
        early morning include: a walk to Bukit Indah, followed by a boat ride
        through the rapids to Kuala Trenggan, returning to headquarters on
        foot; a walk to the Tabing Hide, followed by a boat ride to the Lata
        Berkoh rapids, then another trek back to headquarters; a boat ride on
        the Tembeling River to the Gua Telinga Bat Cave, which you enter on
        hands and knees until you can stand — you then find yourself in a great
        vault inhabited by hundreds of fruit- and insect-eating bats not at all
        interested in attacking humans. Only the squeamish will object to the
        giant toads and harmless little white cave-racer snakes.
        The most adventurous trek for experienced climbers is a
        full nine-day walk up and down the peninsulas highest peak, Mount
        Tahan (2,187 m/7,173 ft) high. A jungle guide accompanies the
        group.
        Flora and Fauna
        The dipterocarp rainforest here includes the tualang tree.
        At 50 m (164 ft), it is the tallest tree in Southeast Asia. Among the
        jungle fruit are mango, durian, rambutan, and wild banana. At over
        1,500 m (5,000 ft), you will see montane oaks and conifers.
        With patience and luck by day or rotating shift watches by
        night, you may see wild pigs, sambars, and barking deer, gibbons,
        pig-tailed macaques and leaf monkeys, tree shrews, and red flying
        squirrels. Visitors to the Kumbang Hide have seen rare tigers and
        leopards.
        During the fruit season, birdwatchers have spotted up to
        70 species just around the park headquarters. Among them: lesser fish
        eagle, crested serpent eagle, osprey, peacock pheasant, and garnet
        pitta. From September to March you can also see migrant Arctic
        warblers, Japanese paradise flycatchers, and Siberian blue robins.
        Even if you do not spot much of the wildlife we
        mention — and you are almost assured of seeing something — the sheer
        experience of the jungle at night, with its incredible noises, the
        flitting of mysterious fireflies, and the sense of invisible but
        omnipresent life and movement around you make it all worthwhile.
        The West Coast
        For the romantics, the township names of Port Dickson and
        Melaka (formerly Malacca) on the West Coast evoke stories of the
        glorious past of sailing ships and Chinese junks carrying spices,
        silks, and gold, of cutlasses, noble men, and beautiful princesses. In
        many ways this is the story of southwestern Malaysias southwest
        coastline. Nowadays, the rich tapestry of history lies in the monuments
        and homes as well as the descendants of the Malay and Indian, the
        Chinese, Portuguese, Dutch, and British colonizers. In the far north,
        Pulau Penang is both holiday destination and commercial center, while
        closer to the border with Thailand, Pulau Langkawi is the newest resort
        destination for those in search of white sands and gentle seas.
        South from KL to Melaka
        The highway from Kuala Lumpur and Selangor leads through
        Negeri Sembilan, literally the nine states federated as one in the
        18th century. You travel past the vast palm oil and rubber plantations
        to the state capital of Seremban, 64 km (40 miles) southwest of KL.
        Sereban
        Here the architecturally distinctive Minangkabau
        buffalo-horn roofs of Sumatran heritage are evident, together with the
        more recent colonial Victorian style and the traditions of Chinese
        commercial shophouses. The main attractions are the State Legislative
        Assembly Building, a nest of nine roofs, one for each founding state,
        and the Taman Seni Budaya Negeri (Arts and Culture Complex). Visit the
        state museum, and in the grounds opposite is the Kampung Ampang Tinggi,
        built entirely of wood, a Malay princes residence. On show in the
        museum are weapons as well as brass and silverware and a tableau
        portraying a grand royal wedding. The Neo-Classical State Library, with
        its imposing colonial façade, was once the State Secretarial Building.
        Opposite is the extensive Lake Gardens.
        Sri Menanti
        For what is probably the best original example of
        Minangkabau architecture, take a side trip to the old royal capital, 37
        km (23 miles) east of Seremban on the Kuala Pilah Road. The rulers
        palace, Istana Lama, was the official residence of the royal family
        until 1931, replacing an earlier palace which had burnt down. The
        palace features 99 pillars, denoting 99 warriors of various luak
        (clans).
        Melaka
        Melaka (Malacca), easily reached by air or express bus
        from KL, was Malaysias first city, built on the trading empires of
        spices and textiles and a history soaked in the blood of battles as
        rival colonial powers challenged each other to take hold of the port.
        In its glorious 15th-century heyday, it had been the most vital port in
        Southeast Asia, with as many as 2,000 ships docked as the citys
        sultans expanded their territorial reach from the wealth of trade to as
        far as Pahang and Singapore and even to the east coast of Sumatra.
        Today, even as the high-rise makes its present felt, the colonial past
        remains in the architecture and monuments. The citys Chinatown and
        especially along Jalan Hang Jebat — once known as Jonker Street — are
        havens for antiques buyers or those who just want to browse along the
        streets two-story shophouses.
        The Historic Center
        The main buildings of historical or cultural significance
        are all within easy walking distance of the old center, Dutch Square,
        down by the Melaka River.
        The square is situated just off Melaka Bridge. Spanning
        the river, the bridge was once the towns main strategic link between
        port and city and the site of major battles against the European
        invaders.
        The most prominent building overlooking the square is the
        Dutch Stadthuys (Town Hall), dating from around 1650. It was originally
        the official residence of Dutch governors and their officers. Behind
        the red façade is a structure of masonry hauled from the Portuguese
        citadel. Since 1980 the building has housed the Museum of Ethnography
        and History, tracing the towns colonial and Malay past.
        The Jam Besar (clock tower) was built in 1886 by the
        family of Chinese merchant, Tang Bee Sweng. In the middle of the square
        is the Queen Victoria Jubilee Fountain, flanked by a mouse-deer
        recalling the legendary little beast that inspired Prince Parameswara
        to make Melaka his capital.
        Christ Church, with its imposing red exterior, was erected
        between 1741 and 1763, in commemoration of the centenary of the Dutch
        occupation. Additions to the church were made by the British in the
        nineteenth century. Each of the long ceiling beams of its interior is
        hewn from one tree. Equally impressive are the original massive,
        hand-made wooden pews.
        The archway and gate of the A Formosa fortress, the
        remains of the 16th-century Portuguese fort next to Stadthuys, is all
        that stands, saved from total destruction by Sir Stamford Raffles, then
        a government secretary in Penang. The date 1670 and coat of arms were
        added to the gateway by the Dutch East India Company. The gate steps
        lead to the remains of St. Pauls Church, built by a Portuguese sailor,
        Duarte Coelho, in 1521 and origi nally known as the Church of Our Lady
        of the Annunciation. It was later renamed by the Dutch. In front of the
        church tower is a Statue of St. Francis Xavier, its right arm broken
        off during a storm. The Spanish Jesuit missionary visited Melaka
        several times from 1545 until his death in 1553 on Shangchuan Island
        off the coast of Canton. In the church, a stone slab marks his tomb,
        empty since his remains were transported to Goa in India. Granite
        tombstones from the Dutch era stand against the walls. A Dutch and
        British cemetery is to be found farther down the hill.
        Set among its own grounds is the Tugu Pengistiharn
        Kemerdekaan (Proclamation of Independence Memorial), built in 1912. It
        occupies what was once known as the Malacca Club for British colonials
        and local planters. It was on the clubs padang (playing field) that
        future Prime Minister Tunku Abdul Rahman announced in 1956 the success
        of his London negotiations. Nowadays, the Memorial building offers
        films and documents tracing the campaign for independence. Opposite on
        Padang Pahlawan (Bandar Hill) a sound-and-light show is held in the
        evenings, following the tradition of turning history into entertainment
        to draw the crowds.
        Back to the river, one of Melakas more recent additions,
        the Maritime Museum, is housed in a model of the Flor De La Mar, a
        Portuguese ship that sank off Malaka laden with bullion and other
        valuables. Exhibits include models of ships that have called at the
        port over its long and glorious history.
        The Istana Kesultanan Melayu (Malay Sultanate Palace)
        stands as a cultural museum amid elegant gardens north of the Porta da
        Santiago. Reconstructed from ancient prints, it is an approximate but
        noteworthy replica of Mansur Shahs grandiose hilltop residence, which
        is believed to have burned down in 1460.
        Chinatown
        The living history of Melaka is to be found among the Baba
        Nyonya community, the descendants of the original Chinese pioneers and
        entrepreneurs who married local Malay women in the old Straits
        Settlements — Melaka, Penang, and Singapore.
        The narrow streets of Melakas Chinatown, just next to the
        river, hold an abundance of history, especially of last century, when
        the entrepreneurs from this community helped lift the local economy.
        Their contribution now stands among the houses along Jalan Tun Tan
        Cheng Lock, also known as Millionaires Row.  This is an
        antiques-hunters paradise, filled with new and old Oriental
        treasures — porcelain, statues, jewelry, silverware, and heavy
        19th-century furniture. Also, head to Jalan Hang Jebat (formerly Jonker
        Street) for more browsing and bargains.
        One of the mansions, at 50 Jalan Tun Tan Cheng Lock, is
        Baba Nyonya Heritage Museum, an amalgam of three houses belonging to
        the one family. Built in 1896 by rubber planter Chan Cheng Siew, this
        house offers a vivid introduction to the life and culture of the
        Straits Chinese, as the Babas are also known. In a style best described
        as Chinese Palladian, with its Neo-Classical columns and heavy hardwood
        doors, the furnishings and decor bear witness to the great prosperity
        of Baba entrepreneurs. A member of the Chan family usually gives guided
        tours of the house, which last about 45 minutes, and will point out its
        finer points — the silks, filigree, silver ornaments, gleaming
        blackwood furniture inlaid with ivory or mother-of-pearl, and
        monumental gilded teak staircase leading to the bedrooms on the upper
        floor. Also of note: the massive lattice wooden screens though which
        unmarried daughters were allowed to peep at their parents guests in
        the drawing room.
        Along Jalan Tokong and Jalan Tukang Emas are Chinese and
        Hindu temples and a Muslim mosque. The Cheng Hoon Teng Temple (or
        Merciful Cloud Temple), originally built in 1646 by Kapitan China Lee
        Wei King, a fugitive from China, claims to be the oldest Chinese temple
        in Malaysia. Dedicated to Kuan Yin, it is flamboyantly decorated with
        multicolored birds and flowers of glass and porcelain. The bronze
        statue of Kwan Yin, the Goddess of Mercy, was brought back from India
        in the 19th century. The Kampung Kling Mosque, on Jalan Tokong (1748),
        is built in the three-tiered Sumatran style with a pagoda-like minaret.
        Unless you are Muslim you cannot enter the mosque, although you are
        able to enter the courtyard. The nearby Sri Pogyatha Vinayagar Moorthi
        Temple (1781), dedicated to the elephant god Ganesh or Vinayagar, is
        also one of the oldest in the country; it dates to 1781. On Jalan
        Kampung Pantai is the Mausoleum of Hang Jebat, who was killed unjustly
        in a duel of honor with his friend Hang Tuah.
        Outside the City Center
        Rather than drive around the sights away from the old city
        center, you may prefer to relax and let the trishaw-driver find the
        way — and give you the bonus of his wry comments. Start perhaps with an
        evening ride along the open-air restaurants on Jalan Taman, better
        known as Gluttons Corner. Until the recent land reclamation for new
        housing developments, these Malay, Chinese, and Tamil Indian eating
        places bordered on the seafront, but the cuisine (the most notable dish
        being the spicy mee hoon noodles) has not changed.
        Bukit China
        Inland, the hillside provides a Chinese cemetery for over
        12,000 graves, mostly horseshoe-shaped tombs. At the top of the hill
        you will see foundations of the 16th-century Portuguese Franciscan
        monastery and get a splendid view over the town to the Melaka Straits.
        The gaudy red, gold, and white Sam Po Kong Temple stands at the foot of
        Bukit China, honoring Cheng Ho, the eunuch admiral who in 1409 opened
        up Melaka to Chinese trade. Nearby is the Perigi Raja (Sultans Well)
        dug in the 15th century for Princess Hang Li Po, whom the Emperor of
        China had given as a bride to Mansur Shah. Its pure waters were
        subsequently protected by Dutch fortifications.
        The Portuguese Settlement
        A short drive some 3 km (2 miles) south of the town center
        along Jalan Parameswara takes you to the heart of this little Eurasian
        community, peopled by descendants of the Portuguese colonists. Around
        Jalan dAlbuquerque and Dataran Portugis (Portuguese Square), the
        houses look no different from those in the rest of Melaka, but you may
        hear snatches of Cristao, a 16th-century Portuguese dialect, and
        mothers calling out to Afonso, Luis, or Filomena.  The
        restaurants on and off the square serve good seafood, though over the
        centuries the Portuguese cuisine has taken on a spicy Asian flavor. The
        community worships at the simple, unassuming St. Peters Catholic
        Church, where Easter is an especially big event attracting many
        Indians, Chinese, and Malay non-Catholics to the great candlelit
        procession.
        The Coast Roads
        Swimmers should beware of the pollution at the beaches,
        but it is worth taking a ride north along the Jalan Tengkera coast road
        to visit some of the picturesque fishing villages. On the way, take a
        look at the fine three-tiered, Sumatra-style Kling Tengkera Mosque. It
        is the burial place of Sultan Husain of Johor, who negotiated with
        Raffles the British rights to Singapore. You will find good crab and
        shrimp at the fishing village of Pantai Kundor. Farther north, Tanjung
        Bidara, 35 km (20 miles) from Melaka, has a hotel resort and some
        pleasant tree-shade on the beach for picnics.
        Some 8 km (5 miles) south of Melaka, you can take a boat
        at Umbai out to Pulau Besar. The island has good white sandy beaches
        and offers some pleasant walks in the jungle. A resort has recently
        been opened on Pulau Besar.
        Penang
        Located on the northeast coast of Pulau Pinang (Betel Nut
        Island), Georgetown is the draw to Penang state, with rich colonial and
        historic roots amid the clutter of a market and commercial town. (The
        city is often referred to simply as Penang.  ) Its narrow streets and
        busy thoroughfares add to the adventure, with its Chinese history
        reflected in the shophouses and older hotels. Entry points to the
        island are by road and rail, a ferry journey across the Selat Selatan
        from the industrial town of Butterworth, or by way of the 7-km
        (41⁄2-mile) drive over the Penang Bridge, which provides wonderful
        views of the harbor. Flights, including international arrivals, land at
        the Bayan Lepas International Airport 18 km (11 miles) south from
        Georgetown, where taxis to the city are available.
        Though most of the activity in Penang is in the city, its
        also possible to relax at a beach-side resort or to flee the heat on
        the railway link to the top of Penang Hill. You can virtually step back
        into the islands history amid colonial buildings, Chinese temples, and
        shophouses. Great shopping opportunities and delicious food add to
        Penangs charms.
        Georgetown
        Under the British, Penang was named Prince of Wales
        Island, and the capital took its name from the son of King George III,
        the future George IV. Nowadays, it is the third largest of Malaysias
        cities behind KL and Ipoh, with a population of around one million;
        Georgetown is also the center for the countrys electronics industry.
        It was also a key retreat for the 1970s hippy population, lured
        especially to the beaches of Batu Ferringhi (see below). Nowadays, the
        city is a blend of historic buildings and modern skyscrapers, and the
        contrast is striking. Move from the rich, scented air surrounding the
        many Chinese temples to such modern buildings as the 65-story
        Komtar — or Tun Abdul Razak Complex — a government, shopping, and
        entertainment center.
        The Old Center. One of the joys of touring Georgetowns
        historic section is the opportunity to cover many of the sites in this
        compact area by foot. And the best place to begin your tour is at the
        main ferry terminal at Weld Quay. There along the foreshore is the
        Kampung Ayer, or Chinese Water Village, better known as the Clan Piers,
        a hamlet of houses on stilts, joined by wooden walkways over the water
        and inhibited by 2,000 boatmen or fishing families, each group
        belonging to a different clan.
        At the other end of Pengkalan Weld, opposite the Tourist
        Office, is the Jam Besar (Penang Clock Tower) built to mark Queen
        Victorias Diamond Jubilee, and presented to the town in 1897. The
        tower is just over 18 m (60 ft) high, one for each year of Victorias
        rule at the time of her Jubilee.
        Across the road is Fort Cornwallis (named after Charles
        Cornwallis, Governor General of India), which marks the spot where
        Captain Light arrived on 17 July 1786. The greenery of the park and
        gardens surrounds the fortifications, which were originally made of
        wood and rebuilt in 1810. The cannon on the ramparts were never fired
        in defense of the harbor and these days are put to better use as slides
        for the childrens playground. The oldest cannon is the Seri Rambai;
        originally given to the Sultan of Jahor by the Dutch, it was
        transported to Penang in the 17th century aboard a British steamer of
        the same name. If you see flowers in this barrel, this is likely to be
        an offering from a childless woman hoping for fertility, which the
        cannon is said to be able to bestow.
        Jin Tun Syed Sheh Barakban (also known as the Esplanade)
        runs between the waterfront and the Padang before the fort. This area
        is lined with handsome, 19th-century colonial government buildings,
        their brilliant white evocative of the era one hundred years ago. The
        Britons worshipped in St. Georges Church (1818) on Lebuh Farquhar. It
        is oldest Anglican church in Southeast Asia. In the nearby cemetery,
        set among frangipani trees, is the Grave of Francis Light, who died
        from malaria in 1794, only six years after the start of his Penang
        adventure. And there are many other graves, their tombstones revealing
        the hardships of the towns history.
        Francis Lights statue stands at the entrance of the
        Penang Museum and Art Gallery at the corner of Lebuh Light and Lebuh
        Farquhar. In fact, as no photograph of Light himself was available, the
        sculpture is a likeness made from a portrait of his son, William (who
        founded the city of Adelaide in Australia). The museum is housed in
        what was the Penang Free School. Founded in 1816, it was the first
        English language school in Southeast Asia. There is a fine collection
        of historical memorabilia as well as old paintings and etchings, and a
        19th-century Chinese bridal chamber. Also on show is one incongruous
        exhibit left by the Royal Air Airforce: a bronze bust of the German
        Kaiser Wilhelm II. The Art Gallery, upstairs, has a display of batik
        paintings, oils, graphics, and Chinese ink drawings.
        One of the great monuments from Georgetowns colonial days
        is the Eastern & Oriental Hotel at 10–12 Lubuh Farquhar. Even if
        you are not staying at one of the E & Os grand old rooms — where
        such authors as Kipling and Somerset Maugham once stayed — do at least
        take a drink in the venerable 1885 Bar commemorating the year of the
        hotels founding. The E & O is actually a fusion of two separate
        hotels: the Eastern, facing the Esplanade, and the Oriental, facing the
        sea. It was the brainchild of Martin and Tigran Sharkie, Armenian
        brothers who also created the famous Raffles Hotel in Singapore.
        Recently restored to its former splendor, is now linked to a select
        group of famous hotels in Southeast Asia and Indo-china. In the
        evening, sit by the pool overlooking the wide waters and dream of
        supping in the days of the Empire.
        Chinatown. The heartland of Georgetowns chinatown is
        centered on Lebah Chulia and Lebah Campbell, both of which run off the
        citys main commercial thoroughfare of Jalan Penang. Here amid a sea of
        two-story shophouses and busy lanes, wares spill out, competing for
        space and the attention of shoppers. It is also an area favored by
        backpackers lured by cheap hotels and restaurants and the chance of
        purchasing discounted air tickets. The famous flea market is now
        located at Loring Kulit (literally Skin Lane), near the citys
        stadium. Here you can wade through mountains of old clothes, jewelry,
        utensils, clocks, dolls, ornaments, old coins, and all the bric-a-brac
        of an oriental bazaar. You will find good leather and canvas-wear for
        jungle treks on Campbell and Chulia streets. Here also are the betting
        shops, antique barber shops, and stores offering exotic medicines.
        Wander around the neighborhoods back streets to admire
        the beautifully kept residential houses, many with elegantly carved
        teak window screens and doorways and handsome gold-and-black lacquered
        name plates. The more flamboyant are the Clan Houses, bulwarks of
        community solidarity. They combine temples for ancestral worship with
        meeting halls to settle local problems — housing, jobs, medical care,
        help for orphans, and discreetly handled intra-community crime.
        Off Lebuh Cannon — so called because of the holes made in
        the road surface here by cannonballs fired during the Great Penang Riot
        of 1867 — and through a laneway is the Khoo Kongsi (clan house house of
        the family Khoo). Approach it via a narrow alley near the intersection
        of Jalan Acheh and Lebuh Pitt. Inside is an image of the clans patron,
        Tua Sai Yeah, a renowned general of the Chin dynasty (221–207 b.c. ).
        Other houses nearby date back to the mid-19th century. The ornate
        ancestral temple Leong San Tong stands opposite a smaller hall used for
        open-air Chinese opera and theater. To the left is the shrine to the
        God of Prosperity and to the right is the hall of sinchoo
        (soul-tablets): gold plaques honoring clan dignitaries and simpler
        wooden panels for more humble clan members.
        The Cheong Fatt Tze Mansion, on Lebuh Leith, with its
        striking outer walls of a rich blue color, was built around 1860 by
        Thio Thaw Siat, a Chinese businessman. It is considered one of the best
        examples of 19th-century Chinese architecture in Penang. The building
        is being restored, but its future purpose remains undecided.
        The busiest public temple in Penang is the Kuan Yin Ten
        Temple, on Lebuh Pitt (Jalan Masjid Kapitan Kling), near St. Georges
        Church. It is dedicated to the Goddess of Mercy, who is often
        associated with fertility rituals and other benevolent powers and as a
        result draws a wide range of both the rich and poor to pay respect. For
        newlyweds, the Goddess is also identified with the Indian Boddhisattva
        of Fertility. The shrine is protected by two stone lions at the
        entrance and guardian dragons on the roof. The atmosphere is heavy with
        the scent of burning joss-sticks mixed with aroma of flowers, scented
        oils, fruits, cakes, and roast chicken offered on the altars to help
        solve family problems. This deity forms a bridge between traditional
        Chinese beliefs and Buddhism.
        On the same street is the Kapitan Kling Mosque, the
        states oldest mosque, built in 1800 for Muslim Indian soldiers. The
        Sri Mariamman Temple on Lebuh Queen (which runs parallel to Lebuh Pitt)
        was built in 1883 and is the oldest Hindu temple in Penang. Vividly
        decorated, it is dedicated to Lord Subramaniam, the son of Shiva and
        destroyer of evil, who is the focus of worship during the Thaipusam
        festival held in the early months of the year.
        Beyond the City Center
        Away from the frenzy of downtown Georgetown, the main
        sights of interest are Penang Hill and the Botanical Gardens. The drive
        out along Jalan Sultan Ahmad Shah takes you past the rubber magnates
        Neo-Gothic and Palladian mansions, built during the boom that lasted
        through World War I.
        The Buddhist Wat Chayamangkalaram monastery, on Lorong
        Burma, is famous for its 33-m- (108-ft-) long reclining Buddha. The
        site for the temple was given to the community by Queen Victoria in
        1845. The gigantic naga serpents, mystical creatures linking earth to
        heaven, are the balustrades at the entrance of the meditation hall.
        Farther west, away from the temple, youll find the
        Botanical Gardens. The 30-hectare (74-acre) garden was created in 1844
        as a tribute to Charles Curtis, its superintendent, who collected
        botanical specimens from the nearby hills. Leaf monkeys and long-tailed
        macaques are among the wildlife. One is cautioned about eating food
        openly, as the monkeys are likely to view this as an invitation to
        dine.
        Jalan Dato Keramat, then Jalan Ayer Hitam, lead west of
        town to the Penang Hill, 830 m (2,722 ft) above sea level, which served
        as a colonial hill station at the turn of the century, and is now
        popular as a weekend excursion for locals. Take a delightfully slow
        ride on the funicular railway (built in 1923) past bungalows and villas
        set amid handsome gardens for panoramic views of the island.
        Day-trippers walk along trails through dense groves of bamboo to catch
        views of flora and wildlife. Birdwatchers look out for blue-tailed
        bee-eaters, sunbirds, and spider-hunters.
        Above the small town of Ayer (also Air) Hitam stands the
        Kek Lok Si (Temple of Paradise). It was founded by Abbot Beow Lean, a
        Chinese Buddhist priest from Fujian province in China who arrived in
        Penang in 1887. The temples construction began in 1890 and took 20
        years to complete. The centerpiece is the seven-tiered Pagoda of a
        Million Buddhas, which is 30 m (90 ft) high and dedicated to Tsi Tsuang
        Wang. The pagoda is actually a blend of three architectural styles, a
        Chinese octagonal base, a Thai central core, and a Burmese peak. At the
        Tortoise Pond, visitors feed the creatures special vegetables and
        tortoise biscuits.  Boulders on the grounds are covered with Chinese
        calligraphy of Buddhist and Confucian texts. Inside the shrine are
        statues of the Laughing Buddha, radiating happiness; Sakyamuni Buddha,
        incarnation of the faiths founder; and Kuan Yin, Goddess of Mercy.
        Around The Island
        Away from Georgetowns hectic, bustling streets and midday
        heat, there is the chance to explore the remainder of the island. A
        tour around the island — about 74 km (46 miles) — will give you the
        best chance to meet the Malay population, who live largely in the rural
        kampungs and fishing villages. The island is a blend of hilly
        rainforest and occasional plantations of rubber, oil palms, pepper,
        nutmeg, cloves, and other spices. A tour around the island can be
        accomplished in just a day, although overnight accommodation away from
        the beach resorts is limited.
        Also northwest 15 km (91⁄2 miles) from Georgetown are the
        beach resorts of Batu Ferringhi, or simply Foreigners Rock,
        including the sandy beaches and rows of luxury hotels offering
        waterskiing, sailing, windsurfing, water scooters, horseback riding,
        and other sports. (There are also small inns and motels in the region
        for travelers on a budget. ) While the beaches are sandy, they may
        prove disappointing to those who have travelled on Malaysias
        northeastern coastline.
        On a journey around the island, there are several
        potential stopovers such as Batu Maung, which offers scenic views and a
        seafood restaurant on stilts over the water. Both Sungei Pinang and
        Pantai Aceh are small Chinese villages reached by turning west off the
        main road. For fishing and snorkeling, stop at Teluk Bahang and hire a
        boat out to Muka Head on the islands northwest tip.
        If a watery adventure is not what you seek, you can trek
        through the Pantai Acheh Forest Reserve. The reserve covers some 20 sq
        km (8 sq miles) of the northwest corner of the island. With only
        camping available as accommodation and vehicles denied access to the
        park, the reward comes in sighting wildlife like wild pigs,
        leopard-cats, slow loris, flying lemurs, leaf monkeys, macaques, and
        black squirrels. The landscape is dotted with granite outcrops.
        Near Teluk Bahangs town centre is Penang Cultural Centre,
        which features art and crafts and music and dance, as well as
        traditional architecture from elsewhere in Malaysia. At the southern
        end of Teluk Bahang village is the Penang Butterfly Farm, which boasts
        hundreds of different specimens fluttering around a netted enclosure of
        landscaped gardens.
        A tropical fruit farm, just 8 km (5 miles) from Teluk
        Bahang, is unique in that it has cultivated 140 types of exotic fruit
        trees on its 10 hectares (25 acres) since its opening in 1992.
        Birdwatchers gather around Genting, one of the worlds largest nesting
        grounds for bee-eaters of all varieties — blue tailed, blue-throated,
        chestnut-headed, and others gather here in their hundreds.
        As the road turns north again past the airport at Bayan
        Lepas, watch out for signs to the Snake Temple or, more correctly, the
        Temple of the Azure Cloud. Fifteen kilometers (71⁄2 miles) south from
        Georgetown, it was built in 1850 as a dedication to a Chinese monk,
        Chor Soo Kong, who gained fame in his ability to heal. After the temple
        was invaded by Waglers vipers, it was decided they were incarnations
        of the monk and they were accorded sacred status. Although poisonous,
        they are supposedly doped harmless by the incense smoke. A few are said
        to have had their teeth pulled, and the monks will be happy to drape
        them around the shoulders of a photograph-seeking tourist. Smile,
        anyone?
        North to Langkawi
        Part of an archipelago of some 100 islets, the pretty
        resort island of Langkawi lies just south of the sea border to Thailand
        and is increasingly seen as a regional resort option with its myriad
        resort hotels and motels. If you are traveling there by road (rather
        than taking a flight from KL), ferries leave from Kuala Perlis and
        Kuala Kedah. There are overnight ferries from Penang and a twice-weekly
        ferry to and from Thailands Phuket Island. There are also
        international flights to Langkawi from Singapore and Kansai Airport in
        Japan.
        The Kedah–Perlis Coast Road
        From Butterworth, the road stretching north into Kedah
        State, heads into the rice bowl of Malaysia, as seas of green spread
        out from either side of the highway as it passes by the Bujang
        Valley.
        At Lembah Bujang is an archeological site that may date
        back to a fifth-century Hindu Kingdom called Langkasuka. The Indian
        traders may have used the city as a entrepot with China. Buddhist
        temples in the Bujang basin have also been uncovered.
        Archeologists are still uncovering remains on the southern
        slopes of Gunung Jerai (Kedah Peak). At 1,200 m (3,936 ft), this is the
        highest peak in Kedah. The Sungei Teroi Forest Recreation Park is to be
        found halfway up the mountain.
        Via the towns of Sungai Petani and Bedong, a left turn
        takes you to Merbok to visit the Candi Bukit Batu Pahat (Temple of
        Chiselled Stone Hill). This is one of the tenth-century temples now
        reconstructed on the Lembah Bajang and possibly built by
        representatives of the South Indian Pallava dynasty before the seventh
        century b.c. More artifacts, ceramics, lingams (phallic symbols), stone
        caskets, and gold and silver Shiva symbols are on show at Merboks
        Archaeological Museum.
        Extending beyond Gunung Jerai lie rolling rice fields, fed
        by the Muda River irrigation system, stretching up to Perlis in the
        north and along the coastline from Penang to Langkawi. The Kedah State
        capital, Alor Setar, is the last stop before the Thai border, and its
        history is a sad catalogue of invasion and subjugation, mostly by the
        Thais. In the center of the city is the traditional padang (square),
        here dominated by a fountain and crown of Kedah monument. The Masjid
        Zahir, built in 1912, is located on the squares western side, its
        Moorish architecture highlighted at night by myriad small lights.
        Standing majestically nearby is the Balai Besar, built in 1898 in the
        Thai style for the royal audiences. Opposite the Masjid Zahir is the
        impressive octagonal Balai Nobat, a tower where the royal nobat drums,
        flutes, and gongs are stored. Nobat, the royal orchestra, is played
        during royal ceremonies; however, it is not open to the public. The
        State Museum, about 15 minutes by car just north of the city, was built
        in 1736, and is worth a visit for its collection of Bunga Mas and Bunga
        Perak (flowers made of real gold and silver), which were sent to the
        Thai court as tribute.
        At the nearby port of Kuala Kedah, also a departure point
        for ferries to Langkawi, you can see the remains of an 18th-century
        fort and sample some of the best seafood in northern Malaysia,
        especially crab.
        Malaysias smallest state, Perlis, also marks a change of
        scenery, from the flat rice lands to solitary limestone outcrops, which
        are viewed as guardians to subterranean caves. The main towns are Arau,
        the royal town, and Padang Besar, where the Malaysian and Thai rail
        systems meet. Kuala Perlis, south of the state capital, Kangar, is the
        departure point for the less than an hours ferry journey to Langkawi.
        It is also a good location to buy inexpensive fruit at the local
        market.
        Pulau Langkawi
        The Langkawi island group, a cluster of over 100 islands,
        some of which disappear under the high tide, have been a focal point in
        Malaysias tourism promotion. But tourism in the area is centered on
        Pulau Langkawi and its array of some 56 holiday resorts and hotels. For
        the ferry traveler, Kuah is your arrival point, while those coming by
        air will touch down at the international airport, located 18 km (11
        miles) northwest from the town. Kuah has some good Chinese, Thai,
        Indian, and Malay restaurants and shops selling a range of goods at
        duty-free rates. Kuahs town square is dominated by a sculpture of a
        giant eagle (Langkawi means red eagle in Malay). Next to the square is
        a theme park with twenty hectares of landscaped gardens.
        To discover Langkawis 80 km (50 miles) of roads, its
        possible to rent four-wheel-drive and standard cars, but many find
        bicycles and motorcycles the most attractive way to explore the island
        and reach the more secluded beaches. Swimmers should be careful of
        powerful currents at most of the beaches.
        Most accommodation is located near Kuah town or within
        easy reach of the international airport. The main resorts near Kuah
        include the Sheraton Perdana, Langkawi Seaview Hotel, and The Gates
        Langkawi, while those closer to the airport, on the islands
        southwestern tip, include the Langkawi Village Resort, Langkawi Holiday
        Villa, Lanai Langkawi, and the Awana Porto Malai. But there are plenty
        of beach chalets and huts located at the beaches around the island.
        Development at Pantai Cenang is among the most extensive
        on the island. An aquarium here, Underwater World, is reputed to be one
        of the largest in Asia, with over 5,000 marine and freshwater fish.
        Tasik Dayang Bunting (Lake of the Pregnant Maiden), the largest
        freshwater lake in all the islands of Langkawi, is accompanied by the
        fable of a Kedah princess who drank the lakes water and became
        pregnant.
        On the northern cape of Pulau Langkawi is Tanjung Rhu
        (Casuarina Bay). From here a boat journey is the only way to reach the
        Gua Cerita (Cave of Legends), inscribed with writings from the
        Koran.
        Other beaches to visit include Pantai Kok, Pantai Tengah,
        Datai, and Burau Bay. Historical romantics may be interested to know
        that the islands were a favored hideaway for the many pirates who
        preyed on ships in the Melaka Straits. The absence of a detailed,
        legitimate history of the island has led some to cultivate its
        mythology. One such fable surrounds the death of Makam Mahsuri.
        Mahsuris Tomb, 12 km (7 miles) west of Kuah, consists of a white
        marble monument set amidst a picturesque garden. The shrine pays
        tribute to a woman wrongly executed for adultery more than 200 years
        ago. As the legend has it, she bled white blood, a testament to her
        innocence, and in her dying words cursed the island for seven
        generations.
        As a change of pace, beach-goers might be interested in a
        jungle trek across the middle of the island. Guided tours can be
        arranged for the hilly Gunnung Raya and Machinchang Forest Reserves,
        where a wide array of wildlife can be viewed; birdwatchers will also be
        rewarded on these treks. One of the easier walks takes you over to the
        Durian Perangin Waterfall.
        At the Pulau Singa Besar Wildlife Sanctuary, 45 minutes
        south of Kuah by boat, youll find 640 hectares (1,581 acres) filled
        with monkeys, mouse-deer, iguanas, and peacocks.
        Other sites include a Craft Cultural Complex on the
        northern coast of Langkawi near Teluk Yu, and near the airport, Kampung
        Buku Malaysia, is said to have the only village book market in
        Southeast Asia.
        The East Coast and Johor
        Malaysias less-visited east coast offers the visitor a
        slower pace set against the beauty of the regions beaches and the
        richness of its forests. The region covers four states — Kelantan,
        Terengganu, Pahang, and Johor — with most road traffic plying the coast
        road between Kota Bahru, just 30 km (19 miles) from the Thai border, to
        Johor Bahru, just a causeways distance from Singapore. Historically
        resistant to many of the major changes in the rest of Malaysia, the
        region has been able to maintain is authentic Malay culture and Islamic
        traditions. Traditional handicrafts, including the making of spinning
        tops, kites, silverware, baskets, and batik, not to mention
        shadow-puppet shows, are still practiced in many of the rural kampung
        in the states of Kelantan and Terengganu.
        The east coasts beaches are less developed and offer
        opportunities for snorkeling and diving. Wildlife enthusiasts can enter
        the regions forests for jungle trekking and adventure travel. The
        region also offers the chance to see leatherback turtles coming to lay
        their eggs at Cherating near Kuantan or to view the craftsmen at Kuala
        Terengganu, whose boating abilities are legendary.
        Economic growth and prosperity — recently through the
        discovery of oil offshore from Terennganu — has meant more hotels, with
        many new properties opening even in the past year; the positive side to
        this is a wider range of accommodation choices at competitive
        rates.
        Kelantan
        White sandy beaches stretch north from the state capital,
        Kota Bharu, to the Thai border. Buddhist temples close to the capital
        hark back to recent centuries, when Kelantan came under the influence
        of Siamese Kings. The British colonial influence here, which came into
        being in a 1909 agreement with Siam, was to last but a brief three
        decades before their defeat by the Japanese in World War II. Kelantans
        isolation, as well as its embrace of Islam since the 17th century, kept
        19th-century British colonial influence and economic change at bay and
        enabled this cradle of Malay culture to remain intact.
        Here youll see soaring decorative kites as well as the
        wayang kulit (shadow puppet shows), a throwback to wh en Kelantan was
        influenced by the kingdom of Funan in Indochina some 2,000 years
        ago.
        Known as Land of Lightning — due the heavy storms during
        the wet season November to February — Kelantans gateway is Kota Bharu,
        just 40 minutes by air from Kuala Lumpur and only 30 km (19 miles) from
        the Thai border. To the south, as towns dot the main highway, are
        points of access to the many beaches and fishing villages, themselves
        at the heart of regions economy and culture.
        Kota Bharu
        Set upon the banks of the Kelantan River, Kota Bahrus key
        attractions are close to the Pasar Besar (central market) on Jalan
        Doktor. Here rows of food and farm produce almost appear as art itself,
        with vegetables, fruit, and meat on the ground level and kitchenware,
        baskets, and other goods on the floors above.
        The Buluh Kubu Bazaar is also good for bargain-hunters
        seeking T-shirts or silverware. Silversmiths are also to be found on
        Jalan Sultanah Zainab, while batik and other cottage-industry goods are
        over the Jalan Wakat Mek Zainab bridge. The night market, near Pasar
        Besar, will prove worthwhile evening entertainment and give you a
        chance to savor Kelantanese food.
        At sundown, riverside restaurants also come to life near
        to Padang Merdeka (Independence Square), now an open park area for
        recreation but once the towns fresh market. Merdeka Square was also
        the site where the body of slain Malay warrior Tok Janggut (Father Long
        Beard), who led a rebellion against the British in the early years of
        the century, was exhibited in 1915. The declaration of Independence on
        31 August 1957 was read here as well.
        Across the square is the Bank Kerapu (War Museum), housed
        in the building once used by the Japanese Army as their headquarters;
        its the oldest brick building in town (1912). Next door is the Muzium
        Islam, and the Masjid Negiri (State Mosque) beyond, with its ornate
        1926 architecture.
        The Istana Jahar (Royal Customs Museum) was built in 1887,
        with additions by Sultan Muhammad IV in the early years of the 20th
        century. The Istana Balai Besar (Palace with the Large Audience Hall)
        was built in 1844 under Sultan Mohammad II and is now only opened for
        ceremonial occasions (closed to the public). Inside is a throne room,
        royal furniture, and a royal barge, used only once in 1900.
        On the other side of town, along Jalan Sultan Ibrahim and
        near the Tourist Information Centre, is the Kelantan State Museum, with
        its rural Malay artwork and earthenware pots. The best view of living
        Malaysian culture is to be seen at the Gelanggan Seni (Culture Center)
        on Jalan Mahmood opposite the Perdana Hotel, with performances that
        include wayang kulit, main gasing (top spinning), and silat (self
        defense), except on Fridays and during Ramadan.
        Around Kota Bharu
        Within just a few kilometers of Kota Bharu, you can find
        master silversmiths and expert batik weavers, but the maze of country
        lanes around the town could make it difficult to find the kampung
        communities where the artisans still ply their traditional skills. A
        guide may be recommended, with the assistance of the Tourist
        Information Centre.
        Kelatans silversmiths use two techniques, the filigree
        and repousse, and items range from the purely ornamental to the
        functional. Silvercraft factories can be visited at Kampung Sireh,
        along Jalan Sultanah Zainab, or Kampung Marak (also called Kampung
        Badang), on the road to Pantai Cahaya Bulan (PCB). Also on the way to
        Pantai Cahaya Bulan, you can see the skill and beauty of kain songket,
        richly woven materials of gold and silver thread, at Kampung Penambang.
        Songket was the product of the regions early trade with China (with
        silk) and India (with gold and silver thread). Indigenous to Kelantan,
        batik weavers are found throughout the state, but the bigger factories
        are to be found at Kampung Puteh, Kubur Kuda, and Kampung Badang.
        Kite-makers also practice their age-old skills throughout
        the region, and while tradition would have the art passed from father
        to son, many fear the younger generation now lacks the patience to
        carry out the skilled handiwork required.
        One of the oldest mosques in Malaysia is to be found at
        Nilam Puri. The mosque had been dismantled from its site closer to the
        river after repeated flooding at its original location at Kampung Laut.
        The mosque was built entirely without the use of nails.
        Kelantans ancient links with Thailand are evident in the
        number of Thai Buddhist Temples you will see half-hidden among the
        groves of palm and laurel, rising above the rice paddies. North of the
        estuary of the Kelantan River near Tumpat (12 km/7 miles from town) is
        one of the most important, Wat Phothivihan, noted for its 40-m (125-ft)
        reclining Buddha. At Kampung Perasit, south of Kota Bharu, is Wat
        Putharamaram.
        One of the landmarks of World War II can be visited at
        Sabak Beach, 13 km (8 miles) northwest of the Khota Bharu, near the
        mouth of the Kelamantan River. Here is the site of the first Japanese
        assault in the Pacific War, over an hour before Pearl Harbor was bombed
        (see page 28). Jutting out of the sandy beach in the pleasant shade of
        palm and casuarina trees stands a crumbling World War II bunker that
        the Indian artillery defended to the last man.
        The Beaches
        Kelantans white sandy beaches are within easy access of
        Kota Bharu and provide plenty of opportunities for a pleasant swim.
        Most popular is Pantai Cahaya Bulan, or Moonlight Beach. It was
        previously known as Pantai Cinta Berahi, The Beach of Passionate
        Love, a somewhat incongruous name in this strict Muslim region where
        khalwat, or close proximity, is prohibited. It is just 10 km (6 miles)
        north of the town and is popular during weekends and school holidays.
        More secluded, Pantai Kuda (Horse Beach) lies 25 km (15 miles)
        farther north. Pantai Seri Tujuh (Beach of the Seven Lagoons), about
        7 km (41⁄2 miles) from Kota Bharu, is the venue of the International
        Kite Festival and lies on the border with Thailand.
        To the south, Pantai Irama (Melody Beach) is some 25 km
        (16 miles) from Kota Bharu; it is one of the most beautiful along the
        entire coast. On the journey to Terengganu — stop off at the fishing
        village of Semerak, 19 km (12 miles) from Pasir Puteh, where you can
        buy excellent seafood for a barbecue on the beach — is Pantai Bisikan
        Bayu (Beach of the Whispering Breeze, also known as Pantai Dalam
        Rhu).
        Terengganu
        A coast of sandy beaches along the 225 km (141 miles) of
        landfall facing the South China Sea, not to mention myriad offshore
        islands and hinterland forests near Tasik (Lake) Kenyir, are the draw
        to Terengganu. The wealth from offshore oil discoveries in recent years
        has buoyed the state, something youll see reflected in the skyline and
        busy traffic of the capital, Kuala Terengganu. So far the economic
        gains have failed to detract from the towns relaxed charm. The main
        options for traveling to Terengganu are direct flights from KL or
        interstate bus to the Kuala Terengganu, which is generally the starting
        point for a trip to the island resorts or to Tasik Kenyir National
        Park.
        The Islands
        The islands off Terengganus north coast are accessible
        from both Kuala Terengganu — where most of the resort companies have
        booking offices — or by way of the fishing village of Kuala Besut, 45
        km (28 miles) south of Kota Bharu, which is the departure point to
        Pulau Perhentians islands. Before departing from Kuala Besut, a visit
        can be made to Bukit Keluang, just on the coast, for swimming,
        snorkeling, or windsurfing, with caves easily reached by walkways.
        The islands of Pulau Perhentian Kecil and Pulau Perhentian
        Besar are reached after a 21-km (13-mile) journey which takes up to two
        hours. The islands main reputations lie in their being lush and
        tropical, with clear blue waters and coal reefs protected as part of
        Malaysias marine parks. On both islands accommodations range from
        lavish resorts to chalets to huts.
        South from Pulau Perhentian Besar lies Pulau Redang, some
        50 km (31 miles) off the coast, its nine islands making up the largest
        of Terengganus archipelagoes. It is also developing quickly and is
        strongly promoted by resort and travel agents in Kuala Terengganu,
        though there still lies the promise of crystal-clear waters for scuba
        diving. The journey to the islands takes two hours from the village of
        Merang (not to be confused with the town of Marang farther south).
        There are also resorts on Pulau Lang Tengah, just north from Redang
        Islands. Boats take 45 minutes from Merang to reach the island.
        Kuala Terengganu
        This lively state capital, bordered by the Terengganu
        River and the South China Sea, is the largest town in the state and has
        fast progressed from a sleepy fishing village to a bustling, colorful
        center. Youll find a wide range of accommodations available, a
        reflection perhaps of the states growing wealth due to offshore oil
        recovery. Aside from the beautiful Masjid Tengku Tengah Zaharah, 41⁄2
        km (3 miles) out of town, youll find most sites of interest along the
        towns waterfront. The mosque, built on an estuary of the Ibai River,
        gives the illusion that it is floating on water.
        Back in town, a waterfront stroll takes you through
        Chinatown on Jalan Bandar. The old terraced buildings on both sides of
        the road create an attractive sense of timelessness even as the betting
        shops do a lively afternoon trade. Jalan Bandar leads you to the Pasar
        Besar Kedai Payang (Central Market), a multi-level complex — attached
        to a car park — with a fruit, vegetable, and fish market on the ground
        floor and local textiles and handicrafts above.
        For excellent views of the city, try the 200-m (219-ft)
        high Bukit Puteri, a hill just beyond the market. Up the flight of
        stairs youll find an old fort which was used in a local civil war in
        the 19th century. The view overlooks the Istana Maziah, the sultans
        palace, built in 1897, but it is not open to the public.
        Behind the palace, the Masjid Zanial Abidin was originally
        built of timber between 1793 and 1808. It was rebuilt in stone in 1852
        and renovated in 1972.
        A short river cruise from the jetty will take you to the
        Pulau Duyung Besar, a little island where you can view the skills of
        the boat-builders, whose reputations extend far beyond Malaysia. Many
        of the builders clientele for hardwood craft is more likely to be
        wealthy American and Australian yachtsmen than the locals.
        Several other attractions are located out of the town
        proper. Opposite Pulau Sekati, 5 km (3 miles) from town — but also
        accessible from the river — is the State Museum, housed in a
        traditionally styled complex of four blocks housing ten galleries. For
        local silk weaving, try the Sutera Semi Centre at Chendering, 6 km (3
        miles) from Kuala Terengganu, where visitors can witness different
        stages of silk-making and batik-painting. Also on offer is songket,
        woven with silver and gold threads, and brassware.
        Around Kuala Terengganu
        Fifty-five kilometers (34 miles) inland from Kuala
        Terengganu is the largest man-made lake in Southeast Asia, Tasik Kenyir
        (Lake Kenyir), which was created by flooding the valley for
        construction of the countrys largest hydroelectric dam, completed in
        1985. For the angler with a taste for freshwater fish, Tasik Kenyir,
        spanning over 38,000 hectares (260,000 acres) and 340 islands, is the
        place. An international fishing competition is even held here. Besides
        fishing, jet skiing, windsurfing, canoeing, and jungle trekking are all
        available.
        There are also several waterfalls, rapids, and cascades
        within the lake region, including the Lasir, 16 km (10 miles) from the
        gateway jetty at Pengkalan Gawi. This site is popular for picnics.
        South from the Lake are the Sekayu Waterfalls, just 56 km (35 miles)
        west of Kuala Terengganu. After trekking through the rainforest, you
        can enjoy a swim in one of the many natural pools created among the
        rocks by the cascading river.
        Marang is a fishing village 15 km (9 miles) south of Kuala
        Terengganu. Here and across the long wooden bridge at Patah Malam, you
        may see fishermen peacefully mending their nets in the shade of coconut
        palms. From Marang lies access to island of Pulau Kapas which, though
        less than 2 km (1 mile) in length, is considered one of the most
        pleasant islands on the east coast. There are several resorts and
        chalet accommodations on the island.
        Rantau Abang
        Rantau Abangs claim to fame comes through the giant
        leatherback turtles that find their way to its beaches to lay their
        precious eggs, as conservationists struggle to turn back the creatures
        declining numbers. The beach also attracts birds, including the
        hawksbill, the common green, and the Oliver Ridley. The beach, 60 km
        (38 miles) south of the Kuala Terengganu, is one of only six places in
        the world visited by these turtles between the months of May and
        September. During this time, a sanctuary extends 10 km (6 miles) on
        either side of Rantau Abang. Special hatcheries have been set aside,
        where the eggs are collected from the initial nest and reburied in a
        safe location. A Turtle Information Centre is located north of the
        village.
        It is in the midnight to dawn hours that the female
        leatherbacks, up to 21⁄2 m (8 ft) in length and weighing sometimes over
        375 kg (825 lb), make their way up the beach. During daylight hours,
        the beachs sparkling waters and ambience are enough reason to
        visit.
        In the years before ecological awareness, the devastating
        insensitivity of onlookers treated the turtles rendezvous as a popular
        spectacle. Crowds gathered in festive mood to build campfires on the
        beach, dance to the blare of radios, photograph by blinding flashlight
        the turtles night-time egg laying, even ride the backs of the giant
        leatherbacks and poke open their heavy-lidded eyes. This human
        stupidity and sea pollution almost put a stop to this natural
        phenomenon. The annual number of leatherbacks visiting Rantau Abang
        declined from about 2,000 in the 1950s to barely a few hundred by the
        end of the 1980s. At this point, the Malaysian fisheries department
        stepped into protect the turtles. Authorities have banned the use of
        flash photography or flashlights, and visitors must be 5 m (15 ft) from
        the turtles. But still, not all will follow the guidelines. High tide
        on a full moon is the most likely time to sight a leatherback coming
        ashore, but there are no guarantees.
        Tanjung Jara and Points South
        The highway south from Rantau Abang, heading towards
        Kuanten, the state capital of Pahang, passes through Tanjung Jara.
        Here, the award-winning accommodations of the Beach Hotel contrast with
        the rapid industrialization from the offshore oil and gas exploration
        in the region. Farther south is Kuala Dungun, predominantly Chinese in
        character and a location for excellent cuisine. A boat can be hired
        from here to the island to Pulau Tenggol, 30 km (18 miles) offshore, so
        you can go snorkeling among the angelfish. The center of Terengganus
        petroleum industry is Kerteh, with its refineries and gasworks. But
        there are some pretty beaches at the mouth of the Kerten River
        nonetheless.
        Pahang
        The largest state in the peninsula also boasts the longest
        river, the 475-km- (296-mile-) long Pahang. Although its most famous
        sights lie far to the west in the Genting and Cameron Highlands, Padang
        has its share of beach resorts, including the renowned Pulau Tioman
        (Tioman Island) in the far south (though access by sea is from the port
        of Mersing in Johor). The recently developed Endau Rompin State Park,
        straddling the border with Johor state, compliments the better known
        Taman Negara in the far north, which has its road access through the
        state capital Kuanten. Padangs other natural beauties include Lake
        Chini.
        The Coast
        Just 47 km (30 miles) from Kuantan is the beach resort
        area of Cherating, where Club Mediterranée set up its first resort in
        Asia. But Club Med is not alone along the beachfront. Other resorts in
        close proximity to the states capital are located at Balok Beach. The
        Hyatt Hotel Kuantan has joined other resorts at the Teluk Chempedak
        Beach, only 5 km (3 miles) out of the bustling city. The beautiful
        Pelindung Beach is just a short trek through the Teluk Chempedak Forest
        Reserve. From May to September, green turtles and the occasional giant
        leatherback may be seen under moonlight skies when they lay their eggs
        on the beach. At the Beserah Beach, also close to Kuantan, the local
        fishermen still employ buffalo to lead the carts carrying their catch
        to the market, though a batik factory and several cottage handicraft
        workshops may disappoint the more sophisticated souvenir-hunter. You
        will find a pleasant beach nearby at Batu Hitam.
        Kuantan
        Despite a rather glum reputation among some guidebooks,
        Kuantan township offers a wide range of hotels, a lively shopping and
        market quarter, and a quiet ambience next to the river where good
        eating stalls are found. Built on the fortunes from tin mining, the
        capital is now a commercial center for Pahangs oil, palm, and other
        industries, and a key link in the East Coast petroleum and gas
        pipelines.
        Youll find an array of Chinese hotels, which, like Hotel
        Min Heng (1926) and the Tong Nam Ah Hotel, have interesting
        backgrounds. The Mega View Hotel near the river tries to say it all in
        its name. But there are also several new hotels near the river and in
        sight of the impressive Masjid Negeri, such as the Shahzan Inn. On the
        same street, Jalan Masjid, is the cultural center (Infokraf), and just
        opposite is an open sports field. The area around Jalan A. Aziz and
        Jalan Besar is hectic with shops, wares, and an occasional
        money-lender. The local village of Selamat is known for its fine kain
        songket silk brocade.
        Just outside Kuantan is the Gua Charas, a cave temple 25
        km (151⁄2 miles) northeast and built into one of the limestone outcrops
        surrounding the town. Inside the cave, known as the yawning skull
        cave, echoing with the sound of bats, a 9-m (27-ft) reclining Buddha
        is to be found among the illuminated shrines.
        Pekan
        The sleepy old royal capital of Pahang, 45 km (28 miles)
        south of Kuantan, is still the sultans official residence. Upstream on
        the Pahang River, the sultans gleaming palace, Istana Abu Bakar, is
        set among immaculate green polo fields. Gilded and sapphire-blue domes
        grace two white marble mosques and the sultans mausoleum. Nearby, the
        old Victorian state museum displays glories of the old sultanate and
        treasures of a Chinese junk salvaged from the South China Sea. The town
        also boasts a silk-weaving center, located at Kampung Pulau Keladi, 5
        km (3 miles) from Pekan.
        Tasik Chini
        Chini comprises a dozen beautiful lakes surrounded by
        forested hills south of the Pehang River, 100 km (60 miles) west of
        Kuantan. From June to September, much of the surface is covered by
        white lotus blossoms. The myth-shrouded lakes are said to be the home
        of giant snakes, dragons, and other monsters, one of which, according
        to local myth, swam to the South China Sea to become Tioman Island.
        Archeological explorations suggest there are ruins of a Khmer
        settlement beneath the surface. Outside lotus-blossom season, the lakes
        are still a delight to visit, with good fishing for the local toman.
        Members of the local Jakun tribe dwell on the lakeshore. It may be
        possible to pay a discreet visit to one of their hamlets, Kampung
        Gumum.
        Tioman Island
        The combination of first-rate resort facilities and
        magnificent natural beauty makes Tioman one of the finest islands in
        Asia. Preserved from logging, most of the rainforest has remained. A
        hilly ridge runs down the middle of the island at an altitude of 500 m
        (1,640 ft), rising at the southern end to two granite peaks — the
        Donkeys Ears, the taller of which, Mount Kajang, is 1,038 m (3,405
        ft) high.
        You can reach Tioman by flying from Kuantan or by taking
        the boat from the fishing village of Mersing in Johor. The slow boat
        and the fast boat both end up taking three to four hours.
        On the islands west coast, you have the choice between
        the top-class Tioman Island Resort Hotel and the more modest but
        comfortable guest-houses, chalets, and simpler cabins on Salang Beach
        farther north. Facilities around the main island port of Tekek include
        a golf course, where long-tailed macaques act as unofficial caddies who
        do not always give the ball back.
        Most trips around the island will be by boat, and the
        fishermen charge a reasonable fee. From Tekek, make the Jungle Trek
        over the hill to the east coast. Cool off on the way with a dip at the
        hilltop waterfall, them make your way down to the beach at Juara, a
        village serving excellent seafood and banana pancakes. Take another
        swim in the sea, and if you do not feel like trekking back, return to
        Tekek by boat.
        Birdwatchers will see green pied imperial pigeons,
        bulbuls, frigate birds, sunbirds, and flower-peckers.
        Characteristically for island forests, there are no large mammals.
        Hollywood, having recently filmed the remake of The King
        and I on Langkawi Island in 1999, had earlier made Tioman the idyllic
        location for the musical South Pacific, and near Mukut at the islands
        southern tip you can see the waterfall where Mitzi Gaynor decided to
        wash that man right out of [her] hair. 
        Johor
        The peninsulas southernmost state, Johors proximity to
        Singapore has added buoyancy to the states economy and also to that of
        its capital, Johor Bahru. Easy access from Singapore to east-coast
        resorts such as Desaru on the southeast and the islands offshore from
        Mersing has also led to the increased development of these
        destinations. Johors links to Singapore have renewed and solidified
        its position as a guardian of Malay culture since it first provided a
        refuge in the 16th century for the Melaka. Johor offers travelers a
        wide range of opportunities for tourism, from shopping to motor racing,
        equestrian to water sports, and not to mention adventure travel to the
        Endau Rompin National Park, the relatively untouched forests that flank
        the border with Pahang.
        The Endau-Rompin National Park
        Straddling the border between Johor and Pahang,
        Endau-Rompin National Parks 870 sq km(539 sq miles) of jungle and
        rivers is fast gaining a reputation among travelers as an alternative
        to the elder Taman Negara. The park is home to tigers, elephants, wild
        boar, and the largest surviving population of Sumatran rhinoceros in
        peninsular Malaysia. Other species to be found here include the
        binturong (bear cat) and the white-handed gibbon, the only ape species
        in the region. Among bird-life are chirping drongos, hornbills, and
        argus pheasant. The Endau Rompin is also home to the Orang Asli of the
        Jakun tribe.
        Much less developed than the parks of Sarawak and
        Sabah — and so much more pristine — Endau-Rompin offers a unique
        challenge to the adventurous traveler, but facilities for accommodation
        remain limited, with only four campsites in the park, able to
        accommodate between 250 and 300 visitors. These are located at Kuala
        Jasin, Batu Hampar, Upeh Guling, and Kuala Marong. You must employ a
        guide or go on a group tour.
        From Johor Bahru, traveling by the north–south highway,
        upon reaching Kluang, detour to the Kahang town. From there, only a
        four-wheel drive vehicle will take you along the 56-km (35-mile) jungle
        track to Kampung Peta, where there is a visitor center and point of
        entry to the national parks. Otherwise, you can get there via a
        three-hour boat journey from Felda Nitar II. There are also a wide
        range of quite strident regulations governing park usage and duration
        periods.
        Desaru and the Islands North
        The southeast corner of the peninsula was originally
        exploited only for its oil-palm plantations. Today, tourism drives the
        economy, and its high-class hotels share 25 km (15 miles) of golden
        sands. Desaru is accessible by road by way of Kota Tinggi, or by
        following the coast road from Johor Bahru. If traveling through Kota
        Tinggi, it might be worthwhile to make a stopover to see the
        spectacular waterfall at Lembong, 15 km (91⁄2 miles) north from the
        town center. Desaru is 52 km (32 miles) farther east and is the first
        major beach resort outside Singapore. There are several top-end resorts
        and golf courses here, including the Desaru Golden Beach Hotel and
        Resort and the Desaru View Hotel, but budget travelers will also find
        chalet accommodation available.
        Off the coast from the resorts of Mersing, there are
        several islands — Pulau Rawa, Pulau Tengah, Pulau Besar, Pulau Tinggi,
        and Pulau Sibu — offering white sandy beaches, coral reefs, and budget
        accommodations. Boats can be hired from Mersing to take you out to one
        of the secluded lagoons.
        Johor Bahru
        Citizens of prosperous but staid Singapore cross the
        causeway to Johors state capital to escape for the weekend and sample
        its lively nightlife, to shop, or to head farther north. Outside the
        restaurants and malls, visitors can visit the sprawling market, and
        nearby along the Lido Waterfront take a look at the gleaming white
        marble of the Sultan Abu Bakar Mosque, the Royal Museum, and the Istana
        Gardens of the old palace with its Japanese tea house and zoo put
        together from the sultans private menagerie.
        The neoclassical Istana Besar Palace is now used only for
        state ceremonies, the present-day sultans having moved up the coast to
        the modern Istana Bukit Serene, with its 32-m- (104-ft-) high tower.
        Other sights include the colonial-style clock tower overlooking the
        Datan Bandaraya (City Square). The Johor Art Gallery building (1910),
        built in a similar period style, exhibits clothing, weapons, currency,
        and manuscripts, as well as examples of calligraphy and ceramic items
        along with artworks.
        North Towards Melaka
        Two roads — Jalan Tun Dr. Ismail and Jalan Tun Abdul
        Razak — lead northward out of Jahor Bahru to the west coast. But not
        far from Taman Tasik they combine into one in the direction of Ayer
        Hitam. But before heading towards Melaka, gourmets turn off west at
        Sekudai to the coast road and back south to Kukup, a small fishing
        village 40 km (25 miles) southwest of Johor Bahru.
        At Ayer Hitam, a wide range of Chinese-style pottery is on
        display beside the fruit market, where there is an excellent selection
        of rambutans, pineapples, and bananas, as well as locally made nougat
        and fruit-cakes. The market town of of Batu Pahat also offers
        respectable Chinese restaurants. The town witnessed a historic Melaka
        naval victory over the Thai fleet in 1456. The fishing port of Muar was
        of trading importance to the British in the 19th century, as can be
        seen in the graceful old Neo-Classical government offices. It was also
        the scene of the Australian troops heroic but abortive last stand
        against the Japanese advance on Singapore in January 1942.
        Sarawak and Sabah
        From jungles to mountains, the states of Sarawak and Sabah
        offer enough adventure and natural beauty to make the journey across
        the South China Sea worthwhile. These sections of Borneo — whose name
        has miraculously not lost its romantic magic — are sorely tried by the
        modern onslaughts of oil drilling, voracious logging of lucrative
        belian hardwood, and of tourism itself. But such images as
        cloud-engulfed mountain-tops, a tattooed and decorated Iban at a
        riverside longhouse, a bustling produce market, a beachside retreat
        bordering upon turquoise waters, or an orang-utan sitting in lazy
        attitude all mark some side of the genuine adventure which awaits the
        traveler in East Malaysia. From shopping for exotic souvenirs and
        craftwork to dining in a seaside restaurants to the thrill of riding in
        a longboat along river highways deep in the forests, it is all there
        for the choosing.
        The history of the White Rajah — the lineage that
        commenced with adventurer James Brooke in the 1830s and lasted until
        the start of World War II — still lies intact in Kuching, Sawawaks
        capital.
        But away from the cities lies some natural prizes:
        Borneos highest mountain (Mt. Kinabalu in Sabah), its longest river
        (the Rejang in Sarawak), its myriad caves (including the Niah Caves in
        Sarawak), and natural parks to see the wondrous wildlife and
        flora — they all await. For a change of pace, there are plenty of
        beaches along the southern and eastern coasts and plenty of islands for
        snorkeling or turtle-watching.
        Getting around can be a challenge. The rivers, more
        numerous and much longer than on the peninsula, still provide the
        principal way into the interior, supplemented by smaller aircraft
        operated by Malaysia Airlines.
        Sarawak
        It is 90 minutes by air from Kuala Lumpur to Kuching, the
        historic capital of Malaysias largest state — covering 124,967 sq km
        (48,250 sq miles). From the air youll be able to see that Sarawak
        boasts the countrys longest river, the Rejang, flowing 563 km (351
        miles) from the mountains on the Indonesian border to the South China
        Sea. The wealth of river systems among the jungle terrain provides a
        vital link that will transport you to the tribes of the rainforest and
        the chance to experience life in their longhouses first-hand. Between
        river cruises or treks through the rainforest of Bako National Park,
        you can relax at the beachside of Santubong and Damai, just 40 minutes
        from Kuching. In eastern Sarawak, you can pursue more strenuous but
        exhilarating adventures in the Niah or Mulu cave systems.
        Dont be surprised if upon arrival on a domestic flight
        you are asked to show your passport for immigration formalities.
        Kuching
        Unlike the other major towns of East Malaysia — Miri, Kota
        Kinabalu, or Sandakan — Sarawaks state capital has preserved its
        colonial charm, having been spared the bombs of World War II. Kuching
        is built on a bend of the Sarawak River, 32 km (20 miles) from the sea.
        The residence and fort built by the White Rajahs (see page 25) lie on
        the north bank, while on the southern bank is the greater part of the
        town, including Chinese and Indian merchants, major hotels, and several
        colonial buildings, the pasts permanent vestiges.
        The colonial buildings include the General Post Office,
        noteworthy for its 1930s Neo-Classical design and pillars, and the
        Courthouse. The courthouse site was originally a German Lutheran
        mission before James Brooke, the first of the White Rajahs, turned it
        into a judicial administration office. In 1858 that building was
        demolished, making away for a second and later a third structure (the
        one that still stands), which was completed in 1874. State Council
        meetings continued to be held there until 1973. Today it houses the
        High Court and Magistrates Court. The clock tower, whose bells still
        chime on the hour, was added in 1883. In front of the courthouse is the
        Charles Brooke Memorial, six meters in height, which was built in 1924
        in remembrance of the Second White Rajah.
        Along the Esplanade, north of the courthouse, is the
        Square Tower, and on its ground floor is an information center and
        multimedia theater.
        West of the Courthouse is Jalan India, a pedestrian mall
        marking the citys Muslim center. Sarawaks oldest Indian Mosque, built
        in the 1850s, is here. Still farther west, the Kuching Mosque, built in
        1968, located near the markets, is best seen from the other side of the
        river. A new mosque has also been built on the north side of the
        River.
        The main Central Market is located on Jalan Gambier, near
        the esplanade. Here fresh fish, poultry, and vegetables are sold, as
        well as clothes, newspapers, and CDs. Nearby are the bus terminal and
        taxi stand.
        Despite new high-rise construction underway, the myriad
        traditional shophouses — both Chinese and Indian — ensure the citys
        former qualities are still within reach. Chinese shophouses along Jalan
        Padungan, mostly built during the rubber boom of the 1920s and 1930s,
        offer a variety of restaurants, coffee houses, and handicraft
        shops.
        More colorful is the Sunday Market on Jalan Satok at Jalan
        Palm, which actually starts late Saturday and extends through Sunday
        morning, offering a bewildering array of items; Dayaks come to sell
        fruit, vegetables, and handicrafts and even more exotic items from the
        forest, such as lizards, bats, monkeys, and turtles.
        East of the Courthouse, the Tua Pek Ko ng Temple and the
        Chinese History Museum are near the group of grand, five-star hotels
        that line the river. The temple, also known as the Siew San Teng
        Temple, was built in 1876 and is the oldest in Kuching; it remains an
        active place of worship. The nearby museum traces the long history of
        the Chinese, who lived in Borneo well before the arrival of the James
        Brooke, in Sarawak. Another temple is the Kuek Seng Ong Temple, on
        Lebuh Wayang, built in 1895. Finally, the Lim Fah San Monastery
        Association is located on Jalan Sampang Tua.
        For a fee of 30 sen (one way) venture across the Sarawak
        River by tambang (ferry) to the view the Astana (1870) and Fort
        Margherita (1879). The Astana (which means palace in Malay), was
        originally the Brookes home. It is comprised of three bungalows under
        a single roof and built above the ground supported by brick pillars.
        The building has a library and a collection of artifacts associated
        with the Brooke family. The ground floor was the location for many
        garden parties hosted by the Rajahs; it was also used an internment
        center for Japanese prisoners of war during World War II. It is now the
        residence of the Governor of Kuching, the Yang Di-Pertuan Negeri. Set
        among beautiful grounds, it is unfortunately not open to the
        public.
        Up the hill to the right from the Astana, the road leads
        to Fort Margherita, now the Muzium Polis (Police Museum). The
        white-turreted edifice was built by Sir Charles Brooke along the lines
        of a English medieval castle and named after his wife, Margaret. It was
        converted to a museum in 1971 and is now open Tuesdays through Fridays
        from 10am to 6pm. You may need your passport to gain a free pass to
        enter the museum. Inside, there are displays of police weapons and
        simulated opium dens, plus scenes of punishments once meted out to
        prisoners. A skull house in the museum, there as a form of protection,
        offers a grisly reminder of another side of Borneos history.
        Back on the south side of the river, another colonial
        building is the Round Tower on Jalan Tun Abang Haji Openg. It was
        originally designed as a dispensary when built in the 1880s.
        Also south of the river on Jalan Tun Haji Openg is the
        Sawarak Museum, which has one of the best collections of folk art and
        flora and fauna in Southeast Asia. The museum is divided between the
        old wing and the new wing, connected by a footbridge across the road.
        The former was built in 1891 and styled along the lines of a Normandy
        townhouse; it is devoted to Sawaraks rich history and many cultures.
        The new wing, completed in 1983, has more galleries and archeological
        exhibits, including a reconstruction of the early human settlements at
        the Niah Caves. There is a bookstore and souvenir shop.
        Within the Museums grounds there is an Aquarium, the
        Botantic Gardens, and the Heroes Memorial, the latter commemorating the
        dead from World War II, the Emergency, and the Confrontation with
        Indonesia. Adjacent to the new wing of the Sarawak Museum is the Muzium
        Islam (Islamic Museum).
        Highlights of the Old Wing include a reconstructed Iban
        Longhouse, complete with totem-pole, chieftains hornbill-feather
        headdresses, and skulls of head-hunting victims; Kenyah Tree of Life
        Mural, repainted from a longhouse at Long Nawang; Melanau dolls, which
        serve as charms against disease and to lure animals to traps; beads of
        the Kelabit people; and specimens of Alfred Russell Wallaces extensive
        insect collection.
        The New Wing has galleries of Hindu and Buddhist
        Sculptures; Chinese, Thai, Japanese, and European ceramics and
        brassware; a model of the Niah Caves (see page 122), with their birds,
        bats, and other fauna, Stone Age artifacts, and funeral boats from the
        eighth century a.d. A photographic history of Kuching is also
        rewarding.
        Kuching also claims the worlds first Cat Museum, in honor
        of the citys mascot (kuching means cat in Malay; see page 115).
        Around Kuching
        The fishing village and peninsula of Santubong is just 40
        minutes from Kuching. There you will find beach resorts and cultural
        sights, plus opportunities for jungle trekking, bike riding, and golf.
        Mount Santubong (810 m/2,470 ft), peers down on the broad, sandy
        beaches of Damai, where you will find resorts along the long, sandy
        beach. Nearby is the Sarawak Cultural Park, 7 hectares (17 acres) of
        craft demonstrations and cultural performances. Described as a Living
        Museum, it provides an opportunity for the traveler short on time to
        gain a feel for the rich culture of Sarawak. Full- or half-day tours
        are offered, with regular shuttles available from Kuching.
        There are three beach resorts and a rainforest resort at
        Damai, each offering a range of water sports, jungle trekking trips,
        and cultural activities. Two of the resorts, both located at Teluk
        Penyuk Beach, are managed by the Holiday Inn chain and are within easy
        reach of the Cultural Park. Outside the Cultural Park, there is access
        to local longhouses as well as trips to the Bako National Park, local
        fishing villages, and nearby islands, and river cruises around the
        Santubong Peninsula.
        In Sarawak there is one major center involved with the
        rehabilitation of the orang-utan. The Matang Wildlife Centre, 35 km (22
        miles) from Kuching, is to take over the role of Semengoh, which no
        longer maintains captive animals. At Matang, while the focus of their
        work is on the orang-utans, there are enclosures for Sambar deer,
        crocodiles, sun bears, civets, and bear cats, as well as aviaries
        holding hornbills, sea eagles, and other bird life from Sarawak.
        Bako National Parks
        Both Bako National Park and Kubah National Park are within
        easy reach of Kuching. As Sarawaks oldest national park, Bako is also
        one of the smallest, covering just 27 sq km (10 sq miles), but it
        offers great opportunities to see a wide range of animal and plant
        life. Since the park is located just one hour (37 km/23 miles) from
        Kuching, the visitor has a choice between a day trip or an overnight
        stay; accommodations include a resthouse, dormitories, and chalets. You
        must first travel to Kampung Bako, where you can get a boat to
        transport you to the park headquarters at Telok Assam. The long-nosed,
        paunchy proboscis monkey is the major attraction, but also to be seen
        are silver leaf monkeys and long-tail macaques. Mouse-deer, monitor
        lizards, and bird life, including sea eagles, also live here.
        Bako offers 16 well-marked, color-coded jungle trails with
        bridges over the swamps to the best spots for viewing flora and
        wildlife. Twelve of the trails lead off from the right of the parks
        headquarters, just across from the arrival jetty. The Jalan Tanjong
        Sepi, a 30-minute steep climb up to the cliff-tops overlooking the bay
        that fronts the park headquarters, is recommended.
        On the Jalan Lintang, a small observation hide at the
        Lintang Salt Lick offers the chance to see the animals at close
        quarters as they drink. Besides its good hilltop view over the jungle,
        the Jalan Bukit Tambi offers several specimens of carnivorous plants:
        the bladderwort, pitcher plant, and sundew — also known as Venuss
        fly-trap.
        The Jalan Telok Delima and Jalan Telok Paku are the best
        trails for viewing the proboscis monkey; they like to bed down in a
        tree near the seashore. Very often, they will have been watching you
        long before you spot them, and if your presence upsets them, they will
        just honk and disappear. While at the seashore, keep a look out, too,
        for the hairy-nosed otter.
        Longhouse River Cruises
        The opportunity to see the tribes of Sarawak in their
        forest homes is a privilege not to be missed. However, tours to some
        longhouses have acquired the artificial character of a tribal theme
        park.  Unfortunately, as tourism rises and the popularity of such
        expeditions increases, it is a trend difficult to escape, the only real
        alternative being to travel even farther into the forests at added
        expense. But the adoption by some villagers of western clothing or such
        items as televisions and radios shouldnt daunt the visitor.
        On offer for the soft adventure traveler is a choice
        between a day trip, an overnight stay at a guest house near a
        longhouse, or a stay in a longhouse itself. Tours from Kuching usually
        start very early and involve a two- to five-hour road journey to the
        river and then a one-hour cruise by longboat. Tour operators usually
        have exclusive arrangements with particular longhouses.
        The format of the visit varies, but it may include
        cultural performances soon after arrival for day-trippers or at the
        days end as evening entertainment for those staying longer. The
        standard tour is an initial orientation to the longhouse, highlighting
        the bilik (apartments) as distinct from the ruai (communal areas). Tour
        groups are often greeted with tuak, a sweet wine made from glutinous
        rice, and a welcome dance. The musical and cultural performance
        includes a ngajat, a traditional Iban dance. Demonstrations of the
        blowpipe and cockfighting are also likely to be on the agenda.
        Before you leave, your tour guide will remind you to make
        sure that you have gifts — cigarettes, sweets, and little toys for the
        children — which can be bought during one of the bus stopovers earlier
        in the day. Malaysian tourism authorities may also be able to offer
        advice on reputable tour operators in Kuching who organize visits on a
        small scale so as not to offend tribal dignity.
        Around Kuching visitors are likely to visit a longhouse of
        the Iban tribe, but tours are also available to Bidayuh longhouses
        found in the hill regions. Visits to the Iban are likely along the
        Skrang or Batang-ai river. To the east of Kuching you can visit the
        Kenyah and Kayan tribes. Excursions are organized either via Miri from
        Kuala Baram along the majestic Baram River, or via Sibu, from Kapit or
        Belaga, up the Rejang River. The Rejang is considered Malaysias
        greatest river at some 560 km (350 miles) long; a journey along the
        river is considered one of the worlds last great travel adventures.
        The approach to Belaga entails a passage through the Rejangs Pelegus
        Rapids. There are seven in all, each with its own name: Bidai (big
        mat), Nabau (python), Lunggak (dagger), Pantu (sago), Sukat (measure),
        Mawang (fruit), and most ominously, Rapoh (tomb).
        Niah Caves
        At the Niah Caves visitors see the earliest traces of homo
        sapiens in Malaysia; they lived in the area up to 40,000 years ago.
        Later the caves were used as a burial ground, and they are now the
        hunting-ground of collectors of the cave-roof birds nests. The caves
        and surrounding 3,149-hectare (7,775-acre) park are 480 km (300 miles)
        up the coast from Kuching, hidden within the Miri Forests.
        Adventurer A. Hart Everett came across the caves in the
        1870s, but it was not until 1958 that local explorer and Sarawak Museum
        curator Tom Harrison made the important discovery of a human skull
        dating back some 37,000 years, together with 1,200-year-old red
        hematite rock paintings. The fragments of the Deep Skull (so-called
        because it was found deep within an ancient pile of bat guano),
        together with tools, earthenware pots, jars, and later bronze jewelry
        found nearby are on display at the Kuching Museum.
        The park, near the town of Batu Niah, is midway between
        the towns of Bintulu and Miri, a boomtown known for its oil exploration
        and recovery. The caves are accessible by road from either town, taking
        at least two hours from Miri and three hours from Bintulu. The parks
        headquarters is at Pangkalan Lubang, and you will need to obtain a
        permit either here or in the town of Miri. From here, you cross the
        Sungei Niah (or Niah River) by sampan, then follow the 3-km (2-mile)
        plank walkway to the caves. For the cave tour, be sure to take a
        powerful flashlight, sturdy walking shoes with a good grip, and a
        change of clothes — the humidity is quite intense.
        The Traders Cave is the first to be seen, so-called
        because of its role as a meeting place of birds nest-gatherers and
        merchants. The original Niah peoples decline is something of a
        mystery; their forefathers may be the nomadic Penan, who traded the
        nests and hornbill ivory for Chinese porcelain and beads.
        The main or Great Cave is a hollow 400 m (1,1312 ft) up in
        the sandstone Subis plateau. Besides some giant crickets and scorpions
        (from which the extension of the boardwalk through the cave keeps you
        safe), the Great Cave is home to millions of bats and swiftlets. The
        Deep Skull and other relics were discovered here.
        The bats daily droppings furnish one ton of highly valued
        guano fertilizer. But more lucrative than the guano are the swiftlets
        edible nests, for which Chinese merchants are prepared to pay hundreds
        of dollars per kilo (of about 100 nests), reselling them for thousands,
        to make birds-nest soup. Park authorities are increasingly concerned
        about the impact of the on-going harvest on the swiftlets survival.
        The rush of nesting swiftlets flying into the cave at days end while
        the nocturnal bats rush past into the evening sky is a spectacular
        sight.
        The boardwalk continues through the Great Cave down to the
        Painted Cave, also accessible without a guide. Discovered in 1958 along
        with the Deep Skull, its wall-paintings representing red stick figures
        of spread-eagle dancers were executed in a mixture of betel juice and
        lime around a.d. 700. This cave was probably also used as a burial
        chamber.
        Nearby are the several jungle trails, with the Jalan Bukit
        Kasut and the Jalan Madu both clearly marked. Be on the lookout for the
        long-tailed macaques, together with a range of bird-life such as
        bulbuls, tailor birds, crested wood partridges, trogons, and
        hornbills.
        Gunung Mulu National Park
        Offering spectacular visions of one of the worlds largest
        limestone cave system, the relatively new Gunung Mulu National Park
        (53,000 hectares/130,600 acres) is one Sawaraks most important
        attractions. The cave system of 150 km (almost 100 miles) was first
        explored between 1976 to 1984 and requires a minimum two day/one night
        stay to be fully appreciated. The trip is a quite demanding adventure,
        and you need to be in good shape, especially if you are looking to
        undertake the climb to the limestone-sculptured pinnacles on Gunung Api
        (Fire Mountain).
        A 35-minute flight from Miri arrives at the airstrip near
        the parks headquarters. The alternative (by land and boat) also starts
        from Miri and is a four-stage trip. First, you travel by bus or taxi to
        Kuala Baram, at the mouth of the Batang Baram. From here, you take an
        express boat to Marudi before meeting up with the noon boat to Long
        Terawan, followed by a third longboat along the Sungei Tutoh and Sungei
        Melanau to the parks headquarters. This is the only alternative to the
        air trip and requires almost a full day of travel by bus and boat;
        while still available — and recommended for the return journey — the
        flight from Miri over rainforest in a 19-seat Twin Otter plane is
        considered the best way to begin your stay at Mulu.
        There are four main show caves at Mulu — Deer, Langs,
        Clearwater, and Wind — as well as countless other wild caves, which
        are either too dangerous or too ecologically fragile to visit without
        special permits and qualified guides.
        Away from the show caves, expect some crawling around on
        hands and knees or wading chest-deep through underground streams. The
        best guides will provide miners helmets with built-in lamps to explore
        the pitch-black caves. Your own equipment should include very strong
        shoes made of rubber than than leather, lots of socks, tough old
        clothes, a pair of gloves, and a light sleeping bag.
        To give you an idea of the scale of the caverns, Sarawak
        Chamber, the most recently explored cave (and reputed to be the largest
        cave in the world) is said to be capable of holding 40 jumbo jets.
        Although the Sarawak Chamber had been closed to the public in recent
        years, tours began again in late 1998; if you wish to see this chamber,
        be sure to ask when making your arrangements to see if it can still be
        visited.
        Nearest to the parks headquarters are the Deer Cave and
        Langs Cave. The Deer Cave, with an enormous entrance and a passage 2
        km (about 1 mile) long and up to 220 m (670 ft) high, had been a
        shelter for deer. It is uncertain whether it was also used as a human
        burial ground, as other caves in the system were used. Like many other
        large, open caves, it is home to millions of bats, which fly out in a
        cloud at dusk in search for food. Noteworthy is Adam and Eves
        shower, a cascade of water falling 120 m (366 ft) from the caves
        ceiling. Deep within the cave — after about an hours walking — is a
        hidden green valley known as the Garden of Eden.
        Langs Cave, nearby, was once inhibited by wild boars, and
        although smaller, it has a variety of stalactites and stalagmites and
        spectacular rock curtains.
        The Clearwater and Wind caves are reached by longboat from
        the parks headquarters. The Clearwater caves passage extends for 50
        km (31 miles). Youll need to have a good flashlight on hand — in order
        to see the limestone formations — after passing the moss-covered
        stalactites near the entrance. The Wind Cave is accessible to hardy
        cavers near the Clearwater cave, but other visitors must make their
        entry from the river.
        Exploring the Pinnacles, 900 m (3,000 ft) up the side of
        Mount Api, will add extra days to the tour, but there are few sights to
        match these gigantic stone needles thrusting like petrified hooded
        ghosts above the dark green canopy of the forest. Extra time, too, is
        required if you with to attempt the climb up Mount Mulu (2,376 m/7,793
        ft), whose summit was successfully reached by Lord Shackelton in 1932
        after earlier known attempts in the nineteenth century had failed. The
        climb of Mount Mulu can alone can take up to five days, although
        expert climbers have made the journey in less than two.
        The richness of the parks flora and fauna has been the
        topic of many scientific studies. The accumulation of data has revealed
        1,500 species of flowering plants, 20,000 animal species, 8,000
        varieties of fungi, 262 species of bird, 50 species of reptiles, and
        280 species of butterfly. Bird-life includes stork-billed kingfishers,
        myna birds, and strawhead bulbuls.
        Sabah
        Covering the northern tip of Borneo, Sabah lies just clear
        of the cyclones that regularly sweep down across the Philippines, and
        so has been dubbed by generations of sailors the Land Below the Winds.
         Its capital, Kota Kinabalu — popularly known as KK — looks out on the
        South China Sea, with the Sulu to the northeast and the Sulawesi seas
        to the south.
        KK lies in the shadow of the Crocker Mountain Range, home
        of Mount Kinabalu, Southeast Asias tallest mountain at 4,101 m (13,454
        ft). The Kinabalu national park is just one of six protected regions in
        the state.
        The capital serves as a landing-stage for visits to an
        offshore national park of coral islands. On the east coast, Sandakan
        provides a base for visiting the Turtle Islands and the famous
        orang-utans of Sepilok. Fishing, snorkeling, deep sea diving, leisurely
        coral cruises in the beautiful waters surrounding Sabah, or just
        exploring KKs markets are some choices available to the visitor.
        Kota Kinabalu
        Known as Jesselton (after Sir Charles Jessel, chairman of
        the North Borneo Chartered Co.) until World War II, Kota Kinabalu was
        renamed Api (fire) by the occupying Japanese. Todays KK was rebuilt
        from the ashes of the war after allied bombing razed the city during
        the Japanese occupation. KK is at present a prosperous and busy
        seaport, with a growing manufacturing base and a population of 200,000;
        for the tourist there are numerous shopping centers. Rebuilt in a
        modern style, it is blessed with a beautiful natural setting: tree-clad
        coral islands off the coast and the dramatic backdrop of Mount Kinabalu
        to the west. The city is generally used as a base for visiting the
        surrounding national parks.
        Youll find a tourist information office (a former post
        office) on Jalan Gaya (this and the Atkinson Clock Tower are two the
        few pre-war structures still standing).
        The large, golden dome of the State Mosque, at the corner
        of Jalan Tunku Abdul Rahman and Jalan Penempang, can be seen as you
        come into town from the airport. Nearby is the Sabah State Museum on
        Jalan Museum, which is open only from Saturday to Thursday. The Museum
        is styled along the lines of Murut and Rungus longhouses, set on
        grounds where you will also find several steam engines. Its historic
        photograph collection provides a chance to see the township as it was
        before the war.
        Next door is the Science and Technology Centre and an Art
        Gallery. Across from the museum is an Ethnobotanic Garden, offering
        opportunities to see a range of tropical plants.
        On the north side of town is the gleaming Sabah Foundation
        building, a 30-story cylinder mounted on a polygonal pedestal and
        looking like a flat-topped space rocket. Construction of the tower came
        from timber royalties to the state, after the foundation, which is
        devoted to state educational projects, was established in 1966. This
        tower offers a great view of the city.
        One block east of Jalan Gaya is the Atkinson Clock Tower,
        built in 1905. Walk up the hill to try the view from the Signal Hill
        Observatory. One of the most popular markets in town is the Jalan Gaya
        Street Market, held every Sunday morning. At the waterfront can be
        found the Filipino Market, near the general and fish markets.
        The Coral Islands
        Just a brief boat ride from KK are the five islands of the
        Tunku Abdul Rahman National Park, which was created in 1974. Boats can
        be rented at the waterfront, near the Hyatt Hotel, for either a group
        or individual tour to the islands. All five islands lie within a
        five-mile radius and provide first-class beaches and superb
        opportunities for swimming and snorkeling, and there are boardwalk
        trails into the islands jungle interior.
        Pulau Gaya is the largest of the coral islands. The
        national park headquarters here can give you information about the
        flora and fauna, both underwater and in the forest. The sandy Police
        Beach on the north shore is good for swimming and exploring marine life
        among the coral reefs. On the boardwalk trail across a mangrove swamp
        forest, look out for monkeys, bearded pigs, and giant-beaked pied
        hornbills.
        Some of the best nature trails are on neighboring Pulau
        Sapi, a 25-acre islet off the northwestern coast of Pulau Gaya. South
        of Sapi is Palau Manukan, where the parks headquarters are located and
        where you can get information on the islands flora and fauna. Here,
        too, are chalets, a restaurant, swimming pool, and tennis and squash
        courts. Tiny Pulau Mamutik is the smallest of the group, covering just
        15 acres, but it is largely unspoiled, with plenty of reefs at its
        northeastern end; it is very popular with divers and snorkelers. The
        remotest and least developed island, with the parks finest coral reefs
        and abundant marine life, is Pulau Sulug; it offers a more tranquil and
        deserted atmosphere.
        Around Kota Kinabalu
        From the bus station near Jalan Tun Razak, inexpensive
        journeys can be made to locations not far from the city. One
        interesting trip is to visit one of the many tamu (village markets)
        held on different days of the week — ask about days at Kota Kinabalus
        tourist information office. The best are at Tuaran 33 km (19 miles)
        from KK, and farther north at Kota Belud, where one finds the
        Mengkabong and Penambawan Bajau villages.
        At Donggongon in the village of Kuai, some 10 km (6
        miles) south of KK on Penampang River, is the Kampung Monsopiad. It was
        built to commemorate the legendary warrior Monsopiad, whose forte was
        beheading his enemies. Forty-two of his trophies are on show at the
        Cultural Village.
        Spectacular views of the nearby tropical jungle can be had
        from a ride on the railway to Beaufort, 40 km (25 miles) northwest of
        the town of Tenom. Just outside of Tenom is an Agricultural Research
        Station. Although the train begins at Tanjung Aru, one way to save time
        is to take a taxi to Beaufort and another from Tenom back to Kota
        Kinabalu. At Beaufort, Chinese shophouses stand on stilts next to the
        Padas River.
        South from KK, heading towards the Crocker Mountain Range,
        is the Rafflesia Centre. This is dedicated to the worlds largest
        flower, the rafflesia, of which there are 14 varieties.
        Mount Kinabalu National Park
        The cool refreshing temperatures and spectacular scenery
        make a journey to Mount Kinabalu Park worthwhile. Even if you are not
        about to make the vigorous — though quite accessible — climb to the
        mountains summit, the scenery, plants, and wildlife close to the
        parks headquarters are rewarding. Looming huge and dark in the light
        of dawn, the peak is revealed in its full splendor. But it is often
        hidden as morning clouds sweep upwards once again to shroud the peak in
        mist.
        At 4,100 m (13,450 ft), Gunung Kinabalu is the high peak
        between the Himalayas and New Guinea. Its name means sacred home of
        the dead to the Kadazan who dwell on its lower slopes. The park can be
        reached by road 90 km (56 miles) from Kota Kinubalu. There is a special
        bus service from KK, but arrive early, as the bus will depart whenever
        it becomes full. The trip to the park headquarters takes at least two
        hours, though only one and a half hours on return. There are also
        regular buses plying the highway between KK and Sandakan. The journey
        from Kota Kinabalu to the park and climb up into the Crocker Range
        takes you through Malaysias varieties of forest and landscape, from
        coastal mangrove to cloud forest, montane, and subalpine meadow.
        The park covers 754 sq km (291 sq miles) with temperatures
        much, much cooler than on the coast. They ease to a gentle 20°C (68°F)
        at park headquarters and drop to freezing point at the lodge where
        climbers spend the night prior to their pre-dawn assault on the summit,
        so warmer clothing is a must for park visitors — and rainproof
        clothing, too, for those climbing the mountain.
        The climb to the summit is largely open to anyone in good
        condition and ready to make the effort. Except for extra-warm clothing
        and good walking shoes, special mountain-climbing gear is not required.
        But a majority of visitors — some 90 percent — are quite happy just
        exploring the beautiful forests around the park headquarters. Those who
        do climb to the summit are rewarded with a magnificent sunrise over
        Borneo — and a certificate to prove it.
        It is necessary to book at the Sabah National Park
        Headquarters in Kota Kinabalu well in advance, especially in the months
        of April, July, August, and December. The climb requires two days, with
        an overnight stay at a chalet at the point where the climb begins. The
        park offers a good restaurant and a wide range of accommodation, from
        chalets to simple hostels. At the parks headquarters arrangements are
        made for your mountain guide, porters, and transport to the station
        where the climb begins. There are multimedia and slide shows, and trail
        maps are available for those who want to set out on their own (but be
        careful, as some trails are not as well marked as others). Those with a
        hardy constitution may like to swim in the cool Liwago River nearby. A
        small but comprehensive Mountain Garden provides a good introduction to
        the plant life you will find in Kinabalus forest.
        Plant life. The pride of the mountain is its 1,500
        different orchids, found up to an altitude of 3,800 m (12,464 ft).
        Ferns are also present in their hundreds. Rhododendron-lovers may find
        26 different varieties, together with 60 types of oak and chestnuts.
        But the most fascinating remain the pink-speckled, carnivorous pitcher
        plants. Look out, too, for the bracket fungus, growing out of tree
        trunks to form a seat big and strong enough for child to sit on.
        Wildlife. Many of the local forests 100 mammals are
        difficult to spot — the few orang-utans, for instance, are practically
        invisible, but you can at least hear the gibbons whooping. Besides the
        usual sambar and mouse-deer, bearded pig, and clouded leopard, there
        are 28 species of squirrel. They range from the black giant squirrel,
        measuring up to 90 cm (close to 3 ft) from nose to tail and weighing in
        at over 2 kg (41⁄2 lb), and the flying squirrel (who actually jumps
        remarkably well) to the pygmy squirrel, 8 cm (3 in) long.
        Children adore the tiny wide-eyed, doll-like slow
        loris — slow because that is how he moves — and the tarsier. The
        Kadazan describe the tarsier as some kind of compendium, with the tail
        of a rat, eyes of an owl, feet of a frog, ears of a bat, nose of a
        squirrel, fur of a loris, and torso of a monkey. 
        At night, street lamps around park headquarters attract
        thousands of moths from the jungle. They make an ideal breakfast for
        the birds in the next mornings dawn, when all self-respecting
        birdwatchers are up with their binoculars. Kinabalu has 250 species to
        offer, including the scarlet sunbird, long-beaked spider-hunter,
        fork-tailed grey drongo, crested serpent eagle, white-rumped shama, and
        laughing thrushes.
        Climbing Mount Kinabalu. Each year a marathon race — or
        Climbathon — is held on the mountain, with the record presently held
        by a British man, Ian Holmes, who ran to the summit in just 2 hours and
        42.07 seconds. (The first ten place-getters in the 1998 event came in
        under three hours. ) For ordinary mortals the climb takes two days.
        (Meals and bedding are provided at the mountain lodges for the
        overnight stop; also, note that rates charged by the park differ
        between weekdays and the weekends). Armed with warm and rainproof
        clothing for the mountain mists, pocket flashlight, and a stock of
        bananas and chocolate for extra energy, you make an early morning
        start. After a stretch of road, the climb proper begins at Timpohon
        Gate. As you climb, you will notice the change from bamboo groves to
        oaks (the forest here has 40 different varieties), myrtle, laurel, and
        moss-covered pines. The trees become more gnarled and stunted as you
        approach the barren granite plateau at the summit.
        The first shelter at Carsons Falls is at 1,951 m (6,400
        ft). The best chance to see pitcher plants on the trail is at the
        Second Shelter on the trail at 2,134 m (7,000 ft), but remember, no
        picking. You make your overnight stop at the Laban Rata Resthouse, or
        the Panar Laban Hut, Waras Hut, or Gunting Lagadan at 3,353 m (11,000
        ft). Panar Laban means Place of Sacrifice, for it is here that seven
        white chickens and seven eggs are offered by Kadazan climbers to the
        spirits of the sacred mountain each year.
        To get to the summit at sunrise, you must get up at about
        2am. You make your way up across a barren plateau of flaked and pitted
        granite. The Sayat Sayat Huts, 3,811 m (12,500 ft), are the last
        shelters before the summit. Directly to the north are the Donkeys Ears
        rocks, and behind them the Ugly Sisters, as you make your way west to
        Lows Peak (4,101 m/13,455 ft), the highest of the mountains nine
        peaks. (British officer Hugh Low, a highly successful Resident in
        Perak, reached the summit plateau in 1851. ) Even if the altitude does
        not take your breath away, the view from the Crocker Range and out to
        the Philippine Islands will. But one cannot loiter long on the summit,
        as it will soon be enveloped in mid-morning mists, making the descent
        treacherous for even the most experienced climber.
        Poring Hot Springs
        The Poring Hot Springs, 37 km (23 miles) from the park
        headquarters, offers much relief to climbers after the surprisingly
        tough climb down the mountain. The springs, with their soothing sulphur
        baths, were developed by the Japanese during World War II. Cool off at
        the Langanan Waterfall along one of trails, or at the Kepungit
        Waterfall, a site rich in butterflies and bat-filled caves. Nearby are
        groves of towering bamboo (poring means bamboo in Kadazan). If it has
        been raining, you might expect to find some leeches along the
        trail.
        Sandakan
        Stretched along a narrow strip of land between steep hills
        and the Sulu Sea, Sandakan is the gateway to the Turtle Islands
        National Park, the Gomtanong Caves, and the Sepilok Orang-Utan
        sanctuary. Once the capital of British North Borneo, modern Sandakan,
        like Kota Kinabalu, was devastated by allied bombing and burnin g
        during World War II, leaving little evidence of the former
        township.
        The lively Waterfront Market is a good starting point for

        the visitor. Sandakans oldest temple, originally built in the 1880s,
        is dedicated to the Goddess of Mercy, although modernization has
        detracted from its character. The ornate Puu Jih Shih Buddhist Temple,
        built at a cost of some US$2 million in 1987, stands on the hilltop
        above Tanah Merah, south of Sandakan town. The temple is ablaze with
        the red and gold of dragons, gilded Buddhas, hundreds of gleaming
        lamps, and the fragrance of burning incense.
        You can also tour the home of Agnes Keith, an American
        writer whose life in Sandakan from 1932 to 1954, including experiences
        in a prisoner-of-war camp, was documented in three novels, including
        Land Below the Wind. Her pre-war home was destroyed but faithfully
        reconstructed upon the return of her husband and herself in 1946.
        Other links to the war years include the Australian
        Memorial on the site of the former prisoner of war in Taman Rimba, off
        Labuk Road, which commemorates the Allied soldiers who lost their lives
        during the Japanese occupation and serves as a remembrance of the Death
        March by 2,400 soldiers — mostly Australians — from the camp to Ranau
        in September 1944. There is also a small Japanese cemetery in the
        corner of the old cemetery on the hills overlooking the town.
        The Kinabatangan River Basin
        The Kinabatangan Basin, some 80 km (50 miles) southwest of
        Sandakan, offers a good opportunity to catch sight of a range of
        wildlife, especially hornbills, monitor lizards, macaques, and
        orang-utans, not to mention the elusive proboscis monkey or the rare
        rhinoceros and elephant. The Kinabatangan is a rewarding river for
        wildlife enthusiasts, and trips can be organized with tour operators at
        Sandakan.
        Another access point to the wilds of Sabah is through the
        Danum Valley Conservation Area. The valley is 80 km (50 miles) inland
        from Lahad Datu on Sabahs east coast. Here are a range of walking
        trails through the protected forests, home to the western tarsier,
        orang-utan, leopard cat, deer, Malayan sun bear, smooth otter, and
        others, including 16 varieties of bird life (three species of hornbill
        alone).
        The Sepilok Orang-Utan Sanctuary
        A 30-minute drive west of Sandakan, this nature reserve
        provides a rehabilitation center for young orang-utans, previously held
        in captivity, to prepare them to be able to live in the forest unaided.
        Boardwalk trails and muddy paths take visitors through the forest to
        the feeding centers.
        These highly theatrical russet-furred apes (see page 39)
        exist at three levels in Sepiloks rainforest: tame, entirely in the
        care of the zoologists; semi-tame, living within reach of the
        sanctuarys feeding points; and wild, having moved off to the remote
        parts of the forest away from their prying human cousins. Many of the
        orang-utans are as curious as the visitors. They have flashy tastes,
        preferring to snatch at bright objects rather than dull ones. They have
        a good sense of parody. Watching someone put up an umbrella in the
        rain, they will immediately mimic this, using leaves and twigs. And
        they show a weary disdain for the antics of photographers leaping
        around them.
        Optimistic figures put the numbers of orang-utans at
        between 10,000 and 20,000 in Sabah, mostly living in swampy forest
        areas. While still free from being listed as endangered, fears are
        nevertheless held that unbridled timber-cutting could sharply reduce
        their numbers.
        The Turtle Islands
        From July to October, green and hawksbill turtles gather
        to lay their eggs on the island beaches north of Sandakan Bay. The park
        is 40 km (25 miles) from Sandakan and is comprised of three
        islands — Pulau Selingaan, Pulau Bakkungan and Pulau Gulisaan — with a
        total coverage of 1,740 hectares (4,295 acres). Pulau Selingaan has
        three fully-furnished chalets where up to 20 people can stay, from
        which you can maintain your overnight vigil (see page 101).
        Singapore Stopover
        Until the development of the new international airport in
        KL, most people flew into or out of Singapore on their Malaysia trip,
        staying over most notably for the duty-free shopping. Although
        Singapores recent economic growth has led to higher prices, the
        quality and variety of goods remain big draws. But shopping has been
        superceded by travelers interest in experiencing its cosmopolitan
        lifestyle or its historical and cultural offerings. Two days are
        required to do justice to the city — even on a short stay — but you
        will find even more to explore than you can fit in.
        The island of Singapore, joined by a causeway to Johor
        Bahru at the southern tip of the Malaysian peninsula, covers 618 sq km
        (238 sq miles), running 42 km (26 miles) from east to west at its
        widest point and 23 km (141⁄2 miles) from north to south. An
        independent republic since 1965 (see page 31), a third of the country
        is a sprawling city dominated by skyscrapers, though with its patches
        of green. The rest is tailored hills and fields, with the occasional
        groves of lush green woodland, which just two centuries ago was the
        hunting ground of tigers. Located just one degree — or 87 km (54
        miles) — above the equator, Singapores humid heat — around 30°C (86°F)
        by day, 23°C (73°F) at night — nurtures some of the worlds finest
        orchids. Highly efficient air-conditioning makes life tolerable for
        mere humans.
        Land is still being reclaimed from the sea and coastal
        swamp for the construction of industrial estates. Remaining true to its
        colonial origins as a trading port, Singapore boasts the worlds
        fourth-busiest port, as containers are brought from the region to be
        reloaded for new destinations. Banking and stock trading have made
        Singapore a key player in the international financial markets and a
        prime location for raising capital. On top of this, its economy
        sustains thriving machinery and sophisticated electronics industries.
        Asias recent economic crisis has slowed things down, but international
        demand for electronics promises to be a key to Singapores revival. Its
        duty-free retail businesses, especially imported cameras, computers,
        and jewelry, lead many to think of Singapore City as one giant shopping
        mall (see page 151).
        The causeway to Malaysia carries much of Singapores food
        by road and rail as well as water by pipeline. But it continues to
        strive for self-sufficiency where it can, and has become a strong
        regional importer; Singaporeans growing incomes allow them to demand a
        wider choice of imported food.
        Over three-quarters of the islands population of 3.5
        million are Chinese, 14% are Malay, and 7% Indian. The island boasts
        some 500 Chinese and Hindu temples, Muslim mosques, Christian churches
        for its Eurasians and Westerners, and even a couple of Jewish
        synagogues. English, used without nationalistic inhibition, is the
        lingua franca between communities — in addition to their Mandarin,
        Malay, Tamil, and five other Indian dialects.
        Singapore City
        The Lion or Garden City, Singapore is easy to travel
        in, thanks to modern transport systems including more than ten thousand
        taxis, a Mass Rapid Transit (MRT) system, and a bus network. A good way
        to get a feel for the city is to ride bus No. 124, which connects the
        citys major neighborhoods. The five main areas of the city worthy of
        exploring are the Colonial District, Chinatown, Little India, the Arab
        Quarter, the waterfront, and, of course, the citys gardens.
        The Colonial District
        The Padang, bound by Connaught Drive and St. Andrews Road,
        is the heart of what was once the center of colonial life and power in
        Singapore. With the Singapore Cricket Club at one end of the carefully
        manicured greens and the Singapore Recreation Club at the other,
        stretching beyond and nearby are a host of sights that extend to the
        famed Raffles Hotel, the War Memorial Park, Parliament House, the
        Victoria Concert Hall and Theater, and the Neo-Classical design of the
        Supreme Court. Within walking distance are several churches, and, just
        beyond, museums, including the Asian Civilization Museum, the National
        Museum, and the Singapore Art Museum.
        The venerable National Museum, on Stamford Road just
        across from the National Theatre, offers a splendid array of
        predominantly Chinese cultural treasures — Sung, Yuan, and Ming
        porcelain, a rich collection of jade, rosewood, and
        mother-of-pearl-inlaid furniture, and gongs, drums, and silverware.
        Attention is also given to Malaysian and Indonesian arts and a
        documentation of the life of Sir Stamford Raffles. A series of
        three-dimensional dioramas present the history of Singapore from its
        earliest days as an ancient aboriginal settlement to its days as a
        British trading port under Japanese occupation and the post-war
        campaign for independence.
        A block away from Waterloo Street, at the junction of
        Rochor Road and Victoria Street, is Bugis Village, well known for its
        restaurants and entertainment, though less rowdy than in days gone
        by.
        Chinatown
        What was once the heart of Singapores Chinese community
        is now being encroached upon by new development, as the rising
        skyscrapers of the financial district cast their ever-widening shadows
        on the shophouses of South Bridge Road. More recently, efforts have
        been made at restoration rather than destruction, but the old groceries
        and apothecaries are still threatened by rising rents. But not all is
        lost — yet. You can wander around stalls of live eels, gnarled ginger
        root, decorated lanterns, and freshly slaughtered python meat.
        Chinese temples abound. Among the most well known is Leon
        San See Temple, on Race Course Road, dedicated to the goddess of mercy,
        Kuan Yin. The Thain Hock Keng Temple, on Telok Ayer Street, dates back
        to 1821 when a house on the site was dedicated to the goddess of the
        sea; the temples construction was begun in 1839.
        The most famous shrine is the Sri Mariamman, the oldest
        Hindu temple on the island, practically founded with Singapore itself
        in the early 19th century. Inside its South Indian gopuram (tower)
        profusely decorated with statues, you will find the temples presiding
        goddess. She won allegiance for her cures for the smallpox and cholera
        that were prevalent when the colony was established. Next door is the
        Chulia Mosque.
        Little India
        Little India is centered around Serangoon Road, and
        besides the myriad shops and loud music, you will also find restaurants
        and temples. One of the most interesting is the Sri Veeramakaliamman
        Temple, dedicated to Kali, whose origins go back to the early 1880s,
        though the roof carvings of the goddesss many manifestations have only
        been in place for three decades. Worship here tends to be noisy and
        theatrical.
        The Thandayuthapani Temple on Tank Road is scene for the
        annual Thaipusam Festival that is marked throughout the peninsula by
        Hindu communities, as devotees express their faith by piercing their
        bodies with metal spikes.
        The Arab Quarter
        Singapores Muslims are a rich mixture of Malays and
        Indians who intermarried with 19th-century Arab traders. Their
        neighborhood, specifically North Bridge Road, has much of the
        atmosphere of a Middle-Eastern bazaar, with aromas very different than
        in Chinatown. Shops selling silks, Indonesian batiks, basketware, and
        jewelry nestle around the minarets and domes of the Sultan Mosque, on
        North Bridge Road near Arab Street. In the cool, carpeted interior of
        Singapores largest mosque, the clock gives the time in Mecca.
        Up Arab Street across Canal Roads waterway, one plunges
        into a maze of stalls on Sungei Kelantan and Larut roads, known as
        Thieves Market, open only in the afternoon. Hardware and antiques,
        both stolen and acquired honestly, are its speciality, but also to be
        found are jewelry and fake designer clothes. Beware of pick-pockets as
        you shop.
        The Waterfront
        Land reclamation on the downtown stretch of the Singapore
        River has moved the colorful junks, sampan riverboats, and tongkang
        lighters west to the wharves at Pasir Panjang Road. The Statue of
        Merlion, half fish, half-lion, still guards the estuary, and lovers
        meet on the benches of Merlion Park. But it is the great Harbor that
        now provides the waterfronts visual excitement. Beyond the park, the
        Elizabeth Walk Promenade is a good spot from which to watch the
        action.
        For a close-up view, take a harbor cruise in a motorized
        junk from Clifford Pier or the new passenger terminal at Jardine Steps.
        Your vessel coasts by freighters unloading cargo at the wharves and
        fights its way through the countless scows, water-taxis, police-boats,
        tugs, schooners, yachts, and the supertankers that supply Singapores
        half-dozen oil refineries.
        Busy Clifford Pier stands at the end of the Change Alley,
        a partly elevated shopping corridor where money and goods change hands
        at lightning speed.
        Gardens
        To compensate for the relentless urban and industrial
        construction, Singapore has covered its island with parks and gardens.
        The origins of the Botanic Gardens, on Holland Road, date as far back
        as 1836, when a voluntary society hoped to build on earlier failed
        attempts at establishing a garden. It was not until 1859 that they
        succeeded, originally as a nursery for the Brazilian seedlings that
        launched Malaysias rubber industry (see page 27). Two aging trees here
        were actually bore witness to this historic event. More aesthetically
        pleasing is the superb orchid collection. Look out, too, for the fine
        collection of palms, the cannonball tree, the sausage tree, and the
        swans on a lily-covered lake.
        Jurong Park on Yuan Ching Road offers an exquisite
        juxtaposition of Japanese and Chinese garden design. The tranquil
        Seiwaen (Japanese Gardens) present a harmonious landscape of rock
        gardens, bridges, and carp pools. The more ebullient Yu Hwa Yuan
        (Chinese Gardens) are inspired by those of the Peking Summer Palace.
        Climb the six-tiered Cloud-Piercing Pagoda and look out over the red
        and yellow pavilions, the Moon-Receiving Tower, the Fragrance-Filled
        Lily Pond, and the Jade-Splashed Bridge.
        After this, the Tiger Balm Gardens 10 km (6 miles) west of
        Singapore City on Pasir Pajang Road stand in stark contrast, but offer
        a Chinese theme park that children will adore. Also good for the
        younger set are the child-friendly Zoological Gardens in the northern
        part of the island on Mandai Lake Road, which include a thriving
        orang-utan colony. And nearby is the The Night Safari, open only from
        7:30pm to midnight, where you can see nocturnal animals on a guided
        tour by rail cart.
      
    
  
