
  
  
    
      
        Where to Go
        To help you plan your itinerary, we divide Japan into seven
        regional sections. The first is devoted entirely to Tokyo, where youre
        likely to begin your trip, get your bearings, and become acquainted
        with modern Japan. We then present six tours spreading out from the
        capital to the centers of historic and artistic interest as well as to
        sites of natural beauty. If you have sufficient time to explore Japan,
        you might want to begin and end your visit in Tokyo. In between, you
        can venture out to explore the rest of the country.
        Tokyo
        Originally known as Edo (meaning estuary), Tokyo was just
        a sleepy little village surrounded by marshland on the broad Kanto
        plain until the end of the 16th century, when Tokugawa Ieyasu moved
        here and made it the center of his vast domains. When Ieyasu became
        shogun in 1603, Edo in turn became the seat of national
        government — and its castle the largest in the world. Edo expanded
        rapidly to accommodate Ieyasus 80,000 retainers and their families and
        the myriad common people who served their daily needs. By 1787 the
        population had grown to 1,368,000.
        The ruling elite lived on the high ground, the Yamanote
        (bluffs) west and south of the castle. The artisans, tradespeople,
        and providers of entertainment (reputable and not so reputable) lived
        downtown on the reclaimed marshlands north and east, in the area
        still known as Shitamachi. As these two populations interacted, a
        unique new culture was born. Edo became the center of power and also
        the center of all that was vibrant and compelling in the arts.
        After 1868 that center grew even stronger, when the movement
        known as the Meiji Restoration overthrew the Tokugawa shogunate and the
        imperial court moved to Edo. The city was renamed Tokyo (Eastern
        Capital), and from that moment on all roads — political, cultural, and
        financial — led here.
        In the 20th century Tokyo has twice suffered almost total
        destruction. First, the earthquake of 1923 and subsequent fire razed
        nearly all vestiges of old Edo, killing some 140,000 people in the
        process. Rebuilt without any comprehensive urban plan, Tokyo remains a
        city of subcenters and neighborhoods, even villages, each with its own
        distinct personality.
        Unlike the great capital cities of Europe, there is no
        prevailing style of architecture here, no monumental core for a new
        building to harmonize or clash with. Even after the collapse of the
        economic bubble in 1992, construction projects are everywhere. Whole
        blocks of the city seem to disappear overnight, replaced in the blink
        of an eye by new office buildings, condominiums, cultural complexes,
        and shopping centers.
        Tokyo is a city of enormous creative and entrepreneurial
        energy, much of which goes into reinventing itself. If theres a
        commodity in short supply here, its relaxation. Nobody strolls in
        Tokyo, and there are few places to sit down outdoors and watch the
        world go by. The idea of a long, leisurely lunch hour is utterly alien.
        People in Tokyo are in a hurry to get somewhere — even if they dont
        always know precisely where theyre going.
        The Imperial Palace
        If Tokyo can be said to have any center at all, this is it.
        Todays Imperial Palace is on the site of Edo castle, where the
        Tokugawa shogunate ruled Japan for 265 years; it was thereafter home to
        the emperors of the modern era. The palace was almost totally destroyed
        in the air raids of World War II, then rebuilt in ferroconcrete. This
        is the least interesting part of what was once the largest system of
        fortifications in the world, and in any case you cant get in to see
        it. What you can see are the lovely grounds of the East Garden, the
        moat and massive stone ramparts, and those few examples of classic
        Japanese architecture — gates, bridges, armories, and
        watchtowers — that have survived since the 17th century.
        The imperial family still resides in the palace, so the
        general public is admitted to the grounds on only two days each year:
        on 2 January and 23 December. On these occasions, you might find it
        hard to compete with the many thousands of Japanese visitors who come
        to pay their respects.
        The Imperial Palaces East Garden is open to the public
        every day except Monday and Friday. From Otemachi subway station, you
        enter the gardens at the Otemon Gate and wander through hedgerows of
        white and pink azaleas, around ponds and little waterfalls edged with
        pines, plum trees, canary palms, and soft green cryptomeria japonica.
        Over the treetops you catch an occasional glimpse of the skyscrapers of
        modern Tokyo. Also on the grounds are the Museum of Imperial
        Collections, an exhibition hall for art treasures donated to the public
        by the imperial family in 1989; and the Hundred-Man Guardhouse, where
        the approach to the inner sanctum of the fortress was defended by four
        shifts of 100 samurai warriors each.
        A walk clockwise around the palace grounds will bring you
        first to the picturesque Nijubashi Bridge and the Seimon Gate, where
        the public is allowed to enter the palace grounds. You then pass the
        most prominent of Japans modern government buildings, the National
        Diet (Japans parliament) and the Supreme Court. A complete circuit
        would also include the National Theater, and the National Museum of
        Modern Art. With a short detour, you can also take in Yasukuni Jinja.
        Founded in 1869, this is the Shrine of Peace for the Nation,
        dedicated to the souls of those who have died for Japan in battle.
        Besides the main hall and the hall of worship, the shrine complex
        includes a noh theater stage, a sumo wrestling ring, several teahouses,
        and the Yushukan museum of war memorabilia.
        Ginza
        Tokyos best-known district is named after a silver mint
        originally located here. Once the epitome of chic, Ginza has lost many
        of its smartest young shoppers to the fashion boutiques of districts
        like Aoyama and Omote-sando, but the area is still fascinating.
        The windows of such department stores as Wako and
        Mitsukoshi are works of art. Inside, theres more art: all the major
        department stores project themselves as bastions of culture,
        maintaining their own galleries and mounting frequent world-class
        exhibitions of prints, painting, pottery, and sculpture. Downstairs you
        can find still more art — to Western eyes at least — in the
        astonishing basement gourmet food displays. (The basement is also a
        good place for cheaper snacks than youll find in the street-level
        restaurants. )
        Running roughly north–south through Ginza from the corner
        of Hibiya Park all the way to Tokyo Bay is the broad avenue called
        Harumi-dori. Taking a stroll down the avenue is such a national
        institution that theres even a colloquial expression for it: gin-bura.
        Just south of Ginza itself, as you walk toward the bay, you see on your
        left the red lanterns and long banners of the Kabuki-za, home base for
        that most thrilling and colorful form of traditional Japanese drama.
        The first kabuki theater was built in on this site in 1889. Designed to
        invoke the castle architecture of the Tokugawa period, the theater was
        destroyed in an air raid in World War II and rebuilt in 1951.
        Still farther south is the Tsukiji Central Wholesale
        Market — the largest fish market in Asia. Some 1,600 wholesale dealers
        do business here, supplying 90 percent of the fish consumed in Tokyo
        every day. Get here very early (5am is ideal) to see the tuna auctions
        and enjoy the orchestrated pandemonium of the market at its finest.
        From here, you could walk to the lovely Hama Rikyu Detached Palace
        Garden. Originally a Tokugawa family estate, the garden became a public
        park in 1945. The path to the left as you enter leads to the ferry
        landing, where the river buses depart for their journeys up the
        Sumida River to Asakusa.
        Asakusa
        Asakusa is the heart of Shitamachi, the quarter
        best-beloved of that fractious, gossipy, prodigal population called the
        Edokko, who trace their downtown roots back at least three
        generations. Edokko are suckers for sentimentality and for ninjo: the
        web of small favors and kindnesses that bind them together. Sneeze in
        the middle of the night and your Edokko neighbor will demand the next
        morning that you take better care of yourself; stay home with a fever
        and she will be over by noon with a bowl of soup. An Edokko craftsman
        would rather lose a commission than take any guff from a customer who
        doesnt know good work when he sees it. Edokko quarrel in a language
        all their own, an earthy local dialect as profane and expressive as
        Brooklynese. Ignore the proprieties — or offend the pride of an
        Edokko — and he will let you know about it, in no uncertain terms;
        respect his sense of values and you make a friend for life.
        The heart of Asakusa, in turn, is Sensoji (also known as
        the Asakusa Kannon temple). According to legend, the temple houses a
        small statue of the Buddhist goddess of mercy, found in the Sumida
        River by two local fishermen in the year 628 — but in fact not even the
        temple priests have ever seen it. When Edo became the capital of the
        Tokugawa shogunate, Asakusa began to flourish as an entertainment
        quarter. In the early-19th century even the kabuki theaters were
        located here. The Meiji Restoration and the opening of Japan to exotic
        new Western-style amusements further enhanced Asakusas reputation as
        Fun City. The first place in Japan to call itself a bar opened in
        Asakusa in 1880 (and is still doing business); the first movie theater
        opened here in 1903. Before long, the streets and alleys around the
        temple were filled with music halls, burlesque theaters, cabarets,
        gambling dens, and watering holes of every description.
        Most of the temple quarter was firebombed to ashes in 1945,
        but by 1958 the people of the area had raised enough money to rebuild
        Sensoji and all of the important structures around it. So what if the
        restorations were in concrete? The original is still there in
        spirit — and no visitor should neglect it.
        Sensoji Temple and Surroundings
        Start your exploration from Asakusa Station, on the Ginza
        subway line (Tokyos first subway). A few steps from the exit is
        Kaminarimon (Thunder God Gate), the main entrance to the temple, hung
        with a pair of enormous red paper lanterns. From here, the long, narrow
        arcade called Nakamise-dori is lined with shops selling toasted rice
        crackers, spices in gourd-shaped wooden bottles, dolls, toys, fans,
        childrens kimono, and ornaments and souvenirs of all sorts. Some of
        these shops have been operated by the same families for hundreds of
        years.
        The arcade ends at a two-story gate called the Hozomon. To
        the left is the Five-Story Pagoda, and across the courtyard is the main
        hall of Sensoji. Visitors should be sure to stop at the huge bronze
        incense burner in front of the hall, to bathe in the smoke — an
        observance believed to bestow a years worth of good health.
        The building to the right of the main hall is the Asakusa
        Jinja, a Shinto shrine dedicated to the three legendary founders — the
        Sanja — of Sensoji. (Buddhism and Shinto get along quite peacefully in
        Japan, sharing ground and even deities. ) The Sanja Matsuri, held here
        every year on the third weekend in May, is the biggest, most exuberant
        festival in Tokyo.
        Ueno
        North of the city center, Ueno was chosen in 1625 by the
        Tokugawa Shogun Hidetaka as the site of a vast temple complex. Called
        Kaneiji, it was established on the areas one prominent hill to
        protect the capital from evil spirits. Kaneiji was a seat of great
        power until 1868, when it became the battleground in the shogunates
        last stand against the imperial army and most of the buildings were
        destroyed. Subsequently, Ueno was turned into Tokyos first public
        park, endowed with all the preferred Western improvements: museums,
        concert halls, a library, a university of fine arts, and a zoo. Ueno
        should be a stop on any visitors itinerary — especially if you happen
        to be here in mid-April, when the cherry blossoms in the park are
        glorious.
        No visitor here should miss the Tokyo National Museum, a
        complex of four buildings devoted to Japanese art and archaeology
        dating back to the prehistoric Jomon and Yayoi periods. Outstanding
        among the exhibits are Buddhist sculpture of the tenth- and
        11th-century Heian era, illustrated narrative scrolls from the
        13th-century Kamakura period, paintings by the great Muromachi artist
        Sesshu, and woodblock prints by the Edo-period masters Utamaro,
        Hiroshige, and Hokusai.
        Nor should you neglect the National Museum of Western Art,
        on the east side of Ueno Park: an outstanding collection of French
        Impressionist paintings, prints, and drawings, the gift of a wealthy
        businessman named Kojiro Matsukata. The building itself was designed by
        Le Corbusier; the Rodin sculptures in the courtyard — the Gate of Hell,
        the Thinker, and the magnificent Burghers of Calais — are authentic
        castings from the original molds.
        Of the Edo-era buildings that have survived or been
        restored, the most important are the main hall of Kaneiji and the
        Toshogu Shrine to the first Tokugawa Shogun Ieyasu — a lesser version
        of the great sanctum at Nikko, in the mountains of Nagano Prefecture
        (see page 64). Also of interest is the Kiyomizu Kannon Hall, modeled
        after the larger and more famous Kiyomizu temple in Kyoto; registered
        as a National Treasure, this is one of the few buildings that survived
        the battle of 1868 intact.
        At the south end of the park is the statue of Saigo
        Takamori, leader of the imperial army that overthrew the shogunate in
        1868. (Saigo is a problematic hero in Japanese history: in 1871 he was
        killed in an unsuccessful rebellion against the very government he
        helped to found. )
        From here, its a short walk west to the grounds of
        Shinobazu Pond. Just inside the entrance, on the right, is the
        Shitamachi Customs and Manners Museum. Budget some time here: it will
        give you a wonderfully concrete sense of the lifestyle that defined
        this part of the city for well over 300 years. The displays include a
        full-scale reproduction of a nagaya (one of the long, single-story row
        houses typical of the Edo period). Visitors are welcome to take their
        shoes off and walk through the tatami-mat rooms.
        Harajuku and Yoyogi Park
        The venerable imperial traditions of Japan and the frenetic
        celebration of its youth culture are arrayed side by side in this
        quarter of the city. From Harajuku Station on the Japan Railways
        Yamanote loop line, its but a few steps to Meiji Jingu, the shrine
        dedicated to the spirits of the Emperor Meiji (who died in 1912) and
        the Empress Shoken. The entrance is marked by two huge torii gates,
        their pillars made from 1,700-year-old cypress trees.
        From here, broad gravel paths lead to the honden (the
        sanctum of the shrine), destroyed in the air raids of 1945 and restored
        in 1958, and the Imperial Treasure House museum. The Meiji emperor
        presided over the emergence of Japan as a modern nation state, and his
        shrine is surely the most solemn, decorous place in Tokyo. During the
        annual festival (31 October through 3 November) and on New Years Day,
        as many as a million people will come to offer prayers and pay their
        respects. Spring and summer make better visits, when you can admire the
        irises and flowering shrubs of the inner gardens.
        Adjacent to the shrine is Yoyogi Park. The park is
        remarkable chiefly for the National Yoyogi Sports Center, comprising
        two stadiums designed by architect Tange Kenzo. The park itself was
        once a parade ground for the imperial Japanese army. After World War II
        it was taken over by the Occupation for military housing and nicknamed
        Washington Heights, then redeveloped as the Olympic Village site for
        the 1964 Tokyo Olympic Games. By the 1980s, thanks to the broad avenues
        and new subway s tops built for the games, this had become one of the
        liveliest, trendiest, and demographically youngest quarters of the
        city.
        On Sundays and holidays, part of the avenue through the
        park is closed to traffic. Rock bands that are not quite yet on a
        professional footing truck in their equipment and play all day, just
        for practice. The bands are loud — they have to be to compete with the
        groups of Elvis imitators in black leather jackets and sideburns who
        also lay claim to some of this great free space, dancing in circles to
        the oldies on enormous boomboxes. Street food, body paint, in-your-face
        fashion, photo ops: on a warm spring afternoon Yoyogi Park is more fun
        than any place in town.
        The opposite (west) end of the park borders on Shibuya,
        where you can visit NHK Broadcasting Center, headquarters for Japans
        public television network — a must for anyone wishing to see how
        samurai epics are made. Your hotel or the Tourist Information Center
        will have information on the Studio Park guided tour of the NHK
        soundstages.
        Shinjuku
        In the Edo period Shinjuku was where two of the major roads
        from the west came together. By the early 1900s the area had become a
        sort of bohemian quarter, beloved of the citys cliques of writers,
        artists, and intellectuals. After World War II it emerged as one of
        Tokyos major transportation hubs, and today an estimated three million
        people pass through Shinjuku Station every day. The station itself
        divides Shinjuku into two distinctly different areas, east and
        west.
        West Shinjuku rejoices in a special gift of nature. Its
        relatively stable bedrock can support earthquake-safe
        skyscrapers — foremost among them is the new Metropolitan Government
        Office, more familiarly known as Tokyo City Hall. The City Hall complex
        was architect Tange Kenzos magnum opus, arguably the last great work
        of his career. It was a staggeringly expensive project, and taxpayers
        have had an ongoing love-hate relationship with its postmodern
        monumental design since it was completed in 1991. The complex consists
        of a 48-story main office building, a 34-story annex, the Metropolitan
        Assembly building, and a huge central courtyard. The main building
        soars 243 m (797 ft), splitting on the 33rd floor into two towers.
        Weather permitting, the observation decks on the 45th floors of both
        towers offer views all the way to Mt. Fuji.
        East Shinjuku is really two places: a daytime quarter of
        department stores, vertical malls, and discount stores, and a nighttime
        quarter of bars (straight and gay), cheap restaurants, strip joints,
        game parlors, jazz clubs, rooms-by-the-hour hotels, raves, and
        honky-tonks — most of the latter in a seedy, neon-lit neighborhood
        called Kabuki-cho. The neighborhood isnt really dangerous, but its
        all too easy for the unwary visitor to wander into a rip-off; if you
        plan to explore Kabuki-cho, do so with a knowledgeable local guide.
        A longish walk along Shinjuku-dori from the station will
        bring you to the north end of Shinjuku Gyoen National Garden.
        Originally a feudal estate, this collection of gardens (in Japanese,
        French, and English styles) became part of the imperial household after
        the Meiji Restoration and, in 1949, a public park — the ultimate oasis
        in this quarter of the city. Shinjuku Gyoen is famous for its botanical
        greenhouse, for its flowering cherry trees in April, and for its
        chrysanthemum exhibition during the first two weeks of October.
        Shinagawa
        Not otherwise rich in tourist attractions, Shinagawa has
        one gem that should not be missed: Sengakuji — a temple that evokes
        what is surely the most popular story in all of premodern Japanese
        history.
        In 1701 a young provincial baron named Asano Takumi no
        Kami, morally insulted by a court official named Kira, attacked and
        wounded his tormentor. Asano was ordered to commit suicide for his
        offense; however, Kira went free. Asanos clan steward, Oishi
        Kuranosuke, and forty-seven of his loyal retainers vowed revenge. On
        the night of 14 December 1702, despite many obstacles, they attacked
        Kiras heavily guarded villa on the east side of the Sumida River, cut
        off his head, and brought it in triumph to Asanos tomb at Sengakuji,
        the family temple. This was a dilemma for the Tokugawa government. On
        one hand, their revenge was perfectly in accord with the samurai code
        of honor; on the other, they had murdered a high official. Eventually,
        Oishi and his band were also ordered to commit suicide; this they did,
        and they were buried at Sengakuji with their lord. Celebrated in kabuki
        theater, film, and television, the story has had an abiding hold on the
        imagination of the Japanese people. Thousands of visitors come annually
        to Sengakuji to lay incense on the tombstones and walk through the
        small museum called the Hall of the Loyal Retainers, where weapons,
        personal effects, and other memorabilia are preserved.
        Kanto
        The once-marshy plain of Kanto is Tokyos hinterland, the
        region where the feudal warlords set up their military bases and
        administrative headquarters. Their tough-minded pragmatism survives
        today not only in Tokyo but also in the dynamic industrial zone that
        has burgeoned around it in such towns as Kawasaki and Yokohama. But
        monuments at Kamakura and Nikko still bear testimony to the regions
        history. And reigning supreme over Kanto is a sublime spiritual comment
        on the vanity of all such human endeavors: sacred Mt. Fuji.
        Four easy-to-manage excursions from Tokyo would make
        memorable additions to your stay. Two of them — to Yokohama and
        Kamakura — are daytrips. Visits to Nikko and to Mt. Fuji/Hakone will be
        more enjoyable as overnighters.
        Nikko
         Think nothing splendid, says an old Japanese proverb,
        until youve seen Nikko.  In the mountains of Tochigi Prefecture,
        about 150 km (93 miles) north of Tokyo by train, Nikko is the final
        resting place of Ieyasu, founder of the Tokugawa shogunate, who died in
        1616. Upon his death he was declared a god by the imperial court and
        subsequently known as Tosho Daigongen (The Great Incarnation Who
        Illuminates the East). The following year, his remains were taken in a
        grand procession to be enshrined here, on the site of a religious
        center founded some eight centuries before. In life, Ieyasu had made
        himself the absolute monarch of Japan. His personal fief alone was
        worth enough to feed and support some 2.5 million people. Toshogu, the
        mausoleum complex that he commanded for himself in his apotheosis, is
        extraordinary.
        Nikko is best reached from Tokyo by train (by the Japan
        Railways Shinkansen line from Tokyo or Ueno stations, with a transfer
        at Utsunomiya, or by the private Tobu Line Limited Express from
        Asakusa). The journey takes about two hours. The little town of Nikko
        is essentially one long avenue from the railway station to the Toshogu
        shrine.
        The Toshogu Shrine Complex
        A short bus ride from the station plaza brings you to the
        red-lacquer Shinkyo (Sacred Bridge), a 28-m (92-ft) span over the
        Daiya River, where your exploration of Toshogu begins. The bridge marks
        the spot where the Buddhist priest Shodo is said to have crossed the
        river in the year 766 on the backs of two huge serpents, to found the
        temple that would later become Rinnoji. An entrance to the shrine
        complex is just across the road, opposite the bridge and up a flight of
        stone steps that brings you first to Shodos temple.
        Rinnoji belongs to the Tendai sect of Buddhism. The main
        hall, called the Sanbutsudo, with its almost erotic color scheme of
        black and green and vermilion, dates to 1648 and is the largest single
        building at Toshogu. Inside are three huge gold-lacquered statues,
        representing three different manifestations of the Buddha. In the
        center is Amida Nyorai, the Buddha who leads believers to Paradise; on
        the right is Senju (Thousand-Armed) Kannon, the goddess of mercy; on
        the left is Bato-Kannon, depicted with a horses head on its forehead,
        regarded as the protector of animals. North of the main hall is the
        Goho-tendo, a subtemple where worshippers inscribe their prayers for
        health and prosperity on slats of wood that are later burned to carry
        the prayers to heaven. To the south is the residence of the Abbot — by
        tradition an imperial prince — with a particularly fine garden in the
        style of the Edo period.
        Leaving Rinnoji from the west side, you come to the broad
        Omote-sando avenue that leads uphill to the shrine itself. Note the
        monument to the daimyo Matsudaira Masatane, Ieyasus trusted retainer.
        Matsudaira spent some 20 years planting the majestic cryptomeria cedars
        on the grounds of the shrine and along the 64-km (40-mile) avenue of
        approach. Alas, much of the avenue has been destroyed; a few sections
        of it survive on the road east of town, where many of the 13,000 trees
        still standing are maintained by corporate sponsors.
        At the top of the Omote-sando, on the left, is the
        five-story pagoda of the shrine, decorated with the 12 signs of the
        Asian zodiac and the hollyhock crest of the Tokugawa family. From here,
        a flight of stone steps leads to the first gate of Toshogu: the
        Omotemon, guarded by two fierce red-painted Deva kings. In the first
        courtyard is the stable, which houses the shrines sacred white horse;
        the carved panel above the door is the famous group of three
        monkeys — Hear no evil, see no evil, speak no evil!   — that has
        become a symbol of Nikko, the logo on virtually every souvenir. At the
        far end of the courtyard is the Kyozo (Sutra Library), which houses
        some 7,000 Buddhist scriptures in a huge revolving bookcase.
        As you approach a second set of stone steps, you see on the
        right a belfry and a tall bronze candelabrum; on the left is a drum
        tower and a bronze revolving lantern. The two bronzes were presented in
        the mid-17th century by the Dutch government, in gratitude for the
        special exemption that gave them exclusive trading privileges with
        Japan during the period of national seclusion. Off to the left is the
        Yakushi-do, a temple honoring the manifestation of the Buddha as healer
        of illnesses.
        At the top of the steps is the two-story Yomeimon, the
        Gate of Sunlight — the triumphal masterpiece of Toshogu, rightly
        declared a National Treasure. This is the ultimate expression of the
        opulent Momoyama style inspired by Chinese Ming sculpture and
        architecture. Ivory-white and 11.3 m (37 ft) high, its columns, beams,
        and cornices are carved with a menagerie of dragons, phoenixes, lions,
        and tigers in a field of clouds, peonies, Chinese sages, and angels,
        all gilded and painted in red, gold, blue, and green. To the right and
        left of the gate there are paneled galleries, also carved and painted
        with a motifs from nature: pine and plum trees, birds of the field, and
        waterfowl.
        Inside the gate to the left is the Mikoshi-gura, a
        storeroom for the portable shrines that grace the semi-annual Toshogu
        Festival processions (18 May and 17 October). To the right is the
        Kaguraden, a hall where ceremonial dances are performed to honor the
        gods — and where, for a modest fee, couples can have Shinto wedding
        ceremonies performed, complete with flutes and drums and shrine maidens
        to attend them.
        Opposite the Yomeimon, across the courtyard, is the Karamon
        (Chinese Gate), the official entrance to the inner shrine. This
        structure, like Yomeimon, is also a National Treasure and just as
        ornately carved and painted. The walls on both sides of this gate
        enclose the honden (main hall) of the shrine.
        The entrance is to the right. Here you remove your shoes
        (lockers are provided) to visit the outer part of the hall, called the
        haiden (oratory). You may not proceed further than this, for at the far
        end of the oratory are the naijin (inner chamber) and nai-naijin
        (innermost chamber), where the spirit of Ieyasu is enshrined. With him
        are two other worthy companions: Toyotomi Hideyoshi, Ieyasus mentor,
        and the great 12th-century warrior Minamoto no Yoritomo, who founded
        the Kamakura shogunate — and whom Ieyasu claimed as an ancestor.
        The tour next takes you to another Toshogu icon: the famous
        Gate of the Sleeping Cat. The cat itself, on a small panel above the
        entrance, is said to have been sculpted by Hidari Jingoro, a legendary
        master carver of the Tokugawa period. From here a flight of 207 stone
        steps takes you up through a wonderful forest of cedars to Ieyasu
        Tokugawas tomb. The climb is worth making, if only for the view, the
        trees, and a cool, rushing stream. The tomb itself, a miniature bronze
        pagoda that houses the great shoguns ashes, is nothing special.
        A short walk west from Toshogu itself is surely the oldest
        of the institutions on this holy ground. Futarasan Jinja is a Shinto
        shrine founded in the 8th century to honor the deity
        Okuni-nushi-no-Mikoto (God of the Ricefields), his consort, and their
        son. In one corner of the enclosure is a bronze lantern some 2.3 m (7.5
        ft) high; the deep nicks in the bronze were made by guards on duty at
        the shrine, who believed that the lantern transformed itself into a
        goblin at night. Such was the incredible cutting power of the Japanese
        sword — embellished perhaps a bit by Japanese superstition.
        Iemitsu, who was Ieyasus grandson and the third Tokugawa
        shogun (1603–1651), undertook the building of Toshogu. He has his own
        resting place here at Daiyu-in, to the west of Futarasan. Smaller in
        scale, Daiyu-in is in fact the more impressive mausoleum, set on a
        forested hillside and approached by three flights of stone stairs and
        five decorative gates. The most impressive of these, at the top of the
        stairs, is the Yashamon (She-Demon Gate), so named for the figures in
        its four alcoves. The sanctum of the shrine, designated a National
        Treasure, has a gilded and lacquered altar some 3 m (nearly 10 ft)
        high, where a seated wooden figure of Iemitsu looks down upon his
        mighty works.
        Lake Chuzenji
        The waterfalls and forested hills of the Nikko National
        Park area are a welcome respite to the monumentality of Tokugawa
        architecture. Even if you are here only on a daytrip, you should take
        the 10-km (6.2-mile) bus ride up the spectacular winding Irohazaka
        Highway to Chuzenji. Better yet, take a cab and tell the driver to stop
        at Akechi-daira, the halfway point. The view of Mt. Nantai (2,484 m;
        8,148 ft) and the valley below is magnificent.
        Lake Chuzenji, at 1,270 m (4,166 ft) above sea level, was
        made eons ago when a now-dormant volcano erupted and blocked the river
        courses, creating two cataracts. The 96-m (315-ft) Kegon-no-taki at the
        south end is the countrys most famous waterfall. An elevator takes
        sightseers to an observation platform in the gorge below. The falls are
        especially impressive after a summer rain, when the sunshine produces a
        single or even double rainbow in the spray. In the winter the falls
        form a spectacular cascade of icicles. At the gorges north end,
        Ryuzu-no-taki (Dragons Head Falls) is broader but not as high; it
        has the additional merit of a teahouse, where you can sit and watch the
        water tumble into the lake.
        Famous for its rainbow trout, Chuzenji is too cold for
        swimming most of the year, but visitors throng to this area for its
        spectacular spring and fall scenery and for its numerous hot springs
        resorts. The most impressive historical monument on the eastern shore
        of the lake is Chuzenji, a subtemple of Toshogus Rinnoji. The temple
        enshrines a 5-m (16-ft) standing figure of Kannon, the Goddess of
        Mercy, said to have been carved more than 1,000 years ago from the
        trunk of a single Judas tree.
        Yokohama
        Situated 20 km (12.5 miles) southwest of Tokyo, Yokohama
        was an unimportant little fishing village until 1854, when Japans long
        centuries of self-imposed isolation came to an end. Foreign diplomats,
        traders, and missionaries were at last able to enter the country. But
        the unrest they inspired prompted the Tokugawa government to move them
        all here, to a guarded compound on the village flats — ostensibly to
        guarantee their safety, but more importantly to contain the
        contamination of their uncouth ways and ideas.
        The ploy worked well enough until the Meiji Restoration,
        when those Western ideas were needed to modernize the country. In 1869
        Y okohama became an international port, and the burgeoning
        international community quickly spread beyond its confinement to the
        high ground still known today as the Bluff. In 1872 Japans first
        railway went into service between Yokohama and Tokyo, and the city
        began to flourish.
        The two cities have twice shared the same destructive fate.
        The great Kanto earthquake of 1923 destroyed some 60,000 homes in
        Yokohama and took over 20,000 lives. The next twenty years of
        reconstruction and growth were wiped out overnight, in May 1945, when
        American bombers leveled nearly half the city. The harbor was hastily
        restored during the Korean War and today is one of the busiest and most
        important trading ports in the world.
        With a population of some three million, Yokohama no longer
        sits in Tokyos shadow. In many respects, in fact, it is the more
        cosmopolitan city, preferred by many residents of the greater
        metropolitan area as a place to live and work. If you are on a short
        visit to Japan, your excursion time might be better spent elsewhere.
        But Yokohamas great waterfront, port redevelopment project, museums,
        and restaurants should still keep it high on your list.
        The Japan Railways Keihin-Tohoku line takes about 40
        minutes from Tokyo to Sakuragi-cho Station in Yokohama; the faster
        shinkansen leaves you off at Shin-Yokohama, on the outskirts of the
        city. From Sakuragi-cho its a short walk to the waterfront (which is
        still referred to by its old name, the Bund) and to the South Pier and
        Yamashita Park. Here you can take a tour of the harbor on one of the
        sightseeing launches moored near the ship Hikawa-maru, now retired from
        service. It carried passengers between Yokohama and Seattle for some
        thirty years; in summer, it has a pleasant beer garden on the upper
        deck.
        At the entrance to the South Pier is the nine-story Silk
        Center Building. The Silk Museum on the second floor, with its
        collection of kimono and exhibits of the silk-making process, evokes
        the period when Yokohama was the hub of that industry. On the first
        floor are the main offices of the Yokohama International Tourist
        Association.
        For a birds-eye view of the harbor, take the elevator to
        the observation deck of the 106-m (348-ft) Marine Tower. The beacon
        atop the tower gives it a claim of being the tallest lighthouse in the
        world; it also has an interesting oceanographic museum.
        The Minato Mirai 21 project, launched in the mid-1980s, was
        intended to turn a huge tract of neglected waterfront north and east of
        Sakuragi-cho into a model city of the future, integrating business,
        exhibition, and leisure facilities. The centerpiece of the project is
        the 70-story Landmark Tower, Yokohamas tallest building; its
        observation deck affords a spectacular view of the city and the Bay
        Bridge, especially at night.
        Nearby is the Yokohama Museum of Art, designed by Tange
        Kenzo and housing works by both Western and Japanese artists, including
        Picasso, Braque, Kandinsky, Kishida Ryusei, and Yokoyama Taikan. On the
        waterfront itself is Nippon-maru Memorial Park, where pride of place
        goes to the three-masted sailing ship popularly called the Swan of the
        Pacific.  Now a training vessel, it is open to visitors on guided
        tours.
        Yokohamas Chinatown, a few minutes walk from Japan
        Railways Kannai Station in the center of the city, is the largest in
        Japan. Its narrow alleys are crowded with shops selling foodstuffs,
        spices, herbal medicines, cookware — in fact, anything that China
        exports. The restaurants, needless to say, are wonderful.
        Fashionable, upbeat Yokohama is centered in two areas. One
        is Basha-michi (Horse-Carriage Street) running from Kannai Station to
        the waterfront. The street acquired its name in the 19th century, when
        it was laid out for the vehicles of the citys Western residents; a
        more recent redesign evokes that era with red brick sidewalks and
        imitation gas lamps — but the boutiques along the street are
        up-to-the-minute. The other area extends from Ishikawa-cho Station to
        Motomachi and the International Cemetery. Motomachi was the first area
        developed in the Meiji period to serve Western shoppers, and it has
        kept pace with the movements of fashion ever since.
        The International Cemetery, established in 1854, is the
        last resting place of some 4,000 foreigners of 40 different
        nationalities who lived and died in Yokohama. Behind it is the Yamate
        Shiryokan, a small museum of materials about the citys 19th-century
        European population. Just up the hill at this end of Motomachi is
        Harbor View Park, where the views at night — when Yamashita Park and
        the harbor are floodlit — are especially fine.
        The last must-see in Yokohama is Sankei-en, originally the
        estate of wealthy silk merchant and art connoisseur Hara Tomitaro, who
        opened his garden to the public in 1906. At great expense he
        transferred here a number of important 17th-century buildings that once
        belonged to the Tokugawa family, including the Rinshunkaku villa and
        the charming Choshukaku tea pavilion, as well as a small temple from
        Kyotos famed Daitokuji. Sankei-en is a special delight from February
        though early April, when the plum and cherry trees blossom.
        Kamakura
        Kamakura, less than an hour south of Tokyo by train, was
        the seat of Japans first military government. The Kamakura shogunate
        was founded late in the 12th century after a long and bloody rivalry
        between two noble factions over control of the imperial court. The
        victorious Minamoto clan chose Kamakura as its headquarters because
        this fishing village — girded on three sides by steep wooded
        hills — was a natural fortress. Here they created what most of us
        envision as the Way of the Samurai: the values, codes, religion, and
        culture of a warrior caste that would rule Japan for 700 years.
        Much of that culture was inspired by the Rinzai sect of Zen
        Buddhism and its sense of discipline and self-control, its austere
        philosophy of art and life. The shogunate founded great numbers of Zen
        temples in Kamakura. Many are still standing, and some are registered
        as National Treasures. From the Japan Railways station at Kita (North)
        Kamakura, about an hour from Tokyo on the Yokosuka line, you can easily
        reach six of these temples.
        Engakuji, founded in 1282, became the second most important
        in the group of monasteries called the Gozan (Five Mountains), a
        hierarchy established in the 14th century for the Zen temples under the
        official patronage of the shogunate. Engakuji is Kamakuras largest
        temple complex; often wracked by fire and earthquake, 17 of the
        original 46 buildings have survived. Two of these are registered as
        National Treasures: the shariden (hall of holy relics), built in 1282,
        and the huge belfry on the hill above. The bell, some 2.5 m (8 ft)
        tall, was cast in 1301. The principle building open to the public at
        Engakuji is the butsunichi-an ceremonial hall, where visitors can take
        part in a tea ceremony.
        Nearby is Tokeiji, familiarly known as the Divorce
        Temple, which was unique as a sanctuary for the women of the warrior
        caste seeking an escape from unhappy marriages. If the victim managed
        to make her way here and stay for three years as a nun, she could
        obtain a decree of divorce from the shogunate and go free. The
        homotsukan (treasure house) of Tokeiji has a collection of
        Kamakura-period paintings, sculpture, and calligraphy, some of which
        are registered as Important Cultural Objects. Also on the grounds is
        the Matsugaoka Bunko, a research library established in memory of D.T.
        Suzuki (1870–1966), who pioneered the study of Zen Buddhism in the
        West.
        South of Tokeiji, on the way to Kamakuras center, are
        Meigetsu-in and Jochiji, Zen temples with especially fine gardens.
        Still farther south is Kenchoji, founded in 1249, the foremost of the
        Five Mountains.  It was modeled on one of the great Chinese
        monasteries of the time and built for a Chinese monk who was said to
        have interceded with the dreaded Kublai Khan to stop the Mongol
        invasion of Japan. Kenchoji is still an active monastery; like many of
        the temples in Kamakura, it offers visitors the opportunity to take
        part in Zen meditation training sessions. Nearby Ennoji boasts a
        remarkable group of sculptures representing Enma (the Lord of Hell) and
        his judges.
        Sightseeing in Kamakura
        In Kamakura proper, dont miss Tsuru-ga-oka Hachimangu, the
        shrine complex built by Yoritomo no Minamoto, the first Kamakura
        shogun. It was dedicated to the legendary Emperor Ojin, from whom
        Yoritomo claimed descent. As part of the mid-September festival at this
        shrine, there is a spectacular tournament of archery on horseback
        (yabusame), in which contestants dressed in the costume of
        Kamakura-period huntsmen must hit a series of three small wooden
        targets as they come down a narrow course at full gallop. The spacing
        between the targets gives the rider just barely enough time to drop the
        reins, notch and fire an arrow, and regain control of his mount.
        On the grounds of the shrine are two museums. The Kamakura
        Municipal Museum of Modern Art houses a collection of Japanese oil
        paintings, watercolors, wood block prints, and sculpture.The Kokuhokan
        (National Treasure Museum) has a fine collection of objects from
        various Kamakura temples and shrines, including some excellent
        13th-century paintings.
        A short walk east from Hachimangu is the tomb of
        Yoritomo — an exceedingly plain and modest affair compared with the way
        a later dynasty of shoguns chose to immortalize themselves at Nikko. In
        many ways Yoritomo was a less-than-admirable figure in Japanese
        history, but you still might want to stop at this little moss-covered
        stone pagoda to pay your respects.
        If for nothing else, Yoritomo earns our admiration for his
        determination to create a Seated Buddha for his capital to rival the
        huge bronze figure made in 749 for Todaiji temple in Nara. That idea
        bore fruit in 1292 with the casting of the 120-ton Daibutsu in the
        courtyard of Kotoku-in temple — after Mr. Fuji, probably the most
        photographed icon of Japan. The massive seated figure, 11.4 m (37 ft)
        high, sits in the classical pose of the Amida Buddha (Compassionate
        One), his hands resting in his lap, the thumbs touching the palms and
        the eyes half-closed in an expression of profound serenity. The statue
        is hollow, and you can climb a staircase inside to look out through a
        window between the Buddhas shoulders.A temple was originally built to
        house the figure, but this structure was destroyed in a tidal wave in
        1495. For the five centuries since then, the Buddha has been dispensing
        his benevolence to visitors in the open air.
        The Daibutsu and Kotoku-in temple are in Hase, the district
        in the western part of Kamakura. The other major attraction here is
        Hasedera. In the Kannon Hall of this temple is the largest wooden
        devotional figure in the country: a statue of the Eleven-Faced Goddess
        of Mercy, some 10 m (33 ft) high, carved from a single tree trunk and
        covered in gold leaf. The 10 smaller heads in her crown symbolize her
        ability to search in all directions for those in need of compassion. No
        one knows for certain when the figure was carved; one legend dates it
        to the early 8th century. The Amida Hall of Hasedera houses the image
        of a seated Amida Buddha, endowed by Minamoto no Yoritomo when he was
        42 — a particularly unlucky age according to popular Japanese belief.
        Yoritomos piety bought him a little more time to enjoy his success; he
        was 52 when he was thrown by a horse and died of his injuries.
        Ryukoji Temple and Enoshima Island
        Kamakura history was not shaped by the Minamoto clan alone.
        No account of this area would be complete without the story of Nichiren
        (1222–1282), the monk who founded the only native Japanese sect of
        Buddhism. Nichirens defiance of both Zen and Jodo (Pure Land)
        Buddhism eventually persuaded the shogunate to order him beheaded on a
        hill to the south of Hase. However, legend says that, just as the
        executioner raised his sword, a lightning bolt struck and broke it in
        two. Before he could try again, a messenger arrived with an order
        commuting Nichirens sentence to exile on the island of Sadogashima.
        Later, in 1337, the Nichiren sect built the Ryukoji temple on the same
        hill.
        On the nearby Sagami bayshore are Yuigahama and
        Shichirigahama, two of the beaches closest to the metropolitan area. In
        the hot, humid summer months it can feel as if the entire population of
        Tokyo and Yokohama is here, searching in vain for a vacant patch of
        sand. Equally popular is Enoshima, the little island just offshore,
        with a hill in the middle that affords — on clear days — a fine view of
        Mt. Fuji and the Izu Peninsula.
        Hakone
        Hakone is a national park and resort area southeast of Mt.
        Fuji, extremely popular with weekend trippers from Tokyo. Just 90
        minutes by train from the city, this area makes a very pleasant
        daytrip. But to enjoy more of the countryside, you can stay overnight
        and continue down the Izu Peninsula the next day.
        Even if you have a Japan Railpass, we suggest that you
        invest in the all-inclusive Hakone Free Pass offered by the Odakyu
        Railway. This entitles you to a roundtrip train ticket from Shinjuku to
        Gora, connecting with the funicular railway up into the mountains to a
        cable car. You then swing across the volcanic Owakudani valley and down
        the other side for a boat cruise across Lake Ashi to Hakone-machi. From
        there, you can take a bus (still on the same pass) along the Sumiko
        River to Odawara, and then back by train to Tokyo.
        Among the many attractions of this excursion is the Hakone
        Open Air Museum (Chokoku no mori, or Forest of Sculptures) at
        Miyanoshita. Established in 1969, the museum rejoices in a wonderfully
        designed and landscaped mountain setting. Here the works of such
        Western sculptors as Moore, Arp, Calder, and Giacometti share the
        garden space with those of Shimizu Takashi, Takamura Kotaro, and other
        Japanese artists. The exhibits are chosen for their resistance to the
        elements, and the museum is as lovely in winter as it is in summer.
        Visitors stop here on the way to the little town of Gora,
        to catch the cable car to Sozan and from there the gondola ride up into
        the mountains and across the smoking, sulfurous Owakudani valley.
        Theres a stop en route where you can visit the Owakudani Natural
        Science Museum, which has some uninspiring audio-visual presentations
        of volcanic eruptions. Down in the basement is the really interesting
        display: an array of seismographs busily recording the movement of the
        vast tectonic plates deep below.
        Ride the next cable car to the shore of Lake Ashi, where
        excursion cruisers leave from the piers at Togendai for the 20-minute
        ride to Hakone-machi on the other side of the lake. On a good day the
        reflection of Mt. Fuji in these clear blue waters is breathtaking. In
        early August the resorts on the lakeshore sponsor the dramatic Torii
        Matsuri festival, when a great wooden arch is set alight and a thousand
        burning lanterns are sent floating out across the water.
        In the Tokugawa period Hakone-machi was an important town
        on the Tokaido, the only highway through this mountainous area between
        the imperial court in Kyoto and the shogunal capital in Edo. The
        shogunate, always suspicious of people on the move, maintained a system
        of garrisons along the road, and no one went through without an
        official pass. The checkpoint here, called the Hakone Sekisho, is an
        exact replica of the original, with a small museum of period costumes
        and weapons. The surrounding area is well known for its inns and
        thermal baths and for its Hakone-zaiku woodcrafts with inlaid mosaic
        and marquetry.
        Izu Peninsula
        The jumping-off point for this popular vacation area is
        the town of Atami, about an hour from Tokyo on the shinkansen
        super-express train. The Izu Peninsula is blessed with a sunny climate,
        fine beaches, picturesque little fishing ports, and — perhaps more to
        the point — some of the countrys best hot springs resorts.
        Two of the resort towns are of special interest to
        Westerners. Ito, about 16 km (10 miles) south of Atami on the east
        coast, is a spa with some 800 thermal springs and good surf swi mming
        along its beautiful, rugged coast. The nearby Omura-san Park has 3,000
        cherry trees, with different varieties blooming at different times of
        year. Historically, Ito was home for five years to William Adams, the
        Englishman shipwrecked on the shores of Kyushu in the early 17th
        century who became an advisor to Tokugawa Ieyasu. For his knowledge of
        seafaring, he was given the title anjin (pilot). At Ieyasus command,
        Adams (the model for the hero of James Clavells novel Shogun) set up a
        shipyard in Ito and built Japans first two European-style ocean-going
        vessels. There is a monument to Adams at the mouth of the Okawa River,
        and the Anjin Festival is held in his honor every August.
        Shimoda, at the southern tip of the peninsula, is famous
        in still another historical context. It was off the coast here that
        Commodore Matthew Perry, ordered by the US government to open
        diplomatic relation with Japan by force if necessary, anchored his
        fleet of black ships. The shogunate bowed to the pressure and agreed to
        accept American diplomat Townsend Harris, who established the first US
        consulate at Gyokusenji temple in Shimoda in 1856. Two years later, at
        nearby Ryosenji temple, negotiations resulted in the first US–Japan
        Treaty of Amity and Commerce. The monument to Perry and Harris, not far
        from the harbor, celebrates these epochal events, as does Shimodas
        annual Kurobune Matsuri (Black Ship Festival) in May.
        In fact, charming though it still is today as a fishing
        port and yacht harbor, Shimoda was worthless from the commercial or
        diplomatic perspective. The shogunate had simply stuck Harris there to
        keep the dreaded Westerners away from the capital. Later, he negotiated
        the opening of Yokohama as a trading port and foreign settlement. Such
        was the subsequent dismay among reactionary factions at this sign of
        weakness that the Tokugawa shogunate was soon overthrown.
        Mt. Fuji
        Most of the worlds national symbols — the Statue of
        Liberty, the Eiffel Tower, the Kremlin, the Great Wall — are man-made.
        Japans is a phenomenon of nature. And yet, in its near perfect
        symmetry, the cone of Mt. Fuji, snowcapped even in summer, is so
        exquisitely formed that it seems more like the work of an infinitely
        patient landscape artist than a volcanic accident. The solitary
        majestic peak rises 3,776 m (12,385 ft) into the heavens. It is, in a
        word, simply beautiful. Here, more than in any temple garden or ancient
        castle ground, you can appreciate why the Japanese prefer to blur the
        distinction between nature and art.
        The volcanos name is thought to derive from an Ainu word
        for fire.  Fuji-san last erupted in 1707, and today only an
        occasional puff of steam breaks through its crust, the fitful snore of
        a sleeping giant. Graciously, it remains dormant for the sake of the
        hundreds of thousands of visitors who come every year to climb to the
        summit.
        For some, the climb is an act of piety: the mountain is
        revered as the abode of Japans ancestral gods. For others, the climb
        is an exercise in self-discipline and physical purification. Still
        others come out of no particular religious impulse, on holiday, making
        the ascent mainly to be able to say theyve done it and
        leaving — almost in spite of themselves — with a profound sense of
        spiritual uplift. No travel brochure can make Mt. Fuji a cliché, nor
        can the most jaded of world travelers remain immune.
        Most visitors begin their climb at Kawaguchi Lake, in the
        resort area north of the mountain, getting that far by train from Tokyo
        in about two hours. The official climbing season is 1 July to 31
        August, although mountain huts at each of the ten stations on the
        various routes of ascent are open from April to mid-November. Climbing
        out of season (especially in wet weather) is not recommended, but
        people do it all the time.
        From Kawaguchi, you take a local bus to Go-gome (Fifth
        Station) on the north face, to start the five-hour hike to the summit.
        Theres also a direct bus to this point from the Shinjuku bus terminal
        in Tokyo that takes about two and a half hours. If youre coming from
        Kyoto or Osaka, the train or bus connections bring you to the
        Fujino-miya trail, on the south face.
        Truly dedicated pilgrims begin the climb around midnight,
        reaching the top in time to greet the sunrise. Theres no danger of
        losing the well-marked trail, and the night ascent obviates the need to
        put up at any of the dormitory-style mountain huts along the way (where
        the accommodations are truly awful). You can stop at the seventh or
        eighth station to rest en route. Pack extra-warm clothing and wear good
        hiking boots, hats, and gloves. Bad junk food from vending machines is
        all thats available at the summit, so its best to bring your own
        supplies and, above all, a thermos of hot tea or coffee.
        Fuji-san is like any other mountain in one respect: its a
        lot easier coming down. More adventurous visitors will take the descent
        down the volcanic sand slide called the suna-bashiri to Shin-Go-gome
        (New Fifth Station). Just sit on your backpack or a piece of
        cardboard, push off, and slither down. From Shin-Go-gome, buses connect
        to the town of Gotemba for connections home.
        Dont confine your visit to the mountain only. The Fuji
        Five Lakes that form a crescent around the north side of the peak offer
        delightful opportunities for fishing, boating, and hiking. Yamanaka-ko
        is the largest of the five. Kawaguchi-ko is the most popular, probably
        because of the excursion boats that ply the route along the north
        shore, where — with luck and good weather — you get a perfect
        mirror-image reflection of Mt. Fuji in the water. Sai-ko has the best
        trout fishing, and Shoji-ko is smallest, prettiest, and still
        relatively undeveloped. Motosu-ko is the clearest and deepest of the
        five.
        Between Sai-ko and Shoji-ko lies the dense, mysterious
        Jukai (Sea of Trees), a forest notorious for being easier to enter
        than to leave. The volcanic substrata here throw magnetic compasses
        completely out of whack. Many holiday visitors lose their way, some of
        them on purpose: the eerie Jukai is a perennial favorite with would-be
        suicides, and every year the local authorities conduct a sweep of the
        forest to recover the bodies that would otherwise never be discovered.
        Due south of Motosu-ko, the glistening white 26-m (85-ft) Shiraito
        Falls make a far more cheerful setting for a picnic.
        Kansai
        Embracing the historical and cultural centers of Kyoto and
        Nara, the Ise-Shima shrines, and the vibrant commercial cities of Osaka
        and Kobe, the Kansai region is essentially the heart of the nation.
        While Tokyo usually provides the first glimpse of modern
        Japans many strange contrasts, it is to Kyoto and Nara that visitors
        with even a passing interest in Japanese history and culture come to
        peel back the layers of centuries. Although Kyoto is internationally
        renowned as the countrys de facto cultural capital, nearby Nara was
        the first important home of the imperial court and still boasts many of
        Japans most important temples and shrines.
        Ise-Shima National Park is the supreme sanctuary of
        Japans ancestral Shinto deities. Osaka and neighboring Kobe offer
        striking perspectives of modern commercial Japan, albeit on a more
        accessible and less intimidating scale than Tokyos sprawling urban
        conglomeration. No other region of Japan offers the same combination of
        urban intensity, rural tranquillity, and dramatic cultural
        treasures — and all in such close proximity.
        Kyoto
        For millions of would-be travelers around the world, the
        very name Kyoto conjures up images of the exotic and the foreign. Here
        you will find magnificent temples, shrines, and pagodas; exquisite Zen
        gardens; sumptuous traditional feasts; and, of course, that most
        alluring and misunderstood of creatures — the kimono-clad geisha. Kyoto
        is the national center for such traditional disciplines as cha-do (tea
        ceremony) and ikebana (flower arranging), the birthplace of kabuki, and
        the leading center of calligraphy, painting, and sculpture.
        The city has a unique place in the Japanese national
        identity, and one-third of Japans entire population is estimated to
        visit the city each year. Despite this, in many ways Kyoto is a
        surprisingly typical modern Japanese city, with the usual nondescript
        concrete buildings along with the remarkable pockets of culture and
        beauty.
        For a thousand years, Kyoto served as the cultural and
        spiritual capital of Japanese civilization, the home of its revered
        emperors after the Nara period from the end of the 8th century up to
        the Meiji Restoration in the late-19th century. The imperial rulers
        moved the capital to Kyoto originally to escape from the growing
        domination of the Buddhist authorities of Nara. In the new capital the
        building of Buddhist temples was actually briefly banned — ironic in a
        city now universally renowned for its temples.
        Kyoto simply means Capital City, though it was
        originally known as Heian-kyo (Capital of Peace), the name given to
        the golden Heian era between the tenth and 12th centuries. During this
        time Kyoto thrived as Japans cultural and creative heartland. But the
        citys fortunes turned during the Warring States period (1467–1568),
        which was finally ended by the unifying warlords Nobunaga and Hideyoshi
        in the mid-16th century.
        In many ways the city has never recovered from Hideyoshis
        subsequent decision to move the national capital from Kyoto to Edo (now
        Tokyo) in the early 1600s — a blow compounded by the young Emperor
        Meiji shifting the imperial household to Tokyo in 1868. But Kyoto has
        nevertheless remained the repository of the nations noblest cultural
        pursuits and architectural legacy.
        Kyotos Imperial Residences
        The Imperial Palace (Kyoto Gosho) and the Katsura and
        Shugakuin imperial villas are mandatory destinations for anyone with
        even a shred of interest in Japanese architecture, design, and
        aesthetics. However, since they are imperial property, special
        reservations must be made with the Kyoto office of the Imperial
        Household Agency (located on the grounds of the Imperial Palace, just
        south of Imadegawa-dori; passports are required). Overseas reservations
        are not accepted.
        Fires ravaged Kyotos original 8th-century Imperial
        Palace, and the present buildings are a 19th-century reconstruction.
        Through the western Seishomon Gate is the Shishinden ceremonial hall,
        where emperors are enthroned — a privilege retained by Kyoto after the
        move to Tokyo — and where New Years audiences are held. To the west is
        the cypress-wood Seiryoden (the Serene and Cool Chamber), the
        emperors private chapel, serene and cool indeed in vermilion, white,
        and black.
        If you must visit only one of the two imperial villas,
        Katsura is the ultimate must see in a city full of them. Conceived
        with meticulous care, Katsura is one of Japans masterpieces of subtle
        residential design and garden landscaping. Every wall in the villas
        seven pavilions is a sliding panel that can be opened to survey the
        surrounding landscape, including the gardens themselves and the
        Arashiyama Hills beyond. The Furushoin pavilions verandah is the
        perfect place for viewing the full moon.
        The Shugakuin imperial villa lies at the foot of sacred
        Mt. Hiei. Its spacious grounds are a magnificent example of the
        strolling gardens favored during the Edo period. Built by the shogun
        in the 17th century for an abdicated emperor, Shugakuin is in fact
        three villas, each with airy teahouses in the gardens. The upper
        villa — grandest of the three — dominates an imposing avenue of
        pines.
        Exploring the City
        Kyoto is surprisingly large. Since its numerous
        attractions are spread evenly throughout the city, good maps are
        essential. The city has two subway lines, several small private railway
        lines, and many bus routes. If you dont want to depend on costly
        taxis, make sure you have a bus map, which can be picked up at the
        tourist information offices in Kyoto Station or at any JNTO office.
        However, with over 1,500 Buddhist temples, 200 Shinto shrines, numerous
        museums, and magnificent imperial palaces, be aware that youre not
        going to see everything.
        Try to get hold of the Kyoto Visitors Guide, a free
        glossy monthly packed with listings of cultural events and information
        on temples, gardens, festivals, exhibitions, restaurants, and even
        accommodation.
        Sampling Kyoto is definitely a case of less is more. 
        The secret is to pace yourself. It is far better to allow a daily
        ration of a couple of major temples, a museum, and a strolling garden
        or two than to cram everything into a short time, leaving only a blur
        of each and a lasting impression of none.
        Higashiyama
        On the citys east side, Higashiyama boasts temples,
        theaters, museums, and parks — a fine introduction to exploring the
        imperial city on foot.
        Kiyomizu temple, one of Kyotos oldest, is so popular that
        on Sundays it offers all the serenity of rush hour at Kyotos garish
        new station. But dont let that put you off. Founded in 788 just before
        the city entered its golden age as the imperial capital, its numerous
        buildings nestle lovingly against steep Mt. Higashiyama in a dramatic
        cascade of thatched and tiled roofs. However, most of what we see today
        is actually a 17th-century reconstruction of the original 8th-century
        structure. With its numerous buildings set within extensive grounds,
        Kiyomizus main attraction is the hondo (main hall). This elevated
        structures projecting wooden terrace is supported by a vast
        arrangement of 139 massive interlocking beams. Across on the
        mountainside is another terrace on which imperial courtiers and
        dignitaries would sit while enjoying dance performances and music
        recitals on the hondos broad terrace. (The popular expression To jump
        from Kiyomizus terrace means to do something daring and adventurous,
        although this is best left to the imagination. )
        Crowds flock here to take in the bright yet delicate hues
        of cherry blossoms in spring or the blaze of red and gold maple leaves
        in autumn, with special night-time illuminations (check at any tourist
        office for dates and times).
        A moderate stroll takes you to Higashiyamas Gion
        district, Kyotos main historical center of traditional theater, arts,
        and (now) antiques. It is especially renowned as the last center of
        training for the citys most celebrated residents, the geisha. This is
        the place to wander and soak up the sights and sounds of Kyotos lone
        quarter still dedicated to traditional arts and entertainment. Your
        curiosity and patience will inevitably reward you with a glimpse of a
        genuine geisha or maiko (apprentice geisha), the copious layers of her
        opulent — and unimaginably heavy — silk kimono rustling as she hurries
        to an appointment or a training session.
        Gion is a global magnet for collectors and dealers of
        Japanese antiques. Prices are usually high. But even if youre not in
        the market for a major investment, antique-store browsing is a
        marvelous way to get a real taste of Japans celebrated traditional
        design and aesthetics. Some stores are more like small museums,
        offering exquisite examples of the finest craftsmanship.
        The 17th-century Minamiza Theater — Japans
        oldest — stages the famous Kaomise kabuki show in December. But foreign
        visitors can enjoy the Gion Corner, held at Yasaka Hall to provide a
        selection of bite-sized samples of Japanese culture from March through
        November. In a comfortable little theater you can watch a one-hour
        demonstration of tea ceremony, traditional music and dance, flower
        arranging, puppet theater, and a kyogen farce. (Tickets for Gion Corner
        are usually available through your hotel or the Tourist Information
        Center. )
        At the northeast corner of Gion is Maruyama Park, one of
        Kyotos most popular recreation areas, which borders two important
        temples. The massive Chioninji is home to the Jodo (Pure Land)
        Buddhist sect, which in the 12th century spread the appeal of Buddhism
        to the uneducated classes. Looming to an imposing height of 24 m (79
        ft), its entrance gate is thought to be the largest structure of its
        kind in the world. The ringing of Chioninjis bell, Japans large st
        and best known, is televised nationally when resident monks usher in
        the new year.
        A huge arch (torii) spanning the main road marks the
        approach to the Heian Shrine. This popular shrine features a strongly
        Chinese-influenced design and an extensive landscaped garden considered
        one of Kyotos finest, with numerous cherry trees and a large pond with
        an elegant pagoda linked to the shore by a covered bridge.
        In the vicinity are two absorbing museums reflecting
        Kyotos extensive history as a magnet for Japans finest craftsmen. The
        Museum of Traditional Industry presents a diverse collection of
        textiles, porcelain, fans, dolls, lacquerware, cutlery, and
        cabinetwork, with occasional live demonstrations by craftsmen. Next
        door, the National Museum of Modern Art is, despite its name, mainly
        devoted to 19th- and 20th-century ceramics.
        At the northern edge of Higashiyama is one of Japans most
        famous and delightful short walks: the Philosophers Path, stretching
        along a canal running between two major temples — Nanzenji and
        Ginkakuji.
        Nanzenji is a former 13th-century palace whose precincts
        now house a dozen affiliated temples and monasteries. The great gate at
        the main entrance was built in 1628 and became notorious as the site
        where a robber named Goemon Ishikawa was boiled alive in an iron
        cauldron while holding his son aloft to save him from the same fate.
        Since then, old-fashioned Japanese iron bathtubs have been gruesomely
        known as goemon-­buro.  The view from atop the 30-m (98-ft) gate
        provides a fine overall view of the temple grounds and sacred Mt. Hiei
        to the north. The temples truly unique feature is the large red-brick
        aqueduct behind the main buildings, which still carries water from Lake
        Biwa and is a popular strolling route for local residents.
        Not far from Nanzenji is the wonderful Eikan-do, an
        exquisite temple set against the hillside. Its beautiful Amida Buddha
        statue is, unusually, turning to look back over its shoulder. Its
        strange posture commemorates a legendary statue that came to life and
        then berated Eikan, the astonished monk looking on, for pausing from
        his ritual chanting. Each fall the temple has a special night-time
        illumination of its many maple trees, their flaming reds and oranges
        highlighted with strategically placed pin-spotlights. The effect is
        sublime and utterly unforgettable.
        Despite the large numbers who come to view the spring
        blossoms and the superb fall leaves, the Philosophers Path is one of
        Kyotos most tranquil and beloved strolls. Any of the several friendly
        little teahouses and coffee shops along the way make an ideal rest
        stop.
        At the other end of the canal is the second major temple
        on the path. Ginkakuji, the famous Silver Pavilion, never received
        the silver-leaf covering originally intended. It was built in the 15th
        century by an aesthete-mystic shogun, Yoshimasa Ashikaga, who used it
        for esoteric tea ceremonies and, above all, moon-watching in the
        elegant garden. Its flat-topped hillock of white gravel, despite the
        inevitable comparison to Mt. Fuji, reputedly originated as a pile of
        sand left behind by the temples construction workers.
        A short bus ride delivers you to the Kyoto National
        Museum, which houses the countrys largest collection of Japanese
        sculpture and painting as well as weapons, traditional armor, and ten
        centuries of costume including some dazzling noh theater costumes with
        masks. Most of this peerless collection has been gathered from the
        temples and palaces of Kyoto, Nara, and other important cultural
        centers.
        Just south of the National Museum is the spectacular
        Sanjusangendo, the Hall of Thirty-Three Bays.  The original temple
        built in 1164 survived only 100 years, and todays reconstruction dates
        from the 13th century. Its centerpiece is a gilded seated wooden statue
        of the Kannon Bodhisattva, 3.3 m (11 ft) high, with 11 faces on the
        crown of its head and 40 arms (extravagantly known as a thousand
        arms) wielding bells, wheels, and lotus flowers. However,
        Sanjusangendos main wonder is its legion of 1,000 gilded Kannon images
        flanking the central Buddha. The identical statues were carved by the
        13th-century masters Kokei, Unkei, and Tankei, ably aided by 70
        assistants.
        Ukyo and Kita
        These districts on the west and north sides of Kyoto are
        home to most of the citys major temples, set within the surrounding
        greenery and mountains that prompted the Emperor Kammu to select this
        site for his new capital, Heian-kyo, in 794.
        Nestled in the northwest corner of Kyoto, Ryoanji is the
        best known of all Zen Buddhist temples. Its famous rock garden has
        provoked more debates — both admiring and critical — than there are
        chips of gravel in its rectangular 30-m by 10-m (98-ft by 32-ft)
        expanse. There are no trees and no shrubs, just 15 stark rocks
        embellished with ancient moss, standing in clusters amid the perfectly
        raked white gravel. Although it is usually attributed to the great
        master Soami, nobody knows for sure who created it — or why. The
        mystery surrounding its origins does nothing to undermine the power of
        its simplicity. Confounding interpretation, it epitomizes the essence
        of Zen Buddhisms essentially anti-intellectual precepts. Dark islands
        in a white sea, or mountain peaks soaring above clouds: people see what
        they want to see. Get there early in the morning before the crowds
        arrive. Kyoto offers few more memorable experiences than secluded
        contemplation of Ryoanjis enigmatic rock garden.
        Beyond the rock garden you can walk among the maples and
        pines of the forest surrounding the lovely Kyoyochi Pond at the foot of
        Mt. Kinugasa. Thick, luxuriant moss thrives throughout.
        From Ryoanji, a 20-minute stroll or a short bus ride takes
        you to Kinkakuji, Japans famous Temple of the Golden Pavilion.  The
        original late-14th-century pavilion, completely covered in gold leaf,
        was typical of the unrestrained opulence of the Muromachi period
        favored by Shogun Yoshimitsu Ashikaga, who had it built for his
        retirement at the ripe old age of 38. It was burned down by a fanatical
        young monk in 1950, rebuilt in 1955 as an exact replica of the original
        structure, and renovated in 1987 with a brand new gold-foil covering.
        Most of its buildings are closed to the public, but you pass an
        attractive thatch-roofed tea-ceremony house as you follow the winding
        stone steps toward the exit.
        Another celebrated victim of fire is Daitokuji. This vast
        complex of 22 subtemples and affiliated monasteries (down from about 60
        during the Edo period) was built, burned down, and rebuilt between the
        14th and 17th centuries. It is richly endowed with artistic treasures
        and some of Japans most superb Zen gardens, reflecting its history as
        a renowned center of calligraphy, gardening, tea ceremony, and other
        refined arts.
        Four of Daitokujis Zen subtemples in particular offer
        superb gardens, teahouses, and artifacts. Daisen-in, the Zen Temple
        Without Equal, contains splendid painted fusuma (sliding panels) and
        wall paintings. Zuiho-in is a monastery whose curious gardens combine
        Zen Buddhist and Christian symbolism, together with both an attractive
        rock garden and a unusually geometric tea garden. Ryugen-in has five
        distinct rock gardens, one of which is apparently the smallest in
        Japan.
        West of Daisen-in is the Juko-in monastery, where Sen no
        Rikyu, the founder of the tea ceremony and its most celebrated master,
        is buried. His death in 1591 by seppuku (the ritual disemboweling more
        crudely known to Westerners as harakiri) was in fact commanded by
        Toyotomi Hideyoshi, his former friend and patron. Rikyu apparently
        incurred the warlords wrath by placing a statue of himself in the
        large main gate, under which Hideyoshi would have had to pass — an
        intolerable affront to a famously proud warrior.
        To the south is Kitano Temmangu, a large and important
        shrine. Temmangu shrines around the country typically feature statues
        of seated cows and bulls believed to have healing properties. You will
        always see someone rubbing the part of a statue corresponding to an
        afflicted area in the hope of relief from pain and worry. The shrine is
        also known for its thousands of plum trees, whose deep pink blooms draw
        the crowds in the weeks preceding the annual cherry blossom frenzy. But
        the real crowds descend on the 25th of each month, when Kitano Temmangu
        hosts its nationally famous flea market. People travel from afar to
        sift through the offerings of used kimono, antique furniture and
        ceramics, antique scrolls, crafts, food, household items, and countless
        other categories of bric-a-brac and sundries, paying prices ranging
        from the reasonable to the outrageous.
        Central Kyoto
        To the southwest of Kyoto Station is Toji, one of Kyotos
        oldest temples, whose massive pagoda is the largest in Japan. Toji was
        established just after the imperial capital moved to Kyoto in 794,
        built with wood from sacred Mt. Inari in the south. Thirty years later
        Kukai, the revered founder of esoteric Shingon Buddhism, was appointed
        head abbot. The temple complex quickly became Kyotos main center of
        Shingon Buddhism, which it remains today. In addition to its impressive
        pagoda, Toji is a national magnet for bargain hunters at its huge
        monthly flea market held on the 21st of each month.
        Just north of the tower are the headquarters of two
        schools of the Jodo-Shinshu (Pure Land) sect, the Nishi-Honganji and
        Higashi-Honganji temples. The latter was built by Shogun Ieyasu
        Tokugawa to split and counteract the powerful influence of
        Nishi-Honganji, which had attracted thousands of followers with its
        free-wheeling Buddhism: it allowed priests to marry and have children,
        permitted the eating of meat, and renounced traditional ascetic
        practices.
        Most of Higashi-Honganji is closed to the public, but the
        main hall and founders hall, rebuilt in 1895 after repeated fires, are
        notable for the rather gross ropes of human hair fashioned from
        donations by female worshippers to haul the temples pillars into
        position. There is much more to see in nearby Nishi-Honganji, an
        outstanding example of Japanese Buddhist monumental architecture,
        combining a bold, dramatic silhouette with rich ornamentation. The
        17th-century buildings owe much of their splendor to the structures
        brought here from Hideyoshis opulent Fushimi Castle on the south side
        of Kyoto (dismantled by a Tokugawa shogun in 1632).
        Nijo Castle is a poignant monument to the ironic twists of
        history. Built by Ieyasu Tokugawa in 1603 for his occasional, reluctant
        visits to Kyoto (under imperial command), the castle was taken over by
        the Emperor Meiji after the restoration of 1868. It was here that the
        emperor signed the edict abolishing the shogunate and sent his
        carpenters round the castle to replace the Tokugawa hollyhock crest
        with the imperial chrysanthemum.
        For a change of pace and mood, seek out Nishiki Market.
        This remarkably tranquil street market is housed under a single arcade.
        Note the colorful stands of dried fish and fresh fish, colorful
        pickles, stout young bamboo shoots, chicken wings and breasts arranged
        in elaborate patterns, and a whole cornucopia of squid, mussels,
        oysters, and giant scallops.
        Nearby, leading north from Shiji-dori, is another
        important market area worth exploring: Teramachi (literally, temple
        district). Hideyoshi moved many of Kyotos temples to this long narrow
        road during his reorganization of the city in 1591 following its
        near-total destruction by clan warfare. Although small temples and
        shrines remain, visitors will enjoy exploring the covered shopping
        arcade between Shijo and Sanjo streets, famous for its second-hand
        bookstores, traditional hand-made paper (washi) shops, trendy but
        sometimes creative clothing stores, and numerous pickle shops.
        North of Oike, Teramachi becomes home to some of Kyotos
        most respected antique and washi shops, some of which have been in
        business for hundreds of years. The adjoining streets comprise one of
        Japans finest centers for traditional Japanese style tables, screens,
        lamps, scrolls, and other refined furnishings.
        South Kyoto
        It is impossible to overstate the importance of rice in
        Japanese culture. Each year in an important ceremony, the emperor
        plants rice in a symbolic field, reinforcing his role as the hereditary
        link between the Japanese people and their Shinto gods. So important is
        rice that it has the Shinto deity Inari all to itself. There are
        thousands of Inari shrines throughout Japan, distinguished by a pair of
        foxes standing guard.
        Kyoto, however, boasts the most famous of them all — the
        Fushimi-Inari Shrine in southern Kyoto. In a city overpopulated by
        must-see attractions, this is one place guaranteed to deplete whatever
        superlatives remain in your exhausted vocabulary. The main shrine
        buildings are among Kyotos most extensive, with rice and fox motifs
        everywhere. But take the path at the top right of the compound and you
        come to the first of Fushimi-Inaris remarkable features: its long,
        meandering tunnels of bright orange torii arches. Purchased by both
        companies and individuals (at vast expense) in the hope of incurring
        the blessings of the gods, the torii become smaller as you progress
        through the tunnel and begin to ascend the mountain. Farther on you
        come to an amazing double tunnel, forcing you to choose the left or
        right paths. Along the way to the top of Mt. Inari, you will pass many
        subshrines and countless bright red torii both minute and massive. Make
        sure you have plenty of film — youll need it all.
        North of Fushimi is Tofukuji, a major Zen temple complex.
        In addition to many impressive buildings, Tofukuji offers four
        remarkable and distinctive Zen gardens located in the hojo (abbots
        quarters). At Tofukujis center is a ravine containing a small forest
        of maple trees. Hundreds of thousands come each fall to view the
        spectacular fall colors from the temples covered Tsutenkyo (Heavenly
        Way Bridge).
        Excursions from Kyoto
        Arashiyama. When mind and body are ready for a break from
        the rigors of cultural sightseeing, head down to the southern resort
        district of Arashiyama, perched along the Hozu River (or the Oi, as
        its also known). The maple trees setting off the river and the famous
        old wooden Togetsukyo Bridge make it very popular with local tourists,
        so it is worth avoiding on Sundays and public holidays.
        Arashiyama is home to a number of important shrines and
        temples. The Nonomiya Shrine is uniquely renowned for its special role
        in preparing imperial princesses to serve as vestal virgins at the
        Grand Shrine of Ise, Japans most important Shinto shrine (see page 9).
        The shrine has a prominent role in the Tale of Genji and in a famous
        noh play (titled simply Nonomiya), and thus attracts people with
        especial interest in classical Japanese literature.
        Ohara. Also north of Kyoto is the rural enclave of Ohara,
        home to the magnificent temple complex of Sanzenin. From the bus
        station, signs in English point the way to the path winding along a
        stream, past many stalls and small shops selling Oharas famous
        pickles, to the temples massive front gate.
        The superbly landscaped Shuhekein pond garden is a
        legendary spot for meditation and contemplation in every season. After
        the garden, venture into the hall at the end of the corridor and try
        your hand with a calligraphy brush along with the Japanese visitors
        writing traditional prayers to the central Amida Buddha. The view of
        the lush mossy landscaped garden from the verandah at the back of the
        building is one of Kyotos most famous. The Ojo Gokurakuin hall at the
        temples center contains a magnificent seated Amida Buddha dating from
        986 (and so revered that no photography is permitted). The stamps at
        the various numbered stations throughout the complex are particularly
        elegant and make a fine and unusual souvenir of your visit.
        Miho Museum. Some 30 km (18.5 miles) outside Kyoto, set
        deep in a forested nature preserve, is the Miho Museum, designed by
        internationally acclaimed architect I.M. Pei. A tunnel leads to this
        outstanding privately owned collection of ancient Egyptian, South
        Asian, Chinese, Persian and, of course, Japanese masterworks. The
        buildings exterior, interior and exhibit displays are triumphs of
        design and harmony between old and new, East and West, simplicity and
        complexity. The Miho is not to be missed by anyone interested in Asian
        art and design, both ancient and modern.
        Fukui
        Just north of Kyoto is Fukui, a prefecture long renowned
        for its unique combination of history and superb natural scenery. For
        centuries it has been called the Echizen region, and that culturally
        significant name has definitely stuck. The Echizen coast includes
        famous columnar rock formations at Tojimbo and Sotomo, as well as some
        of Japans finest beaches. Culinary delights include Echizen crab and
        distinctive Echizen soba. And the simple, natural style of Echizen
        pottery has been popular throughout the country for hundreds of years,
        as have Echizens highly regarded lacquerware and hand-crafted
        knives.
        Historical heritage is very much the theme at Ichidani.
        Preserved here is an entire 16th century village that served as the
        headquarters of the Asakura clan, which ruled Echizen until 1573. The
        painstakingly recreated buildings contain exhibits of the trades and
        crafts of the day, including a dyers workshop, a merchants office,
        and samurai homes.
        In Fukuis far north, Awara Onsen has become one of
        Japans most popular hot-spring resort towns since the emperor made it
        a hot spot for an imperial soak. But dont expect the rustic quaintness
        of traditional-style inns. Awara typically packs its heat-seekers into
        modern, luxury hotels whose harsh concrete exteriors hardly reflect the
        tranquilizing pleasures provided within.
        Nara
        Although Kyoto remains the countrys major cultural and
        historic destination, Japanese tourists equally revere the Kansai
        regions other celebrated historical center. Nara was Japans first
        imperial capital, and it remains home to many of its most important
        temples, shrines, and collections of Buddhist art treasures. For anyone
        interested in Japanese history, art, and culture, no visit to Japan
        could possibly be complete without a glimpse of Nara, however
        frustratingly brief. And, in addition to its magnificent cultural
        treasures, Nara offers the unlikely phenomenon of the worlds most
        aggressive deer.
        The Kintetsu Station is the ideal starting point for any
        exploration of the city. Next to the stations south entrance is an
        excellent tourist information center. The friendly staff usually speak
        reasonable English and will happily ply you with maps and brochures,
        help you get oriented, and provide advice and information on festivals
        and special events.
        Next to the fountain outside Kintetsu Station is bustling
        Higashi-muki-dori, a covered mall of souvenirs shops, antique stores,
        and numerous eateries. At the other end is Sanjo-dori, Naras main
        shopping street, with more of the same plus calligraphy stores noted
        for their fine inkstones, a Nara specialty.
        Nara Park and Mt. Wakakusa
        The historic area of Nara is on the east side of the
        modern town, at the end of Sanjo-dori. Naramachi is a famous quarter
        filled with gorgeous historic houses, small shops, eclectic galleries,
        and interesting museums. Here too is the western entrance to Nara Park,
        marking the boundary between urban sprawl and primal forest. The towns
        temples and shrines and a major museum are all encompassed by the
        park.
        Nara Parks most famous residents are its deer, protected
        since the eighth century, when they were considered messengers from the
        gods. Despite being wild, the deer are quite tame and loiter around the
        parks various tourist attractions, hoping for a free snack of the deer
        biscuits sold here. Have your camera ready to record the incredible
        sight of a wailing Japanese child beating a hasty retreat to its
        parents after being chased by a group of hungry deer in a feeding
        frenzy.
        At the edge of Sarusawa-ike pond is Kofukuji temple. Its
        imposing 50-m (166-ft) five-story pagoda, Japans second-largest after
        Toji in Kyoto, is one of Naras most photographed images. The present
        structure dates from 1426, replacing five earlier pagodas destroyed by
        fire. At its height Kofukuji embraced around 175 separate buildings,
        including the Kasuga Grand Shrine at the foot of Mt. Wakakusa, with
        which it has been closely associated for 1,100 years. Kofukujis many
        surviving artworks and artifacts are housed in its newest building, the
        Museum of National Treasures, a fireproof repository built in 1958 to
        honor Kofukujis immense cultural and historic importance.
        Past Kofukuji is the original wing of the Nara National
        Museum (50 Noboriojicho; Tel. (0742) 22-7771; open 9am–4:30pm daily
        except Mondays), linked by an underground passage to a newer,
        tile-roofed building just beyond it. This museum of ancient art focuses
        on Buddhist statues and sculptural styles from around 600 through the
        Middle Ages. The permanent collection is housed in the old wing, and
        its fascinating exhibits showcase the development of Chinese-influenced
        Buddhist art and design. The gift shop in the underpass between the two
        buildings offers an excellent selection of quality souvenirs,
        reproductions, and posters of Nara culture.
        Also on the west side of Nara Park is Todaiji,
        which — like many elaborate temple complexes — comprises many
        remarkable structures and artifacts. The first is the majestic
        Nandaimon (Great South Gate), standing over 19 m (63 ft) high and
        dating from 1199. Built in a classical Indian architectural style, this
        huge structure is only two-thirds the size of the original destroyed by
        a typhoon in 962. The gate houses the two Benevolent Kings, guardian
        deities created in the twelfth century by master sculptors Unkei and
        Kaikei to guard the inner temple compound.
        Pass through the gate for your first view of the massive
        roof of the Daibutsuden straight ahead. The current building, dating
        from 1709, is only two-thirds the size of the original, which burned
        down decades earlier. On the right of the door is Binzuru, a disciple
        of Prince Gautama (the Buddhas original name before achieving
        enlightenment). His statue is said to have special healing powers;
        sections of the statue shine with the polish of thousands — if not
        millions — of hands rubbing away ailments over the centuries.Finally,
        inside the massive hall, deep in meditation on a massive podium within
        a ring of giant lotus leaves, is Naras celebrated Daibutsu, or Great
        Buddha. Nearly 15 m (48.5 ft) tall, the gigantic cast-bronze statue is
        shorter than the original unveiled in 752, when it was covered in gold
        leaf. As with all Buddha images, the positions of the hands are highly
        significant. The Great Buddhas right hand is bestowing spiritual
        tranquillity, while the left symbolizes the granting of wishes. Seated
        on one side is the Nyorin Kannon, in whose hand is a jewel used to
        answer prayers and grant wishes; on the other is Kokuzo, who embodies
        wisdom and happiness.
        To the east is Nigatsu-do (Second Month Hall), one of
        Todaijis most famous subtemples, whose front portion rests on a vast
        network of wooden beams. The covered northern staircase and the broad
        stone southern staircase both lead up to the main walkway encircling
        the temple, which has massive lanterns and a strange assortment of
        artwork donated by supporting companies. Nigatsu-do hosts a spectacular
        fire purification festival in the second month of the lunar calendar
        (hence its name): the O-mizu Torii, or Water-Drawing Festival. Every
        night for two weeks, temple priests brandish long poles each with a
        flaming cedar ball at the end. They run along the front of the
        verandah, deliberately showering the large crowd below with burning
        embers that are believed to bring good luck for the coming year,
        burning away transgressions from the previous one. In long-exposure
        photographs, the entire temple appears to be on fire.
        Along the foot of Mt. Wakakusa is the Kasuga Grand Shrine,
        established to house the Shinto deities of the powerful Fujiwara
        family. It has been a place of worship for both emperors and
        aristocrats for centuries. The main approach from the east (from
        Kofukuji temple) is lined with thousands of stone lanterns set amid
        lush greenery. These are illuminated in dramatic crowd-drawing
        ceremonies held in early February and mid-August every year. The
        shrines renowned Treasure House is one of the newest structures here,
        with wooden plaques in the shape of rice paddles reflecting the
        importance of rice in Shinto — and, by definition, Japanese — culture.
        A rice-planting ceremony is held in mid-March, during which the
        shrines sacred rice field is symbolically replanted.
        Outside Nara
        South and west of modern Nara is an ancient area called
        Nishinokyo (meaning west of the capital), where you will find three
        important temples.
        The sunset reflection of the twin pagodas of Yakushiji in
        a nearby lake is one of Japans most striking and visually poetic
        images. Of the original buildings, only the To-to (East Pagoda)
        remains, considered by many to be Japans most beautiful pagoda.
        Although it appears to have six stories, the pagoda is actually a
        three-story structure, each level having an extra roof for added visual
        impact. The vermilion Sai-to (West Pagoda) was built in 1980 on the
        site of the long-destroyed original. Between them is the Kondo (golden,
        or main, hall), reconstructed in 1975. Among its many notable bronze
        images is the Yakushi triad, comprising three blackened-bronze images:
        the Yakushi Buddha (dedicated to healing and medicine) seated on a
        medicine chest between Bodhisattvas of the sun and moon.
        A ten-minute walk to the north is Toshodaiji, which boasts
        rare examples of ancient architecture and sculpture. Less spectacular
        than its expensively restored neighbor to the south, Toshodaiji
        nevertheless is the largest remaining example of Nara period
        architecture. Of its numerous period sculptures, the most celebrated is
        a 5-m (16.5-ft) thousand-armed Kannon statue.
        Every culture has a single historical hero, a visionary
        credited with planting the seeds from which cultural, aesthetic, and
        ethical values flourished. For Japan, that person is the revered Prince
        Shotoku, early champion of Buddhism. Not only did this highly
        progressive leader produce Japans first written constitution and legal
        code, thus laying the foundations of an organized state, he is also
        credited with having introduced the concept of wa (harmony) as the
        fundamental value shaping the Japanese character. His life and
        achievements are celebrated at Horyuji, a large temple complex in
        southern Nara comprising forty buildings that became Japans first
        UNESCO World Heritage Site. Horyuji was actually built decades after
        Prince Shotokus death in 622. However, it stands on the site of one of
        Japans earliest Buddhist temples, which he built.
        After entering through the Nandaimon (Great South Gate),
        walk down another long walkway to the Chumon (Central Gate) and the
        inner temple grounds. Just past the fearsome Guardian Kings on watch
        for intruding evil, is the Sai-in, the western compound. This contains
        Horyujis five-storied pagoda and the Kondo (main hall), built around
        670 and the worlds oldest wooden building. Within the To-in (eastern
        compound) is the octagonal Yumedono (Hall of Dreams), whose exquisite
        Guze Kannon statue was considered so sacred that it was completely
        hidden from human eyes from its dedication in 737 until 1884, when it
        was unwrapped by a visiting American art scholar — with the Meiji
        governments blessing, of course.
        Also in the eastern compound is the Daihozoden (Great
        Treasure Hall), housing Horyujis magnificent collection of Buddhist
        art, among Japans finest. Included are over 10,000 items, 1,780 of
        which are classified as national treasures or important cultural
        assets. Highlights include an Indian-style Shaka triad; the Yumechigae
        (Dream Changing) Kannon, said to transform its worshippers
        nightmares into pleasant dreams; and the Kudara Kannon, a graceful,
        willowy statue named after a region in Korea, whose designer and
        creator was almost certainly Korean. Horyuji was built by craftsmen
        imported from Korea, and the temple bears much of their distinctive
        artistic stamp.
        Surprisingly, Horyuji also contains a building dedicated
        to a foreigner: Langdon Warner, a Harvard art professor whom the
        Japanese have mistakenly credited with saving both Nara and Kyoto from
        aerial bombing during World War II. The decision to spare them was
        actually taken by Henry Stimson, the US Secretary of War, who knew the
        cities from his own pre-war visits.
        Osaka
        More than just Japans second city, Osaka is also the
        perfect base from which to explore nearby Nara and Kyoto by train.
        Although Osaka is overshadowed by Tokyo in the big-city stakes, it is a
        vibrant and energetic world capital in its own right and certainly has
        plenty to offer the curious visitor.
        Indeed, for many visitors Osaka is more truly Japanese
        than Tokyo, having a more distinctive flavor and character than its
        sprawling rival to the east. Osakans pride themselves on being warmer,
        friendlier, and more spontaneous than their Tokyo cousins, whom they
        love to dismiss as formal and uptight. They are also renowned
        throughout Japan for two things: doing business and eating.
        Here, business and pleasure are inextricably linked — and
        have been for hundreds of years. The citys commercial reputation
        reflects its origins as the national merchants capital and a major
        trading hub. When Hideyoshi built his main castle in the center of
        Osaka after unifying the country in 1583, the citys prosperity seemed
        written in stone. With an uninhibited merchant class eager to throw its
        newly acquired wealth around, Osaka quickly became Japans undisputed
        entertainment and theatrical center.
        Despite the economic slowdown and recession of the 1990s
        that followed the bursting of Japans economic bubble, anyone strolling
        around central Osakas famous nighttime entertainment districts will
        quickly realize how much its residents love to eat, drink, and party.
        In fact, so dedicated are Osakans to the cult of eating that they are
        known for kuidare (eating until you drop or until you go bankrupt,
        depending on the interpretation).
        Osaka will win no urban beauty contests, but there are
        plenty of sights to see here, including a couple of interesting
        museums, a remarkable aquarium, and an underground shopping complex
        that might be the worlds largest.
        The best way to see Osaka is by subway. Taxis are
        expensive and vulnerable to the citys sticky traffic situation; and
        information on the tourist-unfriendly bus service is almost entirely in
        Japanese only. An all-day subway pass (available at any ticket machine)
        costs the equivalent of less than four central-area subway tickets
        (about US$7).
        A good place to start exploring is the bustling Umeda
        area, containing Japan Railways Osaka Station, three subway stations,
        and two private railway stations. It also has most famous department
        stores outside Tokyo, the gigantic Hankyu and Hanshin buildings (whose
        private railways serve Kyoto and Kobe). The Osaka City Tourist
        Information Office is just inside the main entrance to the Hankyu
        station. Umeda marks the northern end of the business and entertainment
        district popularly known as Kita (meaning simply North), and is the
        very essence of modern Osakas hustle and bustle.
        At rush hour, Umedas teeming subway platforms rival the
        crowd scenes for which Tokyos subway is so notorious. Equally
        impressive crowd scenes occur below Umeda in a mammoth network of
        shops, bars, and cozy inexpensive restaurants whose scale boggles the
        mind. The basement of every large building in a one-mile radius is
        linked to form a modern commercial labyrinth. It actually comprises
        several shopping centers seamlessly interconnected to ensure maximum
        customer and cash turnover. To explore its fascinating subterranean
        sights, start with the Whity Umeda, under the Hankyu and Hanshin
        buildings, then move on to Herbis Plaza — but dont expect to see
        daylight again for some time.
        A suitable cure for your extended period underground is to
        go up — 40 stories up to the top of Shin-Umeda Sky Building. This
        futuristic and unusual structure is actually two glass-and-steel towers
        linked at the top, from which the Floating Observatory provides a
        panoramic view of Osaka city and the surrounding countryside.
        Shopping arcades are a staple feature of every Japanese
        city, town, and village. Unsurprisingly, Osaka boasts some of Japans
        most impressive — or excessive, depending on your taste. You can spend
        fascinating hours exploring the covered Hankyu Higashi-dori arcade near
        the Hankyu stations, less upmarket but no less fascinating than the
        more famous Shinsaibashi arcade (see below). In the south of Kita,
        across from the US Consulate, is Kita Shinchi, Osakas premiere dining
        and entertainment quarter, centered around the main street of Shinchi
        Hondori. This area is great for people-watching, but to eat here it
        helps to have a generous expense account.
        The Mint is situated on the west bank of the Dojima River
        (opposite Sakuranomiya Park). Although its museum has a large
        exhibition of the history of Japanese and foreign money, it is best
        known for its long avenue of magnificent late-blooming cherry trees,
        the citys finest.
        Just to the east of Sakuranomiya Park is the Fujita Art
        Museum, which has a fine collection of Chinese and Japanese paintings
        from the 11th century to the present. If youve become an adept of the
        tea ceremony, youll appreciate the excellent collection of
        14th-century objects: ceramic tea bowls, tea kettles, and caddies, as
        well as bamboo spoons, whisks, and flower vases.
        For more ceramics, stop in at the Museum of Oriental
        Ceramics, located in the garden at one end of Nakanoshima, the central
        island in the middle of the large river running through Osakas
        center. Here you can find fine specimens of the Korean and Chinese
        ceramics that so strongly influenced Japans own styles. Most of
        Osakas municipal buildings are on Nakanoshima, including an elegant
        European-style town hall dating from 1918, one of the few red-brick
        buildings in Japan.
        Here youll also get a splendid view of Osaka Castle,
        which is dramatically illuminated at night. To celebrate his
        unification of Japan after more than a century of civil war, Hideyoshi
        had made the castle the countrys greatest fortress, so the Tokugawa
        felt obliged to destroy it in 1615 after snatching power away from
        Hideyoshis heir. They later rebuilt it to bolster their own prestige,
        only to burn it down once again in a fit of pique when the Meiji
        Restoration of imperial power abolished their shogunate in 1868. Today,
        a reinforced-concrete replica reproduces only the great five-storied
        tower, 42 m (138 ft) high, surrounded by moats and ivy-covered
        ramparts. The castle contains an interesting but disappointingly modern
        museum displaying armor, weapons, costumes, and historical documents.
        Theres also an enchanting collection of bunraku puppets — a rare
        chance to see them at close range.
        Providing a welcome touch of green amid all the asphalt,
        ginkgo and sycamore trees line the impressive Midosuji Boulevard. This
        thoroughfare runs south from Umeda to Kitas southern counterpart,
        Minami. On one side of Midosuji is America-mura, the favorite posing
        ground for Osakas desperately trendy youth, so named for the large
        number of stores selling much-sought-after secondhand apparel imported
        from the US.
        One block east of Midosuji is Osakas famous Shinsaibashi
        shopping arcade, a consumer-frenzy mecca second in national status only
        to Ginza and Shinjuku in Tokyo. If you have time for only one evening
        walk in Osaka, this is the one. Although the arcade begins over a mile
        north, start from exit 6 of Shinsaibashi Station on the Midosuji subway
        line, between the Sogo and Daimaru department stores, and turn right to
        make your way south.
        Every night of the week, this entire area is teeming with
        businessman frequenting night clubs, hostess bars, and private drinking
        clubs. (Many of these clubs are confusingly called snack bars.  But
        tourists beware! These bizarre establishments are the true home of the
        $20 glass of beer, with prices aimed squarely at lonely executives with
        expense accounts looking for a home away from home. )
        This is where Osakas trendy youth prowl for action, as do
        many of Osakas growing pack of young foreign residents seduced by the
        lure of easy yen. On Saturday afternoons and evenings, the place is a
        teeming throng of humanity. Wandering the side streets at night allows
        you to soak up the heady atmosphere of pleasure and commerce that has
        characterized this part of Osaka for centuries.
        At the far south is the small Ebisu Bridge, a favorite
        meeting place for Osakas trendiest young things. Just before you cross
        the bridge, on your left is an arch announcing the start of Soemon-cho,
        a colorful street of late-night restaurants and night clubs that is
        Minamis answer to Kita-Shinchi near Umeda. Note the ultra-modern
        black-and-chrome Kirin Plaza beer hall next to the entrance to bustling
        Soemon-cho.
        As you cross the bridge, stop in the middle to immerse
        yourself in the sights and sounds of the people, the blazing neon, and
        the Dotomburi River below you. Hundreds of years ago, in Osakas heyday
        as the countrys theater and entertainment capital, the biggest stars
        would arrive by boat to enter the riverside back entrances of the many
        theaters on Dotomburi, which is just south of the river. Frenzied fans
        would pack this very bridge for a glimpse of their idols arriving in
        ornate medieval waterborne equivalents of the modern stretch
        limousine.
        Turning left on the other side of the bridge brings you to
        Dotomburi, which at night is Osakas ultimate assault on the senses. A
        cornucopia of bizarre creatures adorn the buildings flanking this
        pedestrian mall: giant monsters slither down the buildings,
        restaurants, cinemas, theaters, games centers, and steamy noodle bars.
        No photograph can capture the intensity of this strange and
        unforgettable concourse.
        At the other end of Dotomburi is the Nipponbashi area.
        This is where you will find Den-Den Town, Osakas sadly underwhelming
        answer to Tokyos Akihabara electronics district. Nipponbashi is also
        famous as the national home of bunraku, Japans dazzling traditional
        puppet theater. Although various forms of puppet theater date back to
        the 11th century, the remarkably expressive and elaborately costumed
        bunraku style was thriving by the 17th century in both Osaka and Kyoto.
        Although its popularity waned during the Meiji period, it has been
        rediscovered this century, the most dramatic evidence being the vast
        investment in the National Bunraku Theater in Nipponbashi.
        Bunraku is a Japanese performance art of surprising
        dramatic intensity, worth seeing if only for an hour or so in the
        middle of a busy day of sightseeing. Although all dialog and narration
        are in Japanese, an English interpretation device or an English program
        is always available. Many of the most popular heroic and tragic dramas
        were written by Osakas own Monzaemon Chikamatsu (1653–1724), the
        playwright the Japanese claim as their own Shakespeare.
        In the neighboring Namba district, the Shin-Kabuki-za
        Theater (at the bottom of Midosuji Boulevard) gives kabuki performances
        only three weeks each year. But theres plenty of other traditional
        drama such as kyogen farces and manzai comic double-acts. In spring,
        the Osaka International Festival of drama and music takes place both at
        the theater and in the Festival Hall on Nakanoshima Island. Even if you
        dont bother venturing within, the building itself is dramatic and
        should not be missed.
        Between the Nipponbashi and Namba districts, try to find
        nearby Doguya-suji, (Kitchen Street), a narrow alley of restaurant
        wholesalers. This is the place to buy souvenirs of all the imitation
        food youve seen in restaurant windows, together with Japanese-style
        plates, bowls, glasses, sake sets, lacquerware, giant paper lanterns,
        and a million other things you never expected to see for sale.
        South of Namba, between Ebisucho and Tennoji stations, is
        the Tsutenkaku Tower, a rather desperate imitation of the Eiffel Tower
        (and perhaps the only structure that makes Kyotos tower look
        impressive). The view from the observation deck over 300 ft up is
        panoramic but hardly worth the effort.
        The nearby Osaka Municipal Art Museum, near Tennoji
        Station, is worth visiting for its celebrated Abe Collection of 200
        Chinese paintings (ninth–13th centuries) and its Ming- and
        Ching-dynasty ceramics (14th–19th centuries). The large permanent
        encampment of homeless people around Tennoji Park makes the area more
        than a little seedy (but not at all dangerous).
        Close by is Osakas most famous temple, Shitennoji,
        founded in 593 by the revered reforming lawgiver, Prince Shotoku.
        Unfortunately, the buildings in this large temple are concrete
        reproductions of the originals destroyed by bombing in World War II.
        However, the large stone torii gateway is the oldest in Japan, dating
        back to 1294. Shitennoji also hosts Osakas largest temple market on
        the 21st of each month, featuring antiques, used clothing, and
        miscellaneous items.
        Farther south is the Sumiyoshi Taisha shrine, dedicated to
        the god of peace, song, and seafaring. The shrines large and
        attractive arched bridge is just one of the features enjoyed by the
        three million visitors who come to make prayer offerings on the first
        three days of the New Year. Although the shrine is thought to have been
        founded in the third century, the present buildings are relatively
        recent reproductions.
        Finally, Osaka Port at the far west of the city offers two
        ideal distractions for all the family. The futuristic Kaiyukan Aquarium
        has at its core one of the worlds largest indoor tanks, containing a
        dramatic collection of sharks and other large deep-sea fish. Arranged
        in a descending spiral around it are other tanks representing the
        denizens of the Pacific Oceans seismic ring of fire. 
        The aquarium is set in a large complex of unusual shops
        and restaurants that also contains the Suntory Museum. In addition to
        regular art exhibitions, this wildly abstract structure features
        Osakas IMAX wide-screen theater. The entire area makes for a great
        afternoons break from the pressures of Osaka sightseeing.
        Kobe
        Kobe exploded onto the worlds headlines with the
        suddenness of the earthquake that ravaged the city 17 January 1995,
        claiming a final death toll of over 6,000. But a combination of
        remarkable communal solidarity and determination coupled with extensive
        private- and public-sector investment lie behind a recovery that is
        nothing short of astonishing.
        Hemmed into a narrow coastal strip between the Rokko
        Mountains and the Inland Sea, this port city came into its own after
        American pressure forced Japan to open to foreign trade in 1868. The
        merchants who established a foothold in Kobe included large numbers of
        Persians and Indian traders. Today it is still known within Japan for
        its small but highly visible foreign business community, some of whose
        families have called Kobe home for generations. Kobe is a major
        cosmopolitan center with thriving restaurants, bars, and nightlife, not
        to mention Nankin-machi, Japans most famous Chinatown. 
        One early influence of the foreign residents was the
        development of the nationally famous Kobe beef in a country that had
        never touched the stuff until foreign barbarians began demanding
        steaks. Although meat eating is now considered commonplace, it is still
        strongly associated with the cosmopolitan, Western lifestyle that has
        such all-pervasive appeal in modern Japanese society. Raised nearby in
        Tajima or Tamba, the cattle produce a uniquely fatty meat, with a
        special flavor said to come from a daily dose of strong beer. The price
        in the restaurants on Tor Road is exorbitant, but you might like to try
        the beef either grilled straight or prepared Japanese-style as sashimi
        (raw), sukiyaki (thinly sliced and pan-fried), or shabu-shabu (stewed
        in a hot-pot broth).
        Kobes two main downtown shopping districts are Sannomiya
        and neighboring Motomachi, both featuring large department stores and
        fashionable boutiques. Numerous smaller shops are in the Kokashita
        arcade, a long but narrow covered shopping passage beneath the JR
        tracks that is definitely not for the claustrophobic.
        Kobes biggest tourist draw, though, is mainly of interest
        to domestic Japanese visitors. Kitano, the old foreign merchants
        residential district, preserves some of the 19th-century European-style
        houses that survived World War II. For foreign tourists, the most
        interesting thing about this area will probably be witnessing the
        fascination these residences hold over Japanese visitors. Kitanos
        Hindu temple, mosque, and synagogue add to the exotic appeal of this
        unusual area.
        Dominating the mountain range that provides Kobes
        dramatic backdrop is Mt. Rokko, which offers a wide range of natural
        and man-made attractions To escape the stifling heat of summer,
        everyone except the super-fit takes the ten-minute cable car ride to
        the top. Here you will discover a commanding view of Kobe, Osaka, Awaji
        Island, and the Inland Sea. The many hiking and cycling trails draw
        nature-lovers throughout the year.
        Behind Mt. Rokko is Arima Onsen, one of Japans oldest
        hot-spring resorts. Like popular hot-spring resorts around the country,
        this small town has been the site of furious development, and the many
        small traditional inns (ryokan) and bathhouses are now dwarfed by
        large, ugly concrete hotels. Nevertheless, Arima Onsen still offers an
        ideal introduction to the pleasures of bathing Japanese-style, whether
        through a visit of a few hours to one of the large and luxuriously
        equipped centers, or a night spent in a traditional family-run
        hot-spring inn.
        Ise-Shima
        Ise-Shima National Park, southeast of Osaka, is home to
        the Outer and Inner shrines of Ise. These deceptively simple structures
        are no less than the sacred repository of the national
        identity — Shinto sanctuaries dedicated nearly 2,000 years ago to
        Japans founding deities. Their atmospheric setting in serene woodland
        reveals more strongly than anywhere else the profound links between
        modern Japan and its mythical origins. Be forewarned: for foreign
        tourists, Ise is not a destination for picturesque sightseeing, and
        there isnt really very much to see or photograph (especially since
        taking pictures of the Inner Shrine is forbidden). Rather, it provides
        an opportunity to glimpse one key aspect of the very essence of a
        society and people whose origins, development, and identity hold a
        fascination for the rest of the world.
        While no more nor less significant than other countries
        national symbols and icons, the Shinto identity embodied in the shrines
        of Ise is quite distinct from Japans other man-made institutions.
        Nature itself is the primal essence enshrined and worshipped at Ise, as
        implied by the carefully orchestrated approach to the sanctuaries past
        the limpid Isuzu River and through the forest. Although the sacred
        structures represent the ultimate focus of the Shinto religion, they
        are dismantled and renewed every 20 years — one of the most explicit
        manifestations of the traditional Japanese belief in transience and
        perpetual renewal.
        Both the Inner and Outer shrines comprise a main hall and
        two treasure houses, each enclosed within four fences. Only members of
        the imperial family and high-ranking priests are allowed past the
        second of the four fences. This restriction reinforces the notion of
        the imperial family as living descendents and representatives of the
        gods — despite the emperors renunciation of divinity announced as one
        of the terms of surrender at the end of World War II (when some people
        literally fainted upon hearing the emperors voice on the radio for the
        first time). Indeed, so sacred are the Ise shrines that, despite the
        relatively peaceful coexistence of Shinto and Buddhism in Japan,
        Buddhist monks and nuns were banned from entering the precincts prior
        to the Meiji Restoration of 1868.
        The shrines are most easily reached from Nagoya via the
        Kintetsu Railway to Uji-Yamada Station. In addition to the famo us
        shrines, you can explore more of this attractively scenic peninsula,
        with its national park, the haunting image of the sacred wedded rocks
        at Futamigaura beach, and the resort town of Kashikojima at the
        southern end of the Kintetsu railways Shima line.
        The Outer Shrine
        A short walk from Uji-Yamada Station is Geku, the Outer
        Shrine. It is dedicated to the God of the Earth, who was sent down to
        Japan by the Sun Goddess Amaterasu. Originally situated near
        present-day Kyoto, the shrine was moved here in 478. The main entrance
        takes you to the first sacred gateway (torii), which in Japan always
        symbolizes the threshold of holy ground. Both shrines surprisingly
        primitive design is thought to be based on those of granaries and
        storehouses from prehistoric times.
        As you walk along the avenue of pines and giant cedars,
        you pass on the right the Anzaisho, the emperors rest house, and
        Sanshujo, the rest house for the imperial family. Beyond a second torii
        is the Kaguraden, Hall of the Sacred Dances. In return for a donation
        to the shrine, the shrine maidens (miko), dressed in the typically
        Shinto outfit of bright-red pleated skirts with white blouses, will
        perform one of the dances. The girls wield branches of the holy sakaki
        tree and dance to an orchestra composed of wooden clappers (hyoshigi),
        plucked zither (koto), mouth organ (sho), and the oboe-like hichiriki,
        together with flute and drum.
        The avenue ends at the Gekus Shoden (main shrine
        building), which — together with its eastern and western treasure
        houses — is enclosed by a series of four unvarnished wooden fences.
        This is where Shinto priests in white robes with black belts and black
        lacquered clogs stand to bless worshippers as they make a silent
        obeisance. The Shoden itself is just 6 m (20 ft) high, a little less in
        width, and 10 m (33 ft) long.
        Each shrine is constructed of plain, unadorned Japanese
        cypress wood, brought especially from the Kiso Mountains in the Central
        Alps, northeast of Nagoya. The style of the cross-beamed roofs and
        simple wooden frames is the same as that used more than 2,000 years
        ago, before Chinese architecture exerted its influence when Buddhism
        arrived here from Korea. This is a special style of Shinto architecture
        that is prohibited from being used at other shrines.
        The Geku-Jin-en Sacred Park, at the foot of Mt. Takakura,
        is an integral part of the sanctuary and a beautiful place for a quiet
        stroll. In fact, if you dont feel like taking the bus, the walk to the
        inner shrine takes you along a delightful tree-shaded avenue lined with
        stone lanterns.
        The Inner Shrine
        The Naiku (Inner Shrine) is the more important of the two
        shrines, as it is dedicated to Amaterasu, the Sun Goddess and supreme
        deity of Shinto. The Naiku holds the sacred eight-pointed mirror
        (yata-no-kagami), which is one of the three symbols of the imperial
        throne. (The others are the sword, which resides at the Atsuta Shrine
        in Nagoya, and the jewel, kept in the Imperial Palace in Tokyo. ) The
        Naikus layout and the construction of its Shoden are similar to those
        of the Geku, although the approach to the Naiku over the Uji Bridge
        across the Isuzu River is more picturesque. Like the shrines, the
        bridge is renewed every two decades.
        The ritual dismantling of the shrines every 20 years
        (known as sengu-shiki) goes back to prehistoric times, when sacred
        structures tended to be erected for special ceremonies rather than as
        permanent places of worship. You will notice beside each shrine an area
        of open ground on which the new shrine is to be erected — in 2013 — in
        identical form. The structures are broken up into small pieces and
        distributed to the faithful as talismans. The whole process is both
        painstaking and expensive, and the democratization of the imperial
        institutions since the emperor renounced his divinity means the shrines
        (rather than the state) must now foot the bill. To defray costs,
        worshippers must make a generous donation to receive a piece of the old
        shrine.
        You can join the Japanese visitors down at the Isuzu
        River, where they perform a rite of purification by washing their
        mouths with its clear, fresh waters. At the same time, they play with
        the fat red, silver, and black carp swimming around nearby.
        Wakayama
        South of Osaka is Wakayama, a large prefecture whose long
        coastline and lush greenery have long been a magnet for domestic
        tourists. In addition to hundreds of temples, shrines, and hot-spring
        resorts, Wakayama features some of the countrys most popular
        beaches.
        Farther south is Koyasan, the center of the Shingon branch
        of esoteric Buddhism and one of Japans most important religious
        enclaves. Now comprising over 120 temple buildings as well as numerous
        shrines, pagodas, and stupas, this large religious settlement is
        located at the top of Mt. Koya, a 1,006-m (3,300-ft) peak. Koyasan was
        already known as a sacred site for ascetic practices when Kobo Daishi,
        a revered Buddhist priest, teacher, and scholar, received imperial
        permission to establish a religious community to develop his new
        Shingon sect in 816.
        The mausoleum of the kukai (great teacher, as he is
        known) is located at the deepest reaches of Okunoin, Japans most
        famous cemetery and one of Koyasans biggest draws. Once the kukai was
        buried there, the great and the humble alike were quick to see the
        merit of a final resting place near the great teacher. The graves of
        hundreds of thousands from all walks of life now occupy the site, with
        the remains of emperors, warlords, warriors, samurai, and poets all
        jostling for space. Their tombs and stone markers range from the
        ostentatious to the elegant, the well preserved to the decrepit.
        Well over a million ancestor-worshipping Japanese descend
        on Koyasan and Okunoin on major public holidays, especially those
        commemorating the dead. If you are wise enough to avoid these times,
        consider spending the night in one of some 60 temple lodgings (shukubo)
        that offer surprisingly comfortable traditional accommodation to
        visitors and travelers. The main highlight of a stay at one of these
        special temples is the chance to sample the luxurious Buddhist
        vegetarian temple cuisine (shojin-ryori) served only in such lodgings.
        The path to enlightenment can indeed be surprisingly pleasurable.
        Chubu
        The central region of Honshu (Japans main island), Chubu
        stretches northeast from Kansai across the Hida, Kiso, and Akaishi
        mountains — known collectively as the Japan Alps — to the plains of the
        north coast and the Sea of Japan. Its most easily explored in an
        excursion from the Kansai region by train in a picturesque
        mountain-railroad journey from Nagoya. You can visit the charming town
        of Takayama, set in the midst of imposing mountain scenery, and the
        historical city of Kanazawa.
        Takayama
        The Takayama-line train, from Nagoya via Gifu, takes you
        along the Kiso and Hida river valleys. The leisurely three-hour ride
        passes through steep gorges, narrow terraced rice paddies, and neatly
        tailored tea plantations hugging the mountain slopes with not a square
        inch of usable land wasted. The train stops by riverside markets where
        farmers trade fruit, vegetables, and gossip with passengers.
        Takayama is a town famous for its carpenters — a
        reputation going back to the great days of the imperial courts of Nara
        and Kyoto. With the harvests of its Hida mountain district too meager
        to contribute taxes to the national treasury, the town sent instead its
        skillful artisans (Hida no takumi) to help build the temples and
        palaces of the imperial capital. Those skills have been handed down to
        present-day craftsmen working in yew wood, and the old timbered houses
        are exquisitely maintained in traditional style. The local lord in turn
        borrowed the capitals grid pattern when laying out medieval Takayama,
        which became known as Little Kyoto. 
        Just as Kyoto offers some of the most splendid traditional
        inns (ryokan), so Takayama is a good place to try out family-style
        guesthouses (minshuku; see page 229) — theyre especially friendly
        here. All you need to get around are your own two feet, although
        renting a bicycle at the railway station will give you easy access to
        the surrounding countryside.
        Start your day at the open-air Asaichi morning market down
        on the east bank of the Miya River, north of Yasugawa Street bridge.
        Savor the clear mountain air as you enjoy the display of fruit and
        vegetables from Hida farms and the flowers and nuts brought down from
        the hills.
        A little way back from the river, heading south, youll
        find the delightful old houses and workshops of Kami-Sannomachi and
        Furuimachinami streets. The high-quality craftwork here — woodcarvings,
        lacquerware, and pottery — is renowned throughout Japan. Furuimachinami
        is quieter and more residential, with long, two-story, unpainted dark
        timber houses, lattice façades, and low-balconied verandahs, plus a few
        flowers and shrubs in pots or hako-niwa box gardens to add some color.
        Some of the old houses have been redeveloped as museums and eclectic
        galleries.
        Just east of the riverside market are two merchants
        houses, Yoshijima-ke and Kusakabe Mingeikan, the latter turned into a
        superb folkcraft museum displaying local costumes, woodcarvings, and
        the fine, transparent lacquerware (shunkeinuri) that highlights rather
        than conceals the grain of the wood.
        Takayamas most important temple is 16th-century
        Kokubunji. Next to the three-story pagoda is a ginkgo tree said to be
        over 1,000 years old. Southeast of town is Shiroyama Park, whose
        unlandscaped slopes covered with wildflowers have a pleasantly natural
        look and offer an extensive panorama of the town and the Japan Alps
        beyond.
        Hida Minzoku-Mura is a fascinating open-air museum of
        authentic old farmhouses from the region, most of them rescued from an
        area flooded by nearby Mihoro Dam. Laid out in an attractive hillside
        setting half a mile southwest of Takayama Station, the houses — many of
        them three or four stories high, with steeply pitched grass-thatch
        roofs — are oddly reminiscent of those in European Alpine villages. The
        houses display old farm tools and cooking utensils, and some operate as
        workshops where you can watch the much-vaunted local craftsmen
        demonstrating their skills in lacquerwork, carving, weaving, and
        dyeing.
        Hikers and mountain climbers wont want to miss the bus
        excursion (95 minutes from Takayama) to Nori-kura, a 3,026-m (9,928-ft)
        volcano at the southern end of Japan Alps National Park. For the
        hikers, a bus goes to a point quite close to the summit, after which
        its an easy but exhilarating walk to the top.
        Kanazawa
        The largest city in northern Chubu, Kanazawa has been able
        to preserve its older charms from the assaults of the Tokugawa shoguns
        and the bombs of World War II by pursuing a peaceful career of arts,
        crafts, and scholarship. It is home to a major university as well as an
        arts and crafts college. Kanazawa is still considered an archetypal
        castle town, even though the university now occupies the spot once
        dominated by the long-destroyed castle. Still, there are some very
        pleasant walks around what are still referred to as the castle
        grounds.
        Kenrokuen Park, a classical Edo-period strolling garden
        regarded as one of the three best in Japan, is a good place to start
        your visit. The park has a plethora of ponds spanned by elegant stone
        bridges, together with stone lanterns, waterfalls, serpentine streams,
        cherry trees, and pines. Artfully constructed hillocks provide
        panoramic views of the landscaping. The central Kasumigaike (Misty
        Lake) is the most attractive of the ponds, graced by its Tortoise Shell
        Island — the tortoise being much favored by the Japanese as a symbol of
        long life.
        Among Kanazawas other specialties is its pretty,
        five-color glazed kutani pottery, which youll see in many downtown
        shops. If youre interested enough to make a small investment, first
        look at the marvelous samples in the Municipal Art Museum in the park
        before buying.
        West of the park is Nagamachi, the old samurai quarter.
        Wander freely along the secluded canals past the dark timbered houses,
        all situated in very narrow, zigzagging streets to hamper enemy attack.
        The superb Saihitsu-an house features silk-dyers creating unbelievably
        expensive material for kimono.
        On the eastern edge of town, north of the Umeno Hashi
        bridge across the Asano River, is the old geisha district, slightly
        more rundown than Nagamachi but no less quaint.
        Western Honshu and Shikoku
        The area around the Inland Sea offers a wide range of
        attractions, from the varied towns and cities of Western Honshu to the
        major pilgrimage destination of Shikoku island.
        Himeji
        Himejis magnificent castle is unquestionably one of the
        regions must-do sights. As Japans only surviving castle preserved
        in its original form, Himeji Castle has opulent white walls and myriad
        turrets. These have earned it the nickname Shirasagi (White Heron
        Castle) for the way its swooping, white-gabled profile proudly soars
        above this small city. The castle dates from the early 1600s. When the
        famous unifiers Nobunaga, Hideyoshi, and Tokugawa fought to end the
        16th-century civil wars, Hideyoshi used Himeji as a base of operations
        against the recalcitrant warlords of Western Honshu. Although much of
        the castles interior seems dark and austere, this highlights the
        magnificent wood floors and paneling and the superb joinery and
        construction techniques.
        A special combination ticket is available for both Himeji
        Castle and nearby Koko-en, a superb landscaped garden built in 1992 by
        a Kyoto-based master gardener on the site of a former samurai
        residence. Koko-en actually comprises nine distinct gardens, each with
        a special theme such as bamboo, pine trees, seedlings, summer trees,
        and flowers. Dont miss the tea ceremony garden, carefully designed to
        be appreciated from the traditional Urasenke-style teahouse, where
        visitors (and especially foreign tourists) are invited to relax on
        tatami mats and enjoy a bowl of strong green tea and a sweet
        ceremoniously served by elegant kimono-clad tea ceremony students.
        (When served your bowl of tea, dont forget to bow slowly and turn the
        tea bowl three times before sipping the frothy brew. )
        Kurashiki
        Surrounded by heavily industrialized suburbs, the old
        center of Kurashiki has canals lined with dreamy willow trees — a
        reverse comment on the horrors of war. This is practically the only
        town of any consequence here along the Inland Sea coast to have emerged
        unscathed from the terrible fire-bombings of 1945. It thus provides an
        all-too-rare glimpse of provincial life in prewar Japan.
        In the era of the Tokugawa shoguns, the canals were used
        to carry rice and grain in barges for onward shipment to the great
        markets of Osaka and Edo. The elegant black-brick granaries have been
        beautifully preserved to house the towns many museums of art,
        folkcrafts, and archeology. Youll certainly find a days visit to
        Kurashiki a very welcome change from the relentless modernity of some
        of the cities nearby.
        Take a short taxi ride from the station to the museum
        district, then do the rest on foot. There are half a dozen museums
        tucked into an elbow of the canal, but not all of them are worth
        seeing. Be sure to note down the Japanese names of the better ones
        before setting out.
        One of the most delightful is the Kurashiki Mingeikan folk
        art museum, displaying not only Japanese, Korean, and Chinese pottery,
        glassware, textiles, and bamboo-ware, but also Native American and
        European peasant ceramics and basketry with which to compare the Asian
        art. The Ohara Tokikan pottery hall is devoted to the work of modern
        pottery masters Kanjiro Kawai, Shoji Hamada, and Kenkichi Tomimoto, as
        well as their much admired friend, Bernard Leach, the influential
        British potter credited with popularizing Japanese rustic ceramic
        styles and techniques abroad.
        At the Kurashiki Bijutsukan municipal art museum, the
        outside world is very much the focus of the Ninagawa familys
        collection of ancient Greek, Egyptian, Roman, and Persian ceramics,
        sculp ture, and mosaics, plus 19th-century French and Italian marble
        and bronze sculptures. There is also some astonishing Rococo porcelain
        from Meissen, Vienna, Berlin, and Sèvres. Youll find a completely
        furnished traditional Japanese living room on the fourth floor.
        If youve become an enthusiast of large strolling
        gardens, the 18th-century Korakuen, in the nearby town of Okayama, is
        considered a must by connoisseurs. The Japanese have adopted the
        traditional Chinese practice of ranking sights and places, and Korakuen
        is officially one of Japans three greatest gardens. At the gardens
        famous tea pavilion you can sample a tea ceremony while contemplating
        the cherry and plum trees on one side in the spring or the blazing
        maples on the other in autumn.
        Across the Asahi River, you can see the ruins of Okayama
        Castle, unusually painted black and called Ujo (The Crow) in
        deliberate contrast to Himejis White Heron Castle. 
        Hiroshima
        Your first reaction as the train pulls into Hiroshima
        Station might well be surprise. After all, the very name Hiroshima
        has become a modern metaphor, the ultimate symbol of total
        obliteration. Yet around the station you see tower blocks, neon signs,
        cars zipping along the highway — all the signs of a normal town. In
        fact, modern Hiroshima is a city of broad avenues, green parks, and
        almost a million citizens, which is more than double its World War II
        population.
        You might find yourself looking at an old man or woman,
        guessing how old they were on 6 August 1945 and trying to imagine what
        they were doing at 8:15am, the instant of the atomic explosion that
        reverberated around the world. The movingly simple Peace Memorial
        Museum documents the horror with charts, models, photographs, videos,
        everyday objects transformed by the unimaginable heat of the blast, and
        a life-sized diorama portraying horribly burned victims. One of the
        most powerful exhibits is a single photograph: a human shadow left
        imprinted on the steps of the Sumitomo Bank at the moment of the
        flash. 
        The museum will surprise many visitors expecting a
        victims account of one of this centurys most controversial decisions;
        yet the curators have gone to considerable lengths to document the
        horror of atomic weapons and nuclear war in general, driving toward the
        inevitable conclusion that such weapons must never again be used.
        Outside the museum, the Cenotaph contains the names of the
        108,956 casualties, with the inscription: Let all the souls here rest
        in peace, for the evil shall not be repeated.  There is also a huge
        bronze Peace Bell. At the northern end of the park stands the lone
        structure preserved since 1945: the former Hiroshima Prefectural
        Industrial Promotion Hall, now known as the A-Bomb Dome. 
        After visiting the emotionally powerful museum, you may
        wish to seek a therapeutic antidote in the lively shopping centers east
        of the park around Hondori, Hachobori, and Kamiya-cho. But the ultimate
        venue to restore the spirit is tranquil Miyajima, just 30 minutes
        away.
        Miyajima
        Also known as Itsukushima after its celebrated waterfront
        shrine, Miyajima island is one of Japans most popular travel
        destinations. Make a very early start to beat the crowds. (It takes
        about 25 minutes from Hiroshima to Miyajima-guchi Station via Japan
        Railways, and then 10 minutes by ferry to the island. )
        Even if you feel youve seen enough Japanese temples, you
        will certainly be moved by the striking beauty of the bright red
        camphorwood arch of Itsukushima Shrine rising 16 m (52 ft) out of the
        sea in front of the low, brilliant vermilion buildings, themselves
        raised above the water by stilts. Founded as far back as the 6th
        century, the shrine is so sacred that, until the fresh wind of reforms
        instituted during the Meiji era beginning 1868, pregnant women and the
        seriously ill were carried to the mainland to ensure that no births or
        deaths would occur on the island. Mourners had to undergo 50 days of
        purification before being allowed back on Miyajima. While most such
        religious laws have been relaxed, burials are still not permitted
        here.
        Still, Miyajima manages to be both solemn and lively.
        Sacred bugaku and kagura dances are performed at the shrine, while
        numerous souvenir shops do a roaring trade in the local specialties:
        woodcarvings, both sacred and utterly pornographic, and
        maple-leaf-shaped sweet buns (momiji). Youll find handsome polished
        cedarwood cups, bowls, trays, and masks — as well as kitsch renditions
        of the tame deer that loiter lazily around the islands major tourist
        attractions, waiting (sometimes impatiently) for a free snack from yet
        another fascinated visitor.
        Although most people take the ropeway, the easily
        negotiable trail leading to the top of 530-m (1,739-ft) Mt. Misen is an
        invigorating hike. The forest is lush and, past the secluded Gumonjido
        Buddhist temple, the view from the top over the Inland Sea to Hiroshima
        is a fine reward. From the top of Mt. Misen is one of the three finest
        views in Japan.
        For such a small island, Miyajima has much to offer. But
        stay until after the crowds depart in the late afternoon and early
        evening. To take in the sight of the great shrine against the glorious
        setting sun, spend the night at one of Miyajimas many Japanese-style
        hotels and inns, preferably a family-run ryokan or pension (see page
        228).After dinner, don your cotton yukata robe and pad out the short
        distance back to the Itsukushima Shrine. After sundown, the shrines
        atmosphere is utterly transformed — cool, dark, and more than slightly
        surreal, with the subtly illuminated arch dominating the scene. If the
        tide is out, walk down to the base of the shrine to appreciate its
        massive scale.
        Shikoku
        Despite being Shikoku islands largest town, Matsuyama is
        a laid-back place, mainly serving as the shopping center for tourists
        visiting the hot springs situated 4 km (2.5 miles) away. Dogo Spa is a
        great place to try out a public bathhouse: don your cotton kimono and
        clogs, too (if you can manage them). The spring water is alkaline and
        crystal clear, and good for stomach ailments, the lungs, and the
        nervous system.
        Pleasingly unlandscaped, Shiroyama Park covers the lovely
        wooded slopes of Katsuyama Hill. It is dominated by the well-preserved
        Matsuyama Castle, which was once the redoubt of the Matsudaira daimyo.
        This most faithful lieutenant of the Tokugawa clan distinguished
        himself by planting the cedar forest around the shoguns mausoleums at
        Nikko.
        Just a mile from Dogo Spa is the 14th-century Ishiteji
        temple, one of the 88 stages of the springtime Buddhist pilgrimage
        around Shikoku defined by Kobo Daishi, founder of Shingon esoteric
        Buddhism. Notice the especially handsome Niomon Gate.
        Situated at the eastern end of Shikoku, across the Inland
        Sea from Kurashiki and Okayama, is Takamatsu, another friendly
        provincial town where foreigners seem to receive a particularly warm
        welcome. The citizens are very proud of Ritsurin Park, with its bizarre
        twisted pines and strangely shaped boulders. The folk art museum here
        is worth a visit, but also stop for a gracious tea ceremony at the
        delightful Kiku-getsu-tei pavilion. Dont miss the pavilions little
        rock garden, a classic of the genre.
        A 20-minute tram ride takes you out to the Yashima
        peninsula, formerly an island famed for the momentous battles in which
        the Minamoto clan drove out their Taira rivals in 1182, heralding the
        countrys rule by military dictatorship for the next seven centuries.
        Today, ruins of the Taira clans dwellings are still visible, and
        Yashimaji temple houses relics of the battles.
        Kyushu
        Lying the farthest southwest of Japans four main islands,
        Kyushu has always set itself apart from the others. Its climate is
        distinctly Mediterranean and even subtropical at its southern tip, and
        its inhabitants are known for being friendlier, more open, and even
        more Westernized than their compatriots in the rest of the country.
        Kyushu is also the most volcanic of Japans islands, famous for its
        flourishing hot-spring resorts and several active volcanoes. It is a
        terrific place to explore if you have the time. If you can afford the
        bullet train just once, this is your chance, as — in one exhilarating
        sweep — you pass through almost all the major cities of Central and
        Western Honshu on the way.
        Easily accessible from the Asian mainland via Korea,
        Kyushu has a longer history of significant contacts with foreigners
        than any other part of Japan. This was especially the case after it
        found itself on the southern route taken by European merchants and
        missionaries of the 16th century. Indeed, the famous port city of
        Nagasaki served as Japans sole point of contact with the outside world
        during 260 years of self-imposed isolation.
        Kyushu enjoys its special place in the national mythology
        as the cradle of Japanese civilization, despite the support of only a
        meager amount of archeological evidence. Legend tells of the Sun
        Goddess Amaterasu sending her grandson to Mt. Takachiho in central
        Kyushu, armed with the imperial mirror, sword, and jewel that Jimmu
        (Japans first emperor) used on his conquest of the Yamato Plain near
        Nara. Modern historians version is rather less exotic: Jimmu was
        probably a pirate from Okinawa who settled in Kyushu before launching
        his campaign to conquer Honshu.
        The islands next important historical encounter was with
        the Mongols under Kublai Khan, when Kyushu was the target of abortive
        assaults in 1274 and 1281. The islanders heroic resistance, admittedly
        abetted by a timely typhoon (kamikaze: divine wind), earned them a
        formidable martial reputation. The island proved to be the last bastion
        of the samurai ideal, when disenfranchised warriors launched the doomed
        Satsuma Rebellion in their desperation to forestall the relentless
        march of progress. It was in Kagoshima that the Imperial Japanese Navy
        was created from the nucleus of ships bought from the British at the
        end of the 19th century.
        Portuguese merchants arrived in Kagoshima in 1543, with
        the missionaries of St. Francis Xavier following close behind. In
        addition to becoming a center of Western trade, Nagasaki provided a
        firm foothold in Japan for the Catholic Church — today much revived
        after 250 years of brutal suppression under the Tokugawa shoguns.
        Northern Kyushu
        Fukuoka is Kyushus main commercial center, where you can
        tour the lively shopping district around the main station at Hakata.
        The delicate Hakataningyo dolls (the towns specialty craft) make
        attractive gifts, although as works of art for adults rather than toys
        for children. Bayside Place is a thriving nighttime eating and
        entertainment district built alongside Hakata wharf in the old merchant
        district, with attractively illuminated sculptures adding to the
        atmosphere. Enthusiastic and adventurous eaters should also look out
        for the numerous food stalls (yatai) found throughout the city,
        especially those offering Hakata ramen noodles, famed throughout Japan.
        Otherwise, Fukuoka mainly serves as the launching point for your
        exploration of the bulk of Kyushu to the south.
        The first stop on the east coast is Beppu — perhaps the
        busiest and certainly the most intense spa town in Japan, with a
        permanent population of just 150,000 but about 13 million visitors a
        year. The Beppu district boasts eight different hot-spring areas, each
        with different properties. These include a hot waterfall at the
        Shibaseki spring, hot sand at Takegawara, hot mud at Kannawa, and
        picturesque outdoor baths in hot ponds among the rocks of the aptly
        named Hotta Hot Springs.
        Beppus most popular attractions are the open-air hell
        ponds around Kannawa, which are alternately hilarious and dramatic. In
        the open-air Umi Jigoku (Ocean Hell) you can buy eggs hard-boiled in
        a basket. In Oniyama Jigoku (Devils Mountain Hell), a hundred
        crocodiles enjoy a hot soak. Chinoike Jigoku (Blood Pool Hell) is a
        steaming pond turned blood-red by its iron oxide. At the northern edge
        of the district is Bozu Jigoku (Monks Hell), an obscenely bubbling
        mud pond where a Buddhist temple once stood until it was submerged in
        an earthquake back in the 15th century.
        Also near Kannawa are several hot-spring developments,
        including attractive open-air rock pools and mineral mud baths with a
        Youve got it? Well cure it!  reputation. But if heat is your thing,
        pay a visit to the grand old Meiji-era Takegawara public baths, not far
        from the JR train station. The old wooden building is simply
        magnificent, although its hot bath is one of the most basic youre
        likely to encounter. For just ¥620 you can lie down and have hot sand
        raked over you by a grinning, grandmotherly attendant — a ten-minute
        ordeal youll never forget.
        One unusual attraction not mentioned in the official
        tourist literature is Beppus sex museum, which is famous throughout
        Japan. There are several such collections in Japan, consisting of
        bizarre images, sculptures, and elaborate dioramas depicting many of
        the darker aspects of human sexuality, often with fantasies involving
        demons and monsters perpetrating unspeakable deeds upon helpless
        mortals. This is another only in Japan experience, one definitely not
        for the faint-hearted.
        The rural village of Yufuin is relaxed, gentle, and
        charming, featuring old-fashioned farmhouses around tiny Kinrinko Lake.
        Set at the foot of Mt. Yufu — an extinct volcano covered by dense
        bamboo forest — Yufuin is famous for its hot-spring baths, most of
        which you can try for just a few hundred yen. The helpful tourist
        information desk in the JR station can direct you to the most popular
        or unusual spots, especially those with outdoor baths (rotenburo).
        The excellent Folk Craft Museum in an old manor house
        holds regular demonstrations of local arts and crafts. Hard-core
        seekers of local culture will find a single day insufficient for
        visiting Yufuins Museum of Modern Art, the unexpected Marc Chagall
        Museum, and 15 other art galleries. The gentle paths along the small
        rivers that meander through the town provide serene views of ricefields
        and superb scenery.
        Farther south, the thick groves of palm trees lining the
        coast at Miyazaki serve as a reminder of its position on the edge of
        the tropics. This resort town has a long and usually uncrowded sandy
        beach, and there are several pleasant golf courses among the palm
        trees.
        Heiwadai Park brings together the prehistoric past and the
        frequently strange present. The parks prefectural museum displays some
        small clay figures (haniwa) unearthed at nearby ancient burial mounds,
        together with pots, tools, and weapons dating back to as early as
        10,000 b.c. The grounds are dominated by the bizarre and grandiose
        Peace Tower, which, curiously, was erected in 1940. At that time it had
        a different name: Hakko-ichi-wu (Eight World Regions Under One Roof),
        embodying the militarist aims of the Imperial Japanese Army. More
        palatable in its goal is the parks Miyazaki Shrine, dedicated to
        Japans quasi-legendary first emperor, Jimmu, who reputedly commenced
        his glorious career in this region.
        Just north of Miyazaki is one of the many results of
        Japans grandiose spending projects that characterized the bubble
        economy years of the 1980s and early 1990s. Seagaia Ocean Dome, the
        largest indoor water park in the world, comprises an artificially
        landscaped beach complete with palm trees and a giant wave pool to
        complete the illusion of a tropical paradise. The facilities are
        enclosed within a huge retractable roof.
        South of Miyazaki, the little island of Aoshima is
        connected to Kyushu by a footbridge and surrounded by strange,
        wave-like rocks believed to be between 15 million and 30 million years
        old. Beyond Aoshima the picturesque, winding Nichinan coast alternates
        rugged cliffs with some fine sandy bathing beaches. The seafood along
        this coast is especially good: try the reasonably priced lobster and
        giant periwinkles.
        Southern Kyushu
        Kagoshima dominates the head of a deep indentation at the
        southern tip of Kyushu, and its harbor has played a prominent role in
        Japanese military history. It was here that the Portuguese landed,
        bringing to Japan for the first time bread, guns, and Christianity. The
        sailors first landfall was on the little offshore island of
        Tanegashima, which has progressed from matchlocks and muskets to being
        Japans principal rocket-launching center.
        It was from Kagoshima that the last desperate sorties of
        World War II were begun to resist an imminent US invasion, including
        the kamikaze raids on American warships. Inevitably, devastating
        bombing reprisals flattened the city. But modern Kagoshima is now an
        attractive green and airy place, with wide boulevards, delightful
        parks, and a couple of intriguing historical museums.
        Shiroyama Park (southwest of Kagoshima Station) is up on a
        hill, giving you a fine view of the city and Kagoshima Bay through the
        archway of Nanshu Shrine. This shrine is dedicated to Kyushus most
        celebrated son and one of Japans national heroes, Takamori Saigo, last
        great champion of the samurai. He is buried with 2,023 of his warriors,
        who died in the ill-fated 1877 Satsuma Rebellion. This was the last
        stand of the samurai against the overthrow of their time-honored
        privileges. Many of the soldiers, like Takamori himself, died by their
        own hand in a final gesture of defiance. A museum in the park is
        devoted to his life and battles. Nearby, the history of the Kagoshima
        region is nicely summed up in the ultramodern Reimeikan Prefectural
        Museum, which includes local arts and crafts as well as examples of
        those first Portuguese matchlock rifles.
        A couple of miles or so north of Kagoshima Station are the
        lovely Iso Gardens, also landscaped on a hill, where the lord of
        Satsuma had his villa. Be sure to visit the Shoko Shuseikan Museum,
        housed in an old factory established here by the forward-looking leader
        for arms manufacture and other new industries.
        Out in the bay — towering over the entire peninsula — is
        Japans most notoriously active volcano, the huge three-coned
        Sakurajima, which sends up tremendous black and white clouds of ash and
        steam. Take a taxi or bus (from Kagoshima Station) for a closer look at
        the lava and a fine view of the whole Kagoshima Bay area. The
        Sakurajima peninsula was once an island until a gigantic eruption in
        1914, when the rocks and lava joined it forever to the mainland. A
        powerful illustration of the magnitude of the eruption is found at
        Haragosha Shrine, where you can just see the top cross bar of the
        shrines arch, the rest submerged by hardened lava.
        St. Francis Xavier Memorial Church, in Xavier Park (tram
        to Takamibaba stop), was built in 1949 to commemorate the 400th
        anniversary of the arrival of the Jesuit missionary. His
        statue — inexplicably pinned halfway up a monolith in a very
        martyr-like pose, although he died in his bed (in China) — stands with
        its back to the sea beside a sculpted frieze dedicated to the suffering
        of his Japanese converts.
        Ibusuki, south of Kagoshima, is a hot-spring resort that
        caters to honeymoon couples — hundreds of them at a time. However, the
        main draw is its famous natural sand bath. Clad only in a cotton
        kimono, you lie down for attendants to bury you up to the neck in sand
        at a medium-broil temperature. Just stare up at the sky while you sweat
        off a few pounds and the attendant shovels on fresh sand. As the local
        chamber of commerce hilariously puts it: It is not only effective for
        overall beauty, but also for whiplash injuries caused by traffic
        accidents, and popular with newlyweds.  A more cynical view is that
        the sands provide a cure for which there is no known disease.
        Chiran (80 minutes inland by bus from Kagoshima) is a
        peaceful, secluded 18th-century samurai village. In classically narrow,
        zigzagging lanes designed to hinder surprise attack, the houses, today
        still inhabited by the Satsuma warriors descendants, offer the rare
        opportunity to visit some exquisite private gardens, otherwise
        carefully concealed behind tall hedges. The simple, serene style of
        landscaping, with rocks, gravel, and a few shrubs, draws on the
        precepts of Zen Buddhism that had such a special appeal for the austere
        samurai.
        Chirans Kamikaze Museum, which includes a monumental
        statue of a pilot, exhibits the young mens uniforms, helmets, and
        final letters to their families explaining that they were continuing
        the samurai spirit of defending the countrys traditional values. There
        are also full-scale models of the planes, with a fuel tank big enough
        for only a one-way mission.
        Western Kyushu
        Halfway back along Kyushus west coast, Kumamoto is an old
        castle town that was of considerable importance to the Tokugawa shoguns
        as a counterweight to the presence of the annoyingly independent
        Shimazu clan down in Kagoshima. For visitors today, Kumamoto serves as
        a convenient gateway for the scenic road trip to the Mt. Aso volcano or
        a ferry cruise to the Unzen-Amakusa National Park.
        The reconstructed Kumamoto Castle is worth a visit for the
        significant role it played during the last hectic days of Japans
        feudal era. Once a vast fortification of 49 turrets, it ranked
        alongside Osaka and Nagoya as one of the countrys greatest impregnable
        bastions. The 1960 ferroconcrete reconstruction of the main castle-keep
        houses a fine museum of feudal armor and weapons and offers a good view
        of the city.
        Suizenji Park is an extravagant but attractive example of
        the extensive gardens of the 17th century. Here, designers have
        reproduced a miniature version of all the major landscape features
        along the old Tokaido Highway between Kyoto and Edo — including, of
        course, a small artificial version of Mt. Fuji.
        The bus ride from Kumamoto to the mighty Mt. Aso volcano
        takes you across some gently rolling hills, past orange groves, fields
        of watermelon, and the special grass used for tatami mats. There is
        even a rare sight of yellow wheat fields — grown for beer and noodles
        rather than for bread (which is mostly imported). The panorama of the
        five volcanic craters of Mt. Aso blends vivid emerald-green mounds with
        great carpets of pink azaleas on the surrounding slopes and plateau.
        Only one of the craters, Nakadake, is still really active. But it is
        well worth a visit to the top (a short hike from the bus stop) to peer
        down into the bleak, barren crater emitting puffs of sulfurous fumes
        and contrasting starkly with the colorful vegetation all around it.
        On your way back down, allow enough time to visit the
        fascinating Aso Volcanic Museum. This has some very realistic
        audio-visual re-enactments of eruptions and earthquakes, with special
        stereo sound effects. Three-dimensional models of exploding mountains
        and molten lava flows from all over the world are shown. You can press
        a button to see Americas Mt. St Helens blow its top, or you can
        relive the astonishing 1933 eruption of Mt. Aso itself.
        The Unzen-Amakusa National Park, consisting of a peninsula
        and islands west of Kumamoto, is most pleasantly reached on a
        picturesque one-hour ferry trip from the nearby port of Misumi to
        Shimabara. The harbor is dotted with the pine-covered islands of
        Tsukumo, offering delightful bathing along white-sand beaches. Unzen
        itself, once the favored hill station of Europeans escaping the
        steaming summers of the Asian mainland, is now a rather noisy, crowded
        spa resort. It serves best as an overnight stay prior to an early
        morning hike around the Unzen volcanos craters. The volcano last
        erupted in spring 1991, but it is no longer considered dangerous.
        Nagasaki
        Nagasaki is an unexpectedly charming city. To a large
        extent, this reflects its unbroken experience of more than four
        centuries of hospitality to foreigners — Chinese, Portuguese, and
        Dutch — during a period in Japanese history when the country was
        characterized by often murderous xenophobia. It is also a surprisingly
        attractive town: sadly, a relative rarity among Japans bland,
        homogenous cities. Its natural harbor, surrounded by green hills, is
        one of the most attractive in the world. Indeed, the citys distinct
        geography allowed most of its older neighborhoods to survive the
        terrible destruction wrought by the second atomic bomb to be dropped on
        Japan, on 9 August 1945 — despite the fact that the Nagasaki bomb was
        more powerful than the one dropped on Hiroshima three days earlier.
        Long before the arrival of the first Europeans, Nagasaki
        had been a major focus of Japans trade with China. Indeed, the Chinese
        influence in the city is clearly noticeable even today. Major Buddhist
        temples, profiting from the suppression of Christianity during the 17th
        century, were established by Chinese Zen monks and designed in the
        style of the late Ming Dynasty. On a more mundane contemporary level,
        the most popular Nagasaki lunch is a solid, nourishing bowl of chanpon:
        Chinese noodles in a tangy fish broth laden with a cornucopia of
        mushrooms, fish, prawns, vegetables, and other goodies.
        Near the centrally located Japan Railways station is the
        first sign of the Portuguese role in the citys fascinating history. A
        monument to 26 Christian martyrs executed in 1597 (at the beginning of
        Japans repression of Catholicism) includes a small museum displaying
        relics, including a communion wafer that has survived in dehydrated
        form since the 17th century. The museum describes how other Christians
        were boiled alive in 1615 at the nearby Unzen hot springs. (Bear in
        mind, of course, that equally cruel religious persecution of Catholics,
        Protestants, and Jews was quite common in Europe at that time. )
        Even after the persecution and banishing of missionaries
        and the ban on Christianity, Nagasakis Catholics still managed — at
        great risk — to continue clandestine observance throughout the years of
        the Tokugawa shogunate. They even went to Buddhist temples to worship
        the feminine Kannon deities, which were resculpted holding a child to
        represent Mary and Jesus.
        The Dutch, however, being nonproselytizing Protestants,
        were allowed to stay on throughout Japans centuries of isolation.
        Their little community on Dejima Island, in Nagasaki Bay, sheltered the
        only remaining foreigners left in the country. Oranda-san (Dutch
        people) eventually became the accepted term for all foreigners in
        Japan.
        To get a good sense of Nagasakis personality, start down
        at the harbor. Boat tours begin from the pier at Ohata Port Terminal,
        taking you on a fascinating 50-minute cruise around Nagasaki Bay. Your
        excursion steamer will feel like a childs toy as it passes the
        gigantic supertankers of the Mitsubishi Shipyard. Now the largest
        private shipyard in the world, this was the intended target that the US
        Air Force B-52 missed when it dropped the second atomic bomb.
        Dejima Pier has been reconnected to the mainland from what
        was once the Dutch island concession. The museum here has interesting
        relics of the Dutch community. In front of the museum is a model of the
        neat little settlement they established in 1609, when the only Japanese
        permitted to visit were trading partners and prostitutes. Commerce has
        always been an effective bridge of cultural barriers.
        To see how the Dutch of a later era lived, climb the
        cobbled street of Hollander Slope (number 5 tram to the Ishibashi
        stop), where youll see some red-brick and wooden clapboard houses with
        colonial-style verandahs and — a rare sight atop houses in
        Japan — chimneys. The houses are an enduring monument to the privileged
        position of the foreigners allowed to live here.
        The British presence in 19th-century Nagasaki is
        nostalgically commemorated at the hillside Glover Gardens, a short
        distance west of Hollander Slope. Escalators take you up to the houses
        of British traders. To the delighted curiosity of Japanese visitors,
        the houses are filled with the kind of Victorian paraphernalia that is
        becoming increasingly popular in modern Japan: damask-covered
        furniture, an upright piano, a massive mahogany sideboard, and a grand
        old gramophone with a big horn, manufactured by the Nippon-Ophone
        Company.
        Kofukuji temple was the first of the Zen Buddhist temples
        built by the Chinese (1620) after the Tokugawa shoguns had outlawed
        Christianity and ordered citizens to register as Buddhists. In a
        picturesque setting with palm trees in the courtyard, the temples
        architecture and sculpture are typical of southern China. Kofukuji also
        offers (by advanced reservation) a frugal but tasty vegetarian meal
        cooked by the priests themselves. Meal times are announced by the
        beating of a big red fish gong.
        The pride and joy of the neighborhood is the Meganebashi,
        a double-arched stone bridge across the Nakajima River. It was built in
        1634 by the abbot of Kofukuji and is the oldest of its kind in the
        country. The reflection of the double arches in the river on a fairly
        calm day creates a visual image resembling a pair of eyeglasses. The
        narrow streets bordering the river are full of interesting antique
        stores, coffee shops, and restaurants.
        Sofukuji temple (1629) is a handsome example of late Ming
        Dynasty architecture, with its striking vermilion-painted, stone-arched
        tower gate. In the courtyard is a huge iron cauldron that was used for
        distributing rice gruel to the poor during famines in the 17th and 19th
        centuries. The Chinese Buddha statues here are notable for their
        variously proud, cheerful, or humble stances not to be seen in the
        Buddhas of Japanese temples.
        The Nagasaki Peace Park embraces the epicenter of the
        atomic blast that left 73,884 people dead, 74,904 injured, and a
        miraculous 71,585 unscathed. The hills surrounding the city did much to
        contain the subsequent atomic fallout. The park features a monumental
        sculpture (by local artist Kitamura Seibo) that stirred considerable
        controversy when unveiled in 1955. The massive figures right hand
        points skyward — toward the actual point of detonation — as a warning
        of the constant threat of nuclear weapons, while his left hand
        stretches out in a gesture of universal peace. As in Hiroshima, one of
        the most moving monuments is a single piece of masonry left standing.
        In this case, it is the red-brick and gray-stone remains of an arch
        from the Urakami Catholic Church, at the time the largest church in
        Asia.
        A visit to Nagasaki is meaningless without a stop at its
        provocative and challenging Atomic Bomb Museum. The exhibits powerfully
        document the build-up to the dropping of the atomic bomb on Nagasaki
        and the appalling effects of the blast itself and its aftermath. The
        curators have done a good job of separating any military justification
        for the decision from its tragic consequences for the civilian
        population. Like the Hiroshima museum, the final message is not of
        victims demanding sympathy but of an entire community committed to
        total nuclear disarmament for the sake of the entire planet, with its
        own message of Never again. 
        Finally, at the end of a long day, take the cable car to
        the top of Mt. Inasa, 332 m (1,089 ft) high, for a dramatic sunset view
        of Nagasaki and its harbor as city lights begin to sparkle.
        Northern Honshu and Hokkaido
        The regions of Japan to the northeast of Tokyo are more
        sparsely inhabited and tend to be less often visited by tourists,
        either foreign or Japanese. But both northern Honshu — which is more
        commonly known as Tohoku — and the northernmost island of Hokkaido
        offer the advantage of unspoiled countryside and friendly down-to-earth
        villagers still imbued with something of a frontier spirit. Their
        folkcrafts are authentic and much less commercialized than in most
        other parts of Japan. And their festivals, in an area without the usual
        sorts of urban entertainment, are frequent, colorful, and more
        spontaneous than in the more densely populated regions of the country.
        No overall picture of Japanese life can be complete without a short
        visit to these northern territories.
        Tohoku
        Until the Tokugawa shoguns completed their conquest of all
        Japan from the 17th century on, the towns of Tohoku constituted the
        northern boundaries of the Japanese empire. Beyond them were the tribes
        of the native Ainu, at that time not considered Japanese.  It was
        only when the Ainu were progressively driven north up into Hokkaido
        that Tohoku was opened up to broader settlement.
        Its massive rice yield (as much as 20 percent of the
        national rice crop) has made Tohoku the chief supplier of the countrys
        needs. Thus, the general trend for more and more peasants to drift away
        from the land to the cities has been noticeably less marked here. The
        very remoteness of Tohoku was appealing to such religious groups as the
        Zen Buddhists, who espouse an ascetic, unworldly life and constructed
        some of the countrys finest Buddhist temples in this northern part of
        Honshu.
        Matsushima is considered one of the countrys three Great
        Scenic Beauties (part of the Japanese passion for cataloging things in
        three of this or eight of that. ) Although you can reach Matsushima in
        40 minutes by train from Sendai, the best way is to stop off at
        Shiogama and take the one-hour boat cruise across Matsushima Bay.
        Scores of tiny islands dot the bay, their white sandstone shaped by the
        elements into arches, caves, and pyramids and covered with lovely,
        wispy sea pines. The changing perspective as you cruise slowly past is
        extraordinary.
        In the town of Matsushima, visit the pretty Kanrantei
        Pavilion for one of the best views of the bay from a rocky cliff beside
        the landing stage for the cruise ships. But practically any point on
        the hills rising behind the town will offer you a spectacular view.
        Zuiganji temple is the center of an old Zen Buddhist
        seminary. The buildings were constructed in 1609 by the lord of Tohoku,
        Masamune Date. In the temples treasure house you can see a statue of
        the crusty old warlord in all his armor. He lost his right eye — from
        smallpox, not in battle — and was nicknamed Dokugan-ryu (One-Eyed
        Dragon). As you walk up the long cedar-shaded avenue to the temple,
        notice the two-story caves hewn from the rock that serve as
        accommodation for itinerant monks.
        In the town of Hiraizumi — just a 20-minutes bus ride from
        Ichino-seki Station — youll find a temple dating from the late Heian
        period (early 12th century). Chusonji was erected by the Fujiwara
        family when their power behind the imperial throne in Kyoto was waning.
        Two of the temples structures have survived the countless wars of the
        Fujiwara. The Konjikido (Golden Hall) is a fabulously opulent mausoleum
        that Kiyohira Fujiwara built for himself in 1124. Everything except the
        uppermost roof covering is coated in pure gold. This priceless
        treasure, now protected by glass inside a fireproof concrete
        Kamakura-style hall, is believed to be what Columbus was after in his
        search for the country he called Chipangu. The Kyozo is even older
        (1108) and used to house the temples Buddhist scriptures (sutras ),
        which are now kept in the modern treasure house.
        Hokkaido
        Not opened up to full-scale settlement until after the
        Meiji Restoration of 1868, the island of Hokkaido is Japans Far
        North.  Here are some of the few Japanese who enjoy uncrowded cities,
        unspoiled wilderness, and a simpler existence in a climate and
        landscape comparable to Scandinavia: snowcapped mountains and pine
        forest, with a subarctic climate in the northernmost area. The islands
        capital, Sapporo, was a natural choice for Japans first Winter Olympic
        Games in 1972. Yet in the summer months Hokkaidos mountains and lake
        country are mild enough for good camping and hiking.
        At the end of the 19th century unemployed
        samurai— adventurous but still attached to the old traditions — took
        their families to Hokkaido to carve out a new life for themselves.
        American advisers helped to develop Hokkaidos agriculture and coal
        mining industries and to lay out an urban grid system for Sapporo.
        After years of neglect and discrimination, the cultural
        significance of the tiny though historically significant Ainu community
        is finally being recognized. Hokkaido now has some fascinating museums
        devoted to Ainu life, and the village of Shiraoi preserves the
        artifacts and folkcrafts of their culture.
        Sapporo
        One of the most attractive postwar urban innovations in
        Japan is Sapporos Odori Promenade, a broad green boulevard lined with
        flower beds, lilacs, and maples — and with fountains down the middle,
        running east to west for a straight mile. Its a great place to start
        your visit.
        Sapporo has a nationwide reputation for its beer,
        introduced in the 1870s by a German brewer who recognized the
        surrounding countrys hop-growing potential. The beer garden, to the
        northeast of the downtown area, is a lusty place to sample the towns
        frontier spirit.
        Around the Island
        Lake Shikotsu, a volcanic crater lake situated 26 km (16
        miles) west of Chitose airport, provides one of southern Hokkaidos
        most picturesque camping and hiking areas. Theres great salmon fishing
        here each year starting in May.
        Not far from the spa town of Noboribetsu is Shiraoi, a
        well-reconstructed Ainu village complete with artisans demonstrating
        traditional arts and crafts. The superb Ainu Museum, established with
        the help of European and American anthropologists, features a vivid
        exhibition of Ainu history.
      
    
  
