
   
   
      
         
            Headline
            

            You raise an interesting point. If we consider the right-wing politicians
and media people on your list as actually believing their professed ideology,
which I'm not sure they all do, I think yes, orthodoxers of one sort or another
are often fighting the return of the repressed: a
stop-me-before-I-divorce-again kind of a thing. They're like gaybashers who are
in flight from their own homosexual impulses. Except, in the case of the people
you mention, they do get divorced all they want to. That's what gets
me--they permit themselves a freedom they seek to deny to others. Instead of
being made more understanding by their own frailties and failures, they just
forgive themselves and condemn others.

            In any case, I don't think marriage works as a preserver of relationships.
At least not for long--just a few weeks, in the case of John Podhoretz. (What
was the story there, I wonder.) Having children often does make people try hard
to make their relationships work, but I don't think marriage, in and of itself,
does that, although I know that is an argument often advanced in its favor.
People just get mean and depressed, and drag about sullenly hoping their spouse
will be swept away by El Nino. Or become obsessed with work. Or have
whipped-cream nights out when the cat's away. Or all of the above!

            About NOW--Yes, I have disagreed with their policies publicly on many
occasions. Not just about Paula Jones (where I don't think their actual
position is as bad as it's been made to look in the media), but also their
enthusiasm for electoral politics, the Democratic Party, and Clinton.

            I have to say, though, that I don't blame them for not signing on to Paula
Jones' appeal. The whole thing has become such a circus--and Jones and her
people are no friends of women, either. Look what they've done to Monica
Lewinsky. The real victim in all this, if you ask me!

            Cheers,
Katha

         
      
   
