
   
   
      
         
            Idiot Box: Be Afraid. Or Change the Channel.

            Week Two of sweeps features not only a Stephen King mini-series but also a
spate of serial killers, assassins, aliens, and even a baby-snatching social
worker. If that's not scary enough, be warned: The eerily cheerful Tara
Lipinksi appears on CBS twice , including her own TV special
( Wednesday , 8 p.m.).

            Take shelter from the storm with Jimi Hendrix (if you can forgive the mixed
musical allusion) in a new Bravo documentary, Searching for Jimi Hendrix
( Friday , Feb. 12., 8:00 p.m.). Co-directed by D.A. Pennebaker, who also
made Monterey Pop, the film looks at people such as Cassandra Wilson and
Laurie Anderson as they record the master's music. "It's taking us hours to do
what he did in six minutes," complains singer Taylor Dayne--another reminder of
just how innovative Hendrix really was. To learn more about the guitar legend,
start with this bio page, Celebsite: Jimi Hendrix.

            February is also Black History Month, with more shows on black artists and
themes. On Saturday (8 p.m.), HBO airs Steven Spielberg's uneven
slave-revolt drama, Amistad , with strong performances by Anthony
Hopkins, Morgan Freeman, and newcomer Djimon Hounsou as the noble Cinque, who
recently guest-starred on ER as a noble Nigerian torture victim who
becomes . . . a janitor. Black History Month or not, stereotyping still
lives.

            This weekend, you can relive the hunt for two '70s monsters: a killer shark
( Jaws , TNT, Saturday , midnight) and Richard Nixon ( All the
President's Men , The History Channel, Friday , 9 p.m.). Here's a
chance to remember what real high crimes and misdemeanors are all
about.

            There are plenty of pleasingly creepy moments in ABC's $35 million
blockbuster , The Storm of The Century , the first Stephen King horror
movie written directly for TV ( Sunday , Monday, Thursday, 9 p.m.) The
small, isolated town of Little Tall Island finds itself under siege from both a
brutal winter storm and a sinister visitor, a placid-faced killer with
supernatural powers, Andre Linoge. With six hours of screen time to fill, the
townsfolk take quite a long time to realize that Linoge is the force behind a
series of mysterious killings and suicides. (Don't they read Stephen King
novels up there?) All the while, the demonic Linoge character, ably played by
Colm Feore, keeps insisting: "If you give me what I want, I'll go away." While
we wait and wait for him to tell us what he wants, the movie employs stalling
devices such as the search in a darkened house for the elusive bogeyman. "Hell
is repetition," Linoge tells people at various points. Well, yes.

            CBS is counter-programming by offering refuge for women: two heart-tugging
TV films in which mother have to give their children away. Good acting by Ann
Bancroft in Deep in My Heart ( Sunday , 9 p.m.), which traces the
odyssey of the mulatto daughter of a white rape victim, but who cares?

            With the hackneyed police mini-series, To Serve and Protect
( Sunday and Monday , 9 p.m.), NBC is apparently seeking to bridge
this gender gap in programming. The film mixes father-daughter strife
and cop romance and the search for a serial killer. Craig T.
Nelson ( Coach ) gives a confident performance, but it doesn't help this
hodgepodge.

            If you want to solve mysteries, turn instead to the conclusion of the
X-Files two-part conspiracy series (Fox, Sunday , 9 p.m.) when the
Cigarette Smoking Man finally explains (almost) all.

            The week's most interesting programs may be documentaries. (Exceptions to
this rule: an FX network marathon of 
                  NYPD
                
               Blue episodes,
Monday , 4 p.m to 1:30 a.m., and George Clooney's last ER on NBC,
Thursday at 10 p.m.) Monday is President's Day, and the History
Channel takes a look at the formative traumas in Abe Lincoln's life (8 p.m.),
followed by Chris Matthews' documentary on the rivalry between Kennedy and
Nixon (10 p.m.).

            PBS's Nova is offering lots of bang-'em-up footage in its two-part
series , ESCAPE! Because Accidents Happen , on Tuesday and
Wednesday (8-10 p.m.) Using the fig leaf of studying "survival
engineering" and safety pointers, PBS gives us fires, crashes, and sinking
ships.

            PBS returns to form with a strong Great Performances program on the
late Alvin Ailey, who brought black soul to modern dance ( Wednesday , 10
p.m.). The show is a weave of archival footage, interviews, and Judith
Jamison's innovative new dance tribute, "Hymn," which includes the great
performance artist Anna Deavere Smith.

            On Wednesday , NBC sinks to new lows with Confirmation: The Hard
Evidence of Aliens Among Us? (8 p.m. to 10 p.m.) The show exploits the
spurious device of "open-minded" questions about the Roswell UFO incident,
alien abductions, and grainy UFO footage. Result: too much credence given to
incidents exposed elsewhere as hoaxes and illusions. For a more skeptical view
of these issues, check out these sensible articles:  What Really
Happened at Roswell and Abduction by
Aliens or Sleep Paralysis .

            On Thursday , Fox offers The World's Most Shocking Medical
Videos (9 p.m.) and The Learning Channel profiles the sickos who kill
leaders in Shadow of the Assassin -- complete with fast-paced footage of
famous assassinations, President Clinton's head, and repeated gun-shot sound
effects. All this sure to inspire someone--probably the next Sirhan Sirhan.

            -- Art Levine 
            

         
      
   
