
   
   
      
         
            The End of Analysis

            It's a good thing Frederick Crews didn't wander into the New York
Psychoanalytic Institute on Manhattan's Upper East Side Tuesday night. The
aging analysts packed into the auditorium, sweating through their dark clothes
in the September heat wave (only a small desk fan recycled the stale air),
would have confirmed the Berkeley English professor and professional
Freud-basher's darkest suspicions about psychoanalysis as a cult of
personality. For what were Freud's followers, in the sanctum sanctorum of
sternly silent analysts who conduct long-term analyses with patients lying on
couches, in this impossible time for the famously impossible profession, up to?
Composing thoughtful rebuttals to their scientistic critics? Ignoring the
outside world to present the latest advance in countertransference theory? No.
They were watching home movies of Freud.

            Overhearing the audience's indulgent titters, Crews would have found it
pathetic, but Crews would have been wrong. The movies were taken in 1928 by a
patient and student of Freud's named Philip Lehrman, an American who had to
battle Freud's Old-World dislike of gizmos to gain permission to shoot the
footage. In a typical Freudian move, the doctor insisted on analyzing his
patient's obsession with filming him before letting him do it. ("Was it
historical or hysterical?") Notwithstanding everyone's reluctance, Lehrman got
several minutes of film that brought dozens of bit players and their world to
life--the seductive Sandor Ferenczi at a caf, (he once conducted affairs with a
patient and her mother at the same time), the warm and animated Princess Marie
Bonaparte graciously introducing everybody to everybody else at tea parties
(she later rescued Freud from the Nazis), a dashing and alarmingly radiant
Wilhelm Reich (he lated invented orgone therapy). Freud himself proved a
shockingly commanding presence, a man of barely checked intensity lurking in
the shadows (he refused Lehrman's requests to come out into the sunlight) who
only unstiffened in the presence of his dogs.

            The emotional coloring of the evening, though, came from the soundtrack, a
tape of Lehrman explaining his footage 22 years later to a 1950 meeting of the
American Psychoanalytic Association. Over nearly every new person's image came
Lehrman's voice, giving that person's name, his psychoanalytic credential, and
then where he ended up: Israel, America, or--the camps. It was, one realized, a
scene of gravity, even of mourning: Here were today's analysts, at a time when
psychoanalysis seems to be sputtering to an undignified end, done in by managed
health care, psychopharmacology, and the intellectual vindication of behavioral
psychologists by modern trends in genetics. There were yesterday's analysts, at
the field's most hopeful, eager beginning, when it seemed the most brilliant
secular flowering of European-Jewish life. In between them lay a physical war
that wiped out a world and an intellectual war that discredited a past. When
the movie came to an end, there seemed nothing left to say.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
