
   
   
      
         
            Hey, Teacher, Leave Those Kids Alone!

            
               The Chronicle of Higher Education reports that linguists have
invented a computer program that understands student writing. That would be a
welcome advance in civilization, had it not also opened a window on the corrupt
bargain between students and professors when it comes to teaching basic
literary skills in the first place.

            The Intelligent Essay Assessor (an Orwellian misnomer, of course) is based
on a form of artificial intelligence called LSA--latent semantic analysis,
explained in detail on this website. In brief--bear with me here--the program first compares
reference materials to sample essays which have been graded by a professor,
then compares the sample essays to student essays. The students don't have to
use particular keywords for the program to figure out what they're talking
about; it has a wide vocabulary. As for grading, "[I]f an essay appears to
convey the same knowledge as verifiably good essays, the computer gives it a
good score. If a student's work looks similar to a poor essay, it gets a low
score."

            Here's what the IEA catches: Students who never read the assignment in the
first place; plagiarists; people who try to beat the program by packing the
essay with relevant keywords but not stringing them together in any meaningful
way. Here's what it doesn't catch: "clever turns of phrase or creative
approaches to an assignment." But isn't that the essence of higher education?
Wrong! This month's issue of American Demographics reports that more
students than ever don't give a fig about clever turns of phrase or creative
approaches to assignments. They want big financial aid packages and the
assurance of a good job after graduation. Once they get into the school of
their choice, they study less than they ever have. "College students want to
reap what they consider to be the maximum benefits -- money and social status
-- for the minimum amount of work," says the study's author.

            This suits professors just fine. They've told the Chronicle that
they're grateful to have their workload lightened by a computer. And why
shouldn't they be? They're not graded on how well they teach; they're graded by
the number of articles they publish in research journals. Deepening the
intellectual understanding of the next generation, or just teaching it to
compose a decent sentence, seems to be the last thing on anyone's mind. The
University of Colorado and New Mexico State University, quick to grasp that
their role is to funnel students into professional schools and high-income
jobs, not to burden them with fine points of style, have already adopted the
Intelligent Essay Assessor; so has the Graduate Management Admission Test. It
won't be long before the rest of the country does too. So, kids, it's a deal:
We won't teach you how to write, and you won't object that you can't.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
