
   
   
      
         
            re: We Are All on Good Morning America
            

            Katha,
Sorry to hear about the email. Delete! Delete!

            Yes, we're all on Good Morning America , these days, except me. I've
never been on it, and never seen it (way too early). Warhol was absolutely
prescient about that, although surely the 15 minutes ideal will pale in
significance as it becomes truer and truer. I had my epiphany when I was asked
a couple years back to be an MSNBC whateveritis. Stuck on a set in New Jersey,
blathering soundbites about things I know nothing about, watched by a couple of
thousand people, morphing into all those GenX punditclones, who have
subsequently, mercifully, disappeared into the ether. Hell on earth. It's also
a common observation now, first voiced, I think, by our saintly editor Michael
Kinsley, that it only takes about fifteen minutes for those of us in the DC
media-warp, to channel surf before we stumble across someone we know. So much
for the prestige of the box.

            Nevertheless, it still amazes me how powerful TV still is. The response I've
gotten from TV vastly dwarves any feedback I've received from my writing. At
the White House Correspondents' Dinner last Saturday (sorry I missed you) I
found myself at one point walking absent-mindedly behind Dick Cavett. The
tourists who lined the walls literally screamed and clapped and cheered as he
walked by them. One lady grabbed him ecstatically and handed her friend a
camera. It was truly menacing. And Paula, of course, was made by TV, as Monica
surely will be. The complete fusion of Washington and Hollywood, the
replacement of politics by celebrity, was perfectly exemplified by the evening.
Anyone's power was related almost perfectly to their media exposure. The sole
exception to this, I suppose, is the equally saintly TV-free Maureen Dowd. But
can those of us without her wonderful perch manage to be so pure? I'm not
pretending to be above all this, merely partly horrified at my own
complicity.

            Can you grant absolution?

            best
Andrew

         
      
   
