
   
   
      
         
            Idiot Box: Circus Mentality

            
               Please note: All times given are Eastern, but check your local listings
just in case.
            

            Step right up, ladies and gents: The Sweeps have come to town. Everyone's
pandering, but the Fox network is the most blatant with its sleazy
shockumentary When Good Times Go Bad 2 (Thursday, Feb. 11, 9 p.m.). The
network is trying to reach a prized demographic: beer-swigging morons 18-49.
Expect a ratings blockbuster.

            The spirit of Fox seems to have influenced the arty networks, too. The
latest installment of A&E's true-life series, L.A. Detectives (9
p.m. Friday, Feb. 5) is a slightly tonier version of Cops -- sans
the screaming drunks--in which detectives use dogged legwork to find the killer
in a drive-by homicide, and then some more detectives go undercover to entrap
male prostitutes. It's not quite as seamy over at Frontline , which spent
three years researching the life, crimes, and recent execution of the talkative
Clifford Boggess (PBS, Tuesday, 9 p.m.). In this absorbing real-life Dead
Man Walking , you don't get to see the actual lethal injection, but creepy
camerawork helps recreate his murders of two old men and the impact on the
victims' families.

            Take a respite from February's portentous programs with the irreverent humor
of George Carlin's latest HBO live concert, You Are All Diseased
(Saturday, 9:30 P.M).

            On Sunday, heartwarming but predictable made-for-TV movies duel with the
much-hyped X-Files that "exposes" the convoluted alien conspiracy. For
six years, Scully and Mulder have been working to unravel the arcane plot while
even obsessive fans have been struggling just to follow it. The story so far: A
mysterious Syndicate of rich white evildoers has been in apparent cahoots with
aliens seeking to colonize the earth. One of their weapons: infecting humans
with an oily virus that incubates aliens. Or something like that.

            Want to get up to speed? Read this handy crib sheet by an X-Files
expert at the Gist-TV site, GIST TV Sci-Fi: Feature Presentation, or tape the final four
episodes of the FX network's conspiracy repeats on Friday (February 5, 8 p.m.
to midnight). This Sunday's episode on Fox (9 p.m.) brings back repeat abductee
Cassandra Spender, who will supposedly help unlock the mystery of what
really happened to Mulder's abducted sister, Samantha, and other
secrets. Don't hold your breath waiting for final answers.

            The roots of today's conspiracy thinking go back to the assassination of
JFK, which kicks off NBC's ambitious two- dimensional family drama, The
60's (Sun. and Mon., 9 p.m.). It follows two families, black and white, who
turn out to be the Zeligs of the 60's: Their rebellious offspring turn up at
every key event from the Freedom Rides to Woodstock. It works as soundtrack
nostalgia and history lesson but flounders as drama. The acting is competent,
sometimes even affecting, particularly 17-year-old Julia Stiles as an aimless,
pregnant hippie. But this Classics Comics-style tour of the decade has neither
gripping narrative nor compelling characters. And the actors, such as Charles
Dutton as an idealistic black minister, aren't helped by the dialogue: "The
world is changing for the better, son. We got a long way to go but look where
we are now!" On the plus side: This show will infuriate neo-cons. David
Horowitz, eat your heart out.

            Middle-American women who don't like 60's rebels or aliens are the
apparent target of the new Hallmark Hall of Fame weepie, Night Ride

               Home (Sunday, CBS, 9 p.m.). Don't go there with them: It's a tedious
look at a troubled husband and wife (played by ex-sexpot Rebecca De Mornay) and
their response to the tragic death of their son in a horse- riding accident.
Family healing, blah blah. Only the threat of, say, an alien abduction could
make a man watch all the way through this domestic bathos.

            A better bet on Sunday is the delightful The Sopranos (HBO, 9 p.m.),
the dramedy that keeps getting richer with each episode. James Gandolfini's
portrayal of the depressed mob boss on Prozac has become one of the most
complex and enjoyable characters on TV. This week, Tony Soprano takes his
daughter to scout a college campus, only to spot a mob snitch he may have to
whack. Complications ensue.

            The folks at HBO can make another claim to quality programming: their film
of the hip-hop, black-owned Universoul Circus (Monday, 8 p.m.). Part
uplift for black kids, part thrilling feats of circus daring, it's family
programming that can appeal to adults of all races.

            The broadcast networks are keeping up with potentially strong episodes of
their flagship series. On Tuesday's NYPD Blue (ABC, 10 p.m.), Rick
Schroder's tight-lipped character, Danny Sorenson, opens up to Sipowicz while
seeking help for an alcoholic friend. It's about time. They won't be killing
off George Clooney's character at ER like they did to Jimmy Smits at
NYPD . Instead, Dr. Doug Ross is being forced out over the next two
episodes because the maverick heartthrob gives an unauthorized painkiller to a
terminally ill boy (Thursday, 10 p.m.). The other NBC ratings champ,
Frasier , has Kelsey Grammer directing a three-vignette episode geared to
Valentine's Day (Thursday, 9 p.m.).

            For bitchy wit at its best, set your VCRs to catch Bette Davis in the
incomparable All About Eve (Monday, Cinemax 2, 4 p.m.). To track all of
this month's four-star movies, check out the TV-Now website Four Star Movies
February TV Schedule.

            -- Art Levine
            

         
      
   
