
   
   
      
         
            Great Moments in Flytrap Lit

            First and foremost, of course, my colleague David
Plotz's review of three quickie Flytrap books. But after that, New York
Times editorial writer Anthony Lewis's column
praising philosopher Thomas Nagel's essay in the August 14 issue of the
Times Literary Supplement , and the essay itself. In it, Nagel makes two
obvious but overlooked points: 1. Civilization is impossible without
distinctions drawn between private and public life, and between the inner and
the outer self; and 2. A society governed by politicians without private lives
or inner selves is a society governed by madmen or cretins.

            Two caveats. In his column, Lewis uses the philosopher's more finely-tuned
prose as an occasion to bash everyone who, in Lewis's words, "let[s] it all
hang out." By the time Lewis is through attacking everyone who exemplies this
Sixties-ish phrase (Joyce Maynard, Paul Theroux, anyone who might have
criticized JFK's sexual escapades during his administration), you wonder
whether any speech about the sexual behavior of public figures is worth
protecting. Aren't there some occasions (date rape, say, or wife-beating) where
we'd want to niggle or quibble? The virtue of Nagel's essay is precisely that
he doesn't go overboard the way Lewis does. He defends privacy without
disparaging the gains of the past 30 years. He is for the sexual
revolution--and who wants to go back to the days when the mention of private
acts was so taboo we had no way to talk about domestic violence or flagrant
abuses of power? Nagel's more subtle complaint is that an increase in sexual
tolerance has been transmogrified into an increase in sexual shaming: "What
looked initially like a growth of freedom has culminated in the reinstitution
of the public pillory."

            Second caveat, this time with Nagel. As often happens when intellectuals
discuss Flytrap, Nagel lapses into a tone of world-weary, almost European
snobbishness, declaring that America's inability to respect the rules of
civility reveals its immaturity as a society. But the immaturity of American
papers is nothing next to the immaturity of the British tabloids, and not even
our worst moments of national hysteria (this is definitely one of them) can be
compared to the worst moments of European hysteria.

            
               Speaking of the National Gossip State ... Here are Culturebox's
contributions, stolen mostly from Variety : A new book is about to come
out that seems likely to amount to a city-wide coming out: Open Secret: Gay
Hollywood 1928-1998 . Tom Cruise has already threatened to sue, even though
the author, David Ehrenstein, says the book only raises rumors of Cruise's
homosexuality in order to put them to rest. ... The very latest in product
placement: potentially, you. MGM will auction off a role in its remake of the
1968 Thomas Crown Affair to the highest bidder (the opening price is
$10,000). The auction is advertised in MGM's retail catalogue, but, the
catalogue copy states, there is "no guarantee that [the role] will be included
in the film's final edited version." ... Now that Leonardo Di Caprio has
spurned Lions Gate Films and American Psycho , the production company is
trying to lure back the director it had rudely kicked off the project, Mary
Harron ( I Shot Andy Warhol ). Though the whole thing was her idea in the
first place, she was dropped the minute Di Caprio expressed interest and turned
an arty $10-million feature into a $40-million vehicle for himself. Sic transit
gloria Hollywood.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
