
   
   
      
         
            Re: If not discrimination, what?
            

            Katha,

            Honestly, I don't think that lower test-scores among candidates from some
minorities is a consequence of institutional racism at universities. Do you? At
Berkeley? And I don't think that race-blind admissions policies is racism
either. So, frankly, I don't see the alleged problem of racial discrimination
that we need to remedy. The only discrimination I think we need to address is
the recent attempt by many universities to deny many people admission purely
because of their race. Now there's discrimination. But it's directed primarily
against hard-working, newly immigrant Asian-Americans.

            The solution to lower test-scores among blacks and Latinos is better public
high school education, and more engaged and dedicated parenting. Period. Like
you, I would like to see much more money spent on public education, as long as
the teachers' unions don't throw it down the toilet. And I think we should do
all we can not to encourage family breakdown among minorities. But even then, I
doubt whether we would have a perfectly balanced racial mix at our
universities. And frankly, I don't see why we should care. Why should we be
concerned what race someone belongs to at college, as long as there isn't any
systematic system to prefer some races over others, and as long as half-way
decent public high school education is also widely available? This racial
obsession is a legacy of past evils, and decreasingly relevant to the polyglot,
multi-racial century we're about to enter. So I hope Proposition 209 is
repeated across the country. And I hope we make a better effort to educate
black and Latino kids in the cities. And I hope the black family recovers. And
I hope we stop the futile attempt to make amends for past injustice by wreaking
new ones on innocent people.

            As to an all-male priesthood, I do think it's an unconscionable and
irrational form of institutional sexism, and I oppose it on the same grounds
that I oppose reverse discrimination. And if we attempted to remedy it by
instituting an all-female priesthood for the next two millennia, I'd be equally
opposed. Two wrongs don't make a right.

            cheers,
Andrew

         
      
   
