
   
   
      
         
            Idiot Box

            
               (Note from the editor: With today's entry we inaugurate Culturebox's new
television column by Michelle Cottle, which will appear at the end of each week
and cover the coming week in television. We know that when it comes to TV,
everyone's a critic, so we invite you to send your picks, pans, and flames to
culturebox@slate.com . We don't
promise to reply to each and every one of you. Also, all times given are
Eastern Standard. Check local listings for broadcast times in your
hometown.)
            

            With only 14 viewing days left until Christmas, the yuletide spirit is
approaching critical mass on pretty much every channel. And navigating the
rising tide of warm-and-fuzzy holiday programming can be harrowing.

            In the coming week, viewers will be bombarded with holiday episodes of
everything from The X Files to Two Girls, a Guy, and a Pizza .
Among the most promising offerings are Fox's King of the Hill (Tues.,
8 PM), in which Hank and Peggy try to nurse a depressed neighbor through the
suicide season; and NBC's Just Shoot Me  (Tues., 9 PM), a take-off on
How the Grinch Stole Christmas narrated by Frasier star
Kelsey Grammer. On a darker note, viewers in need of a good Christmas cry
should check out ER (NBC, Thurs., 10 PM). The show is emotionally
draining on a regular basis, so this week's attempt by the idealistic Dr.
Carter (Noah Wyle) to perform a holiday miracle on a dying teenager is
guaranteed to have you doubling up on Prozac.

            Monday night, you should probably tune in for Ally

               McBeal 's holiday hijinks. (Fox, 9 PM). The episode itself sounds
iffy--Fish launches a wrongful-termination suit on behalf of a major client
who's been fired for claiming to have seen a unicorn--but there's a kind of
perverse thrill in seeing what abject humiliation will befall the show's
emaciated heroine each week. One
recent episode found Ally wedged into a toilet; in another, she got her fingers
stuck inside a bowling ball. And during last week's holiday rerun, the
micro-skirted minx fell into her Christmas tree and lay entangled in the
branches until her roommate came in and marveled that Ally's sex life had
deteriorated to the point where she was humping the Christmas tree. Who knows,
perhaps this holiday season the beleaguered Ms. McBeal will inadvertently drop
her diaphragm into some Salvation Army Santa's collection basket.

            The coming week also delivers a sleigh-full of holiday movies and specials.
Of course there are the requisite showings of  Miracle on 34th Street
(WB, Fri., 8 PM) and It's a Wonderful Life (NBC, Sat., 8 PM). For
those who like their merriment in one concentrated dose, Fox is rebroadcasting
Greatest
               Christmas Moments of All Time , a compilation of
snippets from holiday cartoons, movies, specials, and commercials through the
years (Thur., 8 PM). And then there's NBC's 17th annual Christmas in
Washington (Fri., 10 PM), complete with a special Christmas message from
President Clinton (Come sit on my lap little girl. ... Ho. Ho. Ho.) and a
guided tour of the White House by none other than this month's Vogue
cover-model, Hillary Rodham Clinton. 

            Some of the more terrifying movies and specials to avoid include the Family
Channel's 1997 classic The Christmas List , featuring Marla Maples
(Sun., 8 PM); USA's Ms. Scrooge (Wed., 9 PM), starring
made-for-TV-schmaltz-goddess Cicely Tyson as a bah-humbugging Ebenita (I did
not make that name up); and PBS's Saturday night concert (9 PM), Perry
Como's Irish Christmas --'nuff said.

            By far, your best bet this week is a relatively new but oh-so-jolly holiday
tradition: 15 Days of  007 on TBS (Dec. 5-19). Connery, Moore, Dalton,
even that George Lazenby fellow--they're all there. (Pierce Brosnan has yet to
make it into the line-up, but he's also yet to make a decent Bond flick.)
Seriously, what could be more festive than voodoo priests, poppy fields,
space-based laser weapons, germ warfare, car chases, boat chases, ski
chases,
and a half-naked Ursula Andress? This week's highlights include Diamonds
are
               Forever (Mon., 8:05 PM), From Russia With Love
(Tues., 11:05 PM), On Her Majesty's Secret Service (Wed., 11:05
PM)--yes, Lazenby stinks, but the movie itself is one of the best, and it's the
only one in which James gets hitched-- Live and Let Die (Thurs., 10:05
PM), and Dr . No (Fri., 11:10 PM).

            A word of warning to those desperately seeking non-holiday fare: Although
there's not an Xmas tree or menorah in sight, steer clear of NBC's retelling of
Shakespeare's The Tempest (Sun., 9 PM). Set in the Civil War South,
Peter Fonda is the benevolent plantation owner Gideon Prosper, whose evil
brother (John Glover) plots to have him killed in order to take over the
plantation. Fonda escapes with the help of a slave, who also happens to be a
voodoo priestess, and runs off with his daughter Miranda (Katherine Hegl) to
live in the swamps. The movie has some smashing special effects a la NBC's
Merlin , but it also has its share of bad acting and heavy-handed
dialogue. (We won't even go into Fonda's half-baked Dixie accent.) All told,
you're better off with Bond.

            
               Disclaimer : Bear in mind that I've not had the opportunity to
actually preview many of the aforementioned shows and in many cases am relying
on press releases, written synopses, and assurances from network flacks that a
particular episode doesn't suck. My recommendations, however, are made in good
faith and based on the most up-to-date research methods

                  Slate
                can afford. Nonetheless, I will gladly and
profusely apologize for any and all bad calls.

            -- Michelle Cottle
            

         
      
   
