
   
   
      
         
            Is Furby a Must-Buy?

            Here's a brief sordid history of toys-of-the-year: Fisticuffs have erupted
over Cabbage Patch Kids; Tickle-Me-Elmos have been stockpiled and scalped for
bank-breaking prices; Beanie Baby counterfeiters have taken rubes to the
cleaners; and this year's toy-of-the-year--Furby--is already sold out of
several chains and is being auctioned off on eBay for up to $200 apiece

            I first got suspicious about Furbys when I read their online instructions,
which sounded like an excerpt from a pornographic version of G.B. Shaw's
Pygmalion :

            "Before you play with me, please follow these simple steps:

            

               Turn me upside down and open my battery door.

               Insert four (4) AA batteries into my battery compartment. PLEASE DO NOT
CLOSE THE BATTERY COMPARTMENT YET.

               While holding me upside down, put your finger in my mouth and hold down my
tongue switch, then hit Reset button

               While holding my tongue switch, please close my battery door and secure the
screw.

               I will now wake up and tell you my name. I am now ready to play!"

            

            The doll looks more like a Gremlin than a Galatea--furry, big ears, big
eyes, no neck. The source of its appeal, however, is Galatea-like: You teach,
it learns. It has a motor, internal speakers, a computer chip, a light sensor,
a sound sensor, and touch sensors, so in addition to old-hat tricks like
blinking and "dancing," Furby knows whether you're in the room and will talk,
sing, and generally act cute. But most importantly, Furby responds to Pavlovian
conditioning.

            When you first get the Furby, for instance, you can tickle its stomach and
it may or may not give you a kiss. If it kisses you and you immediately pat it
on the back, you increase the likelihood of it kissing you next time you tickle
its tummy. Furbys also have their own language, Furbish, "which is heavily
influenced by the languages of Thai, Chinese, Mandarin, and Hebrew." Over time,
your Furby will abandon Furbish and begin to "learn" English (actually, it
doesn't really learn--it's just programmed to begin speaking more English words
after a while). The Furby can even communicate with and "teach" other Furbys
tricks and songs by means of infrared signals similar to the ones in a TV
remote control device. If one Furby sings a lullaby, the other will fall asleep
and snore. If you play music, the Furbys will dance together.

            This is all very cool from an adult's perspective. From the child's
perspective, though, the Furby has drawbacks, such as:

            

               The Carapace Issue. In order to protect the various motors, there has to be
a rigid plastic shell under the fur, which makes the thing hard to hug.
Although press materials call it a "cuddly standalone animatronic pet," in my
book, "animatronic" cancels out "cuddly."

            

            

               The Work Issue. Who wants to train a toy to kiss you, when every kid knows
that a regular stuffed animal kisses you every time you touch its plastic nose
to your cheek?

            

            

               The Breakability Issue. The delicate plastic ear bones are just begging to
be snapped, and the toy's many cool functions spark curiosity about how it all
works. In order to satisfy that curiosity, you have to skin Furby and crack
open the internal plastic shell. Another way to see Furby's innards is to check
out the exquisite Furby
Autopsy Home Page .

            

            

               The Grown-Up vs. Kids Issue. As soon as you read that Furby's unique
language is "heavily influenced by the languages of Thai, Chinese, Mandarin,
and Hebrew," you know that this is a toy that parents will like more than kids.
Same goes for all the tricks Furby learns that are cool in concept--but boring
after about a week.

            

            Is your child too young for a Furby? Will it create more frustration and
heartbreak than happiness? Is $30 retail (or up to $200 online) too much for
what you get? Do you want a furry animatronic pet that burps (and worse) after
you "feed" it by pushing down on its tongue? These questions are all worth
considering before you join in on a Furby auction, break into a cold sweat over
the grim warning on Furby fan pages: "WAL-MART NOW OUT OF FURBYS!!!!!," or
smuggle a stun-gun into Toys-R-Us to disable the competition.

            -- Eliza Truitt
            

             

         
      
   
