
   
   
      
         
            Is America Too Democratic . . .

            Europeans love to condescend to Americans, but not until historian C. Vann
Woodward put all the ways they do so into a book-- The Old World's New
World , which came out in 1991--was it possible to see how inventive they've
been about it over the past four centuries. First they worried about our
environment--our animals were dwarfish and our plants lacked nutrients. Then
they fretted about our intellectual life: Would we ever produce great poets?
Then they waxed romantic about our charming freedom from social hierarchy. Then
they turned against it, since the French Revolution had proved that social
equality could never work. And on it goes, a list of nose-wrinkling quibbles
you can still hear today: We're mercenary, self-centered, impolite, and worst
of all, too bourgeois to understand the geniuses of our age, such as Jerry
Lewis and Mickey Rourke.

            The latest outburst of Continental condescension comes, sad to say, from an
American, albeit one who spends a great deal of time in Paris. Writing last
Sunday in the New York Times Magazine , New York University politics
professor Mark Lilla claims to have discovered why the Sixties still incite
debate in America (under the guise of the culture wars) whereas such matters
have long since been resolved in Europe: Americans naively make a religion out
of democracy. They just don't understand that politics is politics and culture
culture, and so when they have a political revolution, they're forced to apply
its principles to "every aspect of our lives." Hence feminism, or rather, in
Lilla's kind words, "the joyless militancy of American feminists";
multiculturalism; gay rights; and all the other movements which subject
personal relations to "the exacting scrutiny of pure democratic
principles."

            Undergirding Lilla's hesitations about the spread of democracy into various
corners of life are, of course, two Europeans--the two he credits with first
descrying the worrisome "existential character of the American democratic
faith," the Frenchman Alexis De Toqueville and the Englishwoman Frances
Trollope. But Woodward reveals the latter to have been possibly the biggest
snob ever to chronicle American life. She was revolted by "that coarse
familiarity, untampered by any show of respect, which is assumed by the
grossest and the lowest in their intercourse with the highest and most
refined." And De Tocqueville, who is worth listening to, concluded his
travels in America with an endorsement that dismissed all criticisms made
earlier. To quote Woodward: "Granting that 'the wishes of democracy are
capricious, its instruments rude, its laws imperfect,' granting as well an
appalling list of shortcomings that he abhorred--minds 'so petty, so insipid,
so crowded with paltry interests'--Tocqueville still regarded democracy 'not as
the best, but as the only means of preserving freedom.'"

            
               ...Or Do We Just Hate Intellectuals?
            

            Culturebox's friend Nicholas Lemann writes:

            The first time I saw Saving Private Ryan , it was hard to react in any
way more nuanced than just being nearly flattened by its overwhelming power.
The second time, though, I detected one false, and creepy, note. That is the
demonization of Upham, the translator in Captain John Miller's "stick," in the
final extended battle scene. Over and over, we are reminded of Upham's
cowardice: Upham, in giant trembly sweaty closeup, cringes in fear. Upham fails
to come to the aid of his buddies. Upham has a series of clear shots at German
soldiers who don't see him, and can't bring himself to pull the trigger. When
Upham finally does kill, it's too late to do any good, and in clear violation
of the Geneva Conventions. (I saw the movie at a multiplex in the Bronx, and my
appreciation of this point was sharpened by the audience's yelling "faggot!"
every time Upham's face filled the screen.) You're clearly meant to hold Upham
personally responsible for the death of three of his comrades at arms,
including, as I read the narrative logic, Captain Miller, the hero.

            The creepy part is, Upham is a sensitive, artistic type who announces early
in the movie that he wants to depict the bonds that form among soldiers in
combat--all of which also applies to the auteur of Saving Private Ryan ,
Steven Spielberg. Spielberg isn't the first fictionalizer of war to establish
his macho bona fides by humiliating a spun-off, pusillanimous version of
himself. Remember Keefer, the writer-character in The Caine Mutiny , who
spends most of his time proclaiming the superiority of moral principle to
personal loyalty (just like Upham) and then gets humiliatingly told off in the
end? The move here is to react to the automatic suspicion of anyone artsy in a
military setting by signing on to it, rather than challenging it. See, I agree
with you! They are all pansies! I'm a regular guy too! The Upham
character is a particularly lurid example--his body type (skinny) and his
movements (mincing) are completely different from those of the other soldiers,
and seem somehow to be linked to his being more educated. Could his
cartoonishness be an indication of how defensive Spielberg, who like nearly all
upper-middle-class Americans of his generation didn't serve in Vietnam, feels
regarding the military and its virtues?

         
      
   
