
   
   
      
         
            Pompous? Moi?

            Apropos of Neil Strauss's interview with Billy Corgan, the lead singer of
the Smashing
Pumpkins, in Wednesday's New York Times , Culturebox was moved to ask
several real and self-styled rock historians (and who isn't the latter?) the
following question: When did self-important pomposity become an acceptable
cultural style for a pop star?

            The answers:

            

               "I date it to the Vanilla Fudge recording of 'You Keep Me Hanging On.' I
associate this with Quaaludes. Vanilla Fudge made a brilliant discovery. They
covered a Supremes song at half the tempo. My theory is (I have no evidence for
this, of course) that in a drug-addled state, they put the 45 on and switched
it to 33. It turns out that any cheerful pop jingle slowed down and its key
lowered by a fifth sounds important. It's the rhetorical trick of speaking very
slowly when you want to say something important. The wonderful thing about
Quaaludes is they do that for you. I recommend, if anybody still has 45s, that
they go through the entire Supremes catalogue and play them at 33. It sounds
like Vanilla Fudge. It sounds like the Deep Meaning Songbook. You play these
songs at 33, you will believe you have discovered the secret of life. You will
be wrong, of course." -- Randy Cohen
               

               "I associate this with things like having a guru and putting out
three-record sets. The kind of thing that really broke out after Woodstock,
after the break-up of the Beatles. You could say in a way that John Lennon was
a pathbreaker. There was the whole bed-in thing. It had a humorous quotient to
it, there was something disarming about it, but just think of anyone else doing
it and you realize just how fatuous it was. And then all these also-ran groups
started throwing their weight around. Everybody was making some kind of grand
statement. It was the era when the Bee Gees could release a record in a red
velvet jacket. It was called "Odessa," by the way, and it wasn't half
bad."-- Luc Sante
               

               "I would say the Moody Blues and the London Symphony Orchestra. That was
pretty seminal." -- Mickey Kaus
               

               "When Buddy Holly started adding strings."-- Jack Shafer
               

               "I think it was once rock stars starting going to rehab. In rehab you sit
down and think about all the people you've screwed over, you've done horrible
things to so many people, and people have let you because you're a rock star
and you sell records and they want to do anything that will keep you selling
records. You realize you were an asshole, you meet somebody who lives in the
real world, maybe he's your roommate in rehab, and you realize how far away
you've gotten from all that. Then you become a rock star who doesn't live in
the real world who thinks he or she has got a corner on understanding the real
world. That's where the pomposity comes in. Who am I thinking of? Courtney, I
guess."-- Kim France
               

               "The classic thing is, John Lennon made that statement about how we're
bigger than Jesus Christ, and people started burning records in the South. But
there was always something about the Beatles that was self-deprecating and
charming. The question is, when did things really become so completely without
irony? In the late Sixties you get the concept album, which is what the
Smashing Pumpkin's "Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness" [a two-CD set] is.
Other things that come to mind are The Who with their rock operas, Tommy
and Quadrophenia , the way they presented those as overarching allegories
about everything, and Pete Townshend, who always seemed so humorless about it
all. There was this band called Iron Butterfly and this 18-minute song called
"In A Gadda Da Vita" and that just seemed overweening. There was the concert
for Bangladesh. 1972. George Harrison organized it in Madison Square Garden
with Ravi Shankar. George also had a triple-record set called All Things
Must Pass which was pretty pompous. One other thing: The Last Waltz
and The Band. I love The Band deeply but here's this band already in decline
having a farewell concert and they invite everybody--Muddy Waters, Bob Dylan.
They get Martin Scorsese to orchestrate everything, then they interview
themselves at great length not being that interesting."-- Alex Star
               

               "Contrary to conventional wisdom, pretension was introduced into mainstream
pop not by the Beatles but by the Rolling Stones. The Stones made a movie with
Jean-Luc Godard, something you could not imagine even John Lennon doing. The
Beatles produced sophomoric concept albums, like "Magical Mystery Tour," but
they never made anything as fake as "Their Satanic Majesties Request." And I
have always regarded "Anastasia screamed in vain" as the most pretentious line
in rock and roll. Do you think Chuck Berry had even heard of
Anastasia?"-- Louis Menand
               

               "It's a combination of groupies and the rock press both serving to inflate
the egos of these guys. If on the one hand you have somebody telling you you're
a great artist and on the other girls wanting to sleep with you every night,
it's hard to stay humble. Some of the pomposity is insecurity over the
incredible brutality of the recond business and recording careers. You have to
have a sort of bluster. Authors like to complain, of course, but it is so rare
for any recording artist to put out records over more than a three-year period.
They just chew you up and spit you out. All these guys just have to be
worried."-- Nicholas Lemann
               

               "Actually, self-important pomposity is out right now. People want flossier
and poppier rock stars and pop stars. There's something about [Corgan's] whole
grandiosity that is very four years ago. Did you know he is boycotting
Spin because he felt we weren't reverential enough to him? When the
"Reason" album came out he made sure his label pulled his ad from Spin.
It was a full page ad, too. But the high point [of pomposity] might be ELO--the
Electric Light Orchestra. They performed a very vital function for me. I was
able to convince my parents that it was OK to listen to them because it was
sort of classical. This was back when you still had to justify your pop taste
to your parents, before they started lighting up and handing you joints. But
pomposity is a perfectly legitimate cultural style. The audience for music is
very susceptible to pomposity. They haven't developed their sense of self-irony
yet. It's a good mirror to their own puffed-up souls."-- Michael
Hirschorn
               

            

            Readers are of course invited to submit their candidates to the Rock
Pomposity Sweepstakes at culturebox@slate.com. Winners to this and last
Wednesday's Spiterature Contest to be announced next week.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
