
   
   
      
         
            Houellebecq: A Boocq

            Michel Houellebecq is a 40-year-old computer programmer who emerged from a
French mental hospital a decade ago, started publishing poems, and branched
out. His second novel, Les particules elementaires , concerns two
desperately lonely half-brothers. One is a sex maniac, the other a genetic
researcher who seeks through cloning to make sex obsolete. The two have more in
common than it sounds--which is Houellebecq's point, sort of. The book has sold
several hundred thousand copies and launched the first real French literary
spat in years.

            
               Particules has already got two write-ups you might have seen: a
New Yorker piece on the affaire by Adam Gopnik and a driblet in
the TLS . Both seek the source of the book's controversy in its politics.
Houellebecq was kicked out of his Paris literary coterie, Les Perpendiculaires,
on those grounds. But if his politics are right-wing, it's not in the French
anti-dreyfusard-poujadist-lepenist line. No, these are '90s issues. Houellebecq
rails at materialism--both consumerist and sexual. He especially damns the
places where the two overlap, like drugs, abortion, and penile and breast
implants. But the reader soon notices that these diatribes are being delivered
in the course of lengthy gang-bang descriptions--which are lovingly, even
excitedly rendered. A reviewer who, like this one, is shaky on his French
idioms, will learn all sorts of words, like se branler for "whack off,"
partouze for "orgy," and branlette espagnole for . . . Sorry,
that's where I draw the line. But finish this book and you'll have no trouble
reading the menu in any French whorehouse.

            How does Houellebecq reconcile his paeans to random sex with his lament over
the world it leaves in its wake? By viewing both as stages on the way to a
eugenicist paradise. Houellebecq even reads Huxley's Brave New World as
a u- , not dys- , topia. (And defends his point with considerable
documentation and brilliance on pp. 193-201.) Here's a sum-up of Houellebecq's
thinking on the matter:

            (1) without God and/or a belief in progress, life's a torture;

            (2) still, sexual liberation's worth trying as a consolation;

            (3) but it doesn't ultimately satisfy, so forget about it. Let's clone a
new

            race and get the hell out of here.

            The critic Frederic Badre calls Particules "the first 21st-century
novel" and Houellebecq "the first novelist who is not a humanist." One hopes
(and suspects) that Houellebecq is describing not la condition humaine
but la condition francaise .

            (To order Particules , or indeed any French book, go to www.lemonde.fr/livres,
www.fnac.fr, or www.alapage.com.)

            -- Christopher Caldwell
            

         
      
   
