
   
   
      
         
            Headline
            

                   Re women on welfare: I have no problem with the idea of supporting
poor women to take care of their own small children. But if they are to
be made to work, they should be paid decent wages (for example, in New York
City, the wages of the city workers who did those jobs before workfare). They
should have vacations, benefits, proper clothing, recourse for grievances,
bathroom breaks (and bathrooms!), and all the other things that workers get
that workfare workers don't get, or get only sporadically. And their
children--and the children of other working mothers too--should have good child
care. We Americans profess to be so concerned with kids, and education, and
early brain development, and on and on, and even today working moms are subject
to tremendous amounts of disapproval for supposedly compromising their
children's whatever, no matter how terrific their child-care arrangements are,
but now we are taking the most vulnerable kids and saying we don't care what
kind of arrangements you make, just show up for your sub-minimum-wage
street-cleaning job, which will hardly ever lead to a real job, and which you
have to drop out of school to get to. It's very punitive--to women and their
children.
       From USA Today , this stop-the-presses news on
condoms-in-the-schools programs: "Condom Access Shows No Effect on Teen Sex
Rate," which evoked this response from Family Research Council spokeswoman
Gracie Hsu: "You are laying down a standard that says teen-age sexual behavior
is fine so long as you use condoms." Well, no--isn't that like saying that
giving your kids vitamin pills means you don't care if your kids eat nothing
but junk food? Originally sexual conservatives claimed to oppose condoms
because they would provoke more sex. If they have no such effect, why continue
to oppose them?
       What do you make of this from the AIDS perspective? It is as though
Gracie Hsu cares more about keeping condoms away from teens than about keeping
kids away from AIDS. I hate her.
       Talk to you tomorrow,

            Cheers,
Katha

            P.S. I would be for condom access in the schools even if it did mean
more teens would have sex. AIDS, STDs, pregnancy--these are much more serious
problems, it seems to me, than virginity. Better a thousand rubberized
deflorations than a single dead young person or another unhappy young mom
picking up leaves in the park.
       But have you noticed that the big conservative welfare reform fans never
talk about birth control? You'd think they'd love it, but they don't.

         
      
   
