
   
   
      
         
            A Tale of Two Princesses

            The fact that royal biographer Andrew Morton wrote the stories of both the
late Princess Diana and Monica Lewinsky has made the comparison irresistible,
and it turns out to be apt: They were both childish women whose
self-involvement nearly brought down their respective governments. Disregard
the quasi-coincidental similarities--the paparazzi , the eating
disorders, the overprivileged backgrounds, the parents' divorces, the
educational failures (Diana was a finishing-school dropout; Monica made it
through college with difficulty). A deeper affinity seems to have drawn Morton
to them, ghostwriting fees aside: Here were two massively unself-aware
individuals who had maneuvered themselves into positions of national
awkwardness, women who were all but impossible to defend. Morton has met the
challenge with gallant efficiency. From what I've read of his oeuvre
--two books on Diana, this latest one on Monica--he is our poet of female
self-pity, a man for whom no excuse is suspect, no outrage inexplicable, as
long as the explanation is given by a woman who can claim to have been hurt by
a man, and as long as the man is a prince or a president.

            Consider Diana, the baby sitter to the Sloane Ranger crowd who apparently
threw daily temper tantrums from the moment she entered the royal palace, who
developed a pathological jealousy of her husband's ex-girlfriend that may have
driven him back into her arms. Or Monica, the inexperienced flirt who blithely
tried to blackmail the president of the United States, who in fact was
something of a stalker, even if the supposedly hateful Sidney Blumenthal was
the one to call her that. Morton's ambition is to make these women's
monstrousness pale beside that of their torturers. In Diana's case, that's
easy, because her husband happened to be an equally self-involved prince who
clearly married her because he thought she would be a docile breeder.

            Monica's case is more difficult: Whose pathetic victim is she, exactly?
Going into the book, we think she's the president's. After all, that's the
symbolic valence of the scandal: Just as bulimic Diana was a people's princess
driven to vomit up the monarchy, gullible Monica is the citizen seduced and
abandoned by an untrustworthy, poll-driven presidency. She is the sexual
metaphor for all our feelings about political slickness, its uncanny ability to
tell people what they want to hear before leaving them high and dry.

            But Monica won't have any of that, thank you very much, and that is what
makes her book--and she herself--so much more interesting than the New Age
princess and her story, more interesting, in fact, than any version of the
scandal narrative so far. In Morton's hands, Monica's is the same old tale of
female victimization, but--just as she did before the Senate, thereby helping
to forestall impeachment--she manages to shift the blame. It is not the
president who traduced the morals of an immature girl. It is the prurient
prosecutor who imposed his Puritanical moralism on a sexually liberated if
somewhat confused woman--a man who held her against her will, denied her the
right to call her lawyer, harassed her mother and brother, flagrantly violated
her constitutional rights.

            To accept this, of course, you have to accept her version of Bill Clinton as
a helpless, goofy romantic, a emotional isolate tormented by the barrenness of
life in Washington. That is a fantasy that is admittedly hard to take. But when
it comes to Kenneth Starr, at least, poor crazy Monica has finally got it
right.

            
               --Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
