
   
   
      
         
            Ob Jay Dar

            The hour-long Antiques Road Show airs on PBS Monday nights at 8 PM.
It is an inspired solution to the problems that beset publicly funded arts and
humanities in the early 1990s. Back then, public broadcasting and the national
endowments for the Arts and Humanities were (rightly) taken to task as
mechanisms for transferring money from working-class families to a handful of
elite subversives in Boston, New York, and Los Angeles. Two reforms were needed
if these cultural programs were to survive: (1) they had to transfer more
government dough to Podunk; (2) they had to become more prole-friendly.

            
               Road Show , produced for the past three years by WGBH in Boston, kills
these two birds with one marvelous stone. Host Chris Jussel leads a team of
gallery-owners and academic experts to a different antique show in a different
far-flung city each week. These are the only people in dresses and ties you'll
see. All they do is appraise antiques. Down-at-heel locals bring various
heirlooms from their attics and cellars in hopes they'll turn out to be Ob Jay
Dar.

            Monday night last, at Edgecroft Hall in Richmond, Virginia, we started with
a lady who brought a pair of gold bracelets, which turned out to have been
given by an army captain to his wife during the siege of Fort Sumter--$15,000!
Then a jade necklace someone's great aunt had brought back from China--$35,000!
A pear-shaped tea caddy from the eighteenth century--$4,000! There was an
eighteenth-century French sundial ($8,000-12,000), a pocketbook owned by a
friend of George Washington ($4,000-6,000), a ball used in Don Larsen's perfect
game in the 1956 World Series ($18,000). And that's nothing! The all-time
highlight came a year or so ago, when some old lady found out her 25-dollar
card table was actually a Seymour card table. It sold for $490,000 at Sotheby's
months later.

            What's really showcased is the reciprocal exploitation at the heart of the
antiques trade. Urbanites rob the patrimony of these rustics who know
Chippendale only as the name of a strip club; hayseeds bleed city-dwellers over
a piece of furniture they'd otherwise use as firewood. There's a reciprocal
malarkey as well: The experts pretend to know offhand the history of the
object. (Which they've obviously rehearsed, since it includes such arcana as
the provenance of the ochre used in the enamel-painting for Lepine watches in
the 1840s.)

            And the owners pretend to care.

            -- Christopher Caldwell
            

         
      
   
