
   
   
      
         
            Clearing the Table of Yesterday's Crumbs
            

            Andrew,

            You have a sly way of encoding your political slant in statements you then
present as our shared views. Very clever! Thus, just to clear this morning's
table of yesterday's old toast crumbs, I don't share your view of
President Clinton, as you breezily conclude, if by that you mean your view that
the President is close to evil, uniquely immoral and irresponsible, worse than
Reagan or Bush--whose hostility to gays and gelid indifference to AIDS, I note,
don't seem to bother you as much as Clinton's
fine-words-that-butter-no-parsnips. I also protest "reverse racial
discrimination" as a way to characterize affirmative action, which (as I guess
you know) I support. So, really, we don't have the same view of President
Clinton: we both dislike him, but for different reasons.

            I also don't want to leave our May Day thread without challenging your
equation of Communists and Nazis. Yes, in some ways Stalin was as murderous as
Hitler; certainly, to a Spanish anarchist, and many ordinary citizens caught in
their regimes, they were equally bad news. As my ultra-leftist friend Jeff
says, when we speak of fascism, we must not forget to include Red fascism. But
when you wonder why in this country, a demonstration of communists is regarded
more indulgently--or, as I would say, with less alarm--than one of fascists
would be, I think you are forgetting the very different domestic roles of these
two political strains.

            In this country, the legacy of American Communists includes some good
things: opposition to segregation and racism, for example, going way back to
the 30s. The Old Left was very important in the civil-rights movement, which
now even the far right concedes was a Good Thing, but which at the time it
bitterly opposed. The Old Left stood for things that benefited lots of people
and that lots of people who were quite anti-communist also supported--the New
Deal, unions, the safety net, civil liberties, even (just a little) women's
rights. Note: I'm not saying all these things were without their complications
or downsides, or that there wasn't an element of self-interest or calculation
involved (in the CP's advocacy of free speech, for example, which didn't extend
to Trotskyists, whom the CP was glad to see investigated by the govt. in the
late 40s I think it was). I'm just saying that the Old Left was active in a lot
of very mainstream social causes, often on what everyone now agrees was the
right side.

            But I can't think, off hand, of any great contributions to our polity made
by members of the American Nazi party, the German Bund, the Ku Klux Klan or
other fans of Hitler. Can you?

            Cheers,
Katha

            ps. Just got your Vatican post. More soon.

         
      
   
