
   
   
      
         
            Coen Head

            My father-in-law got me Ethan Coen's short-story collection Gates of
Eden for Christmas because I'm so fond of the Coen brothers' movies. (At
least I assume that's why he got it for me--what kind of man, after all, wants
his daughter to marry someone with an appetite for Contemporary Short
Fiction?)

            This is an extraordinary collection. Roughly a third of the stories are
about mobsters, a third about anomic losers, and a third about growing up
Jewish in Minneapolis (which Coen did). Throughout, it's a book so funny you
should not take it out of the house without a change of underpants. The three
best stories:

            (1) "Have You Ever Been to Electric Ladyland," the monologue of a schlock-
rock producer trying to figure out who had a motive to break into his house and
castrate his dog (answer: anyone who's ever had to deal with him for five
minutes);

            (2) "It is an Ancient Mariner," which has the same kind of
self-incriminating narrator as Ring Lardner's "Haircut" --and is a better
story;

            (3) "Gates of Eden," which describes the sexual misadventures of a fascistic
operative on the California Weights and Measures board. "Well, that's the
beauty of the Eastern female," says Joe. "We might tag her submissive or
unliberated or what have you, but to my mind she has a grace and dignity all
her own, bred by centuries of tradition. Her purpose in life, which she will
ever strive to perfect, is the serving of her master, Jap though he may
be."

            Few writers alive have Coen's gift for voice. A lawyer in "Hector Berlioz,
Private Investigator," says, "I knew a Frenchman once. Fellow named Le Clare,
though he spelled it Le Clerk. Died of typhus. I did his estate work. Had to
fill out a bunch of French forms. Pain in the neck, but I guess they know what
they're doing." And a mafioso in "Destiny" says: "These girls, me they would
not fuck."

            Even if Gates of Eden was given to me as a curiosity, I'm ticked off
that the mere handful of critics who've noticed it have reviewed it as a
curiosity. Excepting Christopher Lehmann-Haupt in the New York

               Times , the attitude has been: "How . . . em, sweet that this famous
filmmaker should try to apply his gifts to our genre." Here I'm thinking of
Mark Lindquist in the Times 
               Book Review ("while Ethan Coen [qua
screenwriter] isn't quite as stylish with language as his brother is with a
camera, he does have a distinctive voice and an offbeat worldview") or Renee
Graham in the Boston Globe ("As with his films, his failures are often
almost as interesting as other writers' successes.").

            Which means nothing. Like much deference, it's really a disguised kiss-off.
It's precisely because Coen is a filmmaker that no resident of
Contemporary Short Fictionland will give this book its due. Contemporary Short
Fiction is shriveled up like a protectionist economy. It is an economy in which
everyone is a Buchananite and the policy is one of praise-rationing and
fame-redistribution. Those who labor in the rusting fiction mills of the
Midwest look at Coen as a recent immigrant to the genre who's taking jobs away
from native Contemporary Short Fictionites. Time to open the borders.

            
               --Christopher Caldwell
            

         
      
   
