
   
   
      
         
            Fun for the Whole Family

            The WB network's hit family series 7 th Heaven has been
celebrated for its uncommon pleasantness and normalcy by publications as
disparate as The New Yorker , Spin , and TV Guide . Now, you
can indulge the show in that fashion if you've seen it once or twice, but after
repeated viewing you can't help suspecting that its niceness is the punch line
to a dark joke. The show revolves around the Camden family: a genial Christian
minister, his tightly wound wife, their seven children ( seven
children?), and a big house in a small town in California. The children bring
home the social diseases of the day--sex and drugs, mainly--and the parents
dispel them with the dreamlike reasonableness of a ministerial counseling
session. The 18-year-old son is grounded for coming in late? Just when you
expect him to clutch his head and moan, like James Dean in Rebel Without a
Cause , "You're tearing me apart!," he smiles cheerfully at his punishment
and trots off to his room. A bottle of over-the-counter speed is discovered in
the 16-year-old daughter's bedroom? She didn't know it contained the
dangerous but not yet outlawed substance ephedrine. Once she finds out, father
and daughter join forces in proselytizing against it.

            The dark joke here, of course, is the late '60s and early '70s, and the
social disorder we are alleged to have inherited from that period. Set in the
present, 7 th Heaven is nonetheless a revisionist view of the
past--what that era of cultural upheaval might have looked like if the
Weekly Standard had had its way with it. (It is not a coincidence that
when the show flagged in its second season, the network hired a publicist to
flack it to Christian groups, or that reruns are shown on Pax TV.)  Never has a
show so skillfully exploited contemporary retro-chic to rewrite our visual
image of history. Everything in its universe is '70s revival, from the
sartorial style--tight button-down shirts, clingy pants, long straight hair for
girls, floppy mops for boys--to the lighting design, which is warm and dim in
the manner of Family and The Brady Bunch , to the static
camerawork, as deftly evocative of early '70s television as anything Quentin
Tarantino has filmed. (I hadn't grasped how square and stolid the framing was
until last night, when, while filming a concert by the pathetic dregs of a
real '70s band, the camera tilted sardonically, just for an instant.)
Even the casting functions as a form of allusion. Barry Watson as eldest son
Matt has the soulful eyes, clean-cut yet girlish features, and long dark shag
of Keith Partridge. Jessica Biel as eldest sister Mary has the center part and
symmetrical eyes and mouth of a Marcia Brady. The middle daughter, Lucy, is the
reincarnation of Jan. And on it goes, the show doing battle against our dour
memories of those so-called anni horribili with a self-referential
perkiness that would do Disney proud.

            The difference between then and now, though, is that while family life in
those real '70s shows was unrealistically goofy, in this fake '70s show it's
strangely isolated and defensive--a little too warm on the inside, a little too
besieged by countercultural horrors on the outside. Consider the absurdly
anachronistic flower-power band that visited its old buddy, Dad, in last
night's episode, for instance, and how afraid he was that they'd bring
marijuana into his home. Or how the children's friends are always turning up
with strange addictions, illegitimate babies, or the need to slice
themselves--cautionary examples of family disintegration for the Camden kids to
steer clear of, or at least try to staunch. The Camdens aren't raising a
family; they're fighting a culture war, no matter how gentle the father's
Christianity may seem, and underneath the pop-cultural giddiness there's a
missionary zeal that comes off as more High School Confidential than
Brady 
               Bunch. What do you imagine happens to Mary's friend
when she ignores the warnings issued by the good reverend to her father and the
preaching of Mary herself and defiantly keeps popping ephedrine? She nearly
drops dead of a heart attack.

            The most troubling character of all, however, is the mother, Annie, played
by Catherine Hicks with a not-quite-comic tension that never seems to achieve
release. Wielding her Windex bottle like a weapon, smashing Kleenexes into the
9-year-old's mouth to retrieve illicit pieces of chewing gum, Annie is a
counterfactual from hell--what American housewives would probably be like if
Betty Friedan had never published The Feminine Mystique . Annie's
mothering is loving but grim, and she's prone to irrational outbursts the rest
of the family has to tiptoe around. There's the time her widower father showed
up with his new girlfriend, and Annie refused to speak to her. The theme that
episode was: How can we get Mom to behave? Her husband couldn't have been more
understanding, but his wife's emotionalism was so impervious to logic it became
disturbing. In fact, Annie is always slightly more disturbing than any other
character is allowed to be, a sense of inexpressible rage hovering somewhere in
the vicinity of her brightly upturned mouth. She makes you realize with
gratitude that not even the show's creator, Brenda Hampton, can force the
American family back into its box without having a little female frustration
leak out.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
