
   
   
      
         
            Cry Me A River

            Earlier this week, Ellen DeGeneres was quoted in the Los Angeles
Times saying that she and her girlfriend, actress Anne Heche, had fired
their agents and publicists and were leaving Hollywood--they were sick of the
homophobia they'd experienced since coming out as lesbians last year.
"Everything that I ever feared happened to me," DeGeneres said. "I lost my
show. I've been attacked like hell. I went from making a lot of money on a
sitcom to making no money."

            What's the problem here? Heche got better reviews than the heterosexual
Harrison Ford in last spring's hapless comedy Six Days, Seven Nights ,
and today she reprises Janet Leigh's role in Psycho as the most
notorious murder victim in film history. DeGeneres has two movies coming out
(one a Ron Howard comedy) and is set to do a standup tour later this
winter.

            I do feel sympathy for Ellen. To come out of the closet and begin a new
relationship under such intense public scrutiny is unimaginable. I'm happy that
my own period of playing the gay megaphone, which took place on campus at age
19, wasn't staged for Diane Sawyer, Oprah, and President Clinton. And you have
to admit that the professional pressure on DeGeneres was fierce, even if her
dilemma was notable mostly for its irony: Could an sitcom get decent ratings
if an out lesbian was played by out lesbian?
            

            But if DeGeneres feels that her subtleties as a performer are being
overshadowed by her status as a lesbian, she's the one who set it up that way.
She used her sexuality as a crutch throughout the long feud with ABC that
dominated the troubled last season of her show. She should have copped to the
fact that after a single luminous, thought-provoking, and joyful coming-out
episode in the spring of 1997, Ellen got lost in awkwardly orchestrated,
unfunny plot developments about parents and first girlfriends. Instead, she
called her network a bunch of homophobes.

            I used to think DeGeneres was funny, and I loved Anne Heche in the little
indie film Walking and Talking back when she was just an alumna of the
soap opera Another 
               World . Now I think of them as entitlement
queens who whine while their careers steam ahead. Watching them make out in
front of President Clinton was hard to take, but I'm sure he didn't mind.
Watching Ellen screech, "They're killing us!" upon the death of gay student
Matthew Shepard turned my stomach. Faced with an actual tragedy, the least she
could have done is realize how fortunate she was.

            The day after DeGeneres made her announcement, Variety ran an
interview with the couple's publicist, who claimed that their comments were
taken out of context. (What context would that be?) He added they should
have been taken as "wistful," rather than literal. As for whether the two
actresses are really dropping out, Variety writes, "They don't have
the agent, still have the publicist and the house, and Heche was last seen
driving through Burbank." Whatever they wind up doing, I'm adopting a "don't
ask/don't tell" policy about it.

            -- Kate Aurthur 
            

         
      
   
