
   
   
      
         
            Thanks for the Recovered Memories

            Is it possible to forget a memory? Culturebox poses this paradoxical
question apropos of the continuing fallout from CNN's controversial
newsmagazine segment on "Operation Tailwind." To refresh your memory, the
story's central figure, Robert Van Buskirk, claimed to have watched as U.S.
forces dropped sarin gas on a Laotian village. He also claimed to have killed
two U.S. defectors with a phosphorous grenade during the mission. It soon
emerged, though, that Van Buskirk had failed to note this seemingly noteworthy
recollection in his 1983 book on Vietnam. Why? As other reporters poked holes
in the CNN expose, Van Buskirk confessed that he had "recovered the
memory."

            But how do we know that such memories represent real, rather than imagined,
events?

            Freud grappled with this very dilemma in turn-of-the-century Vienna. In 1895
he came up with his seduction theory, which linked hysteria to repressed
memories of sexual molestation during childhood. A few years later, however,
Freud decided that these were not, in fact, real memories; they were
fantasies.

            Fast-forward to the 1970s, the heyday of pop psychology. A backlash is
brewing against therapists who are considered too skeptical of recovered
memories, and a new movement is born: Repressed Memory Therapy. By the
mid-1980s, bookstores are crowded with self-help guides on how to deal with
"repressed memory syndrome." The message is always the same: If you're feeling
alienated, disaffected, unmotivated, trust that inner voice--you probably were
the victim of sexual abuse. Then the inevitable occurs: A California man named
George Franklin is convicted of raping and murdering a playmate of his daughter
20 years earlier. The centerpiece of the prosecution's case is a recovered
memory.

            It turned out, though, that the daughter had been hypnotized by her
therapist to help remember the details of the event. The case was thrown out a
few years back, but the question remains: What if these so-called repressed
memories are simply the product of the power of psychoanalytic persuasion?

            Culturebox asked that of Richard Ofshe, a social psychologist at
UC-Berkeley, and his answer was refreshingly unambiguous: "There is no mental
mechanism that could create this ignorance of memory. If anything, things of a
traumatic character are more likely to be remembered than forgotten." Recovered
memory therapy? Ofshe prefers the term "psychotherapy malpractice."

            As for Van Buskirk, well, we may never know exactly what happened out there.
But we do have some clues. A psychiatrist who treated World War II veterans
reported that one man who had been in a tank regiment visualized being trapped
inside a burning tank, though it never actually happened. And decades later, a
Vietnam vet who had never been captured acted out the experience of having been
tortured by the Viet Cong.

            Even more bizarre: As Mark Pendergrast writes in his book Victims of
Memory: Incest Accusations and Shattered Lives , one participant in a
support group for Vietnam veterans, Ed, recalled seeing a buddy's head explode
during a firefight. When one of his fellow group members called Ed's parents to
help put together a surprise party for him, his mother was shocked: "What? He's
in a veterans' recovery group? But he was rated 4-F. He never was allowed to go
to Vietnam!"

            -- Jonathan Mahler
            

         
      
   
