
   
   
      
         
            Re: Loathing of Clinton
            

            Katha,

            It's a very good question. Many times I have tried to figure out what it is
about the man that truly offends me. As you point out, I'm quite happy with
many of the results of his policies--the expansion of free trade, the reform of
welfare, the reduction of the deficit, the acquiescence to the rollback of
reverse racial discrimination. Yes, I'm not so happy about his support of the
death penalty, his signing of the Defense of Marriage Act, his Bosnia debacle,
his civil-liberties record, his anti-smoking crusade. But then I'm not a
lock-step conservative, as you know. And you can't have everything. So what is
it?

            For my part, it's not sex and drugs and rock 'n' roll. Believe me. Some of
my best friends are sex-crazed stoners. I think, ultimately, it's because of
his moral vacuity on a more profound level. Bosnia was the clincher for me. He
said it was a holocaust, then did nothing to stop it, then claimed credit for
ending it, then apologized for the holocaust. Anyone who can use such a grave
moral issue so glibly and cynically is pretty close to being evil. Ditto his
complete lack of substance on civil rights. Here is a man who says he is
against discrimination, then fires more gay people from the military than
George Bush, signs DOMA (then boasts about it, then apologizes for it), signs a
bill to expel HIV-positive people from the military (then says he didn't mean
it), signs a bill barring HIV-positive immigrants from entering the country,
and asks for less money on AIDS research than the Republican Congress. It's not
the end result that gets me so much. A Republican might have been worse on both
Bosnia and civil rights. It's his refusal to take moral responsibility for
anything, or take credit for things he opposed, or evade blame where blame is
genuinely deserved. When someone like that is at the head of the country, it is
truly corrosive of our morality in the real sense of that word. Because it is
truly corrosive of any sense of personal responsibility. He has the super-ego
of a seven-year-old.

            Sometimes, I really think he is evil.

            Best,
Andrew

         
      
   
