
   
   
      
         
            What Churchill Knew

            Conquering troops swagger into towns, round up members of an undesirable
ethnic population, and systematically slaughter them. The world knows all about
it but dithers anyway. Not for years after they first learn of the pattern of
atrocities do they do anything about it. Sound familiar? We're not talking
Kosovo or Bosnia here. We're talking about the war which taught the Serbs just
how much horror an occupier can get away with.

            One of the many unpleasant duties of Holocaust historians involves rounding
out the portrait of Allied indifference to the genocide of the Jews during
World War II. Richard Breitman, a historian at American University, has just
added some new details to that picture. In his book, Official Secrets: What
The Nazis Planned, What the British and Americans Knew (Hill and Wang), he
argues that the British were made fully aware of the Nazi plan to wipe out the
Jews as early as January 1942--half a year earlier than previously thought.

            Breitman's argument, based on recently declassified British intelligence
documents, goes as follows: As early as 1939, British decoders unscrambled
radio signals from German special police units. Messages intercepted from the
Eastern Front in September 1941 showed that these units were following behind
the army and rounding up vast numbers of Jews in the Soviet Union. The decoders
knew something about Nazi terminology by then, so they understood that "special
duties" or "pacification" meant something much worse than relocation. They'd
also heard enough to know that it was a campaign planned before the
invasion of the Soviet Union, not some random by-product of war. This
intelligence rose all the way up to British Foreign Minister Anthony Eden, who
quashed it, and Winston Churchill, who enfolded it in grandiose speeches about
mass execution that didn't quite explain what was occurring.

            What difference would this information have made? The difference the
confirmation of rumor always makes. Had the world known for certain that the
incredible stories coming from the Soviet Union were true, more Jews could have
been warned. Neutral and satellite states could have been pressured to accept
more refugees, years sooner. Even after the war, the British intelligence
reports could have helped pin the blame on the right people. During the
Nuremberg trials, for instance, prosecutors misclassified the special police
units largely responsible for the slaughter on the Eastern Front as
run-of-the-mill policemen, rather than as the mass murderers they were. The
future mass murderers of the world surely drew the obvious moral lesson.

            -- Kate Galbraith and Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
