
   
   
      
         
            Quibbles and Corrections

            Dear Culturebox:

            I'm not sure why booksellers don't want the hard numbers, but their
instincts are dead right. Soundscan has done nothing but harm to the creative
end of rock & roll--not because it has made information available, but
because it has made information available too quickly to people who, in turn,
overvalue the importance of information gotten too quickly.

            Put another way, Soundscan has killed off word of mouth. It used to be that
a critic could get behind an album, or an influential DJ, or a cohort of
college kids--and bingo, an interesting album becomes a hit album. Now it's
wham-bam: An album isn't catching on in a week or two (as measured by
Soundscan) and the plug gets pulled on promotion, the CD gets pulled from
racks, etc.

            Further, the industry itself starts pushing albums that will "open
big"--albums with a catchy single (and maybe little else) and (did somebody say
"synergy"?) soundtrack albums. Look at this week's Pop Top 20 for the results
of Soundscan. If you want a Lorrie Moore to sneak onto the bestseller list
every once in a while, you better hope Bookscan never catches on.-- Gerry
Marzorati
            

            
               Dear Gerry:
            

            
               I think there's a risk of such short-sighted thinking, but I don't think
it would prevail in the end. There just wouldn't be enough blockbusters to keep
the book market going as a blockbuster-only concern. If all publishers and
booksellers pursued that strategy, in the end some of them would be forced to
re-enter the quality books market, just to get themselves back in the game. I
tend to think that's what's happening in Hollywood, actually, which is why the
whole indie scene has become so hot.
            

            
               In response to your Lorrie Moore point, I'd think Bookscan would have the
opposite effect. By allowing publishers target their marketing dollars more
effectively, Bookscan would help them sell the smaller books. The
publisher could pinpoint exactly where Lorrie Moore sells, and dispatch her
there on a book tour; could test whether her books were responsive to
advertising and what kind (a test run on Moore might also work for Alice Munro,
and so on). In short, with real numbers publishers would be able to maximize
the audience for a serious book. --Culturebox

            Dear Culturebox:

            With the consumer trade book category exceeding $10 billion in 1997 in
retail dollars the stakes are now too high not to begin to fine-tune the
marketing mix. For every 100 books shipped in 1997, over 33% came back to the
publisher for full credit and a one percent reduction in returns would save the
industry over $12 million per year.

            It's important to note, though, that SoundScan's launch in the music world
in 1991 was not an easy task. Several of the same issues that you address in
"Fuzzy Logic" existed in the music industry in the early '90's.

            Also, the scanning device that you mention has existed for over two decades
and has been utilized by package goods manufactures to target market their
products onto the shelves of retailers across the world. The system is the UPC
or in the case of books a EAN/ISBN number that when a book is scanned by a
retailer identifies the book, format, suggested price point, genre, etc.
--Tom Fogarty, Soundscan executive in charge of Bookscan.
            

         
      
   
