
   
   
      
         
            A Hundred Years Of Something Or Other

            Last year the Modern Library raised a ruckus with its "hundred best novels
of the century" list. It also sold a ton of books--which made a "hundred best
non-fiction books" list inevitable. It will be released at the Los Angeles
BookExpo in April.

            The first complaint about the earlier list (aside from the basic crassness
of the enterprise) was that it had been made from a checklist prepared by
experts. But experts turned out to be not such a bad thing. When Random House
asked readers to vote, 7 of the top 10 novels were by either Ayn Rand or L. Ron
Hubbard. (Only Orwell's 1984 , Tolkien's Lord of the Rings , and
Harper Lee's To Kill a Mockingbird cracked the magic circle.)

            A second complaint: The panel was too white and too male. So the new panel
has: Maya Angelou, Daniel Boorstin, A.S. Byatt, Caleb Carr, Christopher Cerf,
Ron Chernow, Shelby Foote, Stephen Jay Gould, Vartan Gregorian, Charles
Johnson, Mary Karr, Jon Krakauer, Edmund Morris, Elaine Pagels, John
Richardson, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Carolyn See, William Styron, and Gore
Vidal.

            It will be hard to make this work. Another problem is that there's vastly
more good non-fiction than fiction.

            And what is "non-fiction"? Does it include science, clearing a path
for Thomas Kuhn and Lewis Thomas? Philosophy, psychology? Camus's The
Rebel is an automatic. But do you include dazzling prose writers like
Sigmund Freud and William James? Does Nietzsche's posthumous (1908 ) Ecce
Homo get safe passage out of the 19th century, as Samuel Butler's The
Way of All Flesh so bizarrely did on the fiction list?

            Literary reportage ought to make up the bulk of the list. Rebecca West
should get a half-dozen listings but will be lucky to get one ( Black Lamb
and Grey Falcon ). Ditto A.J. Liebling (probably for The Earl of
Louisiana ). How fictional can this non-fiction be? Does Mailer's The
Executioner's Song get on? How about Frank Harris's My Life and
Loves ? Prize-boards being present- centered and friendship-bound, Tom Wolfe
and John McPhee could interlope.

            A lot of absolute crap could make it: Frantz Fanon's The Wretched of the
Earth , Hunter S. Thompson's Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas . Good
stuff will be lost. Feminists could shut out Simone de Beauvoir's The Second
Sex as too tame. If Maya Angelou doesn't argue for Randall Jarrell's
Poetry and the Age (and she won't), who will? Someone must argue (it's
Gould's job) for Jim Bouton's exquisite Ball Four , the first modern
sports book. And what about those journalistic models--Orwell, Dwight
Macdonald, Cyril Connolly--who never, strictly speaking, wrote a real prose
book?

            Is there an automatic place for the top consciousness-raising tracts of the
fifties (David Riesman's The Lonely Crowd ), sixties (Norman O. Brown's
Love's Body ), seventies (Christopher Lasch's The Culture of
Narcissism ), and eighties (Alan Bloom's The Closing of the American
Mind )? A tempting (and sensible) option is to split the difference between
influence and style by picking the top books about the major events of the
century: Communism (snubbing Whittaker Chambers's Witness would be a
scandal), race and colonialism (Gunnar Myrdal's An American Dilemma ,
Octavio Paz's The Labyrinth of Solitude ); modern art (Woolf's A Room
of One's Own , alas; Edmund Wilson's Axel's Castle , if To the
Finland Station misses under Communism); and the Holocaust (with Anne
Frank's diary likely to top the whole list).

            -- Christopher Caldwell
            

         
      
   
