
   
   
      
         
            Cute, Very Cute

            

               Feeling terrorized by cuteness? The last few years have witnessed Beanie
Babies and ravers in pacifiers and pigtails and the box-office success of
Antz. Now even hi-tech is morphing into cute-tech. Consider Volkswagen's
new Beetle, a shiny bubble of a thing whose tag line in print ads wonders: "Hug
it? Drive it?" Or Apple's iMac, with its cheery translucent green casing that
seems to declare, "Unlike all those complicated computers that try to
intimidate you, I have no secrets." The latest foray into cuteness is Intel's,
the chip manufacturer having recently unveiled the design for a machine it
wants hardware companies to make. The Intel "concept computer" struggles
mightily to be cute despite its distinctly uncute name: "Legacy Removal Concept PC." It's a loud red or blue or green
computer-in-a-box which is goofily reminiscent of an Aztec pyramid.

               Intel's strained effort to please makes the whole cute-machine thing
slightly painful, but Culturebox predicts that cute is more than a passing fad
in industrial design. Cute might seem downmarket, given the associations
companies usually want to attach to their top-flight computers and cars--you
know, power, speed, precision engineering, the building blocks of American
masculinity. And huggable machines do seem custom-tailored for technophobes,
which in the electronics and automobile businesses is often a coded reference
to women. The Beetle does have that plastic bud vase. But Ron Lawner,
the advertising executive behind the car's marketing campaign, denies that the
company was targeting women: "I don't think the car is not macho. It's just
more approachable than either the more boring Japanese cars or the more
pretentious high-priced German cars."

               In fact, another theory of cute machines holds that not only are they not
downscale, they're aimed at the high end of the market. Chee Perlman, the
editor-in-chief of I.D. Magazine , says all her ultra-sophisticated
designer friends were "early adopters"--that is, they rushed out to buy the new
Beetles and iMacs. The little suckers were just so risky, so anti-corporate, so
pro-individual; their manufacturers just seemed so hip. "The Beetle almost
looks like it's smiling at you," she says.

               Maybe. Me, I still see a bug in the service of Hitler's favorite company.
But in a year in which Sharon Stone is willing to play an ant, you have to
admit that even bugs sell as long as they're cute. Why fight it? Cute cars and
computers are personable, friendly, marginally less annoying than the clunky
monsters of the 70s and much less annoying than the creepily sleek, black
Powerbooks and Civics and Camrys of the early Nineties. Now we just have to get
past the man-machine barrier and figure out how to chuck these cutie pies under
the chin.

               -- Judith Shulevitz
               

            

         
      
   
