
   
   
      
         
            Idiot Box: This Week's TV Picks

            
               All times
are Eastern, but check your local listings just in case.
            

            It's cold outside; the Midwest is neck-deep in snow;
there are no good movies opening this week; the post-holiday sales are all
over. Happily, the week's TV line-up provides several decent alternatives to
getting out of the house and actually doing something.

            Most viewers recognize that, in terms of
entertainment quality, the tag line "It's not TV. It's HBO" is basically
meaningless, particularlyin the post-Larry Sanders era. HBO is just as likely
to serve up dreadful programming as any other channel. That said, the new HBO
series The 
               Sopranos (Sun., 9:00 p.m.) may well be worth the price
of a signal unscrambler. The show revolves around the middle-aged angst of New
Jersey mob boss Tony Soprano (James Gandolfini). In addition to obsessing over
problems with his wife, kids, and elderly mother, Soprano is depressed that the
golden days of la cosa nostra have passed him by. Plagued by panic-attacks, he
starts seeing a psychiatrist (a pleasantly low-keyed role for the usually
grating Lorraine Bracco). The series has everything you watch cable
for--violence, drugs, profanity, automatic weapons, topless dancers. Gandolfini
fans will be particularly pleased to see how well he's made the transition from
supporting-cast tough guy ( True Romance , Get Shorty ) to
center-stage tough guy. He captures the show's mix of darkness, humor, and
humanity--without slipping into the criminal-with-a-heart-of-gold cliché. Start
watching now; the early episodes are wonderful, but the scent of "short shelf
life" hangs in the air.

            Those without premium channels need not despair. Also
debuting Sunday is Eddie Murphy's animated series, The 
               PJs (Fox,
8:30 p.m.). In addition to executive producing the show, Murphy stars as the
voice of the main character, Thurgood Stubbs, the smartass super of an urban
housing project. Early rumblings are that The PJs delivers precisely
what you'd expect from Murphy: harsh, brash, and 100 percent politically
incorrect humor. (The ghetto jokes have already prompted protests from black
activist groups.) But even if the show stinks, you should watch at least one
episode so you won't feel left out of the cocktail party/water cooler
blathering about the social implications of the first black animated series to
hit prime time.

            Western junkies may want to give TNT's much-hyped
Purgatory a shot (Sun. 8:00 p.m.). Don't misunderstand--it's not great.
The basic concept is hokey, if mildly original: A band of old-west nasties
stumbles into a strange town populated by the souls of dead outlaws doing
penance in the hopes of earning a seat on the great stagecoach to heaven. (To
illustrate this, a big black stagecoach magically materializes at key moments.)
The execution is even more problematic: There is an abundance of bad acting,
heavy-handed moralizing, obvious dialogue--and, of course, the obligatory
elderly Indian skulking about to highlight the mysticism of the situation. On
the plus side, Eric Roberts is well cast as the irredeemable head nasty, Sam
Shepard is charming (as always) as a penitent Wild Bill Hickok, and the grand
finale involves a gratifying, albeit predictable, shoot-em-up sequence. Keep
your expectations low.

            Perhaps to atone for all the repeats we've endured in
the past month, this week the networks are wheeling out new episodes of The
X Files , The Simpsons , Everybody Loves Raymond , King of
the Hill , The King of 
               Queens , Law & Order , 3rd
Rock , Ally McBeal , Melrose Place , Homicide , NYPD
Blue . ... And for those who get TNN, there's a special treat: the return of
roller derby. Friday at 8:00 p.m. marks the inaugural telecast of the World
Skating League's RollerJam. It has all the power and poetry of traditional
roller derby, but with that extra oomph made possible by today's in-line
skates.

            Heavily promoted events best left unwatched: Gene
Wilder's MFTV movie, Murder In a Small Town (A&E, Sun., 8:00 p.m.),
the 25th annual People's Choice Awards (CBS, Sun., 9:00 p.m.), the 26th annual
American Music Awards (ABC, Mon., 8:00 p.m.)--although the Burt Bacharach-Elvis
Costello duet promises to be riveting--and, of course, the "ultimate milk
squirt off" on Guinness World Records Prime Time, in which grown men snort milk
up their noses and shoot it out their eyeballs (Fox, Tue., 9:00 p.m.). Though
my gender has many flaws--its affection for Ally McBeal being among the most
disturbing--I take comfort in the fact that the viewship of Guinness's weekly
freak parade is predominantly male.

            All things considered, the viewing situation looks
solid. But if nothing this week grabs you, take heart: The lockout is over, and
NBA action should be coming your way soon.

            -- Michelle Cottle
            

         
      
   
