
   
   
      
         
            We Are All on Good Morning America
            

            Good Morning Andrew --

            I can't retrieve my e-mail at the moment. Could it be because I am
treasuring 1275 messages in my inbox? Anyway, I will just send off into the
blue my thoughts on seeing Peter Kurth, brother of Barbara Kurth, on Good
Morning America (I think). You'll remember that Barbara Kurth is the mother
whose daughters were kidnapped by her ex-husband, Stephen Fagan, who changed
his name and lived in shadowy splendor in Palm Beach Florida, raising "the
girls" as they are always called (they're now 21 and 23), having told them
their mother died in a car crash. Barbara Kurth got no help from FBI or legal
system in tracking him down, by the way, because the kidnapping took place in
l979, before parental kidnapping was covered by appropriate laws. She spent all
her money on private eyes, to no avail.

            So of course, since she is the mother, Barbara Kurth has been attacked in
the media, solely on the basis of allegations by Stephen Fagan, who says she
was an alcoholic who neglected the children, leaving him no choice. (She denies
his charge--which was investigated by the court, after all, which found them
untrue and gave her custody.) He doesn't explain why he kept up the deception
for two decades, long after his ex-wife had clearly overcome her problems if
she ever had any, and had gotten a Ph.D. (she is now a professor of cell
biology, married--but no kids). His whole family was in on it, too--his parents
also moved to Florida. It's hard to imagine the cruelty involved here.

            Anyway, I turn on the TV in my hotel room in Whittier California, which
is--as every single person I mentioned this place to reminded me--where Nixon
went to college (why do we all have this little fact so firmly implanted in our
brains?), and there was Barbara Kurth's brother, Peter, being interviewed by
Katie Couric. And what amazed me is that here was this ordinary American man,
who had been suddenly plucked from obscurity by the hand of fate, and he knew
exactly what to do on television! How to sit (not too slumpy, not too stiff),
what to do with his hands (kept them quiet, don't gesticulate or fiddle with
your ear or other body part), how to arrange his expressions (relaxed, alert,
open, affable), how to speak in sound bites (don't digress! don't get mad!
don't talk too long!). It was as though he'd been on TV every day for
years.

            Talk to you later,
Katha

         
      
   
