
   
   
      
         
            Headline
            

            Katha,

                   Oh, God. We're agreeing again. Since when was sport a crucial civic
virtue?? Even egghead effete sheets like the New York Times dedicate a
whole section most days to it, as if it meant anything real or interesting, or
wasn't a lowest common denominator entertainment. You're right about stadiums
as well. DC just shelled out a fortune for a new MCI stadium downtown, and a
new Redskins stadium, and every idiotic newsman and woman is required to nod
knowingly when the sports guy makes some obscure reference to some impenetrable
football play, and anyone like me who finds the entire exercise faintly
ridiculous is regarded as unpatriotic and unmanly. IF DC spent an ounce of the
mental energy it expends on sports on education then the city might be livable
once again. And the only people more boring than sports stars are movie
actors.
       My own theory is that sports are one of the very few ways that most
heterosexual (and some homosexual) men can communicate with each other about
anything other than the weather. They cannot talk about their feelings; and
they cannot really hang out in groups of three or less (someone might think
they're gay); and women confuse and frustrate them. So ... how about those
Skins? Yes, there are some aspects to sports that are beautiful and admirable;
and baseball in this regard is on a different plane than football; and soccer
is even more engaging. (I won't bore you with an appreciation of a five-day
cricket match). But in general, these are definitely what Mr. Mill would have
called lower pleasures. And we need to do a better job of keeping them in their
place.
       On a more troubling level, the sports fetish is also a crude way of
defining masculinity down. I went to a high school (all male, and not one of
those fee-paying buggery clinics from Masterpiece Theatre ) where the
rugby team were gods. But they weren't the only male role models. Britain still
had a place for the masculine scholar, or debater, or scientist. America seems
to me to have allowed for these other pursuits but to have avoided seeing them
as part of being male. (It's bound up, at some level, with a fear of
homosexuality, I suppose.) This means that the minute the american male has a
crisis of masculinity, he looks to Brett Favre or Reggie White for guidance.
This is extremely troubling.
       But are you as interested in the business pages as I am?

            best
Andrew

         
      
   
