
   
   
      
         
            A Mid-Season Night's Dream

            Starting off, there are a couple of mid-season series to address:

            
               Providence . Don't do it. NBC's new drama has been on for a mere two
weeks (Fri., 8 PM), and is already proving emotionally manipulative in a way
ER never dreamed.

            Basic premise: In the aftermath of her mother's death--which, incidentally,
we witness in the first episode--Beverly Hills plastic surgeon Sydney Hansen
(Melina Kanakaredes) returns home to Providence, R.I., to care for her sweetly
dysfunctional family and practice real medicine in the local clinic. In the
first three episodes alone, viewers are subjected to two deaths, an aborted
wedding, an at-home birth, a wake, and the main character's discovering her
boyfriend in the shower with another man. Compounding the emotional
exploitation, Syd's dad (Mike Farrell) is a veterinarian, so every time the
show's tear-jerk quotient threatens to dip below critical mass, viewers are
confronted by sick, injured, and dying puppies.

            Content aside, Providence also has a few "artistic" problems. The
show is positively lousy with long, lingering, dreamy shots of Kanakaredes'
face. Since she's unquestionably beautiful to behold, a little visual
indulgence can perhaps be forgiven. What cannot be forgiven, however, is her
hideous, sing-song voice-over--too perky and heartwarming by half.

            Even more cutesy and annoying, we are periodically inserted into Syd's dream
life, most of which revolves around her bickering with her dead mother and
making out with this guy she had a crush on in high school who is now a local
limo driver. It's reminiscent of Ally McBeal's peeks into characters' inner
thoughts--but without the special effects or originality.

            Thursday at 9 PM is the premiere of CBS's new series Turks . Yet
another variation on the ever-popular cop drama, the show follows the trials
and tribulations of an entire family of Chicago policemen. (Sadly, this means
we have to sit through the characters' tedious personal dramas as well as their
professional ones.)

            The plot lines aren't particularly surprising or clever, but the dialogue is
sharper and wittier than average and William Devane (of Knot's Landing
fame) is particularly appealing as the family patriarch, Sgt. Joe Turk. Those
show's defining feature, however, is its overabundance of male bonding: A
single episode offers multiple sessions of father-son bonding, brother-brother
bonding, cop-cop bonding, and so on. Thus far, the only women around fall into
two categories--docile, wait-at-home wives and single career-gals looking to
bag one of the boys in blue. (There is nary a female cop to be found.) Perhaps
as a sop to female viewers, the cast includes a fair helping of Gillette jaws
and cute butts. Nonetheless, I'm sticking with Frasier .

            Moving right along, Sunday night's movie scene looks good-- The
Fugitive (NBC, 8 PM) vs. Dead Man Walking (CBS, 9 PM)--but after
that, the pickings get decidedly slimmer. Thank god for Lonesome Dove (Family
Channel, Mon.-Thur., 9 PM). Based on the Pulitzer-Prize winning novel by Larry
McMurtry, this 1989 miniseries follows the trail of two former Texas rangers
driving a herd of cattle from the Mexican border up to Montana. Tommy Lee Jones
and Robert Duvall are flat-out brilliant in the lead roles, backed by a strong
supporting cast featuring Angelica Huston, Diane Lane, Danny Glover, and Rick
Schroder.

            Speaking of Little Ricky, if you're having trouble adjusting to the idea of
Schroder starring as the hot new stud on NYPD Blue, you may want to catch a few
minutes of his MFTV movie this week, What We Did That Night (ABC, 9 PM,
Mon.). The movie itself is dreadful--a white-washed blend of Cape Fear
and I Know What You Did Last 
               Summer , with a truly annoying gotcha
ending. Schroder, however, gives a convincing performance as the creepy bad guy
who lures all of his former frat brothers back to the scene of their youthful
crime. He can't save the movie, but he definitely livens it up.

            By far the oddest offering of the week is A&E's Unmentionables: A
Brief History (Sun., 9 PM). A two-hour look at the evolution of underwear,
the special is as silly as it sounds. The history of the myriad painful fads
women have subjected themselves to over the years--iron maidens, rubber
girdles, breast binding--may help remind viewers what all that '60s bra-burning
was about. For the most part, however, listening to lingerie designers ramble
insipidly about the form, function, and sensuousness of undies makes one
suspect that the special was conceived largely as an excuse to show shot after
shot of scantily clad breast, buns, and crotches.

            It's kind of a thinking-man's Baywatch .

            -- Michelle Cottle
            

         
      
   
