
   
   
      
         
            Happy May Day
            

            Happy May Day, Katha,

            A big day at The Nation , I'm sure. Unisex tweeds, seminars on family
values, reminiscences of Alger Hiss, sherry all round. At TNR , all we
got was a large, inflatable menora over 19th Street for Israel's birthday.
Socialists have all the fun.

            Some eternal truths in today's papers. The IRA refuses to disarm. And their
intransigence we are supposed to be grateful for. Why is it that, in the press,
terrorists are heroes if they enter "peace" negotiations but not blackmailing
murderers if they keep their semtex and machine guns? Maybe Gerry Adams learned
something from Arafat. And Yeltsin continues to reform. Why is it that Yeltsin
gets such a terrible press, I wonder? What he has achieved in Russia is
monumental, and just when he is dismissed as a buffoon, he tries once again,
against the odds, to keep economic reform on track. His personal
unpredictability is arguably essential to keep his many enemies off balance.
And the Russian economy, for all its woes, is now in recovery. NATO has
expanded without a revanchist response; and the Constitution is still
(just)intact. What more could we want? Yet it is fashionable to deride this
nation-builder as a drunk autocrat. I don't get it. Maybe some of the tweedies
are nostalgic for the Soviets.

            Clinton's press conference was a classic. It reminded me of the only good
scene in Primary Colors when he learns that he may have made a young
black girl pregnant. "Can't I ever get a break?" he laments. The man's
incapacity to take responsibility is fathomless. My favorite quote of the day
is from Webb Hubbell's prison phone calls to his wife, saying he'll have to
take the hit for not cooperating in the Rose Law Firm inquiry: "I will not
raise those allegations that might open it up to Hillary ... So I need to roll
over one more time."

            Just who does Clinton think he's kidding in all of this? Except most of the
American people.

            best
Andrew

         
      
   
