
   
   
      
         
            Culture: In France, It's in the Blood

            Last week, the French weekly L'Express had a cover story entitled
"Cinema: How To Fight Back Against America." Meanwhile, three French
ex-ministers (including ex-prime minister Laurent Fabius) went on trial for
letting thousands get transfused with AIDS-infected blood in the mid-1980s.
These aren't unrelated stories.

            One reason France has the highest number of transfusion-borne AIDS cases in
Europe is negligence. Well after the 1983 discovery of the AIDS virus--by
French scientists, incidentally--but before screening was possible, France
continued to harvest much of its blood supply from prison populations.
Transfusions are also given more routinely in France than elsewhere--to mothers
post-delivery, for instance.

            But here's the big reason Fabius is on trial: For three months in the spring
of 1985, his government failed to implement screening techniques readily
available from Abbott Laboratories, an American company. At that time, Abbott's
rivals at the French Pasteur Institute were browbeating every politico within
lobbying range to wait for the development of a French procedure, which
they promised was only weeks away. Long weeks, if you were a hemophiliac.

            So why did the Fabius government agree to hold off? Part of the blame lies
with French cultural politics--particularly the cultural nationalism of the
first Mitterrand administration. In 1981, Culture Minister Jack Lang got
Mitterrand to double his ministry's budget. Two things really bugged Lang. The
first, famously, was America. His early days in office were marked by
embarrassingly thorough diktats aimed at purging French of Anglicisms
and frothy tirades against the Deauville festival of American film.

            The second bee in Lang's bonnet was the negligible position of culture in
day-to-day life. Lang was ultimately a materialist who felt that culture wasn't
"real" unless it was shaping politics and the economy. His ministry's motto
was: "É 
               conomie et culture--même
combat ." So he launched what historian Marc Fumaroli, in his magisterial
L'État Culturel, calls "a strategy of
opinion intoxication." He had Rimbaud selections printed for distribution to
government ministers. His most Ozymandian efforts in this direction were
gargantuan, Woodstock-style concerts on behalf of the state-sponsored
initiative "SOS Racism." Lang and Danielle Mitterrand and associated hangers-
on were always insistent that the concerts created a climate of tolerance.

            All right, then. Should they therefore shoulder responsibility for the
climate of medical/industrial chauvinism that led the Fabius government to let
people die of AIDS while awaiting a "French" way of testing blood?

            In their defense, France has had a fairly consistent cultural policy for the
past two decades. The socialist Lang trashed Rambo ; the conservative
Jacques Toubon decreed that 40 percent of songs on the radio must be French
chansons . I'm sympathetic to worries about being swamped by U.S.
culture, armed as it is with theater monopolies, language advantages, and
economies of scale. It's good that France remain a non-Anglo-Saxon exception
culturelle --and a certain price, within reason, is worth paying for it.

            But I'm afraid the answer is: Yes.

            
               --Christopher Caldwell
            

             

         
      
   
