
   
   
      
         
            Fish n Chips
            

            Katha,
No, I'm in favor of abolishing the British National Health Service altogether,
and letting the market take care of most people's healthcare, and the
government coming in to rescue those who fall through the cracks. This would
probably lead, I'd guess, to more social spending on health-care as a
percentage of GNP, and would more accurately reflect people's real balance of
needs and wants. What it would avoid is the impossible politicization of
health-care. In Britain, you regularly have parliamentary debates in which some
limit is imposed on health-care spending and some huffy back-bencher (once
Labour, now Tory) demands why the minister for health just murdered his
grandmother. It's an impossible position to put politicians in, and brings out
their worst instincts, of pandering, emotionalism and over-spending.

            Yes, yes, I know, because of insurance and third parties, there is no true
market for healthcare, but we should try to approximate one as best we can, so
that people's real desires (and not some political hack's view of
them)determine the structure of healthcare. And yes, health is not a good like,
say, computers, and the state should step in and help those who really can't
help themselves - but as a last resort. As for AIDS, the new treatments--mainly
pioneered in the US by big drug companies trying to make profits, not do
good--are far cheaper than the alternative of doing nothing and so economics
should and will guarantee that most people who need them (and can take them
responsibly) should get them. The notion that large numbers of people who need
the meds can't get them is, I think, overstated. Some of the biggest drops in
death rates have been among the poor and racial minorities. But do some people
fall through the cracks? Yes. Should we do all we can to find them and help
them? Yes. But can state-of-the-art treatment of every illness be guaranteed to
every citizen? Not in a universe of limited funding, which is the universe we
live in. But without the US freeish market health system, there would be far
less effective treatments to give people in the first place.

            As to Japan, I don't think our cultural differences are merely related to
media distortion. Lots of people I know who have lived there concur. It sounds
like a living hell. And the only way I have ever enjoyed eating fish is deep
fried in batter, wrapped in newsprint. And lots of vinegar.

            best
Andrew

         
      
   
