
   
   
      
         
            Re: 1910? Come off it.
            

            Katha,

            With all due respect, you keep changing the subject. My point was merely
that our double-standard with regard to Nazism and Communism is curious, and
largely because of lingering (and I think mistaken) notions that somehow the
Communists weren't quite so bad. They were. The targets of their liquidation
were different; but the totalitarian structure, police state, and militaristic
expansionism in both systems were uncannily alike. So, of course, were the
crude, domestic economic policies, which harnessed big business interests to
the military state. Both were evil empires; and both were essentially national
socialist experiments. The only difference is that we defeated one in six
years; and took another forty-four to defeat the other. And you misunderstand
me when I said that Communism was responsible for American casualties in Korea
and Vietnam. I didn't blame the American Left for these wars; I blamed the
Soviet Union. Could anyone now dispute that? Oh, maybe you do.

            And no, I don't dispute that, for a short period of time, some socialistic
impulses addressed some real problems in America and the West and should remain
in place. (What, after all, is workfare, if not a 30s-style piece of government
intervention?) But I do think that, given Big Government's record in providing
public goods over the last few decades (almost universally execrable, wherever
you look), and given Extremely Big Government's record in the Soviet Union and
Nazi Germany, we should be a little more concerned about a state that is now
imposing a higher tax burden on ordinary citizens than at any time in the
history of the Republic. Those tax-payers, by the way, are not "big business."
They are consumers and citizens; and they are being bilked of their own
money.

            And no, I'm not a reactionary. Just because I think we should drastically
cut government's suppression of our economic choices and liberties doesn't mean
I'm against universal suffrage or desegregation. For goodness' sake. I'm a
First Amendment absolutist, a solid believer in gender and racial equality of
opportunity, etc, etc. And you know it. A truly liberal government would be
strictly neutral between citizens, and do as little as possible to rob them of
their civil liberties and worldly goods. Given the twentieth century's record
of the alternative, what's so bad about that?

            Andrew

         
      
   
