
   
   
      
         
            Brow Beating

            Dear Culturebox--

            In response to your "whole indie scene" point: To me this is the problem,
not the solution. There was once in this country--let's say the 60's for
shorthand--a thriving Highish Midbrow Culture.

            This is a culture where Roth and Updike made the bestseller list; where Bob
Dylan's "Blonde on Blonde" charted; where Francis Ford Coppola made a studio
movie called The Godfather ; and where Michael Herr published his Vietnam
War Dispatches in Esquire . I think this culture mattered--not
just to the artists who created these works, but to the lived texture of life
in middle-class America. I think this culture mattered to as many middle-class
Americans as it did because these works were produced and dispensed and
promoted by mainstream businesses, who knew how to reach them. I think these
mainstream businesses produced, dispensed and promoted these products not
because there were hard numbers because some individual in some office at these
places believed in the artists and their products.

            Now we have a vapid Blockbuster Culture and a fringy Indie Culture and a
fragile Highish Midbrow Culture that ever more depends, like the High Culture
world of museums and opera houses long has, on the largesse of angels--think of
Si Newhouse...or, closer to home, Bill Gates. Hold your Bookscan, please. I'll
take the rumpled editor who takes a bet on a Lorrie Moore and sticks with her
until the breakout book--and maybe buys the time by signing up a decent
cookbook.

            
               ---Gerry Marzorati
            

            
               Dear Gerry--
            

            I don't know. I think you're letting nostalgia cloud your vision. Then as
now, there was infinitely more cheese-topping on the great cultural pizza than
there was pepperoni, even if you lower the brow-level on the pepperoni. What
about that hit sitcom The Beverly Hillbillies ? ( Beverly Hills 90210
is merely a few blocks over and up from that.) Or that musical wonder Herb
Alpert and the Tijuana Brass, the pseudo-mariachi band that graced its albums
with photos of beautiful brown-skinned women covered with whipped cream? We're
talking cornball kitsch that couldn't even get an audience at a hip coffee bar
today. For books, bestselling titles like The Greening of America
and Coffee, Tea, or Me float to mind.
            

            Conversely, I don't think the current music scene is half as bad as you make
it out to be. Last time I logged onto the Billboard Top 200
site, Lauryn Hill's new CD was #2. You can't tell me her serious fusion of
hip hop and rap--or, say, the razzle-dazzle poetics of the Wu-Tang
Clan--doesn't speak to some people today the way "Blonde on Blonde" did to its
generation. Same with Pulp Fiction , the Godfather of its era. Or Don
Delillo's Underworld , which I personally couldn't stand but which spoke
truth to many and lingered on the bestseller list for weeks. We 
               could
go on all day, each jockeying to out-brow the other, high and low, which would
be enormously fun for us but boring, I'm afraid, for our readers.
            

            
               On another front, I have to insist that better, clearer, more rigorous
numbers would help books more than they'd hurt them. For instance, if the
New York Times Bestseller List didn't fiddle with the numbers so much--only
looking at certain bookstores and going so far as to seed the process by
sending out a list of books it's interested in tracking, as my colleague
Eliza
Truitt 
               reported in 
               Slate 
               a little while
ago--certain regional bestsellers, such as Cold Mountain , wouldn't take
so long to come to national attention. I know the conventional thinking is that
the NYT Bestseller List is good for mid-list books, because it refuses
to track crap, but if the NYT Bestseller List were based on firm and
comprehensive numbers, rather than guesstimates, why couldn't the Times
still refuse to track crap? It would just have to be more upfront about how
it slices the stats and then it would do much a better job of following the
serious books throughout the country, not just at selected stores.
            

            --Culturebox

         
      
   
