
   
   
      
         
            re: Twelve steps in the web
            

            Hello Andrew,
The story about the Web confession was very disturbing, involving a
particularly mad and grisly crime. Larry Froide, A father with custody of his
small daughter, still felt pressed by his ex-wife's presence in his life. So he
set the house on fire intentionally to kill the child (in fact, he went in as
if to rescue her, but instead dropped her closer to the flames!). After Froide
confessed on-line, three members of the list notified the authorities and were
promptly flamed by others. Interestingly, one who did not tell the police was
the moderator of the list, Dr. Rotgers (of, yes, Rutgers, where he is director
of the program for Addiction, Consultation and Treatment). Dr. Rotgers said
after all, "since the child was already 'dead,'"--I love those scare quotes --
"no purpose would be served in the form of protecting anyone for rash,
emotional and poorly thought-out action." (I think he meant from such
action.) Rotgers sent Froide private e-mails with referrals for therapy.

            I think you're right about the effect of anonymity on the Web. It's part of
the general lack of reality about the Internet: is the child dead? or only
'dead'? I'm not so sure about A.A. though. This particular list wasn't
following a 12 step philosophy--it was something called Moderation Management;
and one of the people who called the FBI was an AA advocate.

            A long time ago I used to go to Al-Anon, which is a support group for
relatives of alcoholics, and I must say I thought it was a good group: people
were very kind, with much life experience and wisdom. And it wasn't so
anonymous either--my "buddy" gave me his business card (he ran a lamp store in
my neighborhood). Unlike on the Net, people in 12 step groups often get to know
each other outside--they go out for coffee, become friends (for a while AA was
a big date scene, maybe it still is). There's an egalitarianism about the
original 12 step programs I really like, a humble, improvising approach. And
the thing is, it's not like there is some fabulous alternative that works
better.

            In AA, though, the anonymity--well, semi-anonymity--is due to the social
stigma of alcoholism. On the Internet, it seems connected with the desire to
lead a fantasy life. Lots of people didn't believe Froide was describing real
events--as if they often encountered very detailed and plausible first person
accounts of imaginary crimes. Weird.

            Interesting that we both were taken by stories about evil fathers in divorce
cases. (Let's not forget the one in last week's horrific story, who injected
his son with the AIDS virus to avoid paying child support.) It casts an
interesting, lurid glow on the current obsession with Fatherhood and father's
rights. But how long do you think it will be before the Wall Street
Journal runs an op-ed by David Blankenhorn pointing out that if the couples
in these cases had only had covenant marriages, those kids would be alive
today?

            Cheers,
Katha

            ps. I haven't read Conversations with God. What is it?

         
      
   
