
   
   
      
         
            Culturebox Rules: Feminism and the Holocaust

            Should feminist scholars be allowed to apply their theories to the
Holocaust? According to a senior editor at Commentary , the answer is no.
Gabriel Schoenfeld, in an article for the June issue of that magazine, "Auschwitz and the Professors," deplores a recent spate of books
and studies written by women (and a few men) he calls "feminist
Holocaustologians," who indulge in "witless and malicious theorizing" and "the
worst excesses" of a discipline--Holocaust Studies--he has no use for to begin
with. The article provoked an outpouring of letters, twenty-one of which were published in Commentary 's August
issue. In them, Schoenfeld is accused of sexism, recklessness, distortion,
ignorance, and "trivializ[ing] the human experience of victims in the
Holocaust."

            Culturebox intends to make a habit of ruling on disputes of this sort. So
who's right? Culturebox has just finished reading one of the key pieces of
evidence for the prosecution, Women in the Holocaust , edited by Dalia
Ofer and Lenore J. Weitzman (Yale, 1998), and can confirm that it isn't very
good. At best, it tells hitherto untold tales about women in the ghettoes and
death-camps, forcing us to ponder such imponderables as: When a baby is born in
Auschwitz, is it crueller to let him starve or to feed him sugar water and
prolong his death? At worst, the book engages in comparative victimology by
making dubious and undocumentable claims, such as: Women's training as
nurturers and makers-do made them better able to adapt to camp life than
men.
            

            On the other hand, all fields of inquiry have their great thinkers and their
embarrassing ones, and Culturebox has never understood why polemicists think a
single cringeworthy quote is enough evidence to declare entire subjects
off-limits. Schoenfeld has an answer to that, and it is a well-known one,
having first been set forth in another Commentary essay in 1981 by the
great Biblical scholar Robert Alter: The danger with Holocaust Studies is that,
in the proliferation of methodologies and agendas, the incomprehensible horror
of the event may be lost--eclipsed, as humanity of the Jews was eclipsed, by a
fog of categories and subcategories and rhetorical feints at ideological
opponents.

            Fair enough, but there are differences between Alter and Schoenfeld worth
pointing out. One is of tone--Alter is calm, respectful, and regretful.
Schoenfeld is shrill and dismissive, with a tendency to distort others' words
for his own convenience. To take one of the more trivial examples, Schoenfeld
writes: "Mainstream scholarship on the Nazi genocide, we are being told on
every side, is not so much mainstream as 'malestream.'" He then repeats the
word "malestream" throughout the piece, as if to remind us of feminists'
tendency to excess. Culturebox combed the New York Public Library to find the
word in the feminist-Holocaust literature, but found it nowhere. If it has been
used, it has clearly not been used frequently, and so is not coming at us from
"every side."

            The more significant difference is a matter of balance. Against the danger
of trivializing the Holocaust by speaking of it too lightly, Alter juxtaposes
the threat of elevating the Holocaust into something quasi-theological by
speaking of it in religious terms. Alter quotes another great Jewish scholar,
Jacob Neusner, to the effect that "the murder of the Jews of Europe" has become
part of "the civil religion of American Jews." Schoenfeld, by censuring some
kinds of Holocaust speech and failing to offer other kinds that would be
acceptable to him, strongly implies that it is, indeed, a religious topic, for
which some words are not just inaccurate or inappropriate but blasphemous.

            In a way, Schoenfeld reminds Culturebox of the French intellectual and film
director, Claude Lanzmann--a man who declared that after his film,
Shoah , "certain things can no longer be done." (See Ron Rosenbaum's
Explaining Hitler to read about Lanzmann's attacks on Holocaust victims
who address it in ways he doesn't like. Or click on Alex Ross's review in
Slate .) But even Lanzmann makes an interesting case for silence--he
believes that causal explanations of Nazi actions belie their deep
inexplicability.

            Schoenfeld has nothing so provocative to say. His case against feminist
Holocaust studies can be reduced to three main objections: 1) Alter's argument,
made with less subtlety; 2) a somewhat crankish concern that the "object of
such exercises" as feminist Holocaust scholarship is "to sever Jewish women, in
their own minds, from their families as well as from the larger Jewish
community"; and 3) the sense that such treatment violates taste, decorum, and
"human decency." When it comes to discussing something as tasteless, indecent,
and indecorous as the Holocaust, none of the above strike Culturebox as
adequate grounds for censorship.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
