
   
   
      
         
            Cold War and Coffee
            

            Dear Katha,

            No, I don't think Russia is heading for elysium, or that the free market
solves every problem (it just bypasses some of the more avoidable ones). But
nor do I think some wrenching social and economic difficulties in a
still-nascent constitutional democracy are comparable to forced starvations,
reigns of terror, and the Gulag. They're a necessary evil, like a de-tox
tremor, not like an arbitrary jack-boot in the head.

            Nor do I think there is or was any faint comparison between the evils the
U.S. sponsored during the Cold War (and the U.S. undoubtedly sponsored some)
and what the Soviets did. Sorry, but what the West imposed on Western Europe
was nothing compared to what the Soviets did in Eastern Europe or the entire
Eurasian continent. I thought, given what we now know, that this was
uncontroversial. I'm interested to see you still don't think so.

            As to my win-win situation, I don't get your point. My view is that
Thatcherism largely worked and was therefore all but coopted by New Labour.
Yes, the Tories had been in power too long and got kicked out for sleaze and
exhaustion. But the difference between what another Major government would have
done, and what Blair has done is, I think, infinitesimal. So I'm disappointed
the Tories didn't go on for ever, but hardly worried. And so far, Blair has
been terrific on most of the important issues.

            Maybe I should apologize for my distemper this morning. I didn't mean to
re-fight the Cold War over coffee. Something just came over me. I certainly
think the Right has plenty of post-ideological problems of its own (and Safire
is as cranky about Russia as many on the Left.) But I think the Left has some
even more thorough accounting to perform than the Right. It seems to me that in
France and Britain, that process is underway. But in America, it still lags.
Meanwhile, nihilist Clintonism rules, and populist Gingrichism yaps. Could it
be that the Left's refusal to pore over its often shameful and mistaken past
has something to do with this political impasse?

            Andrew

         
      
   
