
   
   
      
         
            Headline
            

            Hi Katha,

                   Couldn't agree with you more about tobacco. I grew up imbibing the
stuff from my chain-puffing mother and can't stand it. But I'm at a loss as to
why it gets so many people steamed at a political level. Liberals particularly.
You'd think, if you read Frank Rich or Doonesbury , that the tobacco
companies represent the supreme evil in the universe when they're just a bunch
of lying, avaricious executives trying to make money. In my book that's legal
in America and ought to be. Tax 'em to, er, death, say I. But stop preaching
about it and passing virtual bills of attainder against them. And don't try to
persuade me that my mother never knew the risks of smoking. She did. My own
theory is that liberals and lefties have to find some outlet for their
authoritarian-moral streak. They've given up on the economy in general, having
lost the argument completely. And they know they shouldn't be sexual puritans.
And the Cold War is over, so demonizing the military-industrial complex is
passé. So they hammer the smokers. Or rather they hammer the Big Tobacco execs
in order to "save the children." Save me from saving the children. The most
heartening news from the younger generation this year (apart from the
popularity of South Park ) is that they're smoking in ever greater
numbers. Take that, you do-gooding, liberal paternalists!
       Oh, did you see in the 
                  New York Times
                that daddy is finally helping out with the
kids? Fathers are apparently spending more time with their children and on
household chores than a generation ago, according to a self-reported survey. Is
this a function of feminist lawmaking or the free market and empowered,
money-making women? Just wondering ...
       More mogul-porn in the Times business section. Yawn. But a jolly
piece on how Mr. Scaife spent $2 million on the American Spectator 's
investigative journalism into Clinton. Can you imagine what we could have done
with two mill at TNR or The Nation ? The thing about the
right-wing conspiracy is that, like most conspiracies, it's both paranoid and
incompetent. In some ways, Clinton has been lucky to have it around, I
think.

            best
Andrew

         
      
   
