
   
   
      
         
            Speer Chucker

            Last Friday, Michael Naumann, the unusually candid and big-spending German
editor-in-chief of Henry Holt, cut short the mounting gossip that he was about
to be fired by quitting. He left to become, of course, a politician--Culture
Minister in the shadow Cabinet of Gerhard Schroeder, who's a good bet to defeat
German chancellor Helmut Kohl this fall. On Monday, Naumann told a Berlin radio
station that he opposed the giant Holocaust memorial planned for the center of
that city, designed by Americans Peter Eisenman and Richard Serra. Germany,
said Naumann, should spend its money preserving its crumbling concentration
camps, "a landscape of death [that] is considerably more moving and has
considerably deeper effects than a memorial"--especially since, he added, that
memorial is reminiscent of nothing so much as the works of Hitler's favorite
architect, Albert Speer.

            Yikes! Culturebox knows from having once casually tossed the words "Final
Solution" into some light German cocktail banter that, in Germany, you don't
invoke a name like Speer's in vain. On the other hand, when she looks at the
endlessly-debated project with its 4,000 ominous, towering, concrete slabs,
Culturebox can't help suspecting that Naumann's right. (Click here to see for yourself.)

            As it turns out, German papers lost interest in the Holocaust-memorial angle
as soon as Naumann's boss, Schroeder, announced that the question of its future
would be resolved by public debate. But the buzz has not died down. In the same
radio interview--the first the German public had ever heard from him--Naumann
also outlined the startlingly ambitious program he'd undertake if Schroeder
were elected: federalizing the arts budget in a country in which the arts are
mainly supported by the states; revitalizing the German film industry by
calling on his Hollywood pals to import more German films, and so on.

            As you can imagine, these proposals have been amply dissected and nitpicked
all week by every German newspaper Culturebox has managed to Nexis up. Their
main spin: Who the heck is this guy anyway? Is he "a fresh wind from New York,"
as one paper put it, or a would-be "Culture Pope," which is to say, an
American-style media hound whose appointment should make German voters think
twice about electing his boss? Culturebox, a woman who appreciates the
journalistic value of men of unusual candor, sincerely hopes that the German
voters do not.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
