
   
   
      
         
            Is Rugrats anti-Semitic?

            Last Rosh Hashanah (Sept. 20), the Washington Post ran a comic strip
based on the popular kids' TV show Rugrats , in which the main
character, the half-Jewish toddler Tommy Pickles, is taken to synagogue. He
listens in fascinated befuddlement as all the adults around him utter the
Hebrew words to the Kaddish , the Jewish prayer for the dead. He sits on
the lap of his grandfather Boris, who is very old and has a long nose.

            On Oct. 11, the Washington Post issued an Editor's Note declaring
that its editors should have known better than to run the comic strip and
reporting that the newspaper had complained to Nickelodeon, which produces it,
as well as to the company that distributes it.

            What was wrong with the Rugrats strip? The Editor's Note said "the
depiction of Jewish worshipers and use of the Kaddish were
inappropriate." A Post editor, interviewed in the Jewish newspaper the
Forward , said it had had scores of calls and that most of the callers
were upset about the inclusion of the Kaddish, although a few were incensed by
the length of the nose.

            Culturebox thinks the Washington Post was faced with a genuine
dilemma but made exactly the wrong call. There is a tradition of anti-Semitic
caricature featuring Jews with hideous noses, some of which has been used to
justify persecution. (Think of the Nazi publication Der Stuermer .) That
might have been cause for an Editor's Note pointing out that while some
people may have taken offense, none was intended. But there's no excuse for
censoring cartoonists (even after the fact) because they've used religion as
their subject matter. That's like saying Peanuts can't focus on
Christmas, or that when Brenda Starr prays, she can't use language from the
Lord's Prayer. Since there was no mockery in the Rugrats depiction of
the Kaddish-- just one toddler's curiosity -- one can only
conclude the callers deemed the comic strip, as a medium, insufficiently
dignified for serious Jewish subjects. That would be news to Art Spiegelman,
creator of Maus --comic-book accounts of the Holocaust .
            

            As it turns out, the Rugrats TV show is much beloved among Jewish
parents with young children for its helpful and sympathetic depictions of
Hanukkah and Passover Seders. So the complainers were not only trying to
abridge freedom of expression, they were wildly off-base. But what's shocking
is that one of the nation's leading newspapers gave in to them.

            -- Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
