
   
   
      
         
            Idiot Box: Docudramatic Tension

            Those longing, in this suddenly post-Lewinsky
era, for more real-life melodrama to watch on television have good news: This
third week of sweeps brings plenty of docudramas (one starring Lauren Bacall)
and jazzed-up documentaries to slake our thirst for TV-enhanced reality. Even
the regular fictional series are borrowing the day's headlines or real-life
characters to goose ratings, a practice as old as Shakespeare.


            TV's version of truth (or something resembling it) is
stranger than fiction and often more entertaining as well. The medium's blend
of fact and fiction is part of its very design; the tube creates a living-room
world that sometimes seems as real as our own. It's the perfect environment for
biopics, infotainment, or fictional cover-ups.

            This Friday (Feb. 19) conspiracy, with tips of the hat to Ken
Starr and The X-Files , rules the airwaves. Homicide
(NBC, 10 p.m.) wraps up a two-part "cross-over"
episode that began on Law and Order Wednesday. The two teams of
crime-stoppers plumb a murky murder mystery connected somehow to a lesbian sex
scandal and the White House. There's even a nefarious independent prosecutor
who abuses both key witnesses and our heroic prosecutors! Unfortunately, the
story line is as convoluted as an X-Files alien episode, and both NBC
crime shows lack the energy--and the charismatic lead actors--of their glory
days. Still, it's good to see the Homicide crew finally spending more
time solving crimes than pursuing their boring office romances.

            Dark doings continue on Chris Carter's Millennium on
Friday (Fox, 9 p.m.). Frank Black (well played by Lance Henriksen), the grim
ex-FBI agent who can enter the minds of murderers, learns more about the past
of the mysterious, influential Millennium Group--and J. Edgar Hoover's role.
Oddly enough, the group hasn't run into the X-Files ' all-powerful
Syndicate yet.

            No one's bothered with the generally mirthless
Saturday Night Live in the last five years or so.
Tonight's (NBC, 11:30 p.m.). may be an episode to at least glance at. Bill
Murray, fresh off his rave reviews in Rushmore, hosts, while the wonderful
Lucinda Williams, the unconventionally emotional and compelling country-rock
singer-songwriter, is the musical guest.

            Sunday is docudrama heaven. In Too Rich--The Secret Life of Doris
Duke (CBS, Sunday and Tuesday, 9 p.m.), Lauren Bacall gives a bitchy
grande dame performance as the world's richest woman. There's something
perversely reassuring about a great beauty who had it all--and still ended up a
drug-addled wretch manipulated by a Machiavellian butler (Richard Chamberlain).
Bacall's performance has echoes of her Tony Award- winning Margo Channing role,
all patrician bite and bluster. Told in flashbacks, the film drags a bit when
the younger version of Duke, played by Lindsay Frost, is on screen, but jumps
to life every time the formidable Bacall speaks her mind. On Monday, compare
Bacall with the real thing in a documentary called Doris Duke--The Lonely
Heiress on A&E (8 p.m.). The big mystery of her death:
Did the butler do it?

            Enough seaminess: For moral uplift, check out Sunday's Passing
Glory (TNT, 8 p.m.). It's a stirring true tale of an all-black Catholic
basketball team that faces off with the best white team in the segregated New
Orleans of the 1960s. The film stars Rip Torn and Emmy winner Andre Braugher,
riveting as a priest leading his players in a drive to integrate school
athletics. Although supposedly based on real events, it also feels phony at
times. Is there a federal law that says all basketball flicks must end with one
shot that determines everything?

            On Monday, a series of genuine documentaries square off
against reality-inspired programs. ABC gives us And the Beat Goes On: The
Sonny and Cher Story (9 p.m.). This hagiography, produced by Sonny Bono's
widow, includes the mandatory scene of the downtrodden composer working out his
masterpieces. Here it's Bono (a bland Jay Underwood), dressed in a fur vest,
plucking out "I Got You, Babe." Renee Faia does a Cher impersonation as good as
any drag queen's, but her sullen pouting and his whining make it seem like a
long SCTV skit featuring Andrea Martin. (See the real Sonny Bono on VH-1's
Behind the Music episode at 11 p.m.) True artistry is displayed in
Bravo's portrait of Little Jimmy Scott, the
troubled singer with the angelic voice of a jazz diva (10 p.m.). His fans
include Ray Charles and Lou Reed, and you're likely to become one,
too.

            Genuine immigration abuses are the backdrop for the schlocky murder mystery,
Border Line (Monday, NBC, 9 p.m.), which marks the return to
television of Sherry Stringfield (formerly of ER ). But the
single-mom-in-peril subplot is so trite it's a wonder she can stay awake, never
mind the viewer. A better bet for drama is Meltdown at Three Mile
Island (PBS, 9 p.m.), a tense documentary narrative on the 1979 nuclear
accident.

            Two other docs are worth your attention this week:
The Learning Channel's
gritty Inside the White House Press Corps (Monday, 9 p.m.); and "RFK
vs. LBJ," which offers fake footage of look-alike actors over real audio tape
of the leaders scheming (Tuesday, 9 p.m.). It's competing with a comic take on
politics, Spin City (ABC, 9 p.m.), featuring guest star Christopher
Lloyd as yet another wacky mentor to Michael J. Fox. This time around, Lloyd
believes he's the Messiah.

            At the Grammys on Wednesday (CBS, 8
p.m.), expect Lauryn Hill to be treated like the musical Messiah with her 10
nominations. The host is Rosie O'Donnell, a symbol of the blandness that
usually afflicts the awards.

            All the best Thursday series ( Frasier and
ER ) have sweeps- driven episodes, but perhaps the most powerful
program that night is the movie This Boy's Life (TNT, 8 p.m.), with
Robert De Niro as an abusive stepdad tyrannizing Leonardo DiCaprio.

            It's based, of course, on a true story.

            
               --Art Levine
            

             

         
      
   
