
   
   
      
         
            ... Said the Spider to the Fly

            The giggles were excruciating. Monica Lewinsky took such obvious delight in
regaling us with details of her encounters with her sexual soulmate--her wide
eyes crinkling happily, her full mouth struggling vainly against a triumphant
grin at the impressive number of times he called--you felt you'd wandered into
Lord of the Flies, the female version . What adultless colony did
this girl come from? Could she possibly believe her teen fantasies of secret
love? Is sucking the presidential penis really to be her greatest
accomplishment in life?

            The probable answer is yes. You could see this realization dawning on
Barbara Walters' grave face. At least you hoped that's what you were seeing.
You hoped Walters was feeling some pity for the life thereby wasted, was
suppressing a grandmotherly impulse to shut this child up. For what was much
more gruesome than the spectacle of the giddy Lewinsky was that of the cynical
Walters. Having sat the girl down in her den; having posed with a social
worker's concern questions still unthinkable in their prurience--"Did you ever
try to have intercourse?"; having exploited an insecure person's lack of
internal censors to help a network score a ratings coup, Walters turned
blithely into Linda Tripp. It was the primal scene of maternal betrayal, the
older woman eliciting the confession all too easily from the younger one and
then using it to make her the laughingstock of the nation: Walters asks
Lewinsky to imagine hypothetical children; Lewinsky tells them that "Mommy made
a big mistake"; Walters concludes with a stunning outburst of moral hypocrisy,
"And that is the understatement of the year."

            Let's correct the record here. Lewinsky's was not the biggest mistake made
over the course of this debacle. She is guilty of a lot of small ones. But it
is not a crime to have an affair with a married man and then be indiscreet
about it. Her behavior was stupid and hurt a lot of people, but if the point
here is to measure the size of her errors, they are barely perceptible next to
those of the people who ruined her: a literary agent with profit and something
akin to treason on her mind; a federal prosecutor who chose to hound and harass
a citizen with overweening force and little justification; and journalists who
cooperated by exposing every last detail of her private life.

            The New York Times today joined much of the rest of the media in
censuring Lewinsky for cashing in on her fame. That can't be right. Lewinsky
did not choose her notoriety. Being a blabbermouth doesn't mean you've sought
national exposure; it means you're a blabbermouth. Lewinsky did not ask to be
saddled with hundreds of thousands in legal fees. She could not have known that
messing around with the president meant losing the likelihood of economic
independence when the day comes, as one hopes it will, when she finally
achieves the emotional maturity to take care of herself. But not even Bill
Clinton is to blame for that, or for her understandable need to make herself
human after having been reduced to a national joke. One can pity her for
neither seeing the unsettling impression she creates nor grasping that there's
no way to talk about the affair that will restore some measure of dignity to
her life. But Monica is road kill here, and Walters the latest in a series of
hit-and-run drivers, and there is something sickening about the way we have
watched this woman be knocked down again and again and again, yet still feel
the need to vilify the object of our voyeuristic pleasure.

            
               --Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
