
   
   
      
         
            Say No to the Super Bowl

            
               Please note: All times given are Eastern, but check your local listings
just in case.
            

            Television is a mass medium, and this week's programs are going to lure some
of the biggest audiences of the year--starting with an orgy of Super Bowl
coverage on Fox. By the time of the actual kick-off on Sunday at 6:18 p.m., you
may be convinced that it's your patriotic duty to watch the game. If you
must be un-American, stick to cable and watch Comedy Central's marathon
of The Kids in the Hall (Friday, 11:30 p.m.) and six hours of
Absolutely Fabulous (Sunday, 2 p.m.).

            But make no mistake: Fox rules the TV world this week. Its executives paid
dearly to win the rights to broadcast the Super Bowl, and they're not going to
let you ignore it. On the day of the big game, for instance, they're offering
seven hours of pre-Bowl coverage, starting at 11 a.m. The Super Bowl isn't just
about football, of course, but about ads, network promotions and a new series.
The series this year is an innovative animated Fox series to air in March,
The Family Guy ; it previews at Sunday 10 p.m. Family Guy is
closer in spirit to South Park than to The Simpsons , and not as
funny as either, but still, it's pretty inventive and daring. Don't be
surprised if the Anti-Defamation League attacks the show for highlighting a
whining, bagel-munching "G.I. Jew" toy soldier.

            Some other options: The Independent Film Channel's ... And God

               Spoke (Saturday, 10 p.m.), a hilarious mock documentary about two
B-movie filmmakers who are trying to make a big-budget Biblical epic, but are
reduced to casting Soupy Sales as Moses. Friday (Jan. 29) at 8 p.m., IFC also
offers an engaging documentary about a genuine indie filmmaker, In Bad
Taste: The John Waters Story .

            At the other end of the culture is wholesome Vince Gill, the country music
great featured on A&E's concert series, Live by Request (Saturday, 9
p.m.). Gill's high lonesome tenor voice is a national treasure, and his success
at pulling in Grammies and Country Music Awards shows that popularity and
artistic merit sometimes coincide.

            But there's no assurance of that when Fox broadcasts another unnecessary
awards show, the first annual TV Guide Awards (Monday, 8 p.m.). It's
based on ballots by one million readers; naturally, The Jerry Springer
Show is up for an award. These specials bring to mind Larry Sanders'
comment after watching a focus group: "Now I know why Baywatch is the
number one syndicated show in the world."

            On Monday night, real greatness can be found in I'll Make Me A World ,
the six-hour PBS documentary about the lives and works of
20 th -century black artists (Monday to Wednesday, 9 p.m.)--everyone
from Louis Armstrong to Spike Lee. As Lee says: "It's hard for me to imagine
American culture without black people being part of that. It would be one
b-l-a-a-a-n-d place, bland as Wonderbread."

            Plenty of white-guy blandness on display in Tom Clancy's Netforce , a
thriller about an elite group of FBI cyber-cops in the year 2005 who are
fighting Internet crime and a powerful computer titan modeled after Bill Gates
(ABC, Monday and Thursday at 9 p.m.). It gets mired in techno-speak and stars
the dopey-looking Scott Bakula ( Quantum Leap ), who is no Harrison Ford,
though even Harrison Ford would look silly saying things like, "Run all our
emergency utility programs. I want a full diagnostic!" Bakula's arch-enemy is
Judge Reinhold, a murderous sort who seeks to control the entire Internet with
a nefarious...Web browser! It's never made clear why , since he already
dominates the browser market. But the show does have potential as a kind of
Mommy Dearest for computer geeks.

            UPN has its own entry in the camp market, Roswell: The Aliens

               Attack (Thursday, 8 p.m.), the story of human-like aliens who survive
the Roswell UFO crash in 1947 and plan to destroy Earth with captured nuclear
weapons. The female alien's secret weapon: seducing soldiers. Why rent Tim
Burton's Mars Attacks! parody when you can see a genuine alien film for
free?

            Thursday marks the official beginning of sweeps month, and so there are some
rich pickings. On Frasier (NBC, 9 p.m.), Woody Harrelson visits Frasier
as Woody Boyd, the lovably dumb bartender from Cheers , but then won't
leave. The best sweeps night program of all may be the Turner Classic Movies
broadcasts of the original (and best) The Thin Man movie and its five
sequels (Thursday, 8 p.m.). William Powell and Myrna Loy star, a reminder of
the time when classy (if drunken) wit equalled box-office success.

            Today, they'd be lucky to win anything at the TV Guide Awards .

            -- Art Levine
            

         
      
   
