
   
   
      
         
            A Minor Key

            The Booker Prize has been so controversial that you can't call it England's
most prestigious fiction prize. But it's still the best-flacked. Ian McEwan won
it in November for his 192-page Amsterdam , which has just been published
here. It's a dog. It's also decidedly minor.

            McEwan has never been my favorite writer. I'll assent to the critical
commonplace that he's a narrative virtuoso. But like a docent at his own
retrospective, he's ever insistent that we notice that virtuosity. The
spectacular opening of Enduring Love (1997), in which a half-dozen men
struggle--and fail--to keep a hot-air balloon from taking off with a small boy
in it, is Exhibit A for his skill. But even there, the cuteness cloys: "What
were we running towards? I don't think any of us would ever know fully. But
superficially the answer was, a balloon. Not the nominal space that encloses a
cartoon character's speech or thought, nor, by analogy, the kind that's driven
by mere hot air."

            Clearly, Amsterdam owes its Booker to committee embarrassment over
not tapping (or even shortlisting) Enduring Love . It's rather like the
Nobel committee's honoring Hemingway for his vapid The Old Man and the
Sea . This leads me to realize that "minor" is most often used as a
synonym for "bad" or "short." It's not. Amsterdam and Old
Man are both bad, short, and minor works. So what does it mean to call a
novel "minor"? Herewith, two guesses:

            (1) Minor means solipsistic . McEwan's plot is a contrivance of
infantile simplicity worked out among four characters. (I won't reveal it, but
you can see the book's resolution comin' round the mountain on page 62.) These
characters meet occasionally, but they all hammer out their motivations,
allegiances and enmities in private: on long walks, doodling in the office,
vegetating in bed, sitting at the kitchen table getting drunk alone. Missing is
what the French call intersubjectivite . That's what gives major novels
their heft.

            (2) Minor means classbound . Although they differ in lines of
work--there's a Tory foreign secretary, a broadsheet editor, a composer, and a
magnate--these characters are class- and attitude-bound. They're like the same
character cloned. While the backdrops vary--the magnate's house is utilitarian
and spare, the musician's full of antiques--the spiritual decor is as cold as a
corporate headquarters. Major fiction is animated by major friction--of classes
rubbing together.

            McEwan's aging yuppie ciphers differ only in their wine collections. I
suspect they give an accurate picture of the state of human variety among the
ruling classes of the European Union. Good novels can be written about these
people. So can long ones. But not major ones.

            -- Christopher Caldwell
            

         
      
   
