
   
   
      
         
            Of Conspiracies and King

            A bad liver killed James
Earl Ray last month, but not everyone believes it. No sooner had Martin Luther
King Jr.'s assassin died than rumors began spreading that his death was part of
a government plot. Not surprising: For 30 years Ray had promoted the theory
that the civil rights leader's murder was part of a larger conspiracy.

            He wasn't
the first to say so. Right after King's death, his aide-de-camp, Ralph
Abernathy, hinted at some vast unfathomed plot. White supremacists claimed
black militants were responsible. Before Ray was arrested, a group called the
Kennedy Assassination Inquiry Committee claimed he was one of the three men in
a famous photograph (famous, at least, for Kennedy assassination buffs) of
Dallas' Dealey Plaza, where JFK was murdered.

            Despite multiple debunkings, these fantasies endure. Most
recently, a crackpot named William F. Pepper has convinced King's entire family
that the U.S. government, including President Lyndon Johnson, .

            Why do we
love conspiracy theories so much? Many people refuse to accept James Earl Ray's
guilt (or Lee Harvey Oswald's in JFK's assassination) because they can't accept
that one insignificant lowlife could topple a hero and alter history. More
generally, conspiracism (as Middle East scholar Daniel Pipes calls it)
flourishes during turbulent times--revolutions in particular--when
long-established orders seem imperiled by uncontrollable events, endangered
powers imagine secret plots to undermine them, and the dispossessed worry about
persecution. With their grand designs in which everything has its place,
conspiracists seek to impose a reassuring order on the randomness of history.
As the late historian Richard Hofstadter noted in his famous essay "The
Paranoid Style in American Politics," "[T]hey regard a 'vast' or 'gigantic'
conspiracy as the motive force in historical events. History is a
conspiracy."

            
The histories conspiracists concoct are
convoluted--counterhistories full of strange codes and logic through which
factual history can be glimpsed as in a fun-house mirror. Conspiracy theorists
adopt the trappings of scholarship, touting irrelevant titles and credentials.
They burrow into the arcana of their topics and inundate potential acolytes
with a barrage of pedantic details. Rather than build a case from evidence,
conspiracists deny the available evidence, maintaining that appearances
deceive. Rather than admit to inconvenient facts, they dismiss them as lies,
making their own theories irrefutable. (King conspiracism .)

            Modern
conspiracism is almost a thousand years old. Pipes, in a book called
Conspiracy: How the Paranoid Style Flourishes and Where It Comes From ,
pinpoints the Crusades of the 11 th century--the wars waged by
Europe's Christians on the Muslims who controlled Palestine--as its first mass
outbreak. To legitimize their attacks, Crusaders demonized their Muslim
foes--not hard to do, since the Muslims had a competing empire and religion of
vast size and power. But Europe's Jews, too, had to be converted or killed. How
to justify the eradication of a weak and numerically insignificant group? The
Crusaders convinced themselves the Jews were a secret cabal with insidious
powers, out to destroy Christendom.

            Besides this anti-Semitism, Pipes identifies a second,
related strain in Western conspiracist thought: fear of secret societies. This
variety focused on small groups (other than Jews) whose rituals seemed
mysterious and whose beliefs seemed threatening to Christianity.
Masons--professional stonecutters--were the earliest targets. Since medieval
times, masons had devised confidential phrases and handshakes to recognize
fellow craftsmen and protect their trade secrets from outsiders. During the
Enlightenment, their guilds became clubs for discussing the new liberal ideas
of deism and toleration (and also came to include nonstonecutters as members).
Religious authorities feared that, within their lodges, the Masons, too, were
plotting Christianity's doom.

            Pipes
contends these two strains of conspiracism co-existed and intermingled over the
years, giving rise to various fantasies of global schemes. Typically, these
fantasies have centered on such staples as the Bavarian Illuminati (a Masonlike
order founded in 1776), the Rothschilds (a Jewish banking family of the
18 th century) and, later, the Council on Foreign Relations (a bunch
of foreign-policy wonks who meet on East 68 th Street).

            
Though European in origin, conspiracism has
thrived in the United States. But where aristocratic Europe feared closed-door
cabals of powerful men, democratic America's suspicions focused on its own
government. The American Revolution, most scholars now agree, was itself an
outgrowth of conspiracism: The colonists rebelled because they imagined a
systematic plot by the monarchy to deprive them of their liberties. King George
III and his ministers were actually just blundering their way through the
tricky business of running a trans-Atlantic empire, but suspicious Americans
viewed each restriction of their rights--the Stamp Act, the Tea Act, and so
on--as part of a scheme to reduce them to slavery. And so the Revolution.

            
Democratization fostered more conspiracy-mongering. By the 1820s and '30s, most
states were allowing all white men to vote (before that, they had to own land),
and President Andrew Jackson was leading his famous "war" on the national bank.
In this climate popular hostility was trained against powerful private
interests and gave new life to anti-Masonry as a political movement. (Masonic
lodges were often made up of leading figures in the community.) The Anti-Mason
Party was formally born in Rochester, N.Y., in 1826, when a Mason who had quit
the organization was murdered, and it became a robust third party in the 1832
elections. Masonry came to be seen, as Hofstadter put it, as "a standing
conspiracy against republican government."

            So it has gone, with conspiracism playing a role in crisis
after crisis. The Civil War arose because Northerners feared that a small
Southern "Slave Power" had seized control of Washington, while Southerners were
convinced the North was determined to destroy their way of life. In the depths
of the Cold War, many Americans suspected Communists had infiltrated Washington
and were about to subvert our democracy. (Some of these folks are still writing
for Commentary today.)

            Today's
conspiracism stems mainly from the instability of the late 1960s and early
'70s--a period of both uncontrolled violence (assassinations, urban riots,
political protests turned bloody) and anti-government ideology (the left
challenged laws regulating speech, sex, and drug use; the right fought busing,
the Warren court, and the welfare state).

            
Social breakdown plus anti-statism bred
widespread conspiracism, as the King case shows. King visited Memphis a week
before his assassination for a march in support of striking sanitation workers
there. During the march, a black gang called the Invaders began looting, the
cops attacked them (and the peaceful demonstrators), and a full-scale riot left
dozens hurt. Surely that blood bath--and the hundreds like it in those
years--couldn't have been far from the mind of William Bradford Huie, a
journalist and Ray's confessor, when Huie claimed in a 1968 Look
magazine article that King's well-placed killers "wanted to use King's murder
to trigger violent conflict between white and Negro citizens."

            Of
course, there was a good reason to think the government had it in for King--the
government did have it in for King. FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover loathed
the civil rights leader, thought he was a Communist, and waged a relentless
campaign of surveillance and sabotage against him. (Author Taylor Branch
recounts a shocking episode in which the FBI tried to make King commit suicide,
as noted in this review of his book.) Hoover never contemplated murder, but you
didn't have to be crazy to think powerful figures had it in for King.

            As the White House, FBI, and CIA became increasingly
involved in clandestine, invasive, and illegal acts against citizens--bugging,
wiretapping, surveillance, opening mail, infiltrating organizations--the
government claimed it was just protecting the public from radicals, but people
soon stopped buying the explanation. By the Nixon years, the president's men
were tapping the phones of prominent journalists such as the Washington
Post 's Joseph Kraft, stashing envelopes full of hush money underneath pay
phones, even--believe it or not--breaking into and bugging the headquarters of
the opposition party.

            Watergate brought executive
recklessness back under control. With Nixon's resignation and increased
vigilance by the press, Congress, and the courts, covert government activities
were, if not eradicated, at least no longer the rule. Hatred of the government
gave way to a jaded contempt. Outrage settled into anomie. It was no longer
news that the state might resort to such activities. The seeds of paranoia that
were planted in the hothouse of the late '60s and early '70s germinated, and in
the cynical, offhand conspiracism of the '90s, we reap their fruit.

         
      
   
