
   
   
      
         
            Protecting the President

            The Clinton years haven't
been easy for the U.S. Secret Service. First, agents were blamed for spreading
rumors about marital spats--involving household furniture--between the
president and the first lady. Then they drew jeers for closing part of
Pennsylvania Avenue after two near-assaults on the White House. Last fall,
muckraker Seymour Hersh's book about John F. Kennedy's sexual exploits relied
on dirt from whistle-blowing ex-operatives. Now, Clinton's guards are being
forced to tell all about the president's alleged affair with Monica
Lewinsky.

            It's an uncomfortable role
for a group that prides itself on its low profile--indeed, on its secrecy. From
the Zapruder film to the Clint Eastwood film, the popular image of the Secret
Service agent--stiff posture, of dark suit and shades, the walkie-talkies, the
microphone in the sleeve--is one of laconic, unflappable, and self-abnegating
cool. Though always at the center of things, the agent cherishes his anonymity;
he's expected to sacrifice not just life but also ego to protect the
president.

            Who are
these guys, anyway? And how did they develop such importance and mystique?

            From the beginning, Secret Service operatives have been
thought to have pretty sexy jobs. Abraham Lincoln and Gen. George B. McClellan
conceived of the organization during the Civil War as an espionage agency.
Under the control of the Department of War, its first head was the legendary
private detective Allan Pinkerton, a friend of McClellan's who had learned
of--and helped avert--an attempt on Lincoln's life in 1861. When Lincoln fired
the famously inept McClellan, Pinkerton went, too. He was replaced eventually
by a brigadier general named La Fayette C. Baker, who recorded his exploits of
derring-do in a memoir called The Secret Service in the Late War
(1874)--the first in a long line of agents' kiss-and-tells (click for a brief
review). Later, Baker ran afoul of President Andrew Johnson for having
allegedly set up his own espionage network within the White House. Johnson
abolished the organization, and Baker wound up testifying against the president
during his impeachment hearings.

            Meanwhile,
another Secret Service--the forerunner of today's--was created as a division of
the Treasury Department. On April 14, 1865, Lincoln met with Treasury Secretary
Hugh McCullough about the need to fight rampant wartime counterfeiting. During
the war, the U.S. government had issued its first paper money, or "greenbacks"
(previously, only private banks had issued paper notes), and one-third to
one-half of all paper currency in circulation was believed to be "queer."
McCullough and Lincoln discussed setting up a Secret Service to root out
counterfeiters. It didn't occur to them, unfortunately, to have this new
division protect the president, and that very night Lincoln was assassinated
when the Washington, D.C., policeman assigned to guard him wandered out of
Ford's Theater to a tavern down the street. (La Fayette Baker's men,
coincidentally, helped bring John Wilkes Booth to justice.) The assassination
delayed things, and July 5, McCullough swore in the new service's first chief,
the appropriately named William P. Wood.

            
In the absence of other federal law enforcement
agencies--there was no FBI until 1908--the service over time took on new jobs:
combating the terrorist acts of the Ku Klux Klan, which had sprung up in the
Reconstruction South; conducting espionage during the Spanish-American War and
World War I; investigating the Harding administration's Teapot Dome scandal;
and helping to apprehend the gangster Al Capone for tax fraud. Its main job,
though, has always remained fighting counterfeiting and other forms of fraud:
check, credit card, postage stamp, food stamp, and the like. Which is to say,
if you cash your neighbor's Social Security check, it's the Secret Service that
will come after you.

            
Conspicuously absent from the agency's duties was the job of presidential
protection. Until Lincoln's murder, no president had been assassinated. When,
in 1835, a would-be assassin pointed his pistol at Andrew Jackson, the
pugnacious president simply charged at the assailant, brandishing his cane. To
his good fortune, both the gun and a backup pistol failed to fire. In 1881,
James Garfield was the second president to be killed, and during Grover
Cleveland's second term--a time of fierce labor unrest--the president finally
began using Secret Service agents, informally, for defense. Only when Theodore
Roosevelt took office following the 1901 assassination of William McKinley did
the Treasury Department authorize full-time presidential protection. Five years
later, Congress passed the Sundry Civil Expenses Act, which made the service's
protective duties official.

            For 62 years the Secret Service ably sheltered the
president from danger, despite assassination attempts on Franklin Roosevelt (as
president-elect, in 1933) and Harry Truman (in 1950). John F. Kennedy's
assassination, although the service's greatest failure, nonetheless brought it
renewed acclaim for its agents' heroics. One leapt onto the president's moving
limousine to shield Jackie Kennedy, while another, Rufus Youngblood, gained
fame for covering Vice President Lyndon Johnson's body with his own. (Likewise,
Agent Timothy McCarthy was celebrated for taking a bullet for Ronald Reagan in
1981.) The Kennedy assassination thus marked the arrival of the romantic myth
of the self-sacrificing agent--the myth that Larry Cockell and Clinton's other
agents trade on when they publicize their anguish over having to betray the
president's trust.

            In the
'60s and '70s, the danger of assassination seemed suddenly to expand--Martin
Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy were murdered in 1968, George Wallace was
crippled in 1972, and Gerald Ford was targeted twice within three weeks in
1975--and the Secret Service's custodial duties expanded accordingly.
Protection had been unofficially extended to presidents-elect in 1908. Now,
others came under the shield: former presidents (1961), vice presidents and
vice presidents-elect (1962), former presidents' spouses and families (1965),
presidential and vice presidential candidates (1968), visiting foreign heads of
state (1971), vice presidents' families (1974), foreign diplomatic missions
(1975), and spouses of foreign heads of state (1986). Even the Mona Lisa got
Secret Service guardianship during her visit to the United States in 1962.

            
Naturally, the agency's size and budget
exploded (see David Plotz's explanation in "Strange
Bedfellow"). In 1963 it had 520 employees and an annual budget of $8
million. Today it has approximately 4,600 employees, a $590 million budget, and
field offices around the world. This massive growth has periodically elicited
cries from lean-government types. What's more, in our egalitarian times people
resent the privilege that serves to insulate a somewhat random
quasi-aristocracy from contact with citizens. This same egalitarianism fuels
the feeling that the Secret Service shouldn't serve, in the mot du jour ,
as the president's "Praetorian Guard"--that it shouldn't take metaphorical
bullets to protect his dalliances.

            Even that unpleasant task,
however, has some precedent. In The Dark Side of Camelot , of course,
Hersh found four ex-agents who told him about JFK's reckless sexual escapades
and about how they were pressed into providing cover. Less well known, if less
salacious, is the fact that in 1915, the Presbyterian moralist Woodrow Wilson,
then a recent widower, used agents to run interference for him in his amorous
pursuits. Edmund Starling, who guarded Wilson, wrote in his memoir: "Our boss
was in love. He was courting a handsome widow, Mrs. Edith Bolling Galt ... it
was all taking place at the White House, where Mrs. Galt was brought by her
friends." Soon, Starling was conscripted into following the couple on their
walks through Washington's Rock Creek Park (for more details, click ) and
fending off reporters. Though Wilson was unmarried, dating another woman so
soon after his wife's death seemed vaguely scandalous in 1915, especially
because, as Starling discreetly put it, Wilson was afraid "another woman--a
Mrs. Peck, whom the President had known years before--would make trouble if an
engagement were announced." Starling and his colleagues held their tongues, at
least until he penned his memoir.

            History
teaches few practical lessons, but here it may have a small one to offer: Larry
Cockell, call your agent.

            
               If you
missed the review of Secret Service kiss-and-tell memoirs and other useful
sources, click . For more on President Wilson's chaste pursuit of Mrs. Galt,
click .
            

         
      
   
