
   
   
      
         
            The Unmade Bed

            The only thing most
gardeners really want from winter is assurance that it won't be back. But
before we plunge headlong into spring--starting more seeds than we could ever
hope to plant, scarfing up little wonders at nurseries because we simply
must have them--let us stop to consider the lesson of restraint to be
learned from the garden in winter.

            People
often assume that the winter garden, its flowers having died back, is devoid,
wanting--gardenless. Each year, the gardening press rallies to remedy this
misimpression but only makes things worse. Solace is offered: story after story
on how to supply your garden with what is ubiquitously referred to as "winter
interest." This consists of a seductive array of close-up photos of dangling
berries and mottled, peeling bark designed to cure whatever ails your
garden.

            One problem with the term winter interest is that it
implies that winter is not very interesting. Another is the notion that we seek
something as mealy and undistinguished as interest, rather than beauty, which
is what we strive for come spring.

            In their
defense, these articles do make us aware of these woody winter plants and of
the increasing diversity of cultivars available for winter gardening. Few
things bring me as much joy as the sight of my own swampy backyard, all
leafless and brittle and dotted throughout with bright orange-red winterberries
clinging to their branches. To see the monochromatic splendor of a wintry
Vermont wood, populated only by stands of dusky-white birches and smooth,
silver-gray beeches rising from the snow, is, I firmly believe, to live. The
craze for winter interest, on the other hand, has really become a fetish for
anything that can be left poking out of the snow.

            
But the garden as a whole can be beautiful in
winter, and it can teach us a lot about what makes a garden beautiful in
summer. Winter is a perfect time to visit gardens--not your neighbor's garden,
perhaps, or a garden known mainly for its flower borders, but public gardens,
historic private gardens, well-designed parks, and arboretums. Quieter and more
evocative than in the high season, when teeming with camera-toting tourists,
they're more likely to reveal their secrets, their pasts, and their intentions.
Undistracted by flowers or too much color, you can see tones, lines, shapes,
and light--the garden's pure form.

            A garden
is created more through gestures than by any one plant. Structure, often
referred to as "bones," is created through architectural elements such as
evergreen hedges, arrangements of trees and shrubs, walls, terraces, and
flights of stairs. The placement of these things affects the spatial perception
of the ground, the sides, and the roof plane of the garden. Once you have
created such a garden "room," you can furnish it with any seasonal delights you
like. The bones of the garden are not put in place merely to console you when
you peer from the window in winter; they are the garden.

            When I visited Chiswick House, a Palladian villa outside
London, this winter, the garden beds in front of the 19 th century
conservatory were all empty--just brown dirt against green grass. These beds,
made for the garish, summer displays of bright annuals popular in Victorian
England, will shortly be filled with them again. But on the January day when I
visited, these beds revealed themselves as simple shapes, well-proportioned and
well-placed, making highly pleasing abstract patterns across the ground. We
would do well to consider our own garden beds, no matter how small, not just as
holes where the flowers go but as things in themselves. Careful placement of
our beds would ensure that they did not appear unsightly in winter, and more
importantly, that they create a satisfying grounding for the flowers to
come.

            This part
of the Chiswick gardens was wrapped by a high wall and punctuated with urns. A
flower bed or border is almost always more attractive with a backdrop or
enclosure, such as a hedge or fence, to set it off. Even when empty, an
enclosure immediately creates a garden.

            
One of the most perfect garden rooms in our
country, and perhaps the most simple, is at the Bloedel Reserve, formerly a
private estate, on Bainbridge Island near Seattle. It consists of a
10-foot-high clipped evergreen hedge bordering a large rectangular lawn.
Another large rectangle, a reflecting pool, is set into the lawn, level with
the grass. Pool, grass, and hedge form a rectangle in a rectangle in a
rectangle. If you walk in through the surrounding woods, this overtly man-made
environment will appear to you as a scene of sublime calmness. The woods are
brought into the garden through their reflection on the water. You're forced to
see the wild more clearly; you are made more aware of the trees than when you
were walking under them. The simple gesture, strongly articulated, is more
powerful than any number of smaller ones. Come summer, this garden will hardly
look different from what it does now--a beautiful garden all of green, without
flowers.

         
      
   
