
   
   
      
         
            

            
               ASK
PRUDENCE
            

            

               Prudence, drawing on her rich experience of life, will answer questions
submitted by readers. She will respond to questions about manners, personal
relations, politics, economics, and other subjects. Questions should be sent to
Prudence@slate.com.
They should not exceed 200 words in length. Please indicate how you wish your
letter to be signed, preferably including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I just
had lunch at a local Internet cafe. I brought my own laptop and wireless modem,
the better to read Slate in its full framed glory. I was (slowly)
downloading full images while everyone else was using Lynx. I did order a
cheese sandwich, and nobody gave me any dirty looks, but even so, I felt a
little guilty about not spending any money for my online experience. Is it rude
to bring your own digital device to an Internet cafe? What about bringing food
but paying for a terminal?
            

            
               --Sincerely,Somewhere
in Seattle
            

            
               P.S. To be specific,
I'm at www.speakeasy.org, and I just finished my tasty sandwich.
            

            Dear
Somewhere in Seattle,

            Prudence had never heard of
an Internet cafe until she received your letter. Apparently such things do not
exist east of the Rockies or north of 25 years of age. I have, however,
consulted the Web site to which you refer, and now have a clue as to the
subject of your query.

            As I understand it, the cafe
provides computers and modems for the use of its patrons for a fee and also
sells food. Your question is whether it is improper for you to bring your own
laptop and wireless modem, thus bypassing the fee, and to buy only a cheese
sandwich.

            The management of the cafe
has established the rules for the use of their facility. Since they have let
you in and have not kicked you out, it appears that you have not violated any
of those rules. You are not being rude. But if there are many people like you,
and especially if you are occupying space that might be occupied by a paying
customer, the management will change the rules. They will establish a cover
charge or require a minimum food purchase for the use of a table. The situation
will be like that in a cabaret, where you cannot sit down at a table and watch
the show without paying something.

            In the
meantime, until the rules are changed, it would be wise of you to leave a tip
or spend more on food. Otherwise you will not get a good table or will have
crumbs brushed into your laptop, even though, strictly speaking, you are
abiding by the rules.

            --Prudence, easterly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               This question is about the
etiquette of having a love affair with a macroeconomist. He's 15 years older
than me and a former colleague. I have an iron-clad rule about colleagues and
sex (i.e., don't do it), but now that I've changed jobs he's made his personal
interest in me pretty clear; and I like him a lot. In view of this quite
relevant fact--and the global scarcity of men who, like him, are tall, funny,
and smarter than me--the age thing doesn't bother me. BUT. The problem is: I
don't know if he's still married to the mother of his two college-age kids, and
I don't know how to ask. I know this sounds dumb. But our earlier professional
friendliness did not extend to swapping details of our private lives, although
he does mention the kids. Is this some kind of guy code for "wife"??
            

            
               So, can
you suggest a polite way to raise this, preferably using some kind of Southeast
Asia currency-crisis metaphor to get the point across? (He's up to his neck in
all that stuff out there right now.)
            

            
               --Hesitating in
Paris
            

            Dear
Hesitating in Paris,

            Prudence is pleased that you
are not put off by the fact that this man is a macroeconomist and 15 years
older than you. There can be lots of life left in an old macroeconomist.

            Now, how to find out if he is
married:

            You might say to him, "I
understand that the IMF is committed to standing by Thailand to the end, no
matter what happens. Do you think such a commitment is wise? How about such
commitments between individuals, even between husbands and wives?"

            You might try: "I suppose you
are hoping that Congress will do something about the marriage penalty in the
income tax this year. Would it make much difference to you?"

            How about: "The OECD tax-free
store is having a sale on Chanel No. 5. Should I buy some for your wife?"

            Of course,
you could just ask him.

            --Prudence,
delightedly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Is it
proper etiquette to e-mail thank-you notes? It seems OK to send invitations by
e-mail (for dinners or parties), and I announced my engagement this way to many
people (easier than calling them all on the phone). But whenever I e-mail a
thank-you note (for dinner parties or gifts), I always end up sending a
snail-mail note as well--out of guilt. I doubt that I will send thank-you notes
for wedding gifts this way, but I am curious to know what others think,
especially Emily Post.
            

            
               --Pamela L. in
Seattle
            

            Dear
Pamela,

            I don't know what Emily Post
thinks. She doesn't have an e-mail address. I believe thank-you notes to
persons you know and care about should be individually handwritten and sent by
snail mail. That is a way to show the depth of your gratitude and affection.
Even on occasions where use of a printed acknowledgment is appropriate, as in
acknowledging the receipt of letters of condolence upon bereavement, the
printed card should be signed by hand with a personal word added.

            If you
want to send Bill Clinton a letter thanking him for the fine state of the U.S.
economy, you can send that by e-mail. (For more information, see the White House Web site.)

            --Prudence,
traditionally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I sincerely hope you will
not find cause to "go back to [your] needlepoint" anytime soon [see the Jan. 1,
1998, "Dear Prudence"]. I realize that this feeling is quite selfish, as
it ignores any potential need for needlepoint items you might have, but all I
can offer is the assurance that it is an honest sentiment: Having been born a
century too late, this admirer of yours is pleased to see that not everyone has
adopted the social graces of Beavis and Butt-Head or, for that matter, of the
average politician.
            

            
               May
your needlepoint suffer from years and years of utter neglect!
            

            
               --Felix Kasza
            

            Dear Mr.
Kasza,

            Thanks,
I'll let the needlepoint rest for a while longer.

            --Prudence, gratefully

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Maybe
you can help. My friend has loved the same person for over 20 years. While he
has been and done so many things to end the relationship forever, she is so
loving and forgiving. Now, the big one has happened. He took her car ... and
has not been seen for four days now. He moved here from another state and his
surroundings are new, but we as family have tried to bring him into the fold.
Now he's gone. My friend's heart is broken and I can't help. I think he was
using her all the time. What can I do? I'm VERY worried about my friend's
mentation.
            

            
               --Help
            

            Dear
Help,

            You ask what you can do. You
can play only a secondary role. Only she can salvage her life. If she is
determined to do that, you can help her; otherwise, you can't.

            She has to recognize that
the man is gone--as gone as if a truck had hit him. Even if he returns, he is
gone from her and can no longer be a part of her life. She also has to
recognize that she has behaved very unwisely. As you say, she was "too" in
love--she had invested too much of herself in an asset that has turned out to
be a bad risk and eventually a major loss.

            Now she has to find new
interests. Not knowing her, I cannot tell what they might be--reading, music,
appreciation of nature, volunteer activity, church, or whatever is closest to
her. She has to want these as a new life, not as stopgaps while she waits for
him to return. These new interests will be more valuable to her if she can
share them with someone. That is where you may come in. It would be better
still if she could share those interests with someone she loves. That cannot be
ordered up. But love is more likely to come if she is an interested and
interesting person.

            I
strongly recommend that she read a little book by Viktor E. Frankl, Man's
Search for Meaning . It shows what the will to appreciate and restore life
can do in the most adverse of circumstances.

            --Prudence,
optimistically

         
      
   
