
   
   
      
         
            The Anti-Martha

            Soon, my garden will betray
me. It will seem as if one day, things are going along just fine--fresh, new
leaves and flowers--and the next, I haven't finished with this, I forgot
about that, I neglected this, I left that out in the rain, that should have
been moved, that is overgrown, that is dead, and the weeds are taking over .
Taking to bed with Henry Mitchell is the surest palliative I know. He
understands that I may feel like a genius in May and a wretch by July.

            For 20 years, until his
death in November 1993, Henry wrote a gardening column called "The Earthman"
for the Washington Post . During his lifetime, these pieces were
collected in The Essential Earthman (1981) and One Man's Garden
(1992). A third, posthumous, collection of Henry's work titled Henry
Mitchell on Gardening has just been published.

            Henry was
one of the few garden writers to admit that misery is a major operating
principle in the life of the gardener, which is one "of unexpected failures and
sorrows, somewhat redeemed by unexpected and utterly accidental triumphs."
Devastating winds, early frosts, late frosts, killing storms, bad luck, bad
timing, and general human stupidity are the norm. Over the years, I learned
many things from Henry, such as the lesson of dividing up a small space to make
it seem bigger; the importance of small bodies of water in a garden; and how to
nurture tender plants through the winter. But mostly I learned to get over
myself.

            It is surely unfair to Henry, who is probably the smartest,
funniest, most literate American garden writer, but I read and reread him
mostly for self-help, as if he were a sort of garden shrink. I read not as much
for how to do this or that in the garden as for how to be a better gardening
person. He provides a sense of comfort, much like the feeling you get from a
cookbook when you have no intention of making any of the dishes. He had scores
of devoted readers with little or no interest in gardening.

            Henry had
the remarkable ability to delight in a single flower in bloom, however many
weeds and catastrophes surrounded it. Because when he wrote "my garden is a
mess," he meant it. The overgrown façade of his house was legendary in
Washington, as were the garden's weeds, mud, and the black plastic pond tubs he
never bothered to sink into the ground. The photo on the cover of One
Man's 
               Garden shows him in front of his green, murky pond. A big
piece of tape seems to hold up some vine, dead stems of which obscure his
feet.

            
If philosophies of gardening were on a
continuum, on one side you'd find Henry, the cynical optimist, and on the other
Martha Stewart, the stern gardening Übermensch . He would have hated her,
and she would be appalled by him. In Martha's charmed garden world, there are
no weeds and no storms. Plans are made, schedules followed, and order kept.
Martha's picture-perfect house porn engages your fantasy life while you peruse,
then makes you feel bad afterward.

            Henry never wagged his
finger at you saying now is the time to do such or other. How could he? He was
one of us, forever late--ordering his bulbs, planting them, moving them, or
bringing in his tender plants for winter, and lugging them out again in spring.
(He was never sure how someone who hated houseplants as much as he did could
end up with a living room so full of plants each winter that it was impossible
to walk or sit anywhere without being poked.) He recognized that the best-laid
plans often fail and that the surest way to make a plant thrive was to plant it
where it didn't belong. Sometimes even his beloved irises refused to bloom. His
garden was plagued with bindweed. He didn't let it get him down.

            To Henry
the garden seemed the ideal place to witness the charms and vagaries of the
natural world. He was coyly gleeful about how lucky we are to toil in this
chaos: to see the early snowdrops pushing up from the snow year after year or
some flower graciously volunteering where you never would have been clever
enough to plant it; or just to watch a couple of dragonflies having sex on a
hot summer day. (He rigged up a landing strip for the dragonflies at the edge
of his pond after seeing one drown.)

            In print and in life, Henry was as amusing as he was easily
amused. He would entertain the Post newsroom (where I worked) with his
stories--his rough, sonorous voice; his slow drawl; his erudition and love
affair with the language; his cigarette ash building up until it rolled,
unnoticed by him, down the front of his shirt. He always acted as if he were
getting away with something or sneaking around like a mischievous child where
he didn't actually belong.

            It's not that Henry was soft
on things. On the contrary, he could be quite cantankerous. He reproached the
much beloved garden at Dumbarton Oaks for its limited plant palate, especially
what he referred to as the "forsythia mess"--a hillside covered in the yellow,
early spring flowering shrub that others consider a bold sweep of color. He had
little patience for people who want their flowers to be foolproof and in
continuous bloom. A foolproof flower, such as the stiff, relentless black-eyed
Susan, can never break your heart. Henry liked flowers that could "make a lady
squeal." He loved his bearded irises, old roses, and peonies. He thought they
bloomed for just the right length of time, smartly disappearing before you can
tire of them. If you bemoaned that a particular rose only flowered once a year
and for such a short period, he would advise you to take a vacation from work
in order to stay at home and watch it bloom. He did.

            In an essay, E.B. White
describes his wife Katherine, who, very sick in the fall of the last year of
her life, goes out into the garden, as she has done every year before, to plant
the spring bulbs she knew she would never live to see rise. I had always
thought she did this for her husband, so that flowers would come up for him
that spring. Henry explained that Katherine did this because, as a gardener,
she simply loved the feel of the bulbs in her hand, the textures and colors of
their little tunics. He would know. A week before Henry died from cancer, he
directed his wife, from his bedroom window, on the planting of a new bed of
irises. On the morning of his death, he left his bed and insisted on going out
to help his neighbor plant daffodils. He was concerned because it was November,
and the bulbs should've been in a month before.

         
      
   
