
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Puzzle No. 7: "From
Georges Feydeau to Celine Dion"
            

            Wanna play? Click for the
rules.

            This week, we challenge you
to get from this review of a work by Georges Feydeau, French playwright and master
of the intentional farce (unfortunately, the Toronto Sun misspelled
Feydeau's first name), to this page devoted to Celine Dion, French Canadian singer and master of
the unintentional farce.

            We went from high comedy to
higher comedy in three links. If you can tie or beat that, e-mail your solution
(with instructions and URLs) to FrancisBacon@slate.com by noon ET Tuesday, April 7. (All
submissions will become the property of 
                  Slate
                and will be
published at 
                  Slate
               's discretion. 
                  Slate
                may publish
your name on its site in connection with your submission.)

            Results will be announced
Thursday, April 9, at about 5 p.m. PT, along with a new puzzle. Readers are
also encouraged to submit their own puzzles (along with a solution path).

            Happy
surfing!

            
               Solution
to Puzzle No. 6: "From Hang Gliding to Hoary Marmots"
            

            Last week,
we challenged you to get from this page on hang gliding to this page featuring hoary marmots in six
links or less. The winners: Tamara Glenny and Robert D. Mare, who made the trip
in six links. Here's Glenny's solution:

            This was a very hard one,
I went down endless dead ends before hitting the right link, although I suppose
"Northwest" should have given me a clue.

            At the hang gliding site, click
Links ...

            to go to http://www.ushga.org/links.htm, and from that list, choose
Northwest Voyaguers (spelled wrong), which sends you to ...

            www.voyageurs.com/nwvoyage/, where you click No-Frames ,
which sends you to ...

            voyageurs.com/nwvoyage/frames/noframes/, where you scroll down a
bit and click Glacier National Park--National Park Service Homepage ,
which takes you to ...

            www.nps.gov/glac/index.htm, where you click Visit Glacier's
Website Visitor Center , which takes you to ...

            www.nps.gov/glac/home.htm, where you scroll down a bit and click
Mammal Checklist , which takes you to ...

            www.nps.gov/glac/mammals.htm, where you scroll down a bit to hit
Order Rodentia--Rodents (including the hoary marmot!).

            The important part is to
hit No-Frames at Northwest Voyageurs, which saves you a step.

            
Congratulations to Tamara Glenny and Robert D. Mare for getting from guts and
glory to small and hoary in a victorious six links.

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
