
   
   
      
         
            Why History Is on Clinton's Side in the Impeachment Fight

            After weeks of televised
palaver, the legal division of the Flytrap commentariat has given up: In
determining grounds for impeachment, the Constitution just isn't much help.
Article II, Section 4 allows for the president's removal if the Senate convicts
him of "treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors." But how high
is high? "Clearly, high crimes was referring to serious, serious crimes like
treason and bribery, which are examples," said one legal pundit on PBS'
NewsHour With Jim Lehrer . In other words, no one really knows.

            This
leaves history as our only guide. Unfortunately for scholars (if fortunately
for presidents), Congress has undertaken impeachment proceedings against only
two chief executives, Andrew Johnson (1868, acquitted) and Richard Nixon (1974,
resigned). That doesn't yield much in the way of precedent. Then again, the
rarity of impeachment proceedings may itself be a sort of precedent. If so,
President Clinton should relax--because, given what we know so far, he's on
pretty firm ground.

            The first and only presidential impeachment trial,
Johnson's, has generally been viewed as a partisan vendetta by the Radical
Republicans in Congress. The Radicals, who favored the abolition of slavery and
supported black suffrage, despised Johnson for his timid plans for readmitting
the South to the Union after the Civil War. Johnson, a Tennessee populist who
thought blacks inferior to whites, wanted to give Southern states wide latitude
in shaping their own laws and governments, regardless of the consequences for
the freed slaves. He vetoed key pieces of Reconstruction legislation, including
an 1866 bill that would have granted basic civil rights to blacks, and he
opposed the 14 th Amendment. Political warfare ensued.

            Although
the Republicans once drew the scorn of historians--they were seen as
intemperate ideologues--since the 1960s, they've mostly been cast as the good
guys in the Reconstruction fight. Changing attitudes toward race in the last
generation have helped overhaul the old interpretation of Reconstruction as a
bad idea gone wrong. Except, that is, on the impeachment episode. Here, even
the acknowledged wisdom of the Republicans' Reconstruction plans hasn't changed
the consensus that they acted from partisan motives.

            
The impeachment fight began when the
Republicans, in their tug of war with Johnson, passed some dubious laws that
shifted power from the president to Congress. One, the 1867 Tenure of Office
Act, prohibited presidents from firing their own Cabinet members; another
required that Johnson deliver all his military orders via Gen. Ulysses S.
Grant. When Johnson removed his secretary of war, Edwin M. Stanton, on Feb. 21,
1868, the Radicals struck. They passed 11 articles of impeachment, nine
relating to these two laws. Two other articles accused Johnson of ignoring or
disgracing Congress.

            The
Senate trial focused on Stanton's removal, the most substantive charge. Johnson
offered a somewhat contradictory defense. On the one hand, his lawyers said,
Lincoln, not Johnson, had appointed Stanton, and so the Tenure of Office Act
didn't apply; on the other hand, they claimed, Johnson had deliberately
flouted the law to test it in the Supreme Court. Still, the case against
Johnson was weak: It was hard to construe the act of a president firing his own
subordinate as a "high crime." Johnson was in the last year of his term anyway,
and when he passed word that he'd stop obstructing the Republicans'
Reconstruction plans, his survival seemed assured. In the end, the Radicals
voted to convict, while the Democrats and seven moderate Republicans voted to
acquit. Impeachment fell one vote short of the required two-thirds of the
Senate, though other Republicans would have supported Johnson if necessary.

            In resting their case on an alleged violation of the law
and not on policy differences, the Republicans conceded that impeachment had to
amount to more than a parliamentary-style vote of no confidence. Before
Johnson, this had been an open question; after him, it wasn't. Further, the
Radicals' defeat suggested that successful impeachment charges against the
president would have to allege substantial crimes on his part. Allegations of
criminal wrongdoing that essentially served to cover for political differences
wouldn't be likely to topple a president--even if they were technically
accurate.

            Johnson's
survival, combined with the passage of 100 years, made impeachment, by the time
of Watergate, seem like an altogether unlikely scenario--the equivalent, as
historian Stanley Kutler has written, of a nuclear first strike. In retrospect,
of course, Watergate has come to mean the vast tapestry of that began to
unravel with the June 1972 break-in of the Democratic National Committee
headquarters. But as late as the spring of 1973 the scope of these
misdeeds--including critical details about Nixon's involvement--remained
unclear. So improbable did impeachment seem that April that Nixon's Attorney
General Richard Kleindienst defied Congress to try it, confident it would
relent.

            
As Nixon's troubles worsened, however, his
critics grew bold. After the July 1973 disclosure that Nixon had taped his Oval
Office conversations, Democrat Robert Drinan of Massachusetts introduced the
first impeachment resolution in the House. October brought the Saturday Night
Massacre--in which Nixon had to fire his attorney general and deputy attorney
general in order to get rid of Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox--and four more
impeachment bills, including one introduced by a Republican. After months of
new disclosures, including the release of transcripts of damning White House
conversations, the House Judiciary Committee began impeachment deliberations in
earnest on May 9, 1974. By July, nine fence-sitting members of Congress--two
Southern Democrats and seven Republicans--were ready to endorse some form of
impeachment articles.

            The
committee held its final deliberations from July 24 through July 30. July 27,
it voted 27-11 to pass the first article of impeachment, which focused on
"obstruction of justice": paying hush money to the Watergate burglars, using
the CIA to block the FBI's Watergate investigation, lying to Congress and to
investigators, and otherwise covering up crimes. Two days later, it passed a
second, equally devastating, article by a 28-10 vote. This "abuse of power"
article charged Nixon with having the Internal Revenue Service audit his
enemies, spying on private citizens, setting up the "Plumbers" unit that broke
into the Watergate office building and anti-war activist and Pentagon Papers
author Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist's office, and otherwise using federal
agencies for personal and political advantage. Finally, on July 30, the
committee passed a third, slightly weaker, article 21-17, which charged the
president with having willfully disobeyed subpoenas. Two other articles--urging
Nixon's impeachment for concealing the bombing of Cambodia and for tax
evasion--went down to defeat; moderate Democrats wanted to play only their
strongest cards. That didn't matter much, though; Nixon, knowing he was licked,
resigned 10 days later.

            While Johnson's survival deterred members of Congress from
considering impeachment in Watergate, Nixon's ouster has had the opposite
effect, emboldening Clinton's foes. Watergate remains for many an unhealed
wound, and Clinton's critics delight in needling him with Watergate
comparisons--whether to Whitewater or Flytrap. Impeachment, once taboo, now
seems like a legitimate weapon, a way to settle the score. The principle of
Mutually Assured Destruction, after all, dictated that once nukes are launched,
retaliation becomes much easier.

            Still, if
the relative freshness of Watergate works against Clinton, the enormity of it
works in his favor. In effect, Nixon's misdeeds () so dwarf Clinton's--even the
most severe charges of suborning perjury--that Republicans could wind up
bollixed. They are left either arguing, preposterously, that Clinton's crimes
are just as bad as Nixon's or claiming that Nixon's crimes far exceeded the
threshold for impeachable offenses and shouldn't be the standard for judging
Clinton's. In this situation, Johnson's impeachment looms as the operative
precedent: a case of men who despised and battled their president--perhaps with
good reason--but whose zeal in pursuing flimsy impeachment charges turned the
judgment of history against them.

            
               If you
missed the links in the article, you can click for a summary of Richard Nixon's
transgressions, and for the full text of the articles of impeachment against
him.
            

         
      
   
