
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Puzzle No. 8: "From
Frikik to Free Kick"
            

            Wanna play? Click for the
rules.

            This
week's puzzle comes from 
                  Slate
                reader and "Six Degrees of Francis
Bacon" devotee Tamara Glenny. Here it is, in Glenny's own words:

            This one
is based on a site that someone linked to in "The Fray" for a joke. The idea is
to go from the (dirty) Turkish meaning of the word "frikik" to the official
definition of "free kick" in the game of soccer. You start at the Off-Color Turkish page and scroll down to the letter F to find
the extra meaning that frikik (free kick) carries in Turkish. [ Editor's
warning: Some of the language on this page is mildly offensive. ] You have
to end up at the official FIFA Laws of the Game section featuring the free-kick rule.

            Glenny went from offensive
kicks to offensive kicks in 15 links. If you can tie or beat that, e-mail your
solution (with instructions and URLs) to FrancisBacon@slate.com by noon ET
Tuesday, April 14. (All submissions will become the property of

                  Slate
                and will be published at 
                  Slate
               's discretion.

                  Slate
                may publish your name on its site in connection with your
submission.)

            Results will be announced
Thursday, April 16, at about 5 p.m. PT, along with a new puzzle. Readers are
also encouraged to submit their own puzzles (with a solution path).

            Happy
surfing!

            
               Solution
to Puzzle No. 7: "From Georges Feydeau to Celine Dion"
            

            Last week
we challenged you to go from Georges Feydeau, French farceur , to Celine
Dion, French Canadian farceuse , in three links. Though no one could beat
it, a gaggle of puzzle-solvers tied our score: Michael C. Miller (who did it
first), Tamara Glenny, Michele Harvey, Allen Nussbaumer, Joshua Painter (who
wrote in all the way from Oslo, Norway), Scott Ruthfield, and P. Vijay. Here's
Ruthfield's solution:

            This one ended up being
surprisingly easy! We start with the fine review of a shockingly funny comedy about eye disease. From here,
we go to the bottom to the semi-compass and click Jam! to go to ...

            this page. From there
we follow the left column down and click Pop Encyclopedia in the
Databases category. This leads to ...

            this
page, which provides links to some excellent artists and also to Celine Dion. Not bad at all!

            
Congratulations to all our winners. I believe that your hearts will go on.

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
