
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Bringing
Home the Bacon, or Deep Six Degrees
            

            Sadly, this is the last week
for "Six Degrees of Francis Bacon." We've toured the Web near and far, explored
its nether regions, and even learned a little on the way. But all good things
must come to an end. As a parting challenge, we dare you to link from this page
to the respective home pages of every English monarch since 927, in consecutive
order.

            Happy
surfing!

            
               Solution
to Puzzle No. 8: "From Frikik to Free Kick"
            

            Last week
we challenged you to link from the Off-Color Turkish Page (which features a mildly ribald definition
of the term "frikik") to FIFA's official definition of a soccer free kick in 15 steps or
less. Congratulations go to this week's winners: Carol Clapp, Gillian Lord (Six
Degrees' first Tasmanian winner), Scott Ruthfield, Cathy Smith, Michael
Travers, and Derek Willis. They all did it in 11 links. Here's Willis'
solution:

            From the starting page, click the Home icon at the bottom left-hand corner
of the page or Home at the top left. This will take you ...

            here,
where you should click Links to Other Sites of Interest (the last of the
links), and from

            there, choose the Tunç in Ankara link (at the bottom,
under "Friends ..."). This will take you ...

            here. Then,
click Galatasary (under "HOBBY ROOM Sports that I am interested"). This
will take you ...

            here, where you should
click Current Season , to go ...

            here. Click More
Links (on the right-hand side under "Miscellaneous"), and from

            there, choose
Washington Post (under "News Agency"). This will take you ...

            here, where you should click the FIFA Online link, which
you'll find on the left (under "THE BASICS").

            From FIFA Online, click
Publications and Directories (on the bar below the opening graphic), and
from ...

            there, click Laws of the Game and Decisions of the
International Football Associations Board . That will take you

            here, where you should choose the Law 13 Free-Kick link
from the menu on the left, and you're there.

            
Goooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooal!!!!

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
