
   
   
      
         
            Narcissus-ism

            You can't avoid daffodils in
April, and you wouldn't want to. With their long ruffled trumpets and bright
petals splayed like the rays of the sun, these unabashed bloomers give of
themselves freely and ask little in return. Even the hardest among us feel like
better people for taking pleasure in their charms.

            My
current favorite is shyer than most. It's called Narcissus Hawera , and
it bloomed for the first time in New Zealand in 1937. It's small, rarely
exceeding 8 inches. It's a translucent, pale yellow, with a head that dips
slightly, beckoning you to lift it with a finger to get a better look. It has a
short, straight snub nose with the tiniest unevenness along the rim. Its
perianth is reflexed, meaning that the petals sweep back from the cup and twist
a little, so that the flower looks as if it's being blown by a gentle wind. A
curve at the top of the stem causes the Hawera to flutter, giving it a
disarming nervousness.

            Despite seeming so vulnerable, Hawera is sturdy and
not at all fussy. It's an excellent performer, often yielding several bell-like
flowers on a single stem and blooming for weeks. Content almost anywhere, it
multiplies freely. It has a sweet, delicate fragrance, unlike the heady odor
some narcissuses give off.

            I first
saw Hawera last spring in a garden outside Chicago, where it had been
planted along the foundation of a stone house in long drifts interspersed with
sweeps of fern. The 19 th century British gardener Gertrude Jekyll
was the first to suggest pairing ferns with daffodils, pointing out that just
as the daffodil foliage begins to brown and die back, the fern hits its stride
and covers the mess. This particular fern was fine and lacy and looked fetching
next to Hawera . I scratched its name into my notebook and actually
remembered to order some in the fall. Last week, in San Francisco, I saw it
coming up in a pleasing manner from between the stones of a garden path.

            
I set aside some of my own bulbs last fall,
potting them to bring indoors to bloom in winter. Although slow to appear,
taking nearly two months to flower after being brought inside, Hawera
was glorious when it finally arrived. It ruined for me two varieties of
daffodils I already had flowering. One, Narcissus Topolino , I had tried
because it was said to be an easy forcer, and it was--eagerly blooming in a
vulgar fashion with a trumpet too long for its small face. The other,
Narcissus Diskcissal , was said to be fragrant, and it was--too fragrant.
Plus, it was a splotchy yellow with white leaching through it. Once the elegant
Hawera ventured forth, the others were exiled to the compost pile.

            

               Hawera is a late bloomer in the garden as well, and while other
varieties of narcissus have been opening daily in my New York garden, there is
still no sign of Hawera . Daffodils are categorized as early-, middle-,
or late-blooming, and if you choose a few from each, you can hope for six weeks
of flowers, and you may actually get them. When it gets cold in spring, as it
invariably does, people worry for their daffodils. But daffodils are
cold-weather creatures, and for the most part, the chillier it is, the longer
they'll stick around. The thing to worry about now is what bulbs to order for
next spring. (Click for a quick review of daffodils.)

            Gardeners who really have it together place their orders
early, sometime between June and August, while the rest of us scramble in the
fall. By then, who can even remember what the garden looked like in spring?
This year, I'm determined to make my selection while I'm still looking at
spring's display, deciding what I need, and how many, and where it will all go.
(Click for some planting tips.)

            
Unfortunately, the fall catalogs don't arrive until mid-May at the earliest.
The thing to do is to take notes now on what you want and snap pictures of your
garden to remind yourself where to plant in the fall. If you don't trust
yourself even to do this, you can order now, using last fall's catalog. Most
nurseries will send you their latest one if you don't have it. Regardless of
when you place your order, the nursery will ship the bulbs at the proper time
for planting in your area, so if you do it now, you can forget about it until
later.

            
Many of the best catalogs--Daffodil Mart and
Van Engelen--don't have pictures but compensate with useful line drawings and
excellent descriptions. Either find yourself a reference book such as
Taylor's Guide to Bulbs , or use one of the catalogs with color photos
for reference, so you can take advantage of the picture-less catalogs' high
quality, good selection, and cheaper prices. (The nicer the pictures, the
higher the prices.) The John Scheepers catalog manages to have good photos and
good prices because it is the retail division of Van Engelen. Get both
catalogs, because they work well together, and you can order from either or
both depending on the quantities you plan to purchase. (Van Engelen can offer
lower prices because it deals in larger quantities.) This year Daffodil Mart
will be offering similar discounts for really large orders--say, 800 of
something--and 800 daffodils in a woodland setting or scattered about a lawn
aren't really that many. You can also get a group of friends to order together.
Both of these companies will have lower prices on many items this year because
the dollar is strong against the guilder, and most bulbs are grown in
Holland.

            It would
be hard for a beginning gardener to go wrong with daffodils. They are
foolproof, long-lived, inexpensive, and repellent to animal pests. They have no
downside and are a quiet force for good in the world.

            
               If you
didn't click through to the internal links, click for a daffodil review and for
some planting tips.
            

         
      
   
