
   
   
      
         
            The Wrong Stuff

            The Washington
Post leads with a federal budget compromise that will allocate nearly
$1.4 billion to teacher hiring--a central plank of President Clinton's
education policy. (The New
York Times and Los Angeles Times front this story.) The NYT budget
story warns that there is still no agreement over environmental spending,
abortion, and U.N. finances, but the Post , LAT , and
Wall Street Journal
are optimistic that a budget deal is around the corner (the Journal
says the GOP will try to wrap all remaining appropriations into a $390 billion
package to be voted on as early as next week). USA Today leads with the
release of EgyptAir 990's data-recorder information, which shows that the plane
began its descent under apparent pilot control. This story is fronted by the
NYT and LAT . The LAT goes with a quasi-local lead:
NASA's determination that the loss of the Mars Climate Orbiter earlier this
year stemmed from gross mismanagement at Pasadena's Jet Propulsion Laboratory
and at Lockheed. "These people [at JPL] could not manage their way out of a
Glad bag," pronounces a nonprofit watchdog group. USAT reefers this
story and the Post runs it inside. The NYT leads with the
Clinton administration's private concern over Israeli arms sales to China.

            Leaked by Pentagon officials, the NYT arms-selling story notes that
Israel recently sold a $250 million airborne radar system to China and plans to
sell it several more. Secretive Israeli arms deals with China have long put the
Defense Department in a bind, the Times explains: Since many Israeli
weapons are jointly made with the United States, American technology has likely
made its way to China, which uses it partly to threaten Taiwan, which is
stocked with arms from ... the United States.

            In its (reefered) EgyptAir story, the Post notes that the data
recorder reveals no abrupt movements and that the plane maintained its compass
setting during the dive, which occurred eight seconds after the autopilot shut
off. Although the Post says an explosion is unlikely, the NYT
insists that it is still a possibility. The NYT speculates on a loss
of cabin pressure (which the black box would not record), but USAT
notes that pilots are taught to descend more slowly in such a situation. The
LAT decides to focus on a possible hijacking or passenger rampage, and
for no apparent reason it fills several column inches with a detailed summary
of a 1987 California crash caused by a gunman. (Question: Did the LAT
reporter dwell on this particular crash because he happened to cover it
himself?) It is unknown whether the autopilot disengaged automatically or
manually; most papers merely note this fact in passing, but the Post
oddly attributes this uncertainty to "sources close to the investigation."

            The NYT fronts--and the other papers stuff--the "indictment" of
deposed Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif on charges of hijacking and
kidnapping for his alleged refusal to let Gen. Pervez Musharraf's plane land
last month--an event that triggered a military coup orchestrated by Musharraf.
The general says his plane had only seven minutes of fuel left when the
military commandeered the control tower and cleared the commercial airliner to
land. Sharif could face the death penalty if convicted.

            The LAT off-leads, and USAT fronts, the decisions of Bank
of America and Wells Fargo bank to ban non-customers from using its ATMs in
Santa Monica, California, starting today. The banks are reacting to a ban on
ATM fees passed by San Francisco and Santa Monica voters last week.

            
               USAT , the NYT , and the Post front the
announcement that ramipril, an 8-year-old high-blood pressure medication,
reduces the risk of heart attack and stroke by 22 percent and significantly
reduces the risk of diabetes. The study of 10,000 people over 5 years was
halted early because results were so encouraging.

            A Post story on Hillary Clinton's visit to Israel is a textbook
example of how the media turn an alleged appearance of impropriety by a
politician into a "political problem" and therefore a story:

            

               On paper at least, Clinton's visit to Israel, her fourth as first lady, is
an official trip that has nothing to do with her probable Senate candidacy in
New York next year. Her schedule ... [is] more or less standard fare for an
active first lady's visit to the Holy Land. Neither the address she delivered
... today ... nor the speech ... she is to give Thursday  ... is overtly
political. Yet with the election for the Senate seat she is expected to seek
less than a year away, much of what Clinton does is presumed to be political.
And whatever her intention, there was no escaping the buzz of partisan politics
audible even before her arrival.

            

            For a "Frame Game" on this style of reporting, click here.

            
               Just Another Day at the Office: Among the findings of the
NASA investigation into the loss of the $125 million Mars Orbiter earlier this
year is the following: "There was a widespread perception among the Mars
Climate Orbiter team that 'orbiting Mars is routine,' which caused the team to
not pay enough attention to the risks of interplanetary spaceflight"
( LAT ).

         
      
   
