
   
   
      
         
            What Is a Hostile Takeover?
            

            Last week, the drug companies American Home Products and Warner-Lambert
agreed to a $72 billion merger. Hours later, Pfizer, another drug company,
launched an $82 billion hostile takeover bid for Warner-Lambert. What makes
some takeovers hostile? And how do they work?

            In a friendly takeover, the management teams of the acquiring and target
companies negotiate the terms of the deal--covering issues such as how shares
in the new company will be divided--and then both companies' boards of
directors and shareholders approve it.

            A takeover is deemed hostile when the target company's management objects to
the deal. (This is the case with Warner-Lambert, which quickly rejected
Pfizer's takeover bid. Pfizer has since filed suit to block the AHP-Warner
merger.) In a hostile takeover, the acquirer can take control of the target
company's management one of two ways: a tender offer or a proxy fight.

            In a tender offer , the acquirer offers to buy shares of the target
for more than the market price. Individual shareholders then decide whether to
sell their holdings; if the acquirer doesn't win a controlling stake, the offer
is rescinded and the shares returned. In a proxy fight , the acquiring
company asks shareholders for their "proxies"--that is, the right to vote in
their stead in management elections. The acquirer promises to replace the board
of directors that rejected the merger with one that would approve it. As in a
tender offer, shareholders are guaranteed profit--either through cash payments
or more shares in the new company--if the takeover is successful.

            Although Pfizer has not officially made a tender offer or begun a proxy
fight, it has made clear to Warner-Lambert shareholders that they would benefit
financially from the deal: Pfizer would offer them 15 percent more per share
than AHP. (Click here to read

                  Slate
               's "Moneybox" on why these mergers don't usually
create the value investors expect.) But AHP and Warner have tried to prevent
such an offer from ever reaching shareholders by including a $2 billion breakup
fee in their agreement. This provision requires any company that thwarts the
marriage by acquiring one of the partners to pay the other partner $2 billion.
Pfizer is challenging the breakup fee in court, arguing that the companies'
boards neglected their obligation to pursue the best interests of the
shareholders by undermining attempts at a hostile takeover.

            Next question?

            
               Explainer thanks Prof. Adam Pritchard of the University of Michigan Law
School.
            

         
      
   
