
   
   
      
         
            Japanese Mini-Music and the Death of Irony
            

            Dear Merrill,

            Good morning! It's an honor to share breakfast conversation with one of the
few people the disgruntled smartasses of my formless generation can genuinely
look up to as a formative influence. So, it was with particular pleasure that
today, as I do every day, I padded across the floors of my suburban Long Island
home in my color-coordinated L.L. Bean slippers, pajamas, and bathrobe matching
set, sat down in my spacious breakfast nook over my customary English muffin
and marmalade, took a sip of this delightful Turkish blend my wife and I picked
up in the most adorable little catalogue we found, and began flipping through
the day's periodicals in search of something pithy and clever to ruminate upon.
And boy did I find it! It looks like the Gore camp is really in a tizzy over
the latest ...

            Er ... ah, AHEM. OK. So I'm lying. I, uh, don't live a life anywhere
remotely near what I gather the average reader of 
                  Slate
                must be
like. (No offense, everybody.) To be honest, I was up until about 4 or 5 a.m.,
as I am almost every night, watching Space Ghost cartoons in a drugged
haze, after seriously pissing off my editor by turning in the week's
Onion assignments really, really late. Since, like many self-hating
depressives, I don't normally even get out of bed until at least noon, it sure
felt weird dragging myself into the corner store to buy the morning editions of
the New York Times and Wall Street Journal (for some reason they
didn't have the Washington Post ) for the first time in, gee, um, oh,
say, my entire life (I generally do get around to reading USA Today , but
that's because I get paid to make fun of it) and wondering just how a longhair
dropout like myself somehow ended up, for this one week anyway, being an actual
official employee (of sorts) of our man Bill Gates, the Richest Guy in the
Freaking Universe.

            But I did find something wonderful, actually, and right on the front page of
the Journal : the profile on Takahito Sakurai, the Tokyo composer who
creates the music that announces the arrival and departure of Japan's commuter
trains. Because the schedule is so busy, each composition has to be only seven
seconds long, but he still considers it his mandate to make each one of them
True Art. Too cool. When you consider that Japan is also the center of
something called the Osaka Noise Scene, a sort of hardcore punk based solely on
feedback and industrial sounds played at screeching, distorted levels, you get
a situation where the tie-wearing salarymen (a great word) are listening to
seven-second music on the platform and the punk kids are listening in bars to
extended hour-long jams that sound exactly like a screeching, out-of-control
train. It's this sort of postmodern news story that I love the most, because
you're not sure if it makes you want to laugh or cry. (My favorite type of
found comedy any day.)

            Also, I realize we're supposed to keep this current and newsy, and this is
definitely an old story by now, but I just have to ask what you think about the
whole Death of Irony debate that everybody was talking about a while back. As a
Master Ironist yourself, you must have had some thoughts about this character
Jedediah Purdy or Jed Clampett or Tom Joad or whatever his mame is. I myself
thought it'd be cool to take out a full-page ad someplace as an "Open Letter"
to the guy from the Onion staff saying "Dear Purdy: We're sorry. We were
just trying to be funny. We only wanted people to like us. We promise not to do
it again," etc, but I can't afford a full page of the paper I work for, let
alone of a publication a sincere, earnest gentleman of his ilk would be likely
to read.

            Regards,
Todd

         
      
   
