
   
   
      
         
            <i>L.A. Times</i>, Part III: Mark Willes Speaks

            Times-Mirror chief Mark "cereal killer" Willes this week wrote a lengthy
memo to his staff essentially pleading for a cease-fire in the ongoing war
between the Los Angeles Times ' editorial and business staffs. (To get up
to speed on the controversy, click here and
here to
read Chatterbox's previous items about it.) The key passage in Willes' memo is
headed "Complexities." Here it is:

            

               
                  It is important to realize that as we go forward, there are no easy
solutions to complex problems. Inferences from recent events must be drawn
carefully so that decisions can be made that meet all critical and important
requirements. For example, the Staples Center mistake has been ascribed to the
fact that the Publisher and Times Mirror CEO both lack extensive years of
newspaper experience. Yet the Boston Globe had the courage to report
that it had an equally awkward arrangement with the Fleet Center when it opened
in 1995. The publisher of that paper had newspaper experience. In fact his
family had run the paper for over 100 years. The Globe is owned by the
New York Times Company.
               

            

            
               Chatterbox translation : This is where running a family-owned
newspaper along classy principles gets you: Somebody comes along and buys you
out. ( L'affaire Fleet Center occurred after the Taylor family
sold the Globe to the New York Times .)

            

               
                  Bad decisions can and are made by people with all kinds of backgrounds in
the best kinds of organizations. The key is to have people make the best
decisions they can. And when they make a bad call, to quickly acknowledge it,
learn from it, and move forward.
               

            

            
               Chatterbox translation : A "bad call" is one that people find out
about. So from now on, keep your yaps shut!

            

               
                  Other newspaper organizations have business ties that raise important
journalistic questions with which they successfully grapple every day. For
example, the Chicago Tribune , the Dallas Morning News and the
Arizona Republic must cover sports teams in which their companies have
direct ownership positions. I mention these two examples simply to indicate
that as we go forward we must meet our simultaneous responsibilities to our
readers, customers, advertisers and communities. This requires sensitivity to
all of the relevant issues in a brutally competitive and complex world. We are
not alone in dealing with these issues.
               

            

            
               Chatterbox translates : A word to the wise for other news
organizations: Flay us for the Staples Center deal and we'll flay you right
back. Maybe Shaw should write a six-part series!

            [Correction 11/12: An earlier version of this item ended on the triumphalist
note that the L.A. Times should do penance by giving up tobacco
advertising, as the Boston Globe just announced it will do. The
L.A Times staff writer Michael Hiltzik, who finds most coverage of the
L.A Times fiasco "ludicrously uninformed," informs Chatterbox that the
L.A. Times banned tobacco ads as of Oct. 1. Whoops.]

         
      
   
