
   
   
      
         
            Style of the <I>Times</I>

            The Washington Post leads with the problems plaguing
the Pentagon's anti-missile defense system, a legacy of Ronald Reagan's "Star
Wars" dream. The Los Angeles Times lead exposes the government's gross
underestimation of the flow of cocaine out of Colombia and other drug-producing
countries. Revised estimates on global drug-trafficking are expected to shake
up U.S. drug policy for years to come. The New York Times leads with the unexpected
decline in Medicare spending.

            The WP describes a "stinging" 40-page report, submitted to Congress
by a independent panel appointed by the Defense Department, that criticizes the
government for over-optimism about its ability to develop interceptors, or
"kill vehicles," that would destroy incoming ballistic missiles by colliding
with them at supersonic speed. According to the WP , the program is
fraught with technical challenges and political pressures. The Clinton
administration and congressional Democrats, less gung-ho about the program than
the Republicans, have reluctantly acknowledged that a "limited system" might be
necessary sooner rather than later to protect the United States from such
"rogue nations" as North Korea and Iran. But is the multi-billion-dollar effort
still a pie-in-the-sky dream? Perhaps. The WP points out that despite a
successful interception last month, there has been no integrated test of the
program's component parts: the kill vehicles, radars, and controlling computer
networks. And it remains to be seen whether the kill vehicles will be able to
withstand the shock loads of the booster rockets being designed to carry them
into space.

            The LAT reports that U.S. drug-intelligence officials have admitted
that their methods for measuring drug production might be "seriously flawed."
According to those officials, next year's estimates are likely to "skyrocket."
Two unnamed government sources suggested to the LAT that estimates of
cocaine production in Colombia alone could triple. Where is all that cocaine
going? Some officials think it's going to Europe; others think it's coming here
and that Americans are using more cocaine than previously feared. Not everyone
agrees, of course: The director of the Drug Policy Analysis Program at UCLA is
a cynical, outside dissenter. "More cocaine in the U.S.? Hard to believe," he
said. "Where are all the corpses?" Many skeptics think the estimates are little
more than "guesswork" used by the administration to get more money out of
Congress.

            According to the NYT , Medicare spending has declined by one percent
in the last year, from $213.6 to $212 billion. The slight drop is attributed to
congressional cuts, low inflation, and efforts to weed out fraud. "The decline
in Medicare spending is a phenomenal development," said a former director of
the Congressional Budget Office, which, the NYT reports, had predicted
that the government would spend $19 billion more on Medicare last year than it
actually did.

            Both the WP and LAT front stories on the violence in Chechnya,
and the NYT runs an Op-Ed written by the prime minister of Russia,
Vladimir Putin. The WP story details Russian attacks on civilians and
highlights the plight of refugees.It reports that Chechan officials estimate
that 4,000 civilians have been killed. (The paper admits that the figure cannot
be checked independently.) The LAT , on the other hand, focuses on the
growing tension between Russia and the West and on nationalist support for the
Russian military's operations. In the NYT Op-Ed, Prime Minister Putin
appeals to the American public and denies that Russia is targeting civilians.
"American officials tell us that ordinary citizens are suffering, that our
military tactics may increase that suffering. The very opposite is true. ...
Our land and air forces strive to target only opposing armed forces." ;

            The WP fronts the likely mobilization of American farm and business
lobbies to push Congress to adopt the legislation necessary to open trade with
China, should the United States and China strike a deal that would bring China
into the World Trade Organization. The NYT stuffs a related story on the
U.S.-China WTO negotiations, which had stagnated before the Chinese prime
minister intervened yesterday. The LAT fronts a report from Seattle, the
site of the WTO's November meeting, where the trade debate is already heating
up. Boeing would like to get China--one of the world's fastest growing jet
markets--into the WTO, but U.S. unions are opposed to China's entry until it
allows independent unions and improves general working conditions. ;

            The NYT fronts the discovery that South Korea is trying to develop
longer-range ballistic missiles, prompting concern over a possible arms race
between North and South Korea. The United States, which provides Seoul the
military assistance it needs for strategic deterrence against North Korea, has
been pressing North Korea to restrain its missile program. (After all, our
anti-missile defense program might be on the rocks. See above.) t;

            
               "low" and behold : William Safire laments the end of an era in his "On
Language" column in the NYT Magazine . In the latest edition of the
New York Times Manual of Style and Usage , the guide for writers and
editors of the lauded paper, the capital letter has been taken down a peg.
Safire explains: "We are guided: 'It is President Lamm (without a given name)
in the first reference to the president of the United States.' Note: not 'the
current President,' with a capital P." Also losing caps are "founding fathers"
and "the king," in "God save the King." The country might not feel the
immediate effects of the new rule, but with trickle-down style there's sure to
be a sea change on the way.

         
      
   
