
   
   
      
         
            What Is After-Hours Trading?
            

            When a Federal judge ruled last Friday evening that Microsoft had abused its
monopoly power, many reports noted that the company's stock price fell in
"after-hours trading." What is this?

            It is simply the trading of stock after the markets close. Traditional stock
trading takes place during business hours because it involves a middleman--the
broker or trader--who matches buyers with sellers. (That's what all those
people shouting on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange do--but they only
work weekdays from 9 to 4 Eastern time.) In the past two years, investors have
begun to make trades without a middleman by using electronic communications
networks, or ECNs. With computers making the matches, ECNs--such as Instinet,
MarketXT and Datek Island -- can extend their hours. Many allow trades as
late as 8 p.m. Eastern, and at least one plans to offer 20-hour-a-day trading
by the end of the year. Theoretically they could allow trading around the
clock.

            Because after-hours trading has yet to catch on with large numbers of
investors, the after-hours and daytime markets can reflect different prices for
the same stock. A stock listed on only one exchange during the day--say, the
New York Stock Exchange or the Nasdaq--can be traded after-hours on any number
of ECNs. Since ECNs are not linked to one another, a stock's price may vary
from exchange to exchange. And, because so few transactions occur, stock prices
are much more volatile in after-hours trading. To prevent investors from
getting badly burned, after-hours ECNs accept only "limit orders" (bids in
which the investor names the highest price at which he'll buy or lowest price
at which he'll sell) instead of the "market orders" (in which the investor
accepts the prevailing market price) common during the day. As trade volume
increases, though, analysts expect that the daytime and after-hours markets
will converge.

            Next question?

            
               Explainer thanks 
               Slate 
               reader Steve Ruby for suggesting the topic .

         
      
   
