
   
   
      
         
            How To Tell Armenia From Azerbaijan
            

            

            As Russian bombs once again fall on Chechnya, and Armenia reels from the
assassination of seven political leaders, the troubled Caucasus region is back
in the news. Here's a brief backgrounder.

            The Caucasus region encompasses about 150,000 square miles between
the Black Sea and Caspian Sea in southeastern Europe. It includes the countries
of Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia, as well as seven Russian republics. The
region is home to 22 million people from 50 ethnic groups speaking at least 40
languages. Occupied at different times by the Persian, Hun, Roman and Ottoman
empires, as well as enjoying infrequent self-rule, the Caucasus was largely
conquered in the 19 th century by Russia. Most of the region declared
independence after the Russian Revolution of 1917, but the Soviet Union took
control in 1920-21 and integrated all of the Caucasus into the country. When
the Soviet empire collapsed in 1991, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia regained
their independence while the northern republics remained within Russia.

            Although the Russians (and then Soviets) largely preserved the boundaries
that had evolved along ethnic lines, many minority groups are now vying for
independence, while the established governments are trying to preserve--or
expand--their borders. Like the Soviet Union itself, the Caucasus has suffered
economically since the break up. Agriculture and petroleum--the area's biggest
industries--are now beginning to recover, but the region's estimated GDP
remains lower than it was during Soviet rule.

            
               Armenia (population 3.4 million): With a population that is 90
percent ethnic Armenian, Armenia is the least diverse country in the Caucasus.
The Armenian kingdom once encompassed much of present-day Turkey, Georgia, and
Syria; its more limited modern boundaries were established as part of the
settlement of World War I, which recognized the country as independent (the
Bolsheviks, however, invaded soon thereafter). Since the 4 th century
A.D., it has been one of only a handful of Christian states in the region, and
the Armenian Church has become central to national identity. Armenians' desire
for independence from (and continued resentment of) the U.S.S.R. was caused in
part by the Soviets' persecution of church leaders. Armenia also has a standing
dispute with Azerbaijan over the predominantly Armenian territory of
Nagorno-Karabakh, which the Soviets gave to Azerbaijan in 1922. The two
countries have observed a cease-fire since 1994, but the territory's future
remains a central issue in Armenian politics. When nationalists assassinated
the prime minister and six others last month, observers attributed the killings
to Armenia's continued economic plight and disagreements over how to deal with
Nagorno-Karabakh.

            
               Azerbaijan (population 7.9 million): Azerbaijan, the most
populous of the Caucasian countries, is the most strongly influenced by Arab
cultures. It is a largely Muslim nation, with a language similar to Turkish.
Present-day Azerbaijan was born when Iran ceded the territory to Russia after
two wars in the early 19 th century. Azerbaijanis have long felt
oppressed by their neighbors. Armenian and Russian immigrants prevented
Azerbaijanis from reaping the full benefits of their oil industry. And Soviet
persecution of Azerbaijani nationals was harsh, with at least 120,000 suspected
subversives killed. The fight over Nagorno-Karabakh (and resulting ethnic
violence) has left Azerbaijan divided: Virtually no ethnic Azerbaijanis live in
the disputed territory, and virtually none of Azerbaijan's ethnic Armenians
live outside it. Nagorno-Karabakh has voted for independence from Azerbaijan,
but the government has refused to accept the decision.

            
               Georgia (population 5.1 million): Georgia is the most diverse
of the Caucasian countries. The ethnic Georgian majority is Christian (Georgian
Orthodox) and speaks a language unrelated to any other in the world. Russia
wrested the country piecemeal from Iran throughout the 1800s and combined
Georgia with the semi-autonomous regions of Abkhazia (in Georgia's northwest
corner), Ajara (in its southwest corner), and South Ossetia (in its
north-central region). When Georgia became independent in 1991, Abkhazia and
South Ossetia--each with its own ethnic majority--agitated for greater
autonomy, often clashing with Georgian troops. Although Georgia's 1995
Constitution did not officially grant independence to these two territories,
both are now essentially autonomous, and fighting has ended. Georgia's economy
has recovered faster than other former republics due to its tourist trade (the
Black Sea Coast has a warm climate) and its relative political stability.

            
               Chechnya (population 800,000): Chechnya has resisted Russian
rule for over 400 years. Ethnic Chechens--descendants of an isolated mountain
people--were strong trade partners with Russia in the 18 th and
19 th centuries, but rebelled violently against annexation in the
late 1700s and again in the 1840s and 1850s. Russia gained control of the
largely Muslim nation in 1859. Under Soviet control, Chechnya was united with
neighboring Ingushetia in a single republic. Chechens objected to this
marriage, as well as to religious repression and Soviet attempts to force the
populace to work on collective farms. Although Chechnya announced its
independence before the U.S.S.R.'s collapse, Yeltsin did not invade to stop
secession until 1994. At least 40,000 people were killed in the ensuing war and
300,000 fled. In the 1996 cease-fire, the sides agreed to leave Chechnya's
status unresolved until 2001. Russia still claims Chechnya, and the
international community does not recognize its government as independent.

            (To learn more about the other six Russian republics in the Caucasus, visit
Encarta's entries for Dagestan, Ingushetia , Kabardino-Balkaria , Karachay-Cherkessia , Alania , and Adygea .)

            Next question?

         
      
   
