
   
   
      
         
            Why George W. Wouldn't Hack It as a CEO
            

            One of the curious things about what Jake Weisberg aptly calls the "Do Dim Bulbs
Make Good Presidents?" question is that it's not a question anyone would
ask about corporate CEOs. On the contrary, it's conventional today to hear that
having a really smart CEO is necessary to compete successfully, especially in
the New Economy, and articles about company heads routinely include lines like
"He was the smartest guy I'd ever met." You would be very hard-pressed to find
someone who could argue with a straight face, pace Richard Brookhiser on
George W. Bush's future prospects, that it's precisely because Jack Welch
isn't that smart that he's done such a good job at GE.

            It is true, of course, that the landscape of CEOs is dotted with
high-profile figures who never made it through college, including Michael Dell,
Bill Gates, and Steve Jobs. But the basic assumption about these guys is not
that they got tired of wrestling with Introductory Calculus and quit, but that
they were too smart to waste their time in school. (A debatable assumption, to
be sure, but then I finished college, so I would say that.) The success of
Gates, Dell, et al., in fact, is antithetical to Bush's educational career,
which looks like nothing more than a rote exercise in credentialism.

            The only reason this comparison really matters, incidentally, is that the
same crowd that has leapt to Bush's defense has often been fond of saying in
the past that we should look to business as a model for the way we run
government. This was never as congenial an analogy to Republican ideology as
Republicans thought it was--most corporations borrow significant amounts of
money and take their time paying it back, and most invest heavily in the
future, rather than giving money back to their shareholders--but an important
part of it was the idea that a president needs the same skills as a CEO. (Ross
Perot, too, was fond of this analogy, since he was a CEO.)

            If a president needs the same skills as a CEO, then, George W. is out of
luck. Actually, he probably would have fit in pretty well with the corporate
chieftains of the late 1950s and early 1960s, when there was no foreign and not
much domestic competition and the old-boy network was in full effect. But
not-smartness doesn't count for much anymore, at least not in the business
world.

         
      
   
