
   
   
      
         
            The Winnable War
            

            Hi, Jim,

            Maybe the sting is finally out of the Vietnam War debate. Your comments were
so reasonable, it's hard to believe the subject was Vietnam. When I look back
now at the Vietnam era and recall what people (including me) thought and said,
I think a dark cloud must have passed over the country. Passions were so great
on both sides of the debate in the United States--I was antiwar at the
time--that few people have honestly reconsidered their views or taken a fresh
look at the war and its results.

            With all the Vietnam books pouring out, I'd been looking for months for a
revisionist take, one that didn't accept either of the liberal explanations
(the United States missed opportunities for a settlement; the war was
unwinnable) or the conservative one (politicians tied the hands of the
military). But serious Vietnam revisionism barely existed--until Michael Lind's
book came along. I know Mike, but only slightly, and I haven't read any of his
earlier books. I was excited when I read Vietnam: The Necessary War , and
I think it's an enormously important book.

            Let me start with three points:

            1) Yes, I basically agree with your characterization of the theme of the
book. And I agree with Lind that even an ultimately unsuccessful intervention
was better than none at all. I'm not the first to make the point that Asia
would probably be quite different today (and far worse off) if the United
States had pulled out in, say, 1963 or 1964. Then, the dominoes might really
have fallen; two did anyway (Laos and Cambodia). Peter Kann of the Wall
Street Journal has written that a breathing spell was needed in Asia to
allow free markets and political freedoms to grow. And, boy, did they grow
during that 10-year period from 1965 to 1975 while the United States staved off
the North Vietnamese. Would Thailand be a free country today absent that? I
doubt it. Would Indonesia or Malaysia or Taiwan be independent?

            2) Lind may overstate the bandwagon effect in world affairs, but there's
certainly something to it. The proof is what happened post-1975 after the
United States did bug out. Then, the Soviet Union was emboldened and America
was demoralized. The Soviets were soon on the move in Asia, Africa, and Latin
America. And at least two administrations (Ford, Carter) were all but
paralyzed, and Congress was dead set against intervening anywhere. The defeat
in Vietnam gave the Soviet Union and the rest of the world the message that the
United States was out of the game for a while. And this was an accurate
message. Lind's contention is that things would have even worse if the United
States had simply taken a pass on Vietnam. A more damaging message would have
been sent and a bigger bandwagon effect touched off. As for minimal realism,
it's an excuse for neo-isolationism, for an ever-shrinking United States role
in international affairs. It could have been invoked to let the North Koreans
take the South, the Chinese Communists seize Taiwan, and Communist guerillas
conquer Malaysia. I'm glad it wasn't.

            3. There's one area where I think Lind comes up short. He thinks the United
States, given the way the war was being fought, should have pulled out in 1968,
if only to avert the subsequent casualties that, he argues, wound up weakening
America's determination to combat Soviet and Chinese communism. He's right
about the way the war was fought under Gen. William Westmoreland from 1964 to
1968. Wrongheaded is a mild way of characterizing it. Westmoreland tried to
lure the enemy into big battles and stressed body counts. Meanwhile, most of
South Vietnam was falling under Communist control. But everything changed when
Westmoreland left. His replacement, Gen. Creighton Abrams, adopted a new
strategy, stopped fighting major battles, and began piecemeal seizure of land
from the Communists. His pacification program brought security and a better
economy to rural areas. The Phoenix program wiped out the Viet Cong's
infrastructure. By 1970, the war was won militarily--or almost won. The South
Vietnamese army had become a capable force. All that was needed to save South
Vietnam was what the United States did in South Korea: leave a couple American
divisions and provide military and other support for the government. The truth
is, the war in Vietnam was winnable.

         
      
   
