
   
   
      
         
            The PRI's Primary Primary

            The Los Angeles
Times and the New
York Times lead with partial results from the first-ever primary of
Mexico's ruling party, the PRI. Francisco Labastida, a seasoned politician
favored by party bigwigs, clobbered his nearest competitor, Roberto Madrazo,
the maverick governor of the Tobasco region. The Washington Post
reports that Pentagon strategists, lawyers, and ethicists have been toying with
the question of how a military invasion of a hostile nation's information
systems might play out against the international "rules of war." USA Today talks with
analysts who spent the weekend scratching their heads over how the findings of
fact in the Microsoft trial may affect stock markets. (The LAT runs a
similar story inside.)

            The LAT pushed deadlines back to wait for results from Mexico: With
58 percent of votes in, Labastida was winning in 272 of 300 districts, compared
with Madrazo's 21. The winner needs only a plurality of districts. The election
is an important test for the PRI, which has been in power longer than any other
party in the world; previously, the outgoing president would simply knight his
successor, thereby guaranteeing him victory. Madrazo and the two other
candidates argued throughout the campaign that the party apparatus had buoyed
Labastida. But President Ernesto Zedillo said he is neutral and expressed this
sentiment by checking all four names on his ballot. The PRI should fare well in
next year's general election if it can remain less fractured than its
opposition.

            Halfway through the war with Yugoslavia, DOD legal eagles distributed to the
top brass guidelines for conducting information warfare. They suggested that
military commanders avoid civilian cyber targets (banks, universities) as
carefully as they would if they were bombing brick-and-mortar sites, the
Post reports. Arbitrary cyber assaults with serious civilian
repercussions -- opening a dam's floodgates, releasing radioactivity -- would
be just as illegal under international law as if they were performed manually.
The article ends with a sample tactic dismissed during the war with Yugoslavia:
"to bombard the Yugoslav leadership with faxes and other forms of harassment."
(Banner headline: "Milosevic To Withdraw From Kosovo: Says 'Aw, C'mon, Cut It
Out' ")
            

            A Clinton administration policy, still in development, would allow new
parents on family leave to receive unemployment money, the NYT reports.
The Labor Department two years ago prohibited states from using money for this
purpose, but new regulations may be on their way. At issue: for 60-plus years,
only people who are involuntarily unemployed, eligible for work, and seeking it
have qualified for unemployment insurance. Employees who take time off to care
for newborn infants do so voluntarily, according to employers who disagree with
the president. Objectors to the plan, which Clinton first articulated in May,
also say that the government shouldn't bleed the unemployment trust, which
people may need in years leaner than these. As if anticipating the Times
story, a below-the-fold USAT piece summarizes a psychological study that
shows children left at day care tend to have a weaker bond with their mothers,
which may have developmental consequences.

            A generation of change in the South has allowed prosecutors to pursue a
string of civil rights-era violent crimes, including the racially-motivated
1963 bombing of a church in downtown Birmingham that killed four girls, the
NYT reports. A combination of factors has pushed the cases forward:
Blacks hold more political power and have lobbied for suspects to be tried;
witnesses with heavy consciences can come forward without fear of speaking the
truth; and a feeling that the South must come to terms with past racism and
violence.

            Writing in the Monday "Information Industries" business section, media
reporter Felicity Barringer asks questions posed by the recent rebellion among
LAT staffers over the newspaper's agreement to share profits from a
Sunday magazine with the issue's subject. The LAT incident may make
publishers more cautious about experimenting with revenue sources, she writes,
but they will continue to do so as ad dollars flock Web-ward.

            Latest Y2K precaution-slash-Christmas bonus (NYT fronts, curiously):
The State Department will allow "the most anxious government employees" (as
well as the moderately worried, and those seeking a free trip home) in four
former-Soviet embassies to return to the States for 15 or 30 days over New
Year's. The price tag for the exodus may run as high as $8 million. Those who
stay don't expect a meltdown; without electricity and heating, however, there
may be a freeze-up. Diplomats and embassy employees in Russia, Ukraine,
Belarus, and Moldova qualify. No word on how the host countries feel about this
vote of confidence in their technical know-how.

            In light of the 10th anniversary tomorrow of the Berlin Wall's demise, the
Wall Street Journal
takes a look at that rock, that pillar, that spectacular golden prism for
international political-economic constancy and hope: McDonald's. The writer,
Roger Thurow, reflects on one East German couple's "decade of blind luck, of
East-West rivalry, of booms and busts, of capitalism devouring communism, of
communists devouring cheeseburgers." Manfred and Brigitte Voigt, unassuming
store owners who had never paid any attention to the chain, were approached by
McDonald's in 1990 and asked to open a pioneering restaurant in East Germany.
Where will they spend this anniversary of the event that altered their lives
forever? Florida.

         
      
   
