
   
   
      
         
            The Yent-a-Matic Speaks!

            
               An occasional feature in which kausfiles.com suggests romantic
possibilities between public figures who may or may not know each other. This
one is so . . . well, inevitable, it just might work!:
            

            
               Robert Torricelli --single (divorced) Democratic U.S. senator from New
Jersey who has been linked to a series of glamorous women (e.g. Bianca Jagger;
Patricia Duff Medavoy Perelman)

            
               and
            

            
               Arianna Huffington-- glamorous woman writer and social climber who
divorced failed California Republican U.S. Senate candidate Michael
Huffington.

            Notes: Arianna --OK, he may be a bit conservative for you in your
current bleeding-heart incarnation, but he's got what you want: a seat in the
Senate. You've put up with worse! You'll be back in Beltway dinner
party/talk-show heaven! Tip: Don't call him "The Torch" to his face.
Bob-- True, there's that cult business in her background, but she's
handsome, charming, and funny, and she's got what you want: a knack for
attracting press! Play up her right-wing connections and you can spin it as a
Romeo-Juliet/Carville-Matalin thing. Tip: You'll eventually have to do
something about her Greek mama ("Yaya") hanging around all the time, but better
be nice to her for now.

            
               Beltway Gossip Dump: Washington politicos think the death of Rhode
Island Senator John Chafee means that: a) as has been reported, the
Republican governor of Rhode Island will appoint Chafee's son, Lincoln--who was
already running for the Senate seat from which his father was retiring--to
serve the remainder of his father's term; b) as only kausfiles
will tell you, Rep. Robert Weygand, a Rhode Island Democrat, will decide to
stand for reelection to the House rather than run against Lincoln Chafee for
the Senate, since the younger Chafee will be much tougher to beat as an
incumbent, even an appointed one; c) with Weygand staying put, the
Democrats will have to worry about only four open House seats in November 2000,
while the Republican open seat total (counting resignations expected in the
next month) will soon go up to about 20; d) but Chafee's Rhode Island
Senate seat, which Democrats thought they might capture, is now in the
probable-Republican column. Bad news for the Torch! (Senator Torricelli, when
he's not dating glamourpusses, is chairman of the Democratic Senatorial
Campaign Committee); e) unless, that is, Torricelli can prevail on Rhode
Island Rep. Patrick Kennedy to run against Lincoln Chafee. Kennedy has the name
and fundraising ability to win the Senate seat, but right now Rep. Richard
Gephardt needs him to raise money for the Democrats' campaign to retake the
House. ... Got all that? ... Charlie Cook, eat your heart out! ... Bonus
opinion item: On Sunday, Vice President Al Gore told viewers of ABC's
This Week they could "rest assured" that Roe v. Wade would be
safe in a Gore-appointed Supreme Court. Of course, Gore said, he "would not use
a litmus test." Some questions: How can Gore be so sure his appointees will
support Roe unless he uses a litmus test? And what's wrong with litmus
tests anyway? Wouldn't support of Brown v. Board of Education be a
legitimate litmus test in picking a Supreme Court justice? If Gore feels so
strongly about Roe (which I think was wrongly decided) he should by all
means make it a litmus test. ...

         
      
   
