
   
   
      
         
            Waging War

            The New York
Times ' top non-local story is a NYT /CBS News poll showing that the Democrats
have a significantly higher approval rating than Republicans on most election
issues. The Los Angeles
Times ' top non-local story is the Senate's 55-44 passage of a $1
minimum-wage hike--a bill that has not passed the House and would likely be
vetoed by President Clinton for the tax breaks it gives to businesses. (The
NYT reefers this story.) The Washington Post leads
with the revelation that the Army has rated two of its 10 divisions
as unready for war, the first time any division has received such a designation
in seven years. This "C-4" rating means that the units in question--based in
New York and Germany--need more soldiers, equipment, and training to
participate in a regional conflict. The Post says this is partly an
appeal for more money. The NYT , which credits the Post ,
runs this story inside. USA Today leads with a Y2K
scoop: Nearly 50 percent of local 911 emergency services--such as
fire, police, and ambulance corps--are not Y2K compliant. This statistic comes
from the final report of President Clinton's Year 2000 Conversion Council, to
be released today. The Council also says that 60 percent of health-care
facilities and one-third of schools are unprepared; however, the federal
government, the telecom industry, the financial sector, transportation
services, and the oil and gas industries are over 90 percent ready.

            The NYT poll finds that the Dems have a greater-than-10-point electoral
advantage on health care, education, and Social Security. (The Republicans lead
on military readiness, but this issue holds little weight with voters, the poll
finds.) Moreover, Congressional Democrats have a 7-percent-higher approval
rating than Congressional Republicans; if this holds, the NYT says it
would ensure a Democratic House in 2001. George W. Bush holds a significant but
shrinking lead--about 10 points--over both Al Gore and Bill Bradley (the
difference between the two Democrats in a race with Bush was not statistically
significant). Bush led Gore by 15 points in October and 17 points in September.
Both Democratic candidates have a greater-than-10-point lead over John McCain,
however.

            The Wall Street Journal
reports that 14 Pfizer executives sold 1.2 million shares
of the company in the days leading up to Pfizer's hostile takeover bid for
Warner-Lambert. Since the bid was announced last Thursday, Pfizer shares have
dropped 9 percent.

            A Journal opinion piece describes why there have been so many pharmaceutical mergers
recently. Scientific breakthroughs tend to produce small start-ups firms that
pioneer new methods of research and secure valuable patents. Soon, the
establishment companies realize they need the new research technology and
patents, and the small firms realize they need economies of scale to keep
producing successful drugs. Thus the antibiotic revolution produced a spate of
mergers in the '40s and '50s, breakthroughs in heart and digestive drugs
produced mergers in the '70s, and the genetic revolution is producing mergers
in the '90s. Also, the move in Washington to create new prescription coverage
for Medicare recipients threatens to lower drug prices, which in turn pushes
firms to produce newer drugs with higher margins, which requires more research
money and new technology.

            On the NYT Op-Ed page, Garry Wills argues
that the true test of a presidential candidate is not temperament or virtue but
the shrewd ability to communicate with a constituency.

            

               What disqualifies a leader is the kind of flaw that would turn away
followers. By that measure, Mr. McCain's anger is not what a pastor would
encourage for the good of a man's soul, but it makes little difference at all
in his ability to attract followers.

            

            Gore's problem, therefore, is not that he is a "beta" (vice presidents--even
Lyndon Johnson--must be) or that he is reserved (so was Lincoln), but that
hiring a Dick Morris hanger-on like Naomi Wolf and trying to hide it shows a
"stunning lapse in intelligence," a daft inability to perceive what will
mobilize and what will alienate the voters.

            On the Post opinion page, Michael Kelly asks his colleagues in the media,

            

               Why does everyone loathe us so? Because, my little preciouses, we are so
loathable. ... Reporters like to picture themselves as independent thinkers. In
truth, with the exception of 13-year-old girls, there is no social subspecies
more slavish to fashion, more terrified of originality and more devoted to
group-think.

            

             To this, Today's Papers readily, wholeheartedly, and unconditionally
agrees.

         
      
   
