
   
   
      
         
            Just the Facts

            Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson, who is presiding over the Microsoft antitrust
trial, issued yesterday a 207-page document that states the software giant
"enjoys monopoly power in the relevant market." The story, with accompanying
analyses, leads at all three papers. The Washington Post 's
top non-local, non-Microsoft story outlines Sen. John McCain's emergent
challenge to Gov. George W. Bush. The Los Angeles Times chronicles the Labor Department's release
of October job statistics, which show that unemployment has dipped to its
lowest point in three decades.  The New York Times serves up one of several education stories:
Seventy-seven percent of New York City eighth graders failed a standardized
math exam and 65 percent failed an English test.

            Jackson delivers a powerful reproach to Microsoft, claiming that the company
stifled innovation, squeezed out competition, and impaired consumer choice. His
conclusions, a precursor to the verdict expected early next year, support the
breadth of Justice Department allegations against Microsoft (which publishes

                  Slate ) and dismisses the company's defense as
"specious." Attorney General Janet Reno appeared with prosecutors at a press
conference and touted the findings as a victory for the American consumer. In a
videotaped statement, Bill Gates (William H. on 43rd Street, New York)
"respectfully disagreed" with Jackson and defended the company's integrity.

            The WP ends with a kicker: Jackson e-mailed his findings to attorneys
and the press in a Word Perfect document--Corel Corp.'s alternative to
Microsoft Word. Two-thirds of the way through, the Post cites experts
who say that the findings are hardly surprising (an opinion also expressed by

                  Slate
               's Moneybox).
Lawyers told the NYT that they cannot remember another antitrust trial
in which findings of fact were released before the actual verdict. This was
interpreted by one analyst as a gesture intended to elicit a settlement. If
none is reached, appeals may drag on for years, experts say.

            After holding at 4.2 or 4.3 percent since March, the unemployment rate fell
to 4.1 percent in October, the LAT reports on its front. (Each
percentage point equates to roughly one million people.) The drop brought with
it only insignificant wage inflation, 0.1 percent. The bright news put markets
in good shape before the weekend close, and analysts predict that the Fed will
be less inclined to raise interest rates when it meets November 16.

            McCain's increasing visibility is attributed to the disappearance of half
the Republican campaign field, a floundering Forbes, a best-selling memoir, and
the ability to draw in the politically disenchanted. The story emphasizes the
speed with which the 2000 campaign has ripened, but questions whether McCain
can hold on with significantly less money than his rival. The Post
mentions the outcome of the August 14 Iowa straw poll, but doesn't say that
McCain thumbed his nose at it and trotted off to New Hampshire instead.

            The GAO revealed yesterday that nine federal agencies, including Medicare
and the food stamp program, paid out $19.1 billion they shouldn't have during
the 1998 fiscal year. Such payments sometimes come about through bad
information, accounting errors, or fraud, the Post reports. Sen. Fred
Thompson suggested that the wasted dollars could add up when retiring baby
boomers put increased pressure on Medicare and Social Security coffers.

            Beyond their shock value, New York City's test scores made news because the
state is undergoing a high-profile tightening of educational standards. In
coming years, statewide tests (with class work and attendance) will determine
which students advance to the next grade. All the papers report that a sharply
divided Supreme Court allowed Cleveland to go forward with its school-voucher
program until a definitive ruling is reached about whether the program violates
the separation of church and state. The program lets children attend parochial
schools using public money. The court decided to suspend an injunction
preventing new students from joining the program. Finally, the LAT
fronts and the NYT runs inside official word of a change in leadership
in Los Angeles schools.

            The NYT and Post split the difference on a story about the
U.S. drive for a missile-defense system. The latter highlights European
leaders' "serious alarm" at the shield, which could damage military and
diplomatic ties across the Atlantic, and (somehow less likely) provoke an arms
race with Russia and China. This does not faze the Times, which writes
that the United States could unilaterally pull out of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic
Missile Treaty, despite what anyone thinks. Russia yesterday spearheaded a U.N.
protest vote, supported by U.S. allies, that upheld the treaty's integrity.

            Just how tricky are things in southern Russia? An inside WP lead
details Al Gore's reaction to Bush's "inability [Thursday] to name the leaders
of three foreign countries," Pakistan, India, and Chechnya. The latter,
however, isn't a country, but--as its ever-present Homeric epithet indicates--a
"breakaway republic" of Russia. Perhaps the WP, which calls it a
"breakaway region" later on in the piece, was latently distracted by a blink in
NYT datelines. On three consecutive days in early October, Times
stories began "GROZNY, Russia," "GROZNY, Chechnya," and again "GROZNY,
Russia."

         
      
   
