
   
   
      
         
            Turkey Clubbed

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with yesterday's earthquake in Turkey, a story the
Washington Post fronts and the New York Times slips inside. The NYT lead
announces that President Clinton has won the federal budget battles, and the
WP goes with a scoop on the likely veto of the MCI-Sprint merger by
federal regulators.

            All three papers report that the Turkish quake registered a 7.2 on the
standard measuring scale (the August 17 one was a 7.4) and was closely centered
in the Bolu province, halfway between Istanbul and Ankara (the August 17 one
hit Bolu, but its impact spanned a much wider area). The WP says that
dozens have been killed and hundreds injured; the LAT goes with 120 dead
and 500 injured. Even though this earthquake seems to have been less lethal
than the August one, the country is experiencing a horrible bout of déjà vu,
with reports of victims trapped under small mountains of rubble and widespread
frustration at the state's ineffectual relief efforts. The WP story
emphasizes that the quake came, inconveniently enough, just two days before
President Clinton is supposed to be in Turkey for a European summit (the trip
is still on).

            The NYT tallies the partisan wins and losses in this year's federal
budget wars and declares President Clinton the clear victor. The evidence: The
Republicans have reluctantly loaded their bills with an extra $5 billion in
spending and allowed Clinton to pass his program for adding teachers
nationwide. That said, the story adds that the Republicans could have done
worse, especially given their thin House majority, inexperienced new speaker,
low poll ratings, and internecine strife between conservatives and moderates.
They managed to dedicate more money than Clinton wanted to the Pentagon and
military salaries and establish themselves as protectors of Social Security
revenue. Now, says the story, they simply "want to go home."

            The WP lead, sourced to "knowledgeable insiders," reports that
regulators will veto the merger between MCI WorldCom and Sprint, on the grounds
that it would allow too few companies to control too much of the long-distance
market. AT&T and the new mega-WorldCom Inc. would control nearly 80 percent
of long-distance service. Meanwhile, WorldCom is spinning the deal as "the
single best hope for a strong and effective alternative to the mega-Bells and
the emerging AT&T cable monopoly."

            The WP alone fronts news of a terrorist attack on U.S. and U.N.
targets in Pakistan. The bombers planted explosives in parked cars near U.S.
and U.N. facilities. Only a few people were hurt in the blasts. No one has
claimed responsibility, but most suspect the Taliban movement, which controls
most of Pakistan's neighbor, Afghanistan. The Taliban has denied involvement,
but the bombs are widely perceived as a message to the U.N., which is set to
impose sanctions against the Taliban on Sunday if it fails to expel or
extradite Osama bin Laden.

            The LAT and WP front the latest on the EgyptAir flight 990
investigation. The National Transportation Safety Report still hasn't found any
evidence of fire, loss of cabin pressure, or any other clear reason for the
plane's sharp descent. Investigators have found still-inconclusive evidence
that the two pilots may have been thrusting the controls in opposite
directions, and surmise that they may have been fighting each other, struggling
with passengers, or simply panicking. "The dive was so violent that unbelted
passengers would have floated about the cabin," the WP describes
dramatically.

            The NYT and WP report that Mark Manes, who sold Dylan Klebold
and Eric Harris one of the guns they used in the Columbine massacre, was
sentenced to six years in prison. The trial's biggest revelation was that
Harris and Klebold had made a videotape outlining their plan, thanking those
who had helped them obtain the necessary weapons, and assuring future viewers
that they were acting alone without anyone else's knowledge. "Let me tell you
this much, they have no clue. So don't blame them and arrest them for what we
did," said Klebold. Lawyers quoted from the tape, but it was not released to
the public.

            Parkay and Entenmann's beware: The LAT and NYT front new FDA
guidelines that, if accepted, would include a count of trans fatty acids--aka
"stealth fat"--on nutrition labels. Trans fatty acids, common in margarines and
baked goods, are unanimously thought by nutritionists to contribute to heart
disease. Foods containing less than half a gram of trans fat and a half gram of
saturated fat per serving could proudly claim to be "trans fat free."

            The LAT and NYT fronts the pomp-filled reinterrment of the
remains of 26 Confederate soldiers whose graves were recently found under a
sports stadium in Charleston (the WP puts the story inside). The
bodies had originally been buried in an old mariners' cemetery, but in 1948,
the Citadel built a stadium on the site without properly exhuming the graves,
which were finally discovered this summer by a neo-Confederate group.
Volunteers spent most of the summer digging the site up, and yesterday, Civil
War re-enactment groups gave them a full Confederate burial, including a
rousing rendition of "Dixie." The papers agree that the event epitomized South
Carolina's stubborn and controversial attachment to Confederate symbols. The
NAACP is currently boycotting the state for flying the Confederate flag. Last
week Gov. Jim Hodges asked the NAACP to drop the boycott on the condition that
he push for a bill designating Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday as a state
holiday. South Carolina is also the only state that still flies the flag and
doesn't celebrate King's birthday. The NAACP "doesn't care about the flag,
they're just doing this to raise money," Republican State Senator Arthur
Ravenel told the NYT .

         
      
   
