
   
   
      
         
            The Man Who Loved Genetic Anomalies
            

            Dear Todd,

            Good morning to you. With regard to your comment about "self-hating
depressives who don't get out of bed until noon," I have quite the opposite
problem. Recently I have been the victim of a team action by my four dogs to
move their morning meal from 7:00 to 6:15. It used to take place at 9. Next
thing I knew it was 8:30. Then 8. Then 7:45. I think they think that if they
keep moving the mealtime earlier and earlier they will hit some kind of a
quantum physics time-space continuum where there will be a 24-hour mealtime
loop.

            I have been sitting here waiting to begin this e-mail exchange like I am
preparing to take the SATs again. The only other time I ever intentionally
perused this many newspapers out of sheer anxiety was during my one-year stint
as a radio talk-show host. Ultimately, there was precious little reason to use
any of the information in that format either. But oh, the things I have
learned. For instance, I read in USA Today online that actress/rap star
Brandy Norwood, who plays the college-age star of TV's Moesha , caused
her show to go on hiatus when she was hospitalized for dehydration. Like so
many TV shows, I'll bet they use this unfortunate opportunity to create a
special episode of the series that will finally aim a much needed spotlight on
one of the most overlooked problems facing college students today. We hear so
much about excessive drinking on campus, but so little is ever said about all
the dehydrated young people who refuse all beverages entirely.

            I don't know anything about that screeching-train-type Japanese music you
mentioned, but in a geographically related story, I learned in today's L.A.
Times that 75 percent of Japanese parents-in-waiting are breaking with
traditional Asian thought and are hoping to have baby girls. The timing
couldn't be better for this female population boom because in our country at
last a military advisory committee has opened up a debate that will eventually
pave the way for a world of the future in which every little girl will finally
be able to pursue her cherished childhood dream--to one day live and work on a
nuclear powered submarine.

            And speaking of mildly feminist issues, can I use this as a segue to discuss
just briefly how truly repelled and filled with hatred I am for theoretical
presidential candidate Donald Trump? It's not just the arrogance and the smug
expression, although that helps things along, I admit. But I have been enraged
at his repeated comment about how if Clinton had conducted his affair with a
supermodel instead of a tubby intern he would have been regarded as a hero. And
then he always finishes this up with a comment about how his weakness is that
he (Trump) doesn't smoke or drink but dammit, he "loves women." First of all,
let me say that I never imagined myself having a reason to defend the mainly
pathetic and ridiculous Ms. Lewinsky, but I wonder if the vile and loathsome
Mr. Trump has ever had a conversation with a woman who wasn't a genetic anomaly
(or supermodel, as he calls them). That to me is like a caviar collector saying
that he really likes eggs. OK, I know that analogy doesn't really work. Maybe
you can help me with a new one. I have been looking for a better analogy for
weeks now. As for that earnest young death-of-irony guy, I read only his book
review, not his book. But I hope I don't run in to him in a dark alley
someplace because I have been taking self-defense classes and I might just yell
out "Heelpalm!" and then we'll both have to live with the consequences.

            I guess you must know that today is the birthday of ODB (Old Dirty Bastard)
of the Wu-Tang Clan. He turns 31. Did you get him anything?

         
      
   
