
   
   
      
         
            <i>L.A. Times</i>, Part II: Calling Willes' Bluff

            Chatterbox has experienced much frustration trying to figure out precisely
what's gone amiss at the Los Angeles Times . First it was reported (by
Rick Barrs in New Times L.A. ) that the Times was sharing
advertising revenue from a special issue of its Sunday magazine with the
subject of that special issue, the new Staples Center sports arena. This
created a predictable (and justified) uproar at the paper, which caused the
publisher, Kathryn Downing, to apologize and mumble some nonsense about how she
was unfamiliar with newspaper etiquette, which encouraged reporters and editors
at the paper to push editor Michael Parks to assign a story about the whole
fiasco, which he eventually did (to David Shaw, the paper's Pulitzer-winning
media critic). It also prompted Chatterbox to puzzle over the apparent financial
insanity of a deal in which the L.A. Times paid the Staples Center 2
or 3 million dollars in exchange for what seemed at best $800,000 worth of
services.

            When Chatterbox wrote the earlier
item, he was unaware that even before the New Times L.A. scoop, Dan
Turner of the Los Angeles Business Journal had broken another piece of
the Staples Center story--namely, that the sports arena had contacted "the
teams, concessionaires and various corporate sponsors" connected to the Staples
Center and asked them "to buy ads in the Sunday magazine; the ads themselves
were sold by the Times 's advertising department." (This story is not
available online.) Now that Chatterbox is better informed, he still
suspects the deal was a ripoff for the L.A. Times . Surely an aggressive
sales staff for a virtual-monopoly newspaper like the Times could shake
down these advertisers just as effectively. But Chatterbox must admit that he
doesn't know what other goodies the Times may have extracted from the
Staples Center.

            Chatterbox also doesn't know how common it is for newspapers to enlist the
people they write about to sell ads. The New York Times , after initially
covering the L.A. Times story quite aggressively, subsequently had to
admit that in 1995 the Boston Globe , which it owned then and continues
to own, ran a special section on its new downtown sports arena, the
Fleet Center, which relied on ads procured by ... the Fleet Center. "We treated
them as a sales agent and paid them a commission for ads that they sold,"
Globe spokesman Richard Gulla told the Times ' Felicity Barringer.
"Will it happen today? No."

            Chatterbox would love to see Downing lose her job (and--this is probably too
much to hope for--see her boss, Times Mirror chief Mark Willes, get canned,
too). Still, Chatterbox doesn't really think a ritual sacrifice will address
the basic underlying problem: When media outlets strike secret business deals
with other businesses, readers are unable to evaluate whether these deals might
be compromising news coverage.

            This is not true of advertising, which--say what one will about its
corrupting effect on news coverage--always, by definition , discloses
potential conflicts to readers. It would be wonderful if publications could now
be persuaded never to raise revenue by any means other than sales and
advertising, but that's probably impractical. (Newspaper circulation has, after
all, been declining for many years.) A much better step would be for
newspapers, magazines, Web sites, TV and radio news shows, etc., to
disclose to consumers, on a regular basis, whatever non-advertising
deals they have going. Newspapers, for example, could run a small daily box
of agate type providing this information, with perhaps a longer summary
provided once or twice a year.

            Why reporters didn't clamor for disclosure long ago, at the L.A.
Times and elsewhere, is a bit of a mystery. Probably it reflected a
yearning to remain blissfully ignorant of trends in the news business for as
long as was humanly possible. (Most reporters Chatterbox knows are more
interested in maintaining their virginity than in actually helping to maintain
the integrity of the business organizations they belong to.) The L.A.
Times staff's cultlike attachment to Otis Chandler--the former publisher
and descendant of the paper's founding family, who last week wrote a letter supporting the staff revolt--seems typical of this
ineffectuality. Times reporters have (according to a report in today's Washington Post ) lately been
taping photocopied portraits of Chandler to newsroom walls, in silent protest
against what's being done to his legacy. Chandler was indeed a heroic
publisher--the Times was a mediocre paper when he took it over, a great
one when he stepped down--and it would be wonderful if he were reinstated or
allowed a say about the paper's fate. But by all accounts, he won't be; despite
owning more L.A. Times stock than anyone else, he's outgunned on the
board by an assortment of younger, much more crass and stock-price-obsessed
Chandler cousins.

            A more productive way for L.A. Times staff members to rebel would be
if they demanded to learn--and share with readers--comprehensive information
about the paper's undisclosed sources of income and labor. By doing so, they
would be endorsing Mark Willes' view that the wall between the news and
business sides of newspapers needs to be breached. But they would have the
satisfaction of knowing they were breaching it in a way that Willes and his ilk
would find unpleasant precisely to the extent that it exposed unpleasant
practices.

            Because Chatterbox thinks disclosure of non-advertising business revenue
sources should be a news-industry norm, he will hereby do a little disclosing
of his own. When Chatterbox mentions a book that is in print, he usually
provides a link to it at barnesandnoble.com. This is because Barnes and Noble
pays 
                  Slate
                a sliver of the proceeds whenever someone buys through
a 
                  Slate
                link. Chatterbox, who has no ethical objections to this
arrangement, is free to say whatever he wants about the book in question
(frequently, he says the book is no good). He is under no pressure to mention
particular books, or indeed to mention any books at all, and does so only when
he thinks his readers might want to examine his source material. (Chatterbox
does the same thing--bringing no financial benefit to 
                  Slate
               --with
the other various source links he provides.) But readers of this column should
be under no illusion that it's in the business of finding the cheapest or
otherwise best online vendors for particular books.

            OK, L.A. Times , New York Times , NBC News, Salon , NPR,
the Drudge Report , and the rest of you: Your turn.

         
      
   
