
   
   
      
         
            Col.Qaddafi.com

            The New York
Times , Washington Post , Los Angeles Times, and USA Today lead with a decision by the nation's
second-largest managed-care company, UnitedHealth Group, to stop pre-screening
routine doctors' tests and minor surgereries. The Wall Street Journal puts the HMO
announcement in the second spot of its "Business and Finance" box, giving top
billing to an anonymously sourced report that Monsanto, the agro-drug company,
has been in merger talks with Swiss agro-drug giant Novartis. Monsanto, the
Journal explains, wants to separate its farming operations from its
drug business to boost its stock price. Its executives are trying to either
bisect the existing company or, more likely, merge with another agro-drug
conglomerate and then bisect the whole thing. (For more pharmaceuticals
mergers, see Friday's TP.)

            UnitedHealth Group, which covers 14.5 million people, will stop questioning
doctors' decisions before treatment is given. The Journal has the most
concrete illustration of this change: Instead of questioning whether a heart
patient really needs a cardiac catheterization, for example, United will focus
instead on how to get the procedure done more quickly to reduce the hospital
stay. Besides the mounting pressure of class-action lawsuits and regulatory
bills on Capitol Hill, United's motive was economic: It had determined that the
money saved through pre-screening was less than the cost of employing the
pre-screeners. The company will invest the savings in new ways to compare
treatment costs with patient outcomes, which it will share with doctors. Only
the Post and the Journal credit the Dallas Morning
News --and after the jump, at that--with breaking this story Monday.

            The Journal tops its "Worldwide" box with Clinton's dispatch of two
negotiators to Beijing in a last-ditch effort to include China in the World
Trade Organization before the next WTO meeting on Nov. 30. One inauspicious
sign: Clinton had to call Chinese President Jiang Zemin a second time to
request an invitation for his emissaries, after Jiang did not return his first
call.

            On the Journal editorial page, Microsoft President Steve Ballmer
writes that his company

            

               cannot compromise on the government's demands that Microsoft essentially
stop listening to the marketplace and cease innovating its products. The
current lawsuit would have Microsoft ignore the most important recent
development in computing--the Internet--by shipping a version of Windows that
omits the critical Internet capabilities.

            

            An analysis of the trial's fallout on the Journal 's "Politics and
Policy" page concludes that Microsoft's best bet is to curry favor with as many
politicians as possible; even if the Justice Department were to drop its suit
under a Republican president, the Journal writes, just one state
attorney general could keep the case alive. (Microsoft, by the way, publishes

                  Slate
               .)

            The NYT fronts a news analysis predicting that the most likely
Microsoft breakup scenario would be along product lines: One company would make
Windows, another would make application software such as Microsoft Office, and
the third would handle Internet applications. Such a scenario--which Wall
Street prefers to a cross-product breakup--might even create more combined
shareholder value than current Microsoft stock (which closed $1.625 lower than
Friday's close--but rose about three dollars from its low point after the
decision Friday evening). The LAT notes in a front-page analysis that
although Microsoft dominates the software industry, it has been less successful
in the Internet market and especially in the interactive-cable-TV market. (For
Moneybox's take on Judge Jackson's brief, click here and
here;
for a "Frame Game," click here.)

            On the Post opinion page, editorial-board member Sebastian Mallaby
predicts a partial rejuvenation of machine-style, get-out-the-vote electoral
organizing. Where political ads on television and radio aim to disorient an
opponent's base and suppress his turnout, machine-style organizing aims to
energize a candidate's own base and encourage turnout. The increasing political
activity of unions accounts for much of this rejuvenation, of course, but the
phone-chain, door-to-door electioneering style of unions is being copied by the
U.S. Chamber of Commerce and GOP congressional candidates. In the information
age, Mallaby writes, even a brief personal recommendation at the water cooler
can sway a voter jaded by anonymous electronic campaigning.

            Quick! How many ways can you spell the name of the nation's second-largest
HMO? Today's newspapers manage five. At the Journal and LAT ,
it's "UnitedHealth Group" (Today's Papers' default); at the NYT , it's
"United Health Group"; at the Post , it's "UnitedHealthcare"; at
USAT , it's "United Healthcare"; and the LAT also throws in
"United HealthCare." (What? No "Unitedgrouphealth.com"?) Only the LAT
explains that "-- Group" is the parent company of "-- Care." TP is reminded of
the Saturday Night Live skit featuring 1,000 different ways to spell
Col. Muammar al-Qaddafi--er, Kaddafi, er, Quadaffi, er ...

         
      
   
