
   
   
      
         
            The Petting Party
            

            The top issues are the foreign-policy "pop quiz" given to George W. Bush by
a television journalist and the ridiculousness of Naomi Wolf advising Al Gore.
A close second is the Justice Department's victory in the first round of the
Microsoft anti-trust trial.

            Interviewed briefly on ABC's This Week , Bush says that voters will
choose their president based on "judgment, vision, [and] philosophy" rather
than on factual knowledge. (The interview appears to be excerpted from a longer
interview for another ABC program, though Sam Donaldson fails to make this
clear.) On CNN's Late Edition , Wolf Blitzer tells Pat Buchanan, "At
least I didn't ask you who the president of Croatia is"; Buchanan snaps
"[Franjo] Tudjman" before Blitzer can finish the sentence. Buchanan admits that
Bush was entrapped, but reminds viewers that W. does not have his father's
curiosity about world affairs.

            Except for Eleanor Clift (PBS's McLaughlin Group ), most pundits
think the Bush interview was--in the words of William Safire (NBC's Meet
the Press ), Bob Novak (CNN's Capital Gang ), and Margaret Carlson
( Capital Gang )--"gotcha journalism." Also, most admit to being as
clueless as Bush ( This Week's George F. Will claims that he,
like Bush, knew only one name). Michael Barone ( McLaughlin ) cracks
that the interview "tells you that the guy who just won all the money on
Jeopardy should be president." Several pundits--such as Tucker Carlson
( Late Edition ), Tony Blankley ( McLaughlin ), and George
Stephanopoulos ( This Week )--note that a more sophisticated candidate
would have refused to answer the questions or else launched into a deeper
discussion of foreign policy themes. Mark Shields (PBS's NewsHour with Jim
Lehrer ) says the Bush camp is pleased that their candidate kept his cool
under fire, and Carlson says that anyway Bush's main selling point is
temperament. Brit Hume ( Fox News Sunday ) says that Gore's response to
the Bush flap--Gore announced he could have answered all the questions with no
problem--amounts to "waving your hand in class" and "almost makes you worry
about [Gore]."

            Appearing on This Week , Wolf downplays the importance of her advice
to Gore and defends her right to earn what male campaign advisors make. Barone
notes that advice on gender issues is common in campaigns. Carlson warns that
Wolf's advocacy of "heavy petting" and "onanism" will not help Gore's
popularity, though it might spice up his campaign. Novak thinks Gore is on the
cusp of becoming "ridiculous," but Mark Shields ( Capital Gang ) and Al
Hunt ( Capital Gang ) say Gore looks more relaxed on the campaign trail
than ever. (For a "Frame Game" on Naomi Wolf, click here; for an "Assessment," click
here.)

            On This Week , DOJ prosecutor Joel Klein says the Microsoft verdict
will not require a "specific remedy," but will require "a remedy." On
Late Edition , Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch,
R.-Utah, says the decision demands "major changes in corporate policy" at
Microsoft and that "it's not beyond the ken to see a breakup of the company."
Several commentators--such as Diane Feinstein, D.-Calif. ( Late
Edition ), Alan Murray (PBS's Washington Week in Review ), and Juan
Williams ( Fox )--predict that any punitive action will come after the
market has already broken up Microsoft's monopoly anyway. Hume argues that the
monopoly label is "a big leap" from the evidence. Novak says that Microsoft's
strategy is to drag out its appeal until a Republican wins the White House (and
presumably drops the lawsuit). Fox illustrates its commentary on the
Microsoft findings with a duel scene from Monty Python and the Holy
Grail , in which one knight says, "I move for no man," then gets his limbs
chopped off, and then claims it's "just a flesh wound." (For Moneybox's take on
the judge's findings, click here.)



Hall of Mirrors

Asked whether the Naomi Wolf flap will hurt Gore, Susan Page ( Late
Edition ) says, "Voters don't care if Gore hires Naomi Wolf, but I do think
it reinforces an emerging perception for Al Gore, which is that he doesn't know
who he is." Steve Roberts ( Late Edition ) and Brit Hume ( Fox )
give similarly reasoned comments on the Bush "pop quiz" (ie., it doesn't really
matter, but it reinforces the perception that it matters, and therefore it
matters). (For a "Frame Game" on the media's circular priorities, click
here.) 


And Now, a Word From Our Sponsor

"This was a political attack on success. The one thing the liberals can't stand
is a successful corporation. ... Klein doesn't know anything about
antitrust--he's a liberal politician. ... So I think the idea of penalizing a
great corporation with the use of a 19th-century statute is a suicide on this
country. ... This is relief for the losing companies--the losers--not for the
consumers" (Novak, Capital Gang ).


Last Word

"I am not a fashion consultant. I do think it's a little sexist that that's
been blown into something it isn't. ... I took a cut in pay to work for Al Gore
[at $15,000 a month]. I took another cut in pay to work for him [at $5,000 a
month]--at a time where we're all tightening our belts."

                  --Naomi Wolf, on This Week
            

            
"My jacket is alpha-male brown."

                  --William Safire, Meet the Press
            

            
"Actually, I'm a delta male--Mississippi delta, that is."

                  --Trent Lott, R.-Miss., on Fox
            

         
      
   
