
   
   
      
         
            Bradley's Net Election
            

            Issue 1 is the presidential race--both Democratic and Republican. Issue 2 is
Hillary Clinton's failure to quickly denounce an assertion by Yasser Arafat's
wife that Israel had used poison gas on Palestinians.

            Bill Bradley's basketball buddies take to the airwaves to praise their
candidate. Bradley's former Knick roommate, Dave DeBusschere, tells Meet
the Press (NBC) that the candidate was "very quiet, actually. But a
wonderful roommate--a lot of fun to sit and discuss different things with." On
the same program, former Celtic Bob Cousy acknowledges that "old jocks don't
know a lot about the Balkans and the Middle East solutions or campaign finance
reform." Interviewed courtside at Madison Square Garden (the site of a
fundraiser), Bill Bradley tells Late Edition (CNN) that his new
campaign slogan is, "It Can Happen."

            The pundits are mildly surprised by Gore's increasing lead over Bradley in
New Hampshire. Mark Shields and Paul Gigot (both of PBS's Newshour With Jim
Lehrer ), among others, conclude that Gore has "stopped the hemorrhaging"
in his campaign. Tucker Carlson ( Late Edition ) says Gore will soon be
helped by Bradley's negative ratings, which are sure to rise as the candidate
becomes better known. On Meet the Press , Joe Klein says that when he
asked Gore why he feels so strongly about distancing himself from President
Clinton, Gore referred to his struggle to break free of his father's shadow
when running in his first race for Congress. Bill Schneider ( Late
Edition ) says the smartest thing for Gore to do is simply ignore Clinton,
not criticize him and risk alienating his base.

            Many pundits are encouraged by a new poll showing John McCain, the media
favorite, nearly neck-and-neck with George W. Bush in New Hampshire. Brit Hume
( Fox News Sunday ) thinks this puts more pressure on Bush to perform
well in next month's debate. Skeptics include Jeff Birnbaum ( Fox ), who
notes that one poll is just one poll, and Bob Novak (CNN's Capital
Gang ), who says it's much easier for a polarizing figure such as McCain
(or Buchanan in '96) to win New Hampshire than to win the nomination. However,
Bill Kristol (ABC's This Week ) says that Bush support in South
Carolina (the second primary state) is broad but skin deep; if McCain wins New
Hampshire, he predicts, South Carolina businessmen might give the veteran
another look. George F. Will ( This Week ) proposes that McCain is like
Robert E. Lee and Bush like U.S. Grant (who won by attrition). Kristol counters
that Bush might be George McClellan instead (who did not).

            Most pundits criticize Hillary Clinton for her silence in West
Bank--especially for her comment afterwards that denouncing Arafat's wife on
stage would have hurt the Mideast peace process. ( This Week 's George
Stephanopoulos and Fox 's Juan Williams defend her, however, arguing
that she was in the Mideast on a diplomatic mission as First Lady, not as a New
York senatorial candidate.) Hillary is further ridiculed for a new
soft-money-funded "issue advocacy" TV ad created by the state Democratic Party
and featuring Hillary. Eleanor Clift (PBS's The McLaughlin Group )
argues that every candidate exploits these campaign-finance loopholes, but
Stephanopoulos, Jay Carney ( McLaughlin ), Tony Blankley
( McLaughlin ), and Michael Barone ( McLaughlin ) conclude that
the ad will hurt her more than help her. Joe Klein notes that the Jewish vote
in New York is actually two votes: the "Manhattan superliberal" one and the
"outer-borough superconservative" one.


Et Cetera
            

            On Washington Week in Review (PBS), Michel McQueen notes that there
has been a tremendous surge in Internet fundraising in the last five weeks.
Bradley has now raised one million dollars online; McCain, half a
million.


Fox Softball Sunday
            

            Some of the questions Tim Russert asked Kenneth Starr on Meet the
Press on Oct. 24:

            

               Two months ago the headlines: "Starr Expects To Issue Report On Clintons By
Fall Of 2000." You've now resigned, not completing your report. What
happened?

               Do you believe the public lost confidence in you?

               Supporters of the president are already saying that [your successor] Robert
Ray was hired by Rudy Giuliani in the southern district of New York as a U.S.
attorney at one time; therefore, anything that he concludes about Hillary
Clinton will be tainted because of his relationship with Rudy Giuliani.

               You lost three of the last four jury trials. Do you believe that those
juries were, in effect, influenced by the perception of you in the impeachment
process against the president?

               Five years, $ 50 million--why so long? Why so much money?

               Some would suggest that if you had not been practicing private law while
being independent counsel, the process would have moved along more quickly. In
hindsight, should you have stopped all private law practice?

               Let me show you how the American people in the end viewed your performance
as independent counsel. Put it on the screen. Ken Starr, favorable, 30;
unfavorable, 61. The exact opposite of President Clinton. What happened to
you?

            

            Some of the questions Tony Snow and Brit Hume asked Starr on Fox News
Sunday last weekend:

            

               Was it the Constitution the president was trying to save [as he alleged to
ABC News last week]?

               You mentioned that [Clinton's lies] would be grounds for removal of a judge.
Isn't it also grounds for disbarment?

               Judge [Starr], I'm wondering what you think about the famous moment on the
South Lawn of the White House on the day of the impeachment when Vice President
Gore stepped to the lectern and said that history would remember President
Clinton, in his view, as one of the greatest presidents we've ever had. Does
that tell you anything about Al Gore's judgment?

               Apart from the oddness of the [vice president's] statement--granted it was
odd--what does it show you about the the judgment of the person who made that
statement, if anything?

               What's your sense of Louis Freeh?

            

         
      
   
