
   
   
      
         
            A Response to My Critics!

            Many kausfiles readers criticized the previous
item, "The Ending of the Underclass, Part XVIII," as excessively
optimistic. The most common objection is, roughly:

            
               How do you get from a declining welfare population to "the ending of the
underclass"? What if poor single mothers on welfare just become poor single
mothers working in low-wage jobs?
            

            My answer is: "Underclass" doesn't mean people who are poor, or even people
who are poor and live in neighborhoods with other poor people. It means people
who are poor and live in poor neighborhoods isolated from the mainstream world
of work, where there are lots of single-mother households on welfare, few male
breadwinners, and an adversary culture (typically aggravated by race
differences). Although black poverty has been falling, let's assume, for
purposes of argument, that what is happening is poor single mothers on welfare
have become poor single mothers working in hotels and fast-food joints. Can we
say the underclass is "ending"? I think so.

            We can say it because, by definition and in practice, working-poor mothers
aren't in the "underclass." A maid changing sheets in a Marriott is no longer
cut off from the world of work. On the contrary, she's likely to be on the
lookout for job opportunities that pay more, or offer useful training. She's
eligible for raises and promotions (not to mention government subsidies like
the Earned Income Tax Credit). She can't afford to develop an attitude that
sets itself in opposition to the mainstream culture. Her children will grow up
knowing the discipline of a working home, and they will have at least one
working "role model."

            We can also say it because a society of poor working single mothers is
probably unstable in a good way. If women know they are not going to be
supported by welfare checks but are going to have to work, they are apt to ask
more of the men in their lives--specifically, they are apt to ask that men
contribute by going to work. Young women will be less likely to have children
out of wedlock, or at least partnership with a man, precisely because being a
working single mom is a struggle. These trends are already starting to
appear--the percent of black births that are out of wedlock has finally stopped
growing, and the black teen birthrate has dropped 26 percent since 1991, to its
lowest level since record-keeping began.

            Will such big, favorable long-term trends continue? Will others
materialize--in particular, will employment among poor African-American men
increase? I don't know--that's why I fudged and said the dependency drop
"suggests ... this problem may be on its way to being
radically ameliorated if not solved." (Four escape hatches in one
sentence should be enough!) But I am optimistic, because the logic behind the
favorable scenario seems so powerful. I hope more crack welfare
reporters will be on the lookout to see if this long-term
transformation is happening--i.e., if the ghettos are becoming different,
better places--instead of just tracking down ex-welfare moms who are now
working but are still struggling and not making much money.

            Yes, even if the underclass shrinks through assimilation, the problem of the
working poor will still be with us. But that's a different fight, and an easier
one to wage. Once people are working, it's not that hard to boost their incomes
through familiar means like income supplements (the EITC), day-care subsidies,
health-care subsidies, schools, better training, etc. The peculiar horror of
the underclass has been, in part, that those remedies haven't been able to
crack an isolated subculture of non-working non-families. Why can't we look
forward to the day when that has changed?

            
               Random endnotes: Vice President Gore, after bagging the endorsement
of the national teachers unions, has called for "tough future testing for new
teachers." Not just testing for "new" teachers, but "future " testing for
new teachers. Translation: I want to make it really, really clear that
incompetent current teachers have nothing to worry about! ... Last week's
worst example of the new, half-assed, semi-opinionated New York Times
journalism? Adam Clymer, describing Bill Bradley's answer when asked for
examples of presidential leadership. Clymer wrote: "And in what may have been
the most thoughtful comment of the evening, the former Senator [Bradley] cited
the last president of the Soviet Union. He said Mikhail S. Gorbachev 'saw that
the world must change and had the courage to make that change.' " End of piece.
No explanation of why Bradley's comment was "thoughtful," as opposed to, say,
stupid, given the ultimate pathetic failure of Gorbachev's attempt to modify
Communism rather than replace it. Just a vague, free-floating, NPR-listeners'
bias that, well, anybody who mentions Gorbachev must be a classy, intellectual
guy. ... Clymer's a reporter. He's not one of those "opinion" journalists or
pundits! If he were he'd have to actually defend what he says ...

            
               [Note: The fiendishly clever kausfiles.com business plan calls for
the publication, at about this point in the enterprise's growth, of a snide
little item in the New York Observer that gives kausfiles
much-needed publicity. Sure enough, here it is, right on schedule! (Go to the fourth item.)]
            

         
      
   
