
   
   
      
         
            1999 in Review: A Reader Request

            A little-discussed consequence of the pending calendar turn is the impact it
is likely to have on one of the more hackneyed journalistic traditions: the
year-in-review survey.

            At most major news organizations, the advent of the holiday season means
that reporters, photo editors, and the like can kick back a little and set
about preparing stories, and sometimes whole broadcasts and magazine issues,
dedicated to what happened during the previous year. Since the events in
question were already news once, retelling their stories involves little more
than scanning the clips and yanking some file photos--which is fortunate,
because there are Christmas and Hanukkah presents to buy, parties to attend,
and vacation destinations to get to.

            This year, however, journalists are likely to spend the holiday season
researching stories reviewing the entire millennium , or perhaps just the
century , or (at the less-ambitious media outlets) the decade , all
of which will end at the same moment. Hardly anyone, Chatterbox predicts, will
bother with the usual ritual of reviewing merely the previous 365 days. There
may be some justification in this. When Chatterbox thinks back on 1999, what he
mostly remembers is everyone marveling at or fretting about or otherwise
thinking of the momentous significance of the coming year. But a friend reminds
Chatterbox that a few things did happen in 1999. We fought an air war in
Kosovo. There was a new Star Wars
movie. Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson issued findings of fact in the Microsoft antitrust case that
seemed to raise the possibility that the most powerful software company on
earth would be smashed into itty-bitty pieces. There was ...

            Hmm. Chatterbox can't remember anything else.

            
               Readers are invited to nominate events suitable for commemoration in
Chatterbox's "year in review" item, which Chatterbox would like to post
before Thanksgiving (in order to beat all the various
century/millennium/decade-in-review surveys). Best and worst movies, books, and
TV shows are also welcome, along with lists of the most significant obits of
the year; and if anyone comes up with a list that has never been thought of
before, even better. Chatterbox will publish only the findings that he agrees
with. Please do not post nominations in the Fray. Instead, please send them
to chatterbox@slate.com. Void
where prohibited by law. Cogito ergo sum . It's not the heat, it's the
humidity. La table mérite un detour . Gotta catch 'em all, Pokémon. Yo
quiero Taco Bell . The white zone is for immediate loading and unloading of
passengers only. Etc.

         
      
   
