
   
   
      
         
            Ventura Suite

            The New York Times and USA Today
lead with the Dow's record close--a fraction of a point shy of 11,300. The
Los
Angeles Times leads with the overturning of Proposition 5, which
legalized Indian reservation casinos in California. The Washington Post's top non-local story is the resignation of
Notra Trulock, the Department of Energy whistleblower who insists that China
stole nuclear secrets from Los Alamos.

            A NYT article underscores that Trulock resigned to protest the
curtailment of his role in the continuing nuclear espionage investigation. Last
year, Trulock chose to provide secret testimony to a congressional panel that
investigated the Chinese spying allegations. He claimed that his investigation
was slowed by political interference. The resignation comes amid growing doubts
about whether classified data leaked from Los Alamos and allegations that
Trulock targeted Taiwanese-born Wen Ho Lee based on the physicist's
ethnicity.

            Yesterday's California Supreme Court decision, declaring Indian casinos to
be in violation of a constitutional prohibition against gaming, threatens to
shut down the state's $1.36 billion gambling industry. NYT and
USAT front-pagers note that the overturned proposition was passed after
a $100 million campaign by interested parties. Pro-gambling tribes spent
two-thirds of that total. Nevada casinos fearing encroachment on Las Vegas'
turf bankrolled an opposition campaign. Gov. Gray Davis vowed to find a
constitutional way to keep the casinos, which employ 16,000 Californians, in
business.

            The 199-point jump in the Dow Jones industrial average came amid
anticipation of a quarter-point raise in short-term interest rates. The Federal
Reserve Board will announce its rate decision today. The Wall Street Journal explains that the market is
interpreting the anticipated rate hike as the last raise this year and an
effective means of keeping inflation at bay without slowing economic growth.
USAT predicts that the market would deflate if the Fed hints it might
raise interest rates again this year. All papers expect the Fed to hue to its
"neutral bias" by indicating no predisposition toward a future rate
adjustments. The NYT notes that the Dow has risen 23 percent so far this
year, outpacing last year's 16 percent gain.

            Turkish earthquake follow-ups make the front-page of the Post and the
LAT ; the rest of papers carry the story inside. Relief teams complain
that the Turkish government is encouraging them to leave, even though a
4-year-old was rescued from the rubble yesterday and survivors have been
uncovered in ruins two weeks after previous quakes. The LAT reports that
many Turks are leaving the earthquake zone because of a lack of shelter, fear
of disease, and doubts that the devastated cities will be rebuilt.

            Tests of a Pentagon missile-defense system were rigged, according to the
LAT off-lead. Theater High Altitude Area Defense is a $15.4-billion
system designed to protect battlefield troops by tracking and shooting down
hostile missiles. It is intended for deployment in 2007, most likely in the
Korean Peninsula. An official said favorable tests were "highly scripted" and
further review, simulating field conditions, is necessary.

            The NYT fronts an article on the academic pork barrel. Universities
once received government grants through scientific foundations that rigorously
reviewed research proposals. Now universities short-circuit this process by
lobbying Congress for earmarked appropriations. Congress members insert
deliberately obscure provisions into unrelated legislation to provide money for
favored educational institutions. Colleges in the home states of powerful
Appropriations Committee senators benefit from a disproportionate share of the
pork.

            The USAT cover story reports that a managed-care giant is attempting
to cut emergency service costs by encouraging its customers to call the health
plan before dialing 911. Critics condemn the attempt at "telephone triage."
They fear that insurers will fail to send the closest ambulance and deny care
to dire cases.

            One week after the paper published an inaccurate lead story, which left the
false impression that $1 billion in international aid to Bosnia was stolen, the
Times editorializes on why foreign aid is an unpopular cause. The paper
condemns Congress' myopic intent to cut foreign aid and argues that
international assistance is a good investment because it can bolster political
stability. Last Thursday the paper editorialized, "Outside help will soon dry
up unless corruption is brought under control." Now it opines, "Some American
foreign aid money has been wasted in the past. But that is no reason to starve
the entire program."

            The Post reports that Gov. Jesse Ventura has gained another
distinction. A bedroom suite has been named in his honor at a Nevada brothel he
once frequented.

         
      
   
