
   
   
      
         
            Great Man Theory
            

            Dear Joe,

            It's nice to know that reporting does not change. One of the first lessons I
learned in journalism school was the old phrase "there is nothing new under the
sun," and I suspect that in five years an exciting new topic will be
fascinating us in the same way that the Internet is now and the takeovers of
the 1980s did then. I too was riveted by leveraged buyout stories in that time
and great characters like T. Boone Pickens.

            I was particularly struck by Connie Bruck's The Predator's Ball
about this time period, which I liked because of just what you were talking
about. Business was dramatic, made up of people and not just numbers. I was
very cognizant of this when I was writing my book on AOL. It was clear quickly
that all the successes and failures there over the years were due more to a
particular person than to larger market forces. AOL, born under some kind of
lucky star, was able to attract the right person at the right time to cause it
to be able to get to the next level. In its earliest days, it needed the
craziness provided by a enthusiastic entrepreneur named Bill Von Meister. But
it was a diligent and totally focused executive named Steve Case who was able
to take his ideas and make them real. And Case needed a lot of help too--often
company mythologies focus on one person--from the loud entrance of Ted Leonsis
in 1994 to provide the spice and media savvy that Case lacked to Bob Pittman's
entry in 1996, which gave AOL the world-class manager who would turn the
company into a "real" one.

            The situation with AT&T is a case in point, with its current leader,
Michael Armstrong. Whatever you think of the company's strategy to converge its
cable, telephone, and Internet business to achieve some iron lock on the
consumer, it is clearly being driven by Armstrong. The same is true of most
every Internet company I have written about--such as Jeff Bezos at Amazon and
Jerry Yang and David Filo at Yahoo. It's good, I think, in this speedy and
complex age to see that one person still can make a difference. Microsoft's
success, along with its struggles with the Justice Department, is in this
genre. Bill Gates, no matter how big that company has become, still hangs over
it like a living icon. I wonder if that is a good thing or a bad one as
companies grow?

            In a completely unrelated topic, were you are disturbed as I was about the
stories in the New York Times and the Washington Post about
how the FBI has reversed its stance on the Waco incident in 1993? Oops, it
did fire in incendiary devices, despite its denials. I swear, I am
still so surprised when people or institutions lie like that. Does that make me
hopelessly naive? I should remember another old j-school maxim--if your mother
says she loves you, check it.

            Cheers,
Kara

         
      
   
