
   
   
      
         
            The Sorry State of International Disaster Relief

            The Turkish earthquake of August 17 and its disastrously bungled relief
effort--the official death toll now stands at 17,997 --is a
depressingly familiar story. Why is the world unable to create an international
force to provide manpower and equipment to assist in the aftermath of huge
natural and manmade disasters (which seem to occur pretty reliably at least
five or six times a year)? This extremely sensible idea was floated by the
New Republic , which attached to the hypothetical force the memorable
name "Griefbusters," in a series of editorials from the mid-1980s to the early
1990s. But for some mysterious reason, nobody seemed terribly interested.

            According to an editorial in today's Christian Science Monitor , the United Nations is doing a
better job of coordinating the grab-bag of relief efforts, public and private,
from all over the world, than it used to, thanks to its new Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which apparently took over
many duties of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator
(UNDRO). UNDRO's record wasn't especially good. According to the
Monitor , "the U.N. has learned from past attempts that its best role in
disaster scenes is to pool the efforts of national governments, not to do the
work itself." OCHA, says the Monitor , has a "realistic mandate." But
Chatterbox isn't aware that the creation of a Griefbusters-type force has ever
been tried. Clearly, whatever small improvements the United Nations has made in
international coordination didn't prevent the Turkish government from telling
many foreign rescue workers to leave; even before 4-year-old Ismail Cimen was
pulled out, alive, from under a collapsed balcony yesterday, German, Japanese,
British, and Austrian rescuers had gone home. Meanwhile (according to
yesterday's Toronto Globe and Mail ), a Canadian team of 200 soldiers was
being told by some Turkish officials that the field hospital and
water-purification systems it had brought were needed, and by other Turkish
officials that they were not. Exaggerated deference to an incompetent Turkish
government doesn't strike Chatterbox as the way to go.

            The original New Republic Griefbusters editorial, published after
Mexico City's disastrous 1985 earthquake, said:

            

               
                  A flexible rapid deployment force would report to a single director. More
important, it would know what each kind of disaster called for, and would
either possess or have immediate access to the basic required equipment. The
force could employ a semi-military structure, with reservists from member
nations who could be called up at a moment's notice ... If we made a prior
agreement with other nations, promising to help each other in case of disaster,
the burden would be to refuse aid rather than to ask for it.
               

            

            The editorial expressed a preference for limiting the disaster-relief force
to U.S. allies, working under U.S. control. In a later editorial, the New
Republic proposed U.N. control, rightly pointing out that "however
problematic the U.N. remains politically, it ought to be able to function on a
humanitarian level." Either way is fine with Chatterbox.

            The pathetic state of international disaster relief--arguably the United
Nations is better at peacekeeping , which isn't saying much--calls to
mind Lytton Strachey's description, in Eminent Victorians , of the anarchy with which
Florence Nightingale was confronted when she set out to help wounded British
soldiers in Crimea. (As Strachey makes clear, Nightingale's fake "lady with the
lamp" image as the mother of modern nursing completely obscures her real
significance, which was as a ruthlessly effective administrative reformer,
first of a single military hospital and later of the entire British
military-hospital system.) But in Nightingale's time, the British military at
least had the excuse that the age of modern medicine, with its emphasis on
sterility and proper ventilation of hospital rooms, was only just dawning.
What's our excuse?

         
      
   
