
   
   
      
         
            Culturebox's Fall Preview

             As ahead of itself as the presidential campaign, fall preview season is
upon us. From now until mid-September, Time, 
               Newsweek , the New York Times , and half the other
magazines and newspapers in the country will participate in that odd
journalistic ritual whereby critics abandon the skepticism we demand of them
the rest of the year and emit hopeful bubbles of enthusiasm--a gush that turns
to bile when the plays or movies or art shows in question prove as
disappointing as one sort of suspected they would be.

            Under-researched and perfunctory (no editor or reporter wants this
unrewarding, time-consuming assignment), tending toward hyperbole (once a
writer has picked things to preview, he has to justify his choices), previews
nonetheless provide a valuable service. You read the pix, you buy your tix, and
you're cocktail-party-proofed for the season. The only problem is that not
everybody goes to cocktail parties, or even longs to be up on the latest thing.
What about those of us who consume culture on the fly--who go to the movies
only when dragged to the megaplex by the kids, who buy books at airport
bookstores, who need to know whether the Broadway show whose high-priced
tickets our parents are trying to pawn off on us is a gaudy spectacle from hell
or Great Art? We don't want long lists of everything we know we should see but
never will. We want the opposite: a list of everything we must absolutely not
see, under any circumstances, if it were the only show playing in the
godforsaken town where we'd gone for a stint in an isolation tank and ... you
get the idea.

            To this end, Culturebox hereby inaugurates the Culturebox Anti-Fall-Preview:
an admittedly unscientific list of the musts-to-avoid in this fall's cinematic,
literary, theatrical, and sartorial seasons. Just because it's unscientific
doesn't mean it won't be empirical: Though Culturebox lacks a vast staff of
underlings to read, watch, listen, and try on the latest size-2 fashions for
her, she will rely on you, dear readers, for data. Tell her what on the fall preview lists about
to inundate us you've actually read, or seen, or worked on the set of, or worn,
or gotten some serious inside dope on, and know for a fact to be a
complete and utter dud.

            For instance: This week Entertainment Weekly kicks off its fall preview with a two-and-a-quarter-page spread on Kevin Costner
in For the Love of the Game. Having failed to win critics' hearts with
his last two movies, The Postman and Message in a Bottle, Costner
is presumably reverting to the most consistently successful formula of his
career: charming, over-the-hill sports figure makes a comeback. Now, this may
be a masterly work of cinematic innovation--defying her own demand for
empirical evidence, Culturebox speaks on the basis neither of a preview
screening nor of gossip. She just has this hunch that For The Love of the
Game will turn out to be a pitch-- Bull Durham meets Tin
Cup --that mistakenly found its way to film. You make the call: "His team's
in last place. He's just found out he's about to get traded. And the love of
his life ... is about to leave him. With all of this bad news, he steps onto
the mound at Yankee Stadium, and over the course of what turns out to be a
perfect game, he flashes back on his life and replays its pivotal moments."

            Popcorn, anyone?

         
      
   
