
   
   
      
         
            Getting the Lead Out

            The Washington Post and the Los Angeles
Times lead with, and the New York Times fronts, the Turkish
government's moves to accelerate earthquake clean-up efforts and answer rising
criticism of its disjointed response to the disaster. The NYT goes with
reports suggesting that states are doing a wildly uneven job of testing
children on Medicaid for lead contamination.

            The WP gives its Turkey coverage a human face, using extensive
interviews with survivors and relatives of the dead to paint a macabre picture
of the quake's aftermath. It also reports that efforts by officials in Izmit,
at the epicenter, to use the city's skating rink as an overflow morgue turned
disastrous when the power went out. "As hundreds of corpses lay in their body
bags," the paper reports, "the ice grew soft and watery, and a thick pungent
mist rose from it." The NYT focuses on the Turkish army's sluggish
mobilization in the days following the quake. As soldiers finally appeared in
force Saturday, picking up garbage in an effort to stem the spread of disease,
President Suleyman Demirel told Turks he understood their concerns over the low
profile the army has taken thus far, but also cautioned citizens not to expect
state forces to "work miracles." The paper also says the governors of three
damaged provinces will be fired because they failed to put together efficient
rescue teams. The LAT zeroes in on Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit's plan
to commandeer private hearses, trucks, and construction equipment for the
relief effort. And it cites U.N. officials who predict the death toll could
pass 40,000.

            According to the NYT , both General Accounting Office auditors and a
special federal panel say most states are failing to comply with a 1989 law
requiring lead screening for children on Medicaid. Data show that child
Medicaid recipients--who often live in older housing with peeling lead-based
paint or contaminated dust--are three times as likely as other kids to have
dangerous levels of lead in their blood. The worst offender? Washington state,
where not even 1 percent of Medicaid children were tested. According to the
Centers for Disease Control, nearly 900,000 Americans between the ages of 1 and
5 carry enough lead to cause behavioral problems, learning disabilities, or
neurological damage.

            The Post's off-lead is a startling piece about the 1980 cancer death
of Joseph Harding, a uranium worker at a government-owned Kentucky plant. A
1983 examination of Harding's remains, prepared as part of a lawsuit but never
published, indicated that even a dozen years after leaving his job his bones
showed uranium levels up to 133 times higher than normal. Despite suffering
stomach cancer, perforations in his lungs and fingernail-like growths on his
palms, wrists, and shoulders, Harding was refused a disability pension; Energy
Department officials maintained that Harding's health problems were the result
of smoking cigarettes and eating "country ham." Harding claimed that a thick
haze of uranium dust at the plant, operated until the mid-1980s by Union
Carbide, covered workers' skin and even their teeth.

            The LAT fronts a detailed profile of Buford Furrow Jr., the man
allegedly responsible for opening fire inside a Jewish community center and
killing a Filipino-American mail carrier Aug. 10. It describes him as a
bumbling loner who was largely invisible to classmates and co-workers and was
consumed by periodic bouts of rage. The story says only in the white
supremacist movement was he able to find a measure of acceptance.

            The WP fronts a story about America Online's controversial support
for a proposed new road known as the "techway" that would connect the suburbs
of Maryland to Northern Virginia. Residents along the corridor worry that the
highway would open up huge areas of land for new development. Barb Emmons, a
database manager and member of a local environmental group, tells the
Post that as soon as residents heard that AOL was backing the project,
"Our worst fears were realized." This controversy is in contrast, the paper
reports, to the situation on the West Coast, where high-tech companies like
Intel and Hewlett-Packard have pushed for public transportation improvements
and measures to protect open space.

            At press time, Hurricane Bret had not moved near enough the Texas coast to
merit any front-page coverage, but its alarming increase in speed suggests it
could grab big headlines by Monday. The WP reports on Page A2 that
Bret's strength may well match that of Hurricane Andrew, which pummeled Florida
seven years ago with wind speeds as high as 145 mph, and predicts it will reach
Texas late Sunday or early Monday.

            In the New York Times Book Review , Frank Kermode is disdainful of a
new biography of Princess Diana by Sally Bedell Smith that claims Lady Di
suffered from "a borderline personality disorder." According to Kermode, Smith
employs a "laborious accumulation of detail" to back up her diagnosis that the
late princess "was unpredictable, egocentric, aggressive, insecure,
manipulative, paranoid, possessive, easily bored, uneducated and a habitual
liar." That's not all--she also "steamed open other people's letters."

         
      
   
