
   
   
      
         
            The Speeches

            Each candidate addressed the audience
for a maximum of ten minutes. No one was brilliant, and several were actively
terrible. Here's my estimation of how they stacked up. (Click here to see the results
and 
here to find out what a straw poll is.)

            

               
                  Pat Buchanan The only candidate here who
really knows how to give a rousing speech. The hall loved him, though few would
ever vote for him. Memorable line: "If I'm president, I'm the chief law
enforcement officer of the United States, right? ... The first thing I'd do is
turn to Bill Clinton and say you have the right to remain silent."
               

               
                  Gary Bauer Soft-spoken but effective. His
tribute to Ronald Reagan brought the hall to its feet. The best of social
conservatives. "Campaigns aren't supposed to be about how much one guy has
raised and another guy has inherited. Campaigns are supposed to be about our
futures."
               

               
                  George W. Bush Much less impressive in an
arena setting. His lines were elegant (who writes them?) but he made no real
connection with the audience. "America's strongest foundation is not found in
our wallets. It is found in our souls."
               

               
                  Lamar Alexander Ever competent, never
thrilling. "We need a contest because this is not a horse race. This is not a
football game. This is the biggest job in the world."
               

               
                  Dan Quayle Emphasis on family values. "The
Clinton-Gore administration started off as the Woodstock of 1969 ... It ended
up in the Woodstock of 1999, trashing our values, trashing our ideas and
trashing the White House which is not theirs to trash."
               

               
                  Elizabeth Dole Miss Perfect Platitude. Her
speech takes the daring position that telling the truth is good. "Integrity
never goes out of style. It never goes out of style."
               

               
                  Alan Keyes Despite his rhetorical gifts,
the weakest of the true believers. The consensus is that he's lost his
marbles--his microphone was cut off when he didn't stop at the end of his
allotted ten minutes. "We are coming to the end of the most disgraceful and
immoral presidency in the history of this country."
               

               
                  Orrin Hatch Senate oratory doesn't carry
across a big room. He sounds hoarse and is barely audible. "Al Gore ... climbed
14,000 foot Mt. Ranier, right to the top. He carried 65 pounds of gear on his
back. If he thought that was heavy, wait until he campaigns next year carrying
a 230-pound president on his back."
               

               
                  Steve Forbes Fiasco! Forbes starts with
terrifying indoor fireworks and a release of hundreds of balloons. Supporters
of opposing candidates pop them for the first half of his speech, making it
inaudible. Lesson: Next time, release balloons at the end. "The power of these
Washington elites won't be tamed, bent or broken by a candidate who relies on
pollsters and tutors to tell him what to think. Only an independent outsider
can break the selfish grip that Washington has on our national life."
               

            

         
      
   
