
   
   
      
         
            Anatolian Toll

            The New York Times and the Los Angeles
Times lead with the political and public health aftershocks of the
earthquake in Turkey. The Washington Post carries the story as its top non-local
piece.

            Although the numbers are still rising, the papers agree that over 10,000
people have died and 34,000 have been injured (the LAT says 35,000,
reflecting both its later closing time and the speed with which the numbers are
climbing). The WP story documents how shoddy building standards
exacerbated the effects of the earthquake. Rescuers sifting through the rubble
have found thinner-than-recommended steel rods and cement "filled with so much
sand that it crumbles in [the workers'] hands." Muslim leaders, the media, and
the government are vociferously blaming building contractors for violating
safety standards. But the piece explains that Turkey has virtually no standards
to violate. Once construction begins on a building, it is never subject to
state-mandated inspection.

            The NYT story covers the public health angle. The country is
feverishly scrambling to bury its rotting corpses before they spawn disease.
Muslim clerics have allowed Islamic customs to be disregarded for the sake of
speedy burials, and the Prime Minister ordered that bodies be buried as soon as
they are found (relatives will have to identify their dead through a
pre-internment photo). But the World Health Organization has announced that the
corpses themselves are not a health hazard; open sewage and lack of water are
far more dangerous. This caveat gets only a single sentence, and no further
explanation of Turkey's possibly misplaced priorities.

            A WP front-pager continues the review of the U.S.'s strike on the
Sudan in retaliation for the embassy bombings. Today's story contends that the
U.S. bombed the El Shifa pharmaceutical factory in the Sudan despite the CIA's
warning that it hadn't yet confirmed that the plant was producing chemical
weapons ingredients. An "unnamed official" tells the Post that the
administration has since backtracked on its initial assertions that a toxic
substance was manufactured at the plant and that its owner was a terrorist. The
story admits that the bombing may have required a difficult judgment call,
asking, "Just how certain does the government need to be before it uses force
against a suspected terrorist group overseas?"

            The papers print virtually identical stories about CIA Director George
Tenet's revokation of the security clearance of his predecessor, John M.
Deutch, for transferring classified material to an unsecure PC at his home. All
papers note that Los Alamos physicist Wen Ho Lee was fired in March after
allegedly transferring classified computer files to his own computer. The
WP implies that the revocation is a P.R. stunt, intended to convey the
government's tough line on security. Deutch played along, swallowing his
medicine without protest and even issuing contrite remarks about the security
measures he should have taken.

            A NYT cover story tracks how Joe Park, proprietor of the Tokyo Joe
financial chat room, may have suckered his day trading followers. All week,
Park touted an obscure e-commerce stock as "the next Priceline.com." The stock
rose wildly until midday on Friday. But when it began to drop, subscribers were
suddenly disconnected from the Tokyo Joe site. Park weakly blamed a failed
server. Later that afternoon, Park boasted that he had made a quarter of a
million dollars off the stock's fall.

            An WP inside piece reports on the indictment of 13 smugglers and
pimps who brought hundreds of Asian girls--some as young as 13 years old-- to
the U.S. as indentured servants and forced them to work as prostitutes until
they repaid their debts. The smugglers had duped many of the women into
thinking they would be working as seamstresses or masseuses. In a fit of
numerical detail, the Post calculates that a typical victim had to have
sex with 428 men to pay off her $30,000 debt.

            The NYT reveals that one of Gov. Jesse Ventura's most ardent boosters
is leading a drive against Web sites that support a Ventura presidential
candidacy. He is doing so because Ventura has no plans to run and fears that
Ventura will disappoint--and lose the support of--his fans. "If Jesse Ventura
can participate in [the wrestling event] Summerslam," said one defiant
follower, "then I can put up a Web site."

            A front-page NYT story profiles a particularly splenetic radio talk
show host. He trails Rush Limbaugh in the ratings, but he heaps similar scorn
on his callers. "There is something deranged about you," he told one guest.
"Either you don't read the newspapers carefully enough or you're so prejudiced
and biased that you block out the truth," he railed at another. The host is
none other than New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani.

         
      
   
