
   
   
      
         
            Not for Children Only
            

            Dear Tony,

            I have to admit, I began the first Harry Potter book in a mood of irritable
skepticism. Having worn out flashlight batteries under the blankets since
earliest childhood, I've never understood why other grown-ups won't read
children's books. Of course, there's plenty of dreck being written for all
ages, but the best kids' books--particularly ones by British writers--pull
their readers through adventures of the sort that seem to have vanished from
serious adult fiction, with compelling inventiveness that's rarely been seen
since Lawrence Sterne. (OK, maybe Donald Barthelme and Thomas Pynchon.) Plus,
they're a lot easier to read. Peter Dickinson, who writes superb fantasy novels
for children, once explained it by saying, "You're not allowed to bore
children." And since no one bundles them off into the ghetto of genre when they
bring in magic (unless you consider juvenile lit a genre), children's authors
can draw on myths and fairy tales to give their books resonance and deeply
satisfying structure.

            But until this year, it was almost impossible to get any self-respecting
adult to read them. Friends would thank me with polite puzzlement when I gave
them great children's books I knew they'd love--then would tuck them away in
the bookshelves for when their kids were a bit older. If my book-loving peers
would rather spend their beach reading on plodding thrillers than on the
heart-stopping adventure stories of Philip Pullman (author of the "Dark
Materials" trilogy), say, or the scintillating allegory of Norton Juster
( The Phantom Tollbooth ), then nothing could be done about it, short of
reading aloud to them when they were laid up with the flu (which does work, but
you lose your voice). So what were these Harry Potter books? Why were healthy
adults fighting for them? Could they really be better than the books by Diana
Wynne Jones, or E. Nesbit, or T.H. White (I'm sure you can add your own
favorites here, Tony), which everybody turned up their noses at?

            Well, no, the Harry Potter books aren't better. But that's good news for his
fans--it's like saying that Dickens is no better than George Eliot. I'm hoping
adults will find a savory spread of great kids' books right beneath their
noses, now that they've plucked those noses down from the stratosphere. And I
bet kids are turning to other great books while they wait for the next
installment.

            Harry Potter, the orphan son of a witch and a wizard, gets sent to Hogwarts
School for Wizards after discovering his own magical powers in the first book
in the series, Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone . This puts him
squarely in two time-honored juvenile genres--magic books and school stories.
There's even a fine body of literature in the intersection. When I started
Rowling's series, I found myself comparing them to Jill Murphy's out-of-print
"Worst Witch" books, a series for slightly younger kids (7-to-11-year-olds),
about a hapless student at Miss Cackle's Academy for Witches. The two series
share lots of obvious details: broom-riding lessons; animal familiars with
minds of their own; scary teachers; potions gone wrong; school uniforms that
look like Halloween costumes to us Muggles, as Rowling calls nonmagical folks.
(I hope Murphy's books will fly back into print on Rowling's robe-tails.) I
also thought of Diana Wynne Jones' "Witch Week," one of my all-time favorite
books. It's a dark, witty suspense story about an outbreak of illegal magic in
a school full of witch orphans--children whose parents have been burned as
witches. I was miffed on Jones' and Murphy's accounts (among others) that
Rowling was getting all the press.

            But soon I was hooked, just like everyone else. The woman has an amazing
imagination. She structures the series like one of those Renaissance paintings,
with the perspective lines heading off to infinity in all directions, and weird
supernatural beings and rock formations in the background, while in the
foreground someone in a peculiar hat has an intense interaction with a
hippogriff. And she's so funny! Didn't you love the Whomping Willow, the tree
on the school grounds that bashes any creature fool enough to touch it, and
Peeves, the school poltergeist, whom everyone treats with irritated toleration?
Not to mention poor Nearly Headless Nick, the ghost who's not allowed to ride
in the wild headless chase because the ax that did him in was too blunt and
left a flap of skin on his neck. I also admire Rowling's talent for balancing
humor with serious save-the-world drama, which she does with a far defter hand
than Tolkien.

            I was impressed with her technique for interweaving her magical world with
Muggle life. Her wizard world exists in the interstices of everyday Britain,
with its denizens wandering around in a bit of a muddle. Think of that
hilarious scene when one of Harry's school friends tries to call him on the
telephone and keeps shouting--he can't believe his message is getting through.
Wizards, of course, send messages via owl post.

            And the books are getting better and better. What did you think of the
Dementors, those elegantly symbolic, bone-chilling villains in the latest,
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban ? They guard Azkaban, the wizard
prison, by sucking hope from the prisoners, leaving them in a state of icy
despair, as good a description of depression as I've ever read.

            Like Harry's nerdy, courageous, always-right friend Hermione, I'm tasting
the delicous pleasure of telling everyone I told them so. It's so bad--but it's
so good!

            Yours,
Polly

         
      
   
