
   
   
      
         
            The Gay Marriage Backlash
            

            Dear Joe,

            So I got married this weekend. Yesterday, to be exact, at half past 11
o'clock on an impossibly sunny morning overlooking the San Francisco Bay and
its spectacular Golden Gate Bridge. There was a touch of wind blowing off the
water, which was enough to keep my guests cool, but not enough to blow their
carefully coifed hair into a mousse mess. The amber light sparkled all along
the bay as the city of San Francisco lay like a crown jewel in the
distance.

            If I say so myself, it was a completely perfect wedding to go along with the
perfect weather. There were of course the superficial details of the
event--from the wildflower arch in front of which we took our vows to the tower
of festively decorated individual cupcakes that an ingenious baker hand
fashioned into a unique kind of wedding cake to the delightful surprise I got
yesterday each time I noticed the antique ring around my finger that had
previously and always been bare. And there were the much more profound moments
that come from finally committing to a person for the rest of your
life--looking into each other's eyes as you are promising to love and cherish
one another, the joy radiating from the sea of faces of loved ones who had
traveled from near and far to share in the event, the rush of happiness as
their glasses clinked in a unified toast to our shared lives that lay ahead
with so much possibility.

            Imagine my chagrin then, to read an AP story that had popped up over the
same weekend that several Republican presidential candidates had pledged to
oppose allowing gays and lesbians to adopt children, same-sex relationships
under the term "marriage," discussion of homosexuality in schools, and federal
laws to specifically protect homosexuals from discrimination, part of an
overall effort by a dozen anti-gay groups in this latest election cycle.

            Well, since I had just held one of these dreaded same-sex weddings (icky
term, don't you think?--I prefer my nephew's "bride-bride" hitching
phraseology), I guess they told me. Except, of course, I don't seem to be
paying an ounce of attention to the continuing and perplexingly tireless
efforts of these groups and the candidates they manage to strong-arm into
intolerance. Apparently, a great gob of Republicans had signed on, although
only Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch and publisher Steve Forbes (and, no, even though his
father, Malcolm, was widely rumored to be gay, I am not going to go there in
this obviously ironic twist of dysfunctional familial fate) had confirmed their
pledges.

            One plus, Sen. John McCain of Arizona, GOP's Xena Elizabeth Dole, and
current phenom Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, did not sign, along with
Democratic candidates Vice President Al Gore and Bill Bradley, the former U.S.
senator from New Jersey and all around nice-seeming fellow.

            So what am I to make of all this? The anti-gay groups never seem to want to
give up on their battle to meddle in the private lives of American citizens,
while more and more people are learning more and more about the lives of gay
people like me every day. The venues are many--from massive news coverage of
the coming out of a television star named Ellen (I loved the "Yep, I'm Gay"
title in Time magazine--it was more like "Of course, she's a big homo,"
since most of gay America had gaydared Ms. Degeneres from the second she walked
onscreen) to the tragedy of the brutal and senseless killing of Matthew
Shepherd. Now, I am not a political person--in fact, I am nearly
anti-political. Being a reporter all my life, I have naturally shunned any
side-taking. And covering the Internet as I do now, it's not GOP for me, but
IPO.

            And yet, there I was yesterday, standing up in front of a crowd of 140
people--and hundreds more the night before at a pre-wedding party we also
threw--doing something that is apparently at the heart of our current political
debate. Now, I know I live in San Francisco--the Super Bowl of sin cities to
some--but I did not get the feeling that I was some radical cancer that had
invaded the body politic. I simply felt like I was someone in love with a
kindred soul, who wanted to be able to declare that in a way that had been
going on since the beginning of time.

            It's hard to imagine then that, given these complex times, with so many
important issues to deal with that are likely to challenge this country going
forward, there seems to be such intense focus on this topic. I'd like to know
what you think about this, because I cannot for the life of me see why this
issue seems to inflame so many. Is it the religious thing? Is it the last gasp
of a former culture that wants to hold back the new one? Is it just a
smokescreen to inflame voters rather than actually inform them? I only know the
words of guest after guest who came up to toast my partner, who talked of love,
commitment, family, and the future, and not much of politics.

            My partner told one guest she was marrying, but it was a girl and not a
boy.

            "Well," came the response. "People have been marrying girls for
centuries."

            I could not have said it better myself. So I won't.

            Cheers,
Kara

         
      
   
