
   
   
      
         
            Trying To Read the Fed's Mixed Messages
            

            In William Greider's long book on the Federal Reserve, Secrets of the
Temple (a fascinating book but, in retrospect, a remarkably ill-considered
indictment of inflation-fighting), there's not much mention of the conversion
of the Federal Reserve into a bully pulpit. But as today's quarter-point hike
in the discount rate--in addition to the expected quarter-point hike in the
federal funds rate--demonstrates, the Fed has, at some point in the last five
years or so, come to see inflation-fighting as not merely a matter of raising
or lowering rates. It's also a matter of sending the right messages to the bond
(and, to a lesser extent, the stock) markets.

            I've 
touched on this point once before, when the Fed announced at its last
meeting that it was keeping interest rates steady but changing its bias. Where
once the Fed kept its deliberations secret and acted as sphinxlike as possible
about its intentions, it now tries to indicate what it's concerned about and
the direction in which it's leaning. In one sense, this has made the exercise
of trying to game the Fed easier, since there's more material to go on. In
another sense, it's made everything trickier, since there are a host of signals
to interpret, and sometimes they're not in harmony.

            Today, for instance, the Fed didn't make what would have been the surprising
move, namely hiking interest rates by 50 basis points instead of 25. (One basis
point is equal to one-hundredth of a point.) Had it pushed through the larger
hike, the sell-off in the stock market would probably have been frightening, at
least at first. But the increase would certainly have slammed the brakes on an
economy that's still running very hot.

            You might assume that the quarter-point hike means the Fed isn't that
worried about inflation, even though there are signs that continued strong
demand and tight labor markets are beginning to make themselves felt. But then
there's the discount-rate hike to consider. This is the first time since the
spring of 1995 that the Fed has increased the discount rate (which is the
interest rate the Fed charges banks who want to borrow money from it). And
while the discount rate itself is not that important, which is to say that an
increase in it will have no material effect on the economy, the message the
increase sends is important, and that message is that the Fed is more concerned
about inflation than the small hike in the federal funds rate would indicate. I
think.

            In addition to the rate increases, the Fed also shifted its bias back toward
neutral, which suggests that the economy is still growing faster than Greenspan
believed it would be. But the fact that the Fed isn't biased toward further
tightening suggests that the economy isn't necessarily growing faster than
Greenspan would like it to be.

            Got all that? Good, because I'm not sure that I do.

            In the long run, worrying about all this stuff probably doesn't matter very
much. The Fed and the bond market will determine how fast the economy goes by
determining interest rates, and the concrete impact of the federal funds rate
and of the Fed's printing or not-printing money will far outweigh any
psychological effect of the Fed's symbolic gestures. But it also seems true
that Greenspan has come to recognize the beneficial effect of using those
gestures to push interest rates in a certain direction without the Fed's having
to take concrete action. It's as if he can speed things up or slow them down
without doing much of anything real.

            Of course, mixed messages are a persistent danger here, as evidenced by
today's herky-jerky market, where bond prices rose sharply, while the Dow
meandered and the Nasdaq actually went up. But the truth is that in the end the
market will do a good job of sorting through the messages and finding the ones
that matter. It's trying to interpret the messages on your own--like I just
tried to do--that's a recipe for utter confusion.

         
      
   
