
   
   
      
         
            Two Cheers for Condé Nast's Acquisition
            

            Normally, when one of three big players in an industry buys one of its two
competitors, you hear rumblings about possible antitrust violations and the
deleterious effects of lack of competition. But we've yet to hear any such
rumblings--except perhaps from advertisers--about Condé Nast's $650 million
acquisition of Fairchild Publications, even though Condé Nast will now own
every key fashion magazine in America, with the exceptions of Harper's
Bazaar and Elle . And that's as it should be. If anything, increasing
Condé Nast's hold on the fashion press may have beneficial spillover effects
that no one is really anticipating.

            To begin with, even though after the deal closes, Condé Nast will own
Wd and Women's Wear Daily , in addition to Vogue and
Glamour and assorted other fashion-y magazines, it won't have a monopoly
position. And as the example of the auto industry suggests, having two or three
major players in an industry is qualitatively different from having just one.
As long as Harper's Bazaar and Elle remain outside the fold,
Condé Nast will be limited in its ability to do whatever bad things monopolists
generally do.

            Actually, that's the other thing. It's hard to figure out what the bad
things Condé Nast might do are, and it's just as hard to figure out who is hurt
by this deal (hard to figure out who's being hurt that we don't want to be
hurt, that is). The pricing of magazines is difficult to decipher (it often, in
fact, seems irrational), but it's unlikely that W's cover price is going
to rise just because it's owned by the same company that owns Vogue . And
this is despite magazine consumers' tendency to be somewhat price-insensitive,
which accounts for the fact that so many magazines are sold at the newsstand,
even though the price of one copy there is often equal to the price of four or
five copies bought by subscription. So, consumers won't be hurt in the
pocketbook.

            As for editorial, it's possible that the Condé Nast mentality--whatever that
is--will come to rule the Fairchild magazines, but if a year from now you're
able to tell the difference between the pre- and post-Condé Nast W's,
God bless you. That doesn't mean, of course, that it won't be a new experience
for the editors of W and Jane to work with James Truman and Si
Newhouse, but editors don't count as a valid constituency to protest antitrust
violations.

            The one group that probably will be hurt by the deal is the advertisers, but
this is a good thing. In a business sense, the deal may make all these Condé
Nast magazines less beholden to any single advertiser, which in turn will allow
the company to drive harder bargains. The flip side of this is that it will
make advertisers think harder about why they advertise and where they
advertise. In other words, the acquisition may have the unforeseen effect of
making the whole industry more businesslike.

            More important, this deal may make it easier for magazines--of all sorts--to
take more critical looks at the companies and personalities in the fashion
industry. It's an open secret in magazine publishing that there are some
stories that just can't be done, because running them would result in
advertising's being pulled that magazines can't afford to be pulled. But now
Condé Nast will be in the position of saying to displeased subjects of tough
pieces: "You want to pull your advertising? Fine. If you think you can make it
without W , Women's Wear Daily , Vogue , Glamour ,
etc., etc., more power to you." Shifting the balance of power away from
advertisers is, in that sense, entirely a good thing. So, to take a purely
hypothetical example, perhaps we might actually see a serious piece on what Ron
Perelman, head of Revlon, has done to many of the companies (Marvel
Entertainment, Coleman, Consolidated Cigar, Revlon itself) he's been in charge
of. OK, probably not. But isn't it pretty to think so?

         
      
   
