
   
   
      
         
            Fed Up

            The New York Times ,
the Los
Angeles Times , and the Washington Post lead with the Federal Reserve's
second interest-rate hike of the summer. USA
Today mentions the Fed's news on the front page, but leads instead with
a possible link between the Kremlin and the Bank of New York laundering
scandal.

            All the papers give the same lowdown on the Fed's decision. The federal
funds rate (that is, the one banks charge each another for overnight borrowing)
was lifted from 5 percent to 5.25 percent, reversing last year's cuts. The
Fed's announcement was characteristically opaque. The stories follow the Fed's
lead, hedging their bets as to whether this will be the last hike of the
year.

            The WP and the Wall Street Journal run helpful explanations of the
hike's repercussions. According to the WP , banks already announced
increases in their prime lending rates to 8.25 percent from 8 percent. Since
many credit-card balances, home-equity loans, small business bank loans, and
some personal loans are tied directly to the prime rate, millions of consumers
will see their monthy payments swell soon. A piece inside the Journal
warns the higher cost of borrowing may keep funds away from Latin American
countries that need the cash badly.

            Meanwhile, a WP editorial argues that Alan Greenspan has become so
effective that he's ineffective. If Greenspan raises rates, investors are
assured by what they interpret as a wise, pre-emptive strike against inflation.
If he doesn't, they are emboldened by what can only be a sure sign of economic
health. So even though the rate hike might stave off consumer inflation,
Greenspan is inevitably contributing to stock price inflation.

            Last week the Times reported that hundreds of millions of dollars in IMF
loans to Russia may have been illegally diverted through the Bank of New York
via the Russian mafia. Today USAT adds that Konstantin Kagalovsky,
Russia's representative to the IMF and a close crony of Victor Chernomyrdin, is
now under scrutiny. He is married to a Bank of New York executive who is also
being investigated. The scoop certainly sounds like a potentially juicy one.
But it lists no allegations against the Kagalovskys, and doesn't surmise about
how they might have fit into the IMF-Mafia-Bank triangle.

            The NYT and the WP report that China will prosecute the most
senior members of Falun Gong--and only the most senior ones. A government order
excused most of the sect's adherents as victims who didn't know they were
joining a subversive political organization. The group's leaders, on the other
hand, will almost certainly be sent to prison for life--just in time, says the
Times , for the Chinese Communist Party's 50th birthday bash.

            According to a NYT front-pager, the San Francisco Department of
Health has traced an outbreak of syphilis to an America Online chat room. At
least six men have contracted syphilis from sexual partners they met at San
Francisco Men 4 Men, a chat room hosted by AOL. Citing privacy concerns,
America Online would not divulge the real names of the chat room users to the
health authorities. Instead, the company contacted Planet Out, a gay online
service based in the city, which pelted the denizens of local gay chat rooms
with e-mailed and instant-messengered warnings.

            The WP and the NYT front the news that Samuel Sheinbein, the
teen-ager who set off an extradition battle when he fled to Israel after
allegedly committing murder in Maryland, has accepted a plea bargain in Israel.
The Israeli Supreme Court had refused extradition on the controversial grounds
that Sheinbein is Israeli (his father was born in 1944 in Palestine. Israel was
founded in 1948). He will serve 24 years--a heavy sentence in the Israeli
system, but a light one by American standards. Prosecutors from both countries
decried the way he manipulated the discrepancies between the two legal
systems.

            A NYT front-pager provides welcome perspective on the Kansas School
Board's recent decision to excise evolution from its official curriculum. Most
science teachers will continue to teach evolution. Moreover, "there are 304
locally elected school boards who have the option to tell the state board to go
jump in the lake," said an aide to moderate Republican Gov. Bill Graves. "The
Governor is confident the overwhelming number will."

         
      
   
