
   
   
      
         
            AOL and Free Net Access
            

            Dear Kara,

            A new day, and I'm back in Northampton after a quick trip to New York
yesterday. Between the Amtrak ride to and from the city--Amtrak out West might
be nice, but on the East Coast it's hell--and the awful fluorescent lights in
the Time Inc. building, where Fortune is headquartered, I was a pretty
cranky guy yesterday. My mood is much improved today, back in my lovely little
office overlooking this lovely little downtown, reading about the Red Sox
victory last night--rooting for the Red Sox is the curse of all native New
Englanders--perusing the New York Times before I saddle up for a day in
front of my computer. I check my e-mail, and there is your latest
missive--sent, it says, at 5:30 a.m.! I'm happy to get it--though momentarily
worried that you're not getting enough sleep on what is supposed to be, after
all, a short vacation for you. In any case, yesterday I didn't think I could
muster another thought about the Internet if you put a gun to my head. But as I
say, today I've got a whole new outlook.

            The distinction I was trying to make yesterday was between the Internet as a
tool to make the world a better place (which I don't buy) and the Internet as a
powerful business tool (which I very much do buy). And so there is not that
much in your message that I disagree with, because you are focusing on the
business dynamics. Where we do differ, clearly, is our level of enthusiasm for
the coming of interactivity. You're right: I roll my eyes at the thought of an
"Internet refrigerator." I'm not all that sure I'd even want to have a Web site
dedicated to me and my needs--which are pretty mundane and pretty well
satisfied without such a site. For that matter, I'm not even much of a cell
phone user--I've got a digital phone, but it only works about half the time,
and I don't bother to get anything else.

            (To answer another query of yours: On the privacy issue, I subscribe to the
Scott McNealy position. When asked about this one time, he said something to
the effect of: "You've already lost your privacy. Get over it." Some years ago,
I wrote a book that was devoted, in part, to the rise of the credit card
industry. In doing that research, I became painfully aware of how much personal
information was already "sloshing around," as you put it. In other words, long
before the Internet, this battle had been lost. And in truth, I don't much care
what is discovered about my "habits" through my Web use.)

            I was particularly glad you brought up AOL, for the story in the
Times that caught my eye today was headlined "America Online Offers Free
Internet Use in Britain." This is big, and potentially very dangerous for AOL.
The reason it is the most successful Internet company is that it has a huge
revenue stream because it charges a monthly subscription fee. There is no way
it wants give away free what it used to charge for, but it is being forced to
do so by a British company that is offering free Web access--and has taken away
a big chunk of AOL's market share in Britain. This, of course, is precisely
what Microsoft did to Netscape--it gave away for free a product (the browser)
that produced most of Netscape's revenues. Marc Andreessen, the former Netscape
wonderboy who now works at AOL, must be having nightmares!

            There it is again, though--the Net's ability to blindside an established
company, to squeeze away profits, and to give consumers a deal that seemingly
makes no economic sense but is great for them. The irony is that the
established company in this case is not some so-called bricks-and-mortar
dinosaur, but a Net company! My friend and colleague Andy Serwer predicts that
within 12 to 24 months, nobody will charge for Internet access. Where in
the world will that put AOL then?

            I will say this for AOL. Unlike the folks at Netscape, who never figured out
what to do when Microsoft took away their bread and butter, those guys at AOL
are awfully resilient. They proved it a few years ago, when it was widely
believed that their service would be rendered irrelevant by the growth of the
Internet. And the company's performance during the past few years has been
little short of astounding. I have no doubt they will adapt to broadband, and
deflect the threat posed by AT&T. And they've done a great job keeping
Microsoft from eating their lunch, which is no easy task. But can they adapt to
the potential loss of most of their revenue stream? I dunno. Do you?

            I leave you with one other question, which I've been wondering about for
awhile. When I was covering the Microsoft trial, I got to see two AOL
executives testify: David Colburn, who was on the stand twice, and CEO Steve
Case, who was deposed one day when the trial was in recess. They were both
smart, clever guys who could not be rattled, and easily deflected even the most
hostile questions from Microsoft's lawyers. (Colburn struck me as one mean
SOB.) But the trait they had most in common is that were both real wiseacres,
sarcastic and darkly funny. Is that kind of sarcasm part of the AOL culture?
And if so, what does it say about the company?

            Best,
Joe

         
      
   
