
   
   
      
         
            Questions and Answers
            

            Issue 1 is Gov. George W. Bush and the rumors that he snorted cocaine when
he was in his 20s. Pundits also spend a few moments discussing the political
strengths and weaknesses of Elizabeth Dole, John McCain, and other GOP
presidential candidates; the Clinton marriage and the political standing of the
president and the first lady; and the news, reported this week, that Kenneth
Starr might wrap up his multi-year investigation of the Clinton White House and
leave his job as independent counsel.

            Most pundits agree that questions about whether Bush has ever tried cocaine
are relevant to this year's presidential campaign and a legitimate part of
public discourse. They also agree that the imbroglio in which Bush now finds
himself will probably not severely damage the Bush election effort. George
Stephanopoulos (ABC's This Week ) and David Gergen (NBC's Meet the
Press ) believe that unless someone comes forward with a specific allegation
about Bush using drugs the issue will likely fade from public notice. Bob Novak
(CNN's Capital Gang ) believes that the current Bush position--that he
has been drug-free since 1974--is an eminently reasonable one, and other
pundits point out that the American public simply does not care a great deal
about whether, as a young man in his 20s, George W. Bush dabbled in the
drug.

            Still, pundits are highly critical of Bush's handling of the cocaine issue.
They believe it raises serious questions about the character and credibility of
the Texas governor, and they accuse Bush of giving a series of muddled
responses to questions about drug use as a youth. They attack him for sounding
like Bill Clinton, who in 1992 evaded questions about drug use and
draft-dodging in an eerily similar manner. And they argue that Bush, who has
refused to state flat-out if he has ever used illegal drugs, emerges from the
controversy looking like a waffler and, worst of all, a hypocrite of the first
order.

            As Paul Gigot (PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ), Susan Page (CNN's
Late Edition ), and other pundits explain it, Bush is running a campaign
based in large part on his personal biography. He has trumpeted his credentials
as a faithful husband and fine father, volunteered to reporters that he no
longer drinks, and attacked Clinton for being an immoral philanderer who has
tarnished the dignity of the Oval Office. Bush has promised that as president
he would uphold the dignity of that office, and pundits wonder how he can talk
about some aspects of his personal life without discussing other, less pleasant
parts of his past. Also, as Gergen and other pundits point out, Bush may have a
tough time squaring his own past drug use with his image as a law-and-order
tough who supports stiffer sentencing guidelines for convicted drug
offenders.

            This week Paul Duke, the moderator on Washington Week in Review ,
warns viewers that in Washington the past week has been a "dead" one. And
indeed, other than the Bush cocaine controversy, the opinion mafia has little
to say this week that is new: George Will ( This Week ) attacks John
McCain for being a waffler on the abortion issue. Gigot says Elizabeth Dole is
running a listless campaign and needs to start focusing on major issues of
public concern. Margaret Carlson ( Capital Gang ) and Chris Black ( Late
Edition ), speaking from Martha's Vineyard, where the Clintons are
vacationing, marvel at how Clinton has rebounded from the Lewinsky scandal of a
year earlier. And Karen Tumulty and Brit Hume ( Fox News Sunday ) engage
in a heated debate about the merits of Ken Starr and his lengthy investigation
into wrongdoing in the Clinton White House. Hume says the independent counsel
almost brought down a president and has been, by most measurements, a
successful prosecutor. Tumulty thinks Starr a failure.

            
               Infotainment, Fox-style: 
               Fox News Sunday routinely airs
sensational, 15-second spots that titillate viewers and try to convince them to
stay tuned for upcoming segments. This week the producers at Fox News advertise
an upcoming dialogue on the Bush cocaine controversy by playing the popular
'80s dance song "White Lines" and showing footage of a protester running across
a street carrying a sign that reads, "Snort."

         
      
   
