
   
   
      
         
            The Lamest Company on the Planet
            

            Today's topic is Planet Hollywood, which filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy a
week ago. And today's question is: Won't someone just put this dog out of its
misery?

            Planet Hollywood, a trailblazer in the booming field of cheesy
celebrity-themed restaurants featuring mediocre food, has been struggling for
almost three years now. It has reported shrinking earnings, which eventually
turned into losses, in every quarter in the last two fiscal years. If even a
third of the 80 restaurants it owns around the world are making money, I'd be
shocked. And since April, the company has been in default on $250 million worth
of junk bonds. Trading in the company's stock has been suspended, and the
announcement of Chapter 11 means that the stock is essentially worthless. (Thus
demonstrating the important lesson that buying a cheap stock because you're
sure it can't go any lower is a mistake.)

            It's hard to feel sorry for either the bondholders or the stockholders,
since this was a train wreck you could have seen coming a mile away. (Click
here for
an earlier piece on Planet Hollywood.) But the company's proposed restructuring
plan is nonetheless dismaying. It keeps current management in place and hands
over 70 percent of the equity in the company to an investor group comprising
two of Planet Hollywood's largest shareholders for what is, relatively
speaking, a small investment of $30 million. Current shareholders will probably
walk away with nothing, current bondholders will get less than 50 cents on the
dollar (and that's if everything goes perfectly), while current CEO Robert Earl
and Saudi Prince Al Waleed Bin Talal will get most of the new company.

            Still, my dismay is contained by the fact that 70 percent of nothing is
nothing, and in the end it seems clear that that's all Planet Hollywood is
worth. The striking thing about the restructuring plan is not that the equity
is being redistributed but that so much energy is being put into an enterprise
the upside of which seems so small. Why, after all, do we need a Planet
Hollywood? There isn't a ravenous consumer demand that is going unmet. Themed
restaurants have a terrible track record. And the restaurant business in
general is capital-intensive, high-risk, and low-reward.

            In that sense, the fact that Planet Hollywood won't just die testifies to
two things: the continued strength of inertia in American business and the
continued distance between the interests of corporate managers and corporate
shareholders. Despite all the talk about the Schumpeterian gales of creative
destruction that are raging through the American economy (and they are
raging), there are still plenty of businesses that stay alive just because they
are alive. In an ideal economy, capital will migrate away from inefficient and
unproductive businesses and toward productive businesses.

            But even though in the long run that does happen in the U.S. economy (as
evidenced by the steady decline of Planet Hollywood's stock price, for
instance), and even though it happens here much more than in any other
country's economy, the "long run" can be very long indeed. And sometimes the
mere fact that a company exists can be enough to trick investors into believing
that it should exist. In a perfect world, Planet Hollywood would have
disappeared two years ago, at the point when it became clear that the novelty
of the business had worn off and that all the future held was empty restaurants
and mounting losses.

            The other thing keeping the company afloat is that it's been run by people
who were taking home nice salaries and plenty of corporate perks even as they
were destroying shareholder value with each passing day. For Planet Hollywood
investors, the best thing would have been the liquidation of the company, which
would have let them take their money and put it into real companies. But for
Planet Hollywood executives, liquidation would have meant an end to their jobs.
If you're being paid well to be captain, it's a lot better to let the ship
slowly sink, even if scuttling it is what's best for everyone on board.

            In today's hypercompetitive world, it's easy to believe that Andy Grove is
right, and that only the paranoid survive. But when you look at how tenaciously
Planet Hollywood is clinging to life, it seems clear that even fools can
survive. Perhaps what only the paranoid do is thrive.

         
      
   
