
   
   
      
         
            Harry in the New World
            

            Dear Polly,

            Though the series' Britishness is vital to its charm and appeal, I'd like to
know what the wizards beyond the shores of Albion are up to. We do hear about
the elder Weasley brothers who work in Romania and Egypt--obvious enough
magical places--but I'd love it if Rowling could inject a bit of Tintin-style
globe-trotting into the Potter saga. What if the Hogwartians took a year to
study abroad in, say, the United States? What are the witches of Texas like, or
Brooklyn, or Salt Lake City, or Salem, Mass.? Or are we a nation of muggles
after all? Do American wizards play a sport superficially like Quidditch, but
with a completely different, and to the British wizards utterly
incomprehensible, set of rules? Do they prefer Warlock-Cola to pumpkin juice,
and have their mail delivered by eagles or pterodactyls instead of owls? Or
maybe, if the stateside magic kingdom is too much to contemplate, the next
Defence Against Dark Arts Master (there's a new one each book, just to mix
things up) could be a voodoo priestess from New Orleans or a Wiccan from
Northampton.

            I'd also like to know more about the political economy and social
organization of the magic world. There seems to be a class system of
sorts--aristocrats like the Malfoys at one end, cockneys like Hagrid and the
knightbus drivers in Prisoner of Azkaban at the other, with struggling
middle-class civil-servant types like the Weasleys in the middle.
(Intellectuals like the Hogwarts masters are, as ever, a class unto
themselves.) But where do these distinctions come from? What is the source of
the wealth that sits in Gringotts bank? Is all that coveted Quidditch gear made
by workers in offshore magic sweatshops? Are they unionized? What is the
structure of wizard government? Who appointed Minister Fudge? I'll stop, but
it's testimony to the fertility of Rowling's imagination that these seem like
plausible and interesting questions, and ones I bet she'd have answers to.
Perhaps someday she'll publish a concordance to Harry Potter and explain it
all.

            Meanwhile, I don't see Harry falling for a succubus (I think that's the word
you were looking for). Hagrid might, though, what with his affection for
dangerous monsters. Funny that all of the Hogwarts teachers seem to be
single.

            Which brings me to an intriguing point in your letter. I owe you a silver
sickle, since it seems plain to me that the homosexual themes are already
there, and treated with the sublimation and symbolism you predict. Well, not
homosexual themes per se, since whatever sexuality there is in the books is
conventionally and safely infantile. What I mean is that being a wizard is very
much like being gay: You grow up in a hostile world governed by codes and norms
that seem nonsensical to you, and you discover at a certain age that there are
people like you--what's more, there's a whole subculture with its own codes and
norms right alongside the straight (muggle) one, yet strangely invisible to it.
In out-of-the-way spots in the middle of large cities are secret places--bars,
bookshops--that cater to this special clientele, and suddenly, one day, you
find your way to them. The reaction of many straights (muggles) is hostility
and denial, on the order of the Dursleys. But some muggle parents, like
Hermione's, love their wizard children and support them. (Hermione reciprocates
by taking a course at Hogwarts in muggle studies, the one moment in the series
that made me laugh out loud.) Consider too that there are wizards born of
muggles and muggles born of wizards, so that having magical power (like being
gay, at least according to some schools of thought) is, while not hereditary,
clearly innate. Your use of the phrase "a place for us" was especially
suggestive (though by "us" you meant the muggles), since that's the title of a
fascinating book by D.A. Miller (published last year by Harvard) about the role
of the Broadway musical in forming, at once in secret and out in plain view,
modern gay male cultural identity. The process of acculturation he describes
(which involves playing the cast album from Gypsy in your parents'
suburban basement), is not unlike what Harry undergoes in the early chapters of
Sorcerer's Stone .

            Is this completely crazy? I won't be offended if you say yes. Will Jerry
Falwell now take out after Harry Potter, having raised the alarm about Tinky
Winky? Our dear colleague Chatterbox, that estimable muggle, thinks he might,
but for other reasons, namely that the Potter books take a benign view of
paganism, magic, witchcraft, and other things that scare Christian
fundamentalists. A few years ago they went after Barney because he could fly,
and because he taught kids about the powers of the imagination (in their
crusade they had the tacit support of parents across America, who are fully
prepared to believe that the purple dinosaur is the instrument of Satan). There
have also been outcries raised about Dungeons and Dragons, and about the mere
use of the word "imagination" in school textbooks. So I'm sure it's only a
matter of time before school libraries start getting calls from concerned
parents complaining about our dear Harry. Which makes me like him all the more,
of course.

            That's it! On their year abroad in the United States, Harry and his pals
fall afoul of the local Christian Coalition-dominated school board in a small
Kansas town where they've come in search of Dumbledore's old teacher, the
Wonderful Wizard of Oz, and Minerva MacGonagall goes head to head with Pat
Robertson on Nightline . What do you think?

            Best,
Tony

         
      
   
