
   
   
      
         
            Boring People Doing Interesting Things
            

            Dear Kara,

            I know what that feeling is like--that feeling that you're in on the ground
floor of something really new and different and exciting. I know how jazzed you
can get as a reporter. For me, that moment took place in 1982, shortly after I
moved to Texas, when I was invited by T. Boone Pickens (does anyone remember
him?) to watch him try to take over an oil company 10 times the size of his
own. I had never written a business story in my life. I barely knew a stock
from a bond. But for three weeks that summer I moved into the Waldorf Astoria
and--much to the chagrin of his lawyers and advisors--watched Boone has he made
his play for Cities Service.

            It was the dawn of the age of takeovers; nobody had ever even heard of, say,
Michael Milken back then. The size of deals were puny compared with what would
later come. And, of course, takeovers were much more problematic as a social
phenomenon than the Internet. But there was something about it that was sooooo
compelling--there was so much drama, the stakes were so high, there were so
many incredible ups-and-downs--that I was hooked. Hooked on this story, yes,
but more than that, hooked on business as a subject to write about. Those were
the days when you got the business beat after you'd been demoted from the obit
page (I'm exaggerating, but not by much), and I felt as though I'd been let in
on this wonderful secret: Business was exciting! Business was dramatic!
Business stories were less about balance sheets than about egos and and pride
and failures and triumphs and all the other things that are the grist of good
non-fiction writing. Right around this same time, Norm Pearlstine took over at
the Wall Street Journal and began emphasizing the drama of business, and
everything began to change.

            So I've been doing this now for (gulp!) 17 years, and while I've never had
another story that gave me quite that same jolt, I've never stopped feeling
that way about business. The secret's long out now--not only because of the
Journal , but even more because of the rise of the great technology
companies, and the people who built them (Gates, Jobs et. al.) They fueled the
popular imagination. Now everyone understands how exciting this is. And the
Internet industry has only ratcheted up the excitement all the more.

            The weird part about it all is that the people who build these companies are
almost never exciting as personalities. (Boone, God bless him, was the great
exception.) In fact, I'd go so far as to say that the same qualities that drive
them to build empires make them lousy to write about. They usually lack
introspection. They don't want to recount the past, because they're looking
forward. They keep their cards hidden as much as possible. I'm not surprised
that you say Steve Case is a cipher. From where I'm sitting, they're all pretty
much ciphers. That's what makes this kind of journalism challenging--you're too
often writing about boring people doing really interesting things.

            Michael Dell, anyone?

         
      
   
