
   
   
      
         
            Flat-Tax Flap

            
               Subject: Pampering
the wealthy? No, Fairness

            
               From: Andrew
Sullivan

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Fri Jan
14

            It's a fair cop: I think all taxpayers should pay
the same rate of tax. I also think that equal treatment by government is a
useful idea in the resuscitation of liberalism. Go figure. But I'm not a
wealthy-pamperer. Because today's punitive tax system means you pay
disproportionately more the richer you are, simply moving to an equal system
inevitably gives a break to the rich. I didn't hide this in the New York
Times Magazine piece. I said so explicitly. But that doesn't mean I give
the rich special favors. I give them the same favors as everyone else; and by
combining a flat tax with tax reform, take away large numbers of their goodies
for good measure.

            Surowiecki is right in saying that technology makes
complicated things simpler to enforce; but it's also true that in our very
complicated world, the simple-is-beautiful mantra has increasing cultural
appeal. My point is not that the 40,000-page tax code isn't easier to enforce
with technology. It is. My point is that the increasing cultural attractiveness
of one-click purchasing increases the cultural attractiveness of one-rate
taxation. A subjective impression, but a valid one, I think. If Surowiecki
clambered out of his paleo-liberal, redistributist mindset, he might get
it.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
[ Andrew Sullivan is a senior editor at the New Republic and
contributing editor to the New York Times Magazine.]

            
               Subject: Re:
Pampering the Wealthy? No, Fairness

            
               From: 
               James Surowiecki
            

            
               Re: ""

             

            
               Date: Mon Jan
17

            Sullivan invokes the mantra of "equal treatment" as
if it's an argument-ender. But treating people unequally when they're not equal
is, you might say, what social justice is all about. Old people get Social
Security and Medicare. Poor people get Medicaid. Young people get Head Start
and free public school and free school lunches and, later, interest-free
college loans. Workers at the bottom of the pay ladder are guaranteed a minimum
wage. Wage-earners are paid overtime, while salaried workers are not.
Unemployed people get unemployment insurance.

            Perhaps Sullivan thinks all these, too, are
examples of paleo-liberalism. I'd say they're examples of liberal ideas that
enjoy the support of the vast majority of Americans, as does the progressive
tax. Most Americans believe that once you make a certain amount of money, each
additional dollar matters less, and therefore society has a larger claim on it.
Most Americans think there's a difference between making $50K a year and making
$2 million a year, and that the state does well to recognize that difference.
Sullivan doesn't think this, which is fine. He just shouldn't pretend that the
flat tax has anything to do with liberalism.

             

            
               (To reply, click
here.) 
            

            
[ James Surowiecki writes "Moneybox."]

            
               (To
read an unedited version of the entire exchange, click  and scroll to the
bottom of the page.)
            

            
               Subject: Culturebox
Protects Us From Ourselves

            
               From: Dan Simon

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Thu Jan
13

            Culturebox seems to have missed the glaring
inconsistency of her own position. Claiming that "we are products not just of
evolution, but also of what we imagine ourselves to be," Culturebox decries the
classroom teaching of the evolutionary roots of rape (even as a prelude to
explaining the hows and whys of resisting those roots) on the grounds that
"[t]he first message to be drilled into boys' heads [would be]: We believe
you're genetically programmed to rape." The inevitable consequence: "criminal
lawyers composing their genetic-determinist defenses ... : Why, even the
state said he couldn't help himself! " Apparently, in Culturebox's eyes, if
"we imagine ourselves to be" rational, sensible creatures capable of
distinguishing between biological drives and moral imperatives, it won't help
us one bit--we'll still be compelled by our natures to view objective
descriptions of those drives as moral justifications for giving in to them.

            Now, Culturebox may well be correct that hungry
young males (or hungry old defense attorneys, or jurors of all ages and
appetites) are incapable of resisting the temptation of "tout comprendre,
tout pardonner ." But if so, then it is hardly a triumph for her preferred
"willed culture" over the animal model; rather, it is a subtler, richer
application of the evolutionary psychologists' fundamentally wise observation:
that social institutions fail unless they treat humans as the instinct-driven
creatures they are, and avoid pretending that they are the self-defining
logical and aesthetic intellects that Culturebox would like them to be. After
all, if we could truly will our culture to meet our ideals, then we could tell
our citizens the Darwinian truth and the moral Truth without fearing that human
nature will inevitably confuse the two.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Re:
Culturebox Protects Us From Ourselves

            
               From: Judith
Shulevitz

            
               Re: ""

             

            
               Date: Fri Jan
14

            Dan Simon misses my point. I'm arguing
that by teaching boys about the so-called evolutionary roots of rape we are
not teaching them the truth. We're teaching them a deliberately
diminished view of human nature that has been useful in helping scientists
establish long-overdue connections between human and animal psychology--but
that is not the end-all and be-all of who we are, what we do, and why we do
it.

            In other words, evolutionary psychology is a
reductivist fiction, good at helping scientists point out a few interesting and
as yet not-well-understood analogies between animal and human behavior.
Teaching a bunch of unsophisticated boys that this helpful little fiction is
the gospel truth, that "men are driven to rape because their genes tell them
to," as if we really knew why some men rape and others don't, as if we were in
possession of the complete truth about human motivation, as if we had the
information to say authoritatively, X occurs because of Y , is at best
naive, at worst arrogant and irresponsible.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               [Judith Shulevitz is
Slate 's New York editor and writes "Culturebox."]
            

            
                
            

            
               Subject: The
Sopranos Are Jerseyites Before Mobsters

            
               From: Gerarld
Marzorati

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Tue Jan
18

            I was a little disappointed you two didn't get
beyond the mob and move on to North Jersey, which I think is close to the heart
of what makes The Sopranos interesting. There is something about the
place that makes it special, and not only because I grew up there. It could be
its long multi-ethnic history--it was polyglot even in colonial times. It could
be its strange and thick class co-mingling, wherein somebody in "waste
management" gets to live in a town with country-club types. Where, come summer,
everybody heads to the shore. (And can we get the Sopranos to the shore for an
episode or two please?) But whatever the explanation, North Jersey is a place
where people wear their ethnic identity (but lightly), and where the working
class has created such a strong pop culture of its own--the football Giants,
the all-night diners, Springsteen, the boardwalk at the shore--that even those
with money continue to cling to it, rather than embrace elite culture. (They
don't go to Martha's Vineyard; they just get a bigger house at the
shore.) So what I'm saying is that The Sopranos is as much about Jersey
as it is about the mob, and if you don't like it--hey, who fuckin' asked you
anyway?

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            [ Gerald Marzorati is
the editorial director of the New York Times Magazine.]

         
      
   
