
   
   
      
         
            Changing Tallulah

            Here
is how we spend the first half-hour of every day in Paris:

            Each
morning between 7 and 7:30, Tallulah begins to sing. She's only 8 months old,
so she doesn't know any words. Still, she sounds as if she is practicing her
scales. I crawl out of bed and tumble downstairs to turn on the heat, rigged by
the French handyman so that it cannot run for more than about 12 hours on end
without busting. I then clean up the mess invariably left by Vegas on the
kitchen floor--one of several evil new tricks she has picked up from the local
dogs--and toss her out into the garden. For a minute or so I watch through the
window to make sure she doesn't get any ideas about the Camembert. Like French
people, we now keep our smelly cheeses in planting pots outside. Imprisoned in
the refrigerator, the Camembert still had the power to stink up the entire
house. I'd open the door to grab a cold drink and be driven backwards by the
odor; a minute later, whoever was on the third floor would shout in panicky
tones, "Shut the fridge! Shut the fridge!" Relations with the cheese had
reached the point where one of us had to go.

            Once
Vegas is past the Camembert, I turn and race upstairs to snatch Tallulah from
her crib before she stops singing and becomes outraged. Coming up the stairs, I
sing "Old McDonald Had a Farm." On his farm he had a rooster, I assume.
"Cock-a-doodle-do" is the signal for Tallulah to reach out with her arms and be
lifted from her crib. Rising, she smiles and kicks her feet as if something
really great is about to happen. I try not to disappoint. Together, we draw the
curtains on the third-floor windows and peer up at the back of the crepuscular
neighboring apartment building to see if any French people are doing anything
particularly French. They are: sleeping. This is a nation of vampires; our
streets are empty each morning until nearly 10:00. "Coo," Tallulah says, after
a minute of staring at the old building, then swivels and tosses her warm
little arms around me in her version of a bear hug.

            As we
move to the changing table the mood shifts. The moment she is laid on her back,
Tallulah loses her love for me and becomes as impatient as a race-car driver
waiting for the tires to be changed. To keep her still enough to be unwrapped,
cleaned, and then wrapped again, I must find ever more exotic ways to trick her
into thinking something worth paying attention to is about to happen, right
here, in her own bedroom. She never falls for the same trick twice. This
morning, for instance, I danced the Parisian Trash Bag Dance--a performance she
watched less with amusement than with a kind of morbid fascination. The
Parisian Trash Bag Dance involves grabbing one of the giant blue trash bags
they sell at the local market and swishing it back and forth over my head
alluringly, while swaying my hips, like Salomé charming Herod. Once Tallulah is
mesmerized, I am able to remove one hand from the bag and do the dirty work,
dancing all the while. A moment's pause in the entertainment and she's flipping
herself onto her stomach, in a suicidal attempt to vault sideways off the
changing table.

            The
diaper changed, I grab Tallulah, put her under my arm like a football, duck
beneath the low staircase ceiling, and plunge down the narrow, unbelievably
steep stairs to our bedroom. There, mother sleeps. There, for Tallulah, is
bliss. She raises her arms and cheers and kicks up such a delighted fuss that I
am reminded all over again what a dull pleasure I am to my own child. I am the
warm-up act. The featured attraction, inured to her own importance, reaches up
from under her covers and drags Tallulah under the covers.

            Sadly, there is hardly a
moment to spare on self-pity. By now there is the most unbelievable ruckus
coming from outside. The dog, somehow already possessed of a French dog's sense
of her rights, is busy breaking down the door with her head. Sometimes, for
fun, I open it just as she is about to strike again and she goes flying across
the kitchen floor like a vaudeville comedian in a skit, crashing into the
opposite wall.

         
      
   
