
   
   
      
         
            Mac Attack

            
               Subject:
Culturebox, Yellow Journalist

            
               Re: ""

            
               From: Kevin
MacDonald

            
               Date: Tue Jan
25

            Judith Shulevitz's article, "Evolutionary
Psychology's Anti-Semite," is so outrageous a piece of yellow journalism that I
am surprised that a prominent magazine like 
                  Slate
                would run it.
It bears about as much semblance to what I've written as a creationist tract
attacking evolution bears to Darwin's Origin of Species . It is so
outrageous one almost yearns for British laws on libel so that I could force
her to prove her claims, such as that I am "evolutionary psychology's
anti-Semite" or that my ideas about Jews "represent the broadest, ugliest, and
most vicious anti-Semitism passing for scholarship in this country today." Some
of her statements are simply overly general, others simply false, while others
are incomplete or take my thoughts entirely out of context. In general
Shulevitz fails to even once indicate that I have adduced a great deal of
evidence for my claims and that I have developed a fairly elaborate theory
based on evolutionary biology and evolutionary social psychology.

            

               (To read the rest of MacDonald's post click here; to read
Culturebox's followup to "Evolutionary Psychology's Anti-Semite," click
.)
            

            [ Kevin MacDonald is a
professor of psychology at California State University, Long Beach, and the
editor of Population and Environment . ]

            
                
            

            
               Subject: Stupid
Studies Attacking Me

            
               Re: ""

            
               From: 
               Stanley Bing
            

            
               Date: Fri Jan
21

            I want to thank Judith Shulevitz for her report on
how business media makes men feel inadequate. It's always been my goal to make
other people, regardless of their sex, feel less adequate. This makes me feel
bigger and better, no matter how I'm actually doing. The news that I am "laying
waste to an entire generation of men" exceeds my greatest ambition in this
regard. Here I thought they were just a bunch of losers. Instead, I now
understand it's my fault.

            As I see it, they have two choices. They can drop
out of the entire rat race and become folk singers or something, or they can
belly up to the bar and play in the real world where money is generally the
accepted way we keep score. If they're tired of feeling inferior to the latter
task, I highly recommend my new book, What Would Machiavelli Do? (buy it
here),
which might not be germane to this discussion, but will help me make more
money, which is, of course, one of my most important resolutions.

            Thanks for mentioning me in this august setting.
And anyone who reads my stuff without knowing I am frequently attempting to
achieve irony should probably feel as inadequate as they do. 

            
               (To reply, click
here.)
            

            
[ Stanley Bing writes a column for Fortune . ]

            
               Subject: Hack
Magic

            
               Re: ""

            
               From: 
               Gersh Kuntzman
            

            
               Date: Wed Jan
19

            As the Gersh Kuntzman mentioned in today's
"Breakfast Table" on the tabloids, I feel I must object to the glowing review
Tim Carvell gave me (I believe he called it "the magic of Gersh Kuntzman").

            Never forget that Gersh Kuntzman is a hack of the
highest tabloid order. Sure, his "MetroGnome" column (every Monday) is the best
in the city, but the fact that he can spin dross like the retirement of a Plaza
doorman into gold does not mean he deserves awards or even praise.

            Job offers, however, are another issue.

            Thanks for reading.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
[ Gersh Kuntzman is a reporter for the New York Post . ]

            
               Subject: Sins of
Omission

            
               Re: ""

            
               From: Klement
Baldensberger

            
               Date: Mon Jan
24

            Timothy Noah has lied--by omission.

            Yes, Larry Klayman once sued his mother. I'm
certain Chatterbox knows why, and you owe it to your readers to tell them: Mr.
Klayman sued his mother (successfully) to recover money that she and her
husband embezzled from Klayman's maternal grandmother.

            Altogether a different story, eh?

            
               (To reply, click
here.)
            

            
               Subject: Properties
of Net Privacy

            
               Re: ""

            
               From: 
               Todd Zubler
            

            
               Date: Thu Jan
20

            In response to my post, Lawrence Lessig writes:

            

               I don't get what's
revolutionary about giving people control over data about them. Some don't care
much about data about them. Others do. But that's the benefit of a property
system--people can be different, and the system can respect their differences.
It is always the government's role to establish property regimes. Even my
antagonist in "The Book Club," Richard A. Epstein, argues that. So why not
property to protect this, if it will help assure more control over private
data?

            

            But that's just my point--we already have property
rights in our personal data. No website can steal my data unless I voluntarily
agree to deal with that website. Some people will deal with any website
regardless of privacy practices. Others will choose to deal only with websites
that establish privacy guarantees. The market, in other words, is already
working to accommodate consumer preferences and maximize social welfare with
only minimal intrusion by the government.

            Epstein hits it on the head in his final "Book
Club" response:

            

               [T]he standard set of
legal techniques, from contract to legislation to constitutional protection,
carries over well to [the Internet], even after it ceases to be organized as
vast public space, as it was at its outset. … Of course there will be problems
on the Net, just as there will be problems in any space to which any of have to
venture. No one should be Pangloss, or Cassandra.

            

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Re:
Properties of Net Privacy

            
               Re: ""

            
               From: 
               Lawrence Lessig
            

            
               Date: Thu Jan
20

            A property right in our personal data? I don't know
what you mean. Of course, a web site is not allowed to break into your house
and read your diary. That's because of the law of trespass, not a law giving
you a property right to personal data. If you go to a web site, it can take
information about where you were, where you look, what kind of machine you use,
how long you browse, what your IP address is, it can coordinate cookies with
other sites to figure out who you are, it can share information with that other
site.

            
               (To reply, click here .)
            

         
      
   
