
   
   
      
         
            Storm Blooper

             

             

             

            

               G
               eorge W. Bush and Al Gore won the Iowa
caucuses. Bush received 41 percent of the Republican vote, followed by
Steve Forbes at 30 percent, Alan Keyes at 14, Gary Bauer at 9, and John McCain
at 5. Orrin Hatch won barely 1 percent and dropped out, endorsing Bush. Gore
topped Bill Bradley in the Democratic race, 63 percent to 35 percent. Pundits
said the
caucuses don't reflect the national electorate, but went on to
assess their significance. The consensus spin: Bush and Gore are now
bona fide
front-runners. The McCain-Bradley spin: Just
wait until New Hampshire. The Forbes-Keyes-Bauer spin: Together, we
out-polled Bush, which shows the power of conservative ideas.
(
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg  a night at the Iowa caucus,
Walter Shapiro his experiences covering the melee, and William Saletan  why
McCain comes out looking better than Bradley despite getting fewer votes.)

             

            

               The Congressional Budget Office raised its estimate of the budget
surplus. The CBO projects a non-Social Security
surplus of $838 billion to $1.9 trillion over the next decade. The new
figures-which nearly double those of six months ago-are driven by rosier
forecasts of tax revenue from the economic expansion. The optimistic spin: The
extra money will make it easier for Democrats to accept Republican tax cuts,
Republicans to accept Democratic spending increases, and everyone to accept
debt repayment. The pessimistic spin: No, it will just give them more territory
to fight over.

            
               An
unexpected storm blasted the East Coast. Snow closed schools and airports
and caused blackouts from North Carolina to New England. Meteorologists said
they knew it was coming-just not this soon-and blamed advanced computer
models for the oversight. A recent study showed that the current La
Niña-a one-to-two-year pattern of severe winters in the northern states and
aridity in the Southwest-may be part of a decades-long oscillation in the
world's climate. If so, winters may be colder in the northern United States for
many years. The rosy spin: A decadeslong La Niña cycle will 
cool the Earth and alleviate global warming. (Click for an "Assessment"
of El Niño, and here to
see a satellite map of La Niña-like water temperatures.) 

            A
study linked dual hormone therapy to breast cancer. The National Cancer
Institute found that a woman's risk of breast cancer increases by
8 percent for each year she takes both estrogen and progesterone-the
most commonly prescribed hormone replacements during and after menopause. There
is no obvious alternative because: 1) taking nothing increases the risk of
heart disease and osteoporosis; and 2) taking estrogen alone increases the risk
of uterine cancer. Researchers suggested that more data is needed to determine
which treatment has the lowest overall death rate. Doctors said they did not
know what to recommend in light of the study's conclusions and advised women to
seek recommendations from … their doctors.

            

               E
               lián González's grandmothers will visit him in
Miami. The Immigration and Naturalization Service ordered his Miami
relatives to bring him to a "neutral
location " for the meeting. The grandmothers came to the United States
to meet with members of Congress
and to urge them not to support a bill granting Elián U.S. citizenship.
President Clinton said he had not decided whether he would sign or veto such a
measure. The Miami relatives assert that the best way to honor Elián's
mother-who died bringing him to the Unites States-is to grant him citizenship.
His grandmothers contend that his mother's memory would be most honored by
reuniting the
family.  

            

               The Supreme Court upheld state campaign donation limits. The
6-3 decision declared that such restrictions 
do not violate First Amendment rights, as "money is property; it is not
speech." Reformers said the ruling showed the court's openness
to an overhaul of campaign-finance laws. Opponents said reformers
shouldn't jump the gun, since 1) the decision did not deal with "soft money";
and 2) the court refused to overturn its 1976 decision that campaign
spending limits do impede free speech.

            

               
                  American Beauty won three Golden Globes, including Best
Drama . Acting
awards went to Hilary Swank for Boys Don't Cry , Denzel
Washington for The 
               Hurricane , Janet McTeer for
Tumbleweeds , and Jim Carrey for Man on the Moon . HBO series,
including the critically hyped The Sopranos , won most of the
television awards. Newspapers said the big stories were 1) the continuing
ascendancy of independent films and 2) the continuing decline of network
television. Observers debated whether the Golden Globes were the Oscars' 1)
more genuine and enjoyable counterpart; 2) silly and irrelevant second cousin;
or 3) most accurate bellwether.  

             

             

            

               Russia is facing increasing challenges in the Chechen war. The
Kremlin revealed that it had spent 50 percent more than budgeted on the war and
admitted that nearly
1,000 soldiers have died. More
bad news is anticipated: 1) The Council of Europe is considering
suspension of Russia's membership because of its attacks on civilian areas; 2)
Western creditors may eliminate financial aid that is indirectly subsidizing
the war; and 3) costs will increase as Russia tries to maintain control over
captured areas of Chechnya. Russia insists that it is stamping out
terrorists , not restarting a war. But the international consensus is
that the Kremlin has not learned the lessons of its failed 1996 campaign.

            

               {
               {
               Rams#73691}}The St. Louis Rams and
Tennessee Titans will meet in the Super Bowl. The Rams beat Tampa Bay

11-6 for the NFC title, and the Titans won the AFC championship

33-14 over Jacksonville. Both teams have 1) "powerhouse" offenses; 2)
heroic quarterbacks; and 3) perpetual underdog status. Optimists said the
unexpected match-up injected excitement into the league, since it showed that
any team can make the Super Bowl. Skeptics doubted that much
excitement would be generated by "TV markets No. XXXII and XXXIII
meet[ing] in good ol' Super Bowl XXXIV."  

            
               A
second test of the Pentagon's missile defense system failed. The Pentagon
said that the $100 million test went perfectly until the final six seconds,
when an infrared sensor failed. Last October's first test was successful. After
one more attempt, the Pentagon will determine whether the missile shield can be
deployed by 2005, and President Clinton will decide whether to proceed with the
program. Critics and opponents of the program urged President Clinton to delay
his decision until after the election. The program's supporters--who compared
the project to trying to "hit
a bullet with a bullet "--said that 1) success in the next test will
justify a go-ahead; and 2) the setbacks result from Clinton's unrealistic
timetable.

            

               The wealth of most American families is increasing. The
Federal Reserve found that the median family's net worth rose 17.6 percent
between 1995 and 1998. Other good
news : 1) More families own stock than ever before; 2) finances improved
even for those who didn't own stocks; and 3) minorities' net worth increased
faster than whites'. The bad
news : 1) The richest families reaped most of the gains; 2) the poorest
families' wealth shrunk; and 3) the average family's debt jumped nearly 50
percent. Optimists said the survey revealed the breadth and robustness of the
economic expansion. Pessimists said it showed the expansion's fragility and
warned that a bear market would bring it all crashing down.

         
      
   
