
   
   
      
         
            No. 371: "Measured Response"

             

             

            

               Eight feet, pondered Justice Stephen Breyer. What about 3 feet? asked
Chief Justice William Rehnquist. Two inches, or even an eighth of an inch,
considered Justice Antonin Scalia. At Wednesday's Supreme Court session, the
justices were quite concerned with the size of something. What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com.

             

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 370)--"Hot Spot":
            

            

               Using a helicopter equipped with a heat-seeking device, Suffolk County
cops located two cinderblock warehouses in Holbrook, Long Island, and arrested
two men for theft of electricity. What was going on in the
warehouses?
            

            
"Industrial Light & Magic wizards trying to make Kevin Costner hot
again."- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            "Ricky
Martin was filming his triumphant return to the gay porn industry. Boy, that's
how rumors get started, isn't it?"- Michael J. Basial
            

            "Oh,
some sort of shelter for the poor. Don't worry, though; they put a stop to
it."- Tim Carvell
            

            "Since
one of the men had bolts sticking out of his neck, I'm going to assume that
someone was playing God."- Matthew Singer ( Steven Davis had a
similar answer.)

            
"Florida outsourced its executions to the lowest bidder, not knowing how the
contractor planned to keep the price so low."- Maia Cowan (similarly,
Katha Pollitt and Mark Wegener )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            It is difficult to give
a precise definition of electricity (particularly if you spent much of
seventh-grade science class mooning over your lab partner, Sally Gilbert), but
it seems to have something to do with the movement of electrons from one part
of Long Island to another. Electricity enters our homes and offices and
cinderblock warehouses on copper wires, much as does HBO, but electricity
generally keeps its blouse on even after 11 o'clock at night (as did Sally
Gilbert, at least to my adolescent knowledge). Apparently electricity has
something to do with lightning, as Benjamin Franklin demonstrated in 1752 in a
famous experiment that no doubt proved something or other. This didn't make him
any less popular in Paris where he was catnip to the ladies. In 1768, Luigi
Galvani ran electric current through the legs of a freshly killed frog making
them twitch and no doubt contributing to the bad feelings most frogs have about
their place in the sciences. Not that they were so happy about their place in
Paris. And so perhaps the two things we can say with confidence about
electricity are that 1) it's tough to be a frog  2) unless you've been kissed
by Sally Gilbert.

            
               Highly Potent
Answer
            

            Somebody was growing hydroponic pot.

            Police charged Francisco
Dandraia and Frank Salinas with criminal possession of marijuana and stealing
electricity. The pair is accused of tapping into Long Island Power Authority
electric lines for the current to run 1,000-watt high-intensity halide lamps
and carbon dioxide generators to stimulate the growth of pot plants in
high-tech hydroponic tanks. This system produces mature plants in four to six
weeks instead of the several months required under ordinary growing conditions.
The excellent "connoisseur's cannabis" sold for $5,000 a pound. The men spliced
into the LIPA power lines not to avoid paying for electricity but to avoid the
huge electric bills, about $50,000 over 13 months, that would have called
attention to their operation. But heat dispersal was their undoing.

            
               Cold Comfort
Extra
            

            Participants were invited to devise a photo caption
cliché of the "Winter Turns Cold; People Don Hats, Gloves" variety for any news
outlet.

            

               

                  
                     Los Angeles Times -style: "After yesterday's
freak snowstorm, two Angelenos in parkas walk past the Staples Center(TM), the
city's dynamic new sports, entertainment and convention palace, which can be
arranged in a variety of configurations for concerts (continued on Page
B2)."- Chris Hammett
                  

               

               

                  "It fits! Homeless man beams as he tries on mitten
found in trash can."- Katha Pollitt
                  

               

               

                  "Juice in the Frozen Apple: O.J. Simpson (above),
caught leaving Le Bernardin, looks bundled against the frigid NYC weather--but
denies it. 'I'm not cold,' the former NFL star said. 'Some other guy is.'"
( New York Daily News )- Ellis Weiner
                  

               

               

                  "Mark Greenberg, one of six News Quiz readers not
to live in New York City, considers his latest response while enjoying a fish
taco at the Ocean Beach Pier Cafe. Yesterday's high was 71 with warm weather
expected to continue through the weekend (story B3)." ( San Diego
Union-Tribune )- Mark Greenberg
                  

               

               

                  "President Bill Clinton bundles up against the
frigid chill as first lady announces she will stay with him 'for the rest of
his pathetic, godforsaken days.' "- John Yanosko
                  

               

               

                  "Frosty the Frozen Pool of Ice wishes winter would
just let him die instead of stringing him along with this damn melting and
refreezing over and over again."- Francis Heaney
                  

               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Galvanizing dull
candidates. 

             

         
      
   
