
   
   
      
         
            Six Arguments for Online Fund Raising

            Online
contributions for the four top presidential candidates totaled $3,290,000
during 1999, according to a Politics Online survey. That sum is less than 3
percent of the $138,600,000 they raised overall. And even this unimpressive
number is inflated by contributions that are mailed in but accompanied by
downloaded contribution forms. (When you account for this, John McCain and not
Bill Bradley is the leader in online fund raising, with $1.3 million
collected.) But although online fund raising has yet to catch on in any serious
way, there are six good reasons to believe at least some of the hype about how
big it may turn out to be before the 2000 election cycle is over.

            
               1.
It's cheaper. Online fund raising is less costly than direct mail, phone
solicitations, or $1,000-a-plate fund-raising dinners. Raising money the
old-fashioned way requires hiring professional fund-raisers to identify
potential contributors and convince them to write checks. Raising money on a
Web site is much less expensive. McCain campaign treasurer Max Fose estimates
that it costs roughly $300 to raise $1,000 through direct mail, while it costs
only $100 to raise $1,000 online-that's 66 percent cheaper.

            
               2.
It's easier. E-fund-raising enables candidates to cut down on the
time-consuming ballroom speeches and the humiliating spectacle of posing for
pictures with wealthy donors. Companies such as Politics Online handle the
donation transactions and instantaneously transfer the dough into the campaign
bank accounts for 10 percent of the take.

            
               3.
It's faster. The Web reduces the otherwise tedious process of contributing
to a campaign to a mere click of the mouse. By facilitating instant
contributions, the Internet could help candidates capitalize quickly on early
primary wins by buying more TV ads. This may allow John McCain and Bill Bradley
to remain competitive through later primaries if they do well in New
Hampshire.

            
               4.
It brings in new money. While traditional fund-raising methods tend to
plumb the same ranks of potential donors, the Web attracts fresh contributors
to the political process. The McCain campaign estimates that 39 percent of its
online contributors are first-time donors.

            
               5.
It's cleaner. Candidates benefit from the perception that online donations
are purer than checks written in response to personal appeals. This may be
true, since the average online contribution is low-dollar and not "bundled,"
i.e., not gathered en masse with the interests of some industry or company in
mind. For this reason, Larry Makinson of the Center for Responsive Politics
argues that e-fund-raising is "the only healthy development in the
campaign-finance process."

            

               6. It has symbolic value. Online cash intake is already being
used as a barometer of grass-roots support. On Meet the Press , McCain
recently touted his Internet fund-raising success as an answer to charges that
he improperly weighed in with the Federal Communications Commission on behalf
of big contributors. Of course, the increasing tendency of political
handicappers to cite the size of candidates' Web war chests will encourage
campaigns to pump up their e-fund-raising efforts. It will also encourage them
to artificially pump up the amounts raised in this way, as Bradley's, Bush's,
and Gore's campaigns are currently doing with contributions that aren't really
made online.

         
      
   
