
   
   
      
         
            Angela's Arses

            
               Movies
            

            

               
                  A Map of the World
                (First Look Pictures Releasing). Mixed reviews
for Sigourney Weaver's turn as a mother stretched to the limit after a child in
her care accidentally drowns. Some blast the film because it uses a child's
death "as merely the first manipulation of many meant to engender sympathy for
its heroine" and call it "fraudulent in every detail" (Joe Morgenstern, the
Wall Street Journal ). Others deny these charges, saying the movie has
"an emotional depth and psychological acuity that place it in a category by
itself" (Stephen Holden, the New York Times ). Most concur in their
estimation of Weaver's work: "emotionally direct … lovely, warm" (Lisa
Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ). (Click 
here to read a review of the Jane Hamilton novel that was the basis of the
film.)

            

               
                  Angela's Ashes
                (Paramount Pictures). The film's not bad, but it's
nowhere near the caliber of the beloved Frank McCourt memoir on which it is
based. Emily Watson and Robert Carlyle play Frank's parents; Alan Parker
( The Commitments ) directs. While the adaptation is respectful, it
"mostly misses the humor, lyricism and emotional charge of Frank McCourt's
magical and magnificent memoir" and unfortunately becomes "something resembling
a conventional tale of a gifted young man's struggle to lift himself out of
oppressive circumstances" (Todd McCarthy, Variety ). The harshest
complaint: It's just "two hours and 20 minutes of beautifully photographed
rain, mud, blood, lice, vomit, dead babies, and whining" (Owen Gleiberman,
Entertainment Weekly ). The more upbeat take: The movie is "a thinner
version of the novel, but you still get a drama that has you laughing and
brokenhearted" (Desson Howe, the Washington Post ). (Click here to read an excerpt
from the book.)

            

               
                  Down to You
                (Miramax Films). Negative notices from all concerned
for this cutesy college romance. The leads, Freddie Prinze Jr. and Julia
Stiles, are "scrubbed, wholesome and bland," while the writer-director Kris
Isacsson "flees from anything that might involve real human emotion, or for
that matter any credible human activity other than looking good" (A.O. Scott,
the New York Times ). "You keep waiting for a twist, a difficulty, a
dilemma, a single cleverness," Stephen Hunter writes in the Washington
Post . "Wait in vain, partner." (The official
site includes a list of helpful dating tips, such as "Don't be afraid to
eat in front of your date.")

            

               
                  Play It to the Bone
                (Buena Vista Pictures). This road-cum-boxing
movie starring Woody Harrelson and Antonio Banderas is both trite and strange:
On one hand it "knocks the Rocky tradition on its ear by giving us two
boxers to root for in the same match" (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall Street
Journal ), but despite this departure from convention, it manages to include
"an assembly of ancient and familiar prizefight clichés" (Roger Ebert, the
Chicago Sun-Times ). Director Ron Shelton ( Bull Durham ) is a
veteran of successful sports movies, but this one lacks the "off-the-wall
larkiness" of his previous efforts (Jay Carr, the Boston Globe ). The
film culminates in a gruesome fight between the two stars that leaves several
critics bemoaning the confusion over whom to root for; others contend that the
scene's emotional conflict works in its favor. (Click here to watch the trailer.)

            
               Book
            

            

               
                  Girl With a Pearl Earring
               , by Tracy Chevalier (Dutton). This
"vibrant, sumptuous novel" (Kate Flatley, the Wall Street Journal ) is
dripping with slaver by the time reviewers finish with it. Set in
17 th -century Delft, the "outstanding" (Denise Kersten, USA
Today ) novel traces the singular life of a girl working as a servant in the
home of painter Jan Vermeer. The precocious teen-ager ends up sitting for the
famous portrait that shares its title with the book. Something of an
entanglement develops between the intelligent, artistically aware young girl
and the painter, but the book is in no way a conventional romance; it's "a
brainy novel whose passion is ideas" (Richard Eder, the New York Times ).
(Click here
to look at the titular painting.)

            
               Television
            

            
               
                  Malcolm in the
Middle
                (Fox; 8:30 p.m.; Sunday). Critics pour the love on thick: "Fresh
as a Twinkie right off the assembly line, more welcome than a power failure
during the State of the Union speech, fitfully 'Seinfeldian' in its pure,
crazed hilarity … [it] could very well be the best new sitcom of the season"
(Tom Shales, the Washington Post ). No laugh track, cinematic
single-camera shooting, and an appealingly daffy family all add up to a
fresh-feeling show. Newcomer Freddie Muniz plays Malcolm, a gifted 9-year-old,
and is "that rare thing, an uncloying child actor" (Caryn James, the New
York Times ). Many critics compare the show to Fox's best-known half-hour
comedy, The Simpsons , saying it shares the same sense of the absurd
(mother shaves father's back at the breakfast table, etc.) with an
"undercurrent of love and gentle support" (Ramin Zahed, Variety ). (Click
here to
find out more about the show at Fox's official site.)

         
      
   
