
   
   
      
         
            The French Connection&nbsp;

            The
German political corruption scandal is spreading across Europe, and on Monday
it led not only the German papers but several French and Italian ones as well.
Le Figaro of Paris splashed across
five columns an allegation aired on French and German television that one of
ex-Chancellor Helmut Kohl's secret financial benefactors was late French
President François Mitterrand. Mitterrand was said to have used France's
state-owned Elf energy group in 1992 to channel millions of dollars to Kohl's
Christian Democratic Union in order to get him re-elected-an odd idea because
Mitterrand was a socialist and Kohl the leader of Europe's most powerful
conservative party. But several European papers noted that their personal
friendship and shared commitment to the European ideal overrode ideological
considerations. The Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung reminded readers of the leaders' intimacy by republishing a
famous 1984 photograph of Kohl and Mitterrand standing hand in hand at the site
of the bloody battle of Verdun during a Franco-German reconciliation ceremony
to commemorate World War I.

            

               Die Welt led on growing fears within
the CDU that the scandal could split the party and even destroy it. This, as
Le Figaro noted, was what Italy's corruption scandal did to the Italian
Christian Democrat Party after it had been in power 40 years and, like the CDU,
seemed unassailable as a major political force. The Sunday Times of London exposed a
British dimension to the German crisis when it fronted allegations that Stuart
Iddles, a British former vice president of Airbus Industrie, had arranged
kickbacks worth millions of dollars to Karlheinz Schreiber, the German
businessman at the heart of the scandal, who then passed at least some of the
money on to Kohl. Schreiber allegedly got the kickbacks for helping sell Airbus
planes to Canadian and Thai airlines. Everyone named in the scandal has denied
allegations of this kind.

            Ezer
Weizman's TV address to the nation announcing his refusal to resign as
president of Israel, despite the launch of a criminal investigation into his
admitted receipt of cash gifts from a French former business associate, was
badly received by the Israeli press. Writing Monday in Maariv ,
commentator Amnon Dankner attacked Weizman for revealing nothing except his
determination to stay in office. "The presidency is mainly a symbol," he wrote.
"A presidency under criminal investigation that keeps its mouth shut in the
face of serious public accusations tramples the symbol into the mud and has no
more value. ... To use a metaphor from the world of flying, of which Weizman is
so fond, he should have operated his ejection seat three weeks ago. He didn't
do so, and now he hovers over us with two burnt-out engines and a broken wing,
shortly to crash on the heads of us all."

            

               Yediot Aharonot was more indulgent. It described Weizman as "a
courageous fighter and a courageous statesman … a warm man among cold people, a
sensitive man among the insensitive, a brave man among cowards." But it said
his TV appearance "did not bear witness to public courage or sensitivity to
public discomfort." It went on, "Weizman seemed to sense this. That may be why,
when he said 'I look you in the eye,' his eyes were searching the paper in
front of him." Yediot Aharonot said that, after 50 years of public
service, it was implausible for Weizman to claim that he acted innocently on
the advice of his lawyer. "The correct conclusion from Weizman's appearance
last night may be that he is too naive to be president."

            In
Ha'aretz , military editor
Ze'ev Schiff reported that "various
circles in the United States" had been "stunned" by the huge sums requested by
Israel in security aid to follow its eventual withdrawal from the Golan
Heights. After American protests, the demand was trimmed from $17.4 billion to
$16.9 billion, partly through cuts in requested intelligence funding. Then
Israel surprised the United States again by almost doubling the number of
Tomahawk cruise missiles it said it needed.

            As the
government stood accused by a Russian TV network of claiming less than a tenth
of the real number of Russian troops killed in Chechnya, the latest issue of
the weekly military newspaper Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye said the
official "numbers game" about casualties is losing any relation to reality.
Both the Russians and the Chechens are wildly exaggerating each other's losses.
If Russian figures of Chechen losses were to be believed, there would be almost
no resistance to the Russian attempts to take Grozny.

            In an
op-ed article Monday in the London Evening Standard , Vanity Fair
columnist Christopher Hitchens said that the U.S. presidential election
campaign owed its dreariness in part to manipulation by the professionals. "The
voters of Iowa and New Hampshire are microscopic populations on the margin of
American society as it actually is," he wrote. "Nobody can remember how they
got to take the first whack at weeding the field of candidates, and no sane
system would ever have granted them the permission. But this time not even
their rural cussedness can impart any drama to a race in which dollars and
polls have done their work before any 'real' vote is counted." 

         
      
   
