
   
   
      
         
            No.373: "Courtier"

             

             

             

             

            
               On Monday the
Supreme Court ruled in Nixon vs. Shrink Missouri Government PAC . Fill in
the blank as Justice John Paul Stevens sums up the majority opinion: "Money is
property; it is not ___________."
                
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com.

             

             

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 372)--"Stakes Sauce":
            

            

               Sunday's contests determined that the Tennessee Titans will face the
St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXIV. Inevitably the mayors of Nashville and St.
Louis will wager well-known local products on the big game. What's their bet?
(Question courtesy of Jon Delfin.)
               
            

            "Dolly
Parton's breast implants against Mark McGwire's shrunken, steroid-ruined
testicles."- Brooke Saucier
            

            "If
St. Louis wins, Tennessee drops all criminal charges currently pending against
the Rams' players, and vice versa."- Peter Carlin
            

            "Well,
given that Bill Bradley grew up in St. Louis … wait, sorry, that would only be
funny if Al Gore had grown up in Tennessee."- Greg Diamond
            

            
"Clarence Thomas' penis. Oh, crap. That was yesterday's answer. Sorry."- Jon
Hotchkiss
            

            "Beats
me. Does 'incest' count as a product?"- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            To quiz participants,
the structure that symbolizes Nashville is, of course, the Grand Ole Opry, and
the structure that symbolizes St. Louis is the 12-ounce Budweiser beer can-not
the Arch, which was mentioned only a few times. Nashville has its own failed
attempt at a symbolic structure: None of you referred to the life-size model of
the Parthenon located in Centennial Park (or to the life-size model of a Jew,
so beloved by school children, in the city's Natural History Museum. The
diorama is wonderful: The "Torah" and "roasting Christian baby" are incredibly
lifelike!). The Opry succeeds where the Arch and Parthenon fail because it is
not merely a tourist attraction but a vibrant part of the city's life, with a
genuine, if regrettable, purpose-as a performance space for country music-while
these latter two are self-conscious attempts to construct a symbol. So the
lesson is Empire State Building, good; Space Needle, bad. The Washington
Monument, the Lincoln Memorial, and their ilk seem to be exceptions to this
rule, being evocative symbols of the capital but lacking apparent utility.
However the Lincoln Memorial is not a cheap bit of chamber of commerce
boosterism; it is a genuine attempt to honor the 16 th president,
just as the Washington Monument is meant to inspire penis jokes about
presidents, judges, and former U.S. senators eager to pick up a quick buck, and
so to unite a nation.

            
                
               Inadequately
Researched Answer
            

            I found no stories about mayoral wagering of local
products. I mourn the lost clichés of labored regionalism and my own inability
to figure out these "search engine" thingies.

            However, for traditional money gamblers, St. Louis
is an 8-point favorite; the over-and-under bet is 48 1/2.

            About 80 percent of the
action will be on which team wins, but Vegas bookmakers offer more than 200
wagering options, including Player to Score First Touchdown (Eddie George,
Titans, is the 9-2 favorite); the Double Result, a bet on who's ahead at the
half and at the end (you can have Tennessee at the half and St. Louis at the
end at 7-2); who scores first and who wins the game (you can take the Rams both
ways at 5-6). What player gets arrested for a felony during the actual game
(Marshall Faulk, Rams, is a long shot at 20-1). The odds are 50-1 against this
last bet actually being offered in Vegas, although I once rented an Uzi not 100
yards from the Strip, so pretty much anything goes. And the shrimp
cocktail-huge! And virtually free. 
            

            
               Iowa Republican Caucus
Results Augmented Quotations Extra
            

            (Each final sentence added by News Quiz.)

            

               

                  "We've had a record-shattering victory, and I never
dreamt I'd be able to get such a high vote total. I have dreamt about
having sex with a gun, but that was before I stopped drinking and started
executin'; I'm better now."- G.W. Bush is giddy with victory.
                  

               

               

                  "The power brokers and the power elite are worried
because they have no hooks in me. Calm down, boys, I'm on your side, and so is
my gold-plated monkey, Popo: And, yes, that is a real diamond on his
ass."- Steve Forbes is giddy with defeat.
                  

               

               

                  "Don't let anyone convince you that the decent
heart of America is dead. It won't be dead until I crush it beneath my boot
heel."- Alan Keyes is just plain giddy.
                  

               

               

                  "The kids don't know any difference when you say
Mike Tyson was convicted of rape or got in a fight with a tourist. They just
want a famous guy to show them love and respect. Celebrities-is there anything
they can't do?"- Mike Tyson is giddy with not actually running in the Iowa
caucuses.
                  

               

               

                  "If they really love him, they will come see him.
Obviously they don't love him. Instead of visiting Elián, his grandmothers
should get in a fight with Mike Tyson, a famous guy."- Elly Carrera, a
Cuban-American, is giddy with keeping Eli
                     á
                     n from running in the
Iowa caucuses or from being reunited with his father.
                  

               

            

            
               Matthew Singer's Amtrak
Slogan Ongoing Extra
            

            I'm still seeking new safety slogans for the
Baltimore-Washington commuter line I ride to work. Actual slogans include
"Walk, Don't Run," "Watch the Gap," and "Stay Alert, Stay Alive" and feature
little mockery and derision. Damn government bureaucrats.

            Reponses will run
Thursday and be forwarded to contest officials for a shot at the big prize, a
one-month free pass on the MARC, but no one will be forced to ride the MARC to
Washington.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Anheuser-Busch.

         
      
   
