
   
   
      
         
            Jabberwiney

            Whenever I read that a wine is "lush and creamy,"
"elegant," "lovely," "graceful," "generous," "luscious," or "smooth," I gag.
These days, I gag a lot.

            I've had cheesecake that's lush and creamy. Tequila
and whiskey divide into smooth and rough. My wife is elegant, lovely, graceful,
and even luscious. But contrary to what you read on the back of some bottles,
these terms are meaningless when applied to wine. The label on Castlewood
Grove's chardonnay claims that its wine has a "superb nose." White Oak
chardonnay boasts a "mouth-filling richness," McDowell's syrah is
"ripe-flavored and appealing for immediate enjoyment," Turnbull's cabernet
sauvignon has "legendary concentration and elegance," and Truchard's version of
the same grape has "great character and distinction." Others describe tannins
as "polished," grapes as "rubenesque," and fruit flavors as "forward,"
"abundant," and "bright."

            Most wine critics similarly enjoy gyring and
gimbling in the wabe. Take this sentence about Napa Wine & Co.'s sauvignon
blanc, excerpted from Connoisseur's Guide to California Wine and printed
on one of those little cards that wine merchants put in front of bottles. "From
the first sniff, one is impressed by the precise, deep but never bombastic
aromas in which green apple and crenshaw melon scents [ sic ] and by a
creamy, vanillin accent of oak, and it is wonderfully balanced on the palate
with ripe richness set off by firming acids and brightness."

            Why do these people
write this way? Is this what happens when your job requires you to drink before
noon?

            Ann Noble, a sensory scientist-flavor chemist in the
viticulture and enology department at the University of California, Davis,
would ban from the wine-tasting lexicon whole pages of words that she deems
imprecise, vague, or hedonic (her word).

            "What the hell is 'stylish'?" Noble asks me. "Is a
Volkswagen stylish? Is a Humvee stylish?" She hates "harmonious," disdains
"fragrant," and despises "dense," which she says "doesn't mean exactly
anything." Winemakers, she says, favor fuzzy terms for a reason. "The labels
are for marketing an image," she says.

            Having researched how people assess wine, Noble now
teaches scientific techniques to describe it precisely. To this end, she has
developed a lovely, impressive, and wonderfully balanced tool, which she calls
the wine aroma
wheel. The words found on Noble's wine aroma wheel do not make me sick to
my stomach.

            Noble divides her wheel
into three rings. The inner ring has the 12 "specific and analytical words"
that she believes best describe wine aromas: fruity, vegetative, nutty,
caramelized, woody, earthy, chemical, pungent, oxidized, microbiological,
floral, and spicy. The middle ring subdivides these 12 words into 29 more
specific categories, and the outer ring offers 94 still more precise
descriptions. A sophisticated nose might thus distinguish a fruity wine as
smelling like citrus, berry, tree fruit, tropical fruit, or dried fruit. The
outer ring ups the olfactory ante again, dividing these terms into such exact
descriptions as strawberry jam vs. strawberry.

            Noble's main aim is not to teach wine appreciation. Rather,
she strives for a standard terminology that cuts through the babble of
winespeak. Her undergraduate course "Sensory Evaluation of Wines" is the first
step in this process, teaching students how to link aromas to wine. It's a
"kindergarten of the nose," she says.

            Noble's Web page contains the
nose-training workout that she uses in "Sensory Evaluation of Wines": First,
students pour wine into a bunch of glasses and then drop a different "physical
standard" into each one. For white wines, the physical standards include clove,
bell pepper, brine from canned asparagus, and apricot puree. The point of
making these physical standards is to educate your nose to recognize these
aromas in an undoctored glass of wine. Next, the students pour samples from a
variety of white wines.

            "From this point on, anything goes: Smell the wines
first, smell the standards, start to see which terms describe which wine,"
writes Noble.

            When I told Noble that I
was tackling the workout, she replied, "Your nose is going to start to talk to
you because the contrasts really stand out."

            Following Noble's instructions, I put a little cheap white
wine into 15 glasses and then spiked each one with a different physical
standard: peach puree, apricot puree, brine of asparagus, strawberry jam, wet
cardboard, fresh strawberry, pineapple juice, soy sauce, green olive, melted
butter, coffee grinds, fresh lime juice, cloves, vanilla, and shaved almonds. I
identified the contents of each glass with a label, stretching plastic wrap
over the tops to prevent aromas from escaping. Into another set of labeled
glasses I poured three different chardonnays (which I expected to have
dramatically distinct attributes), one gewürztraminer, and one Riesling. After
putting all 20 of the glasses on the dining room table, I enrolled my wife and
9-year-old daughter in the kindergarten of the nose.

            As Noble instructed, we sniffed each standard,
smelled the untainted wines, and then went back and forth between the standards
and the wines. "My nose isn't talking to me," my wife said. Next, each of us
wrote down descriptions of each wine's scent, but limited our vocabulary to
words that matched the scents wafting from the physical standards.

            Our daughter, who has great character and legendary
intelligence, was a bit dense this evening and instead of describing the wines'
aromas offered blunt descriptors such as "I don't like it." Fair enough.
Interestingly, my wife and I listed different combinations of aromas for each
of the five white wines under assessment. But when we spoke about the choices
we made, resniffing the 20 glasses before us, we agreed on descriptions for
four of the five wines.

            As a final exercise, we
shifted the labels identifying the white wines to the bottoms of the glasses,
where we couldn't read them, and then tried to guess which wine was which. Save
for the gewürztraminer, which I thought smelled of wet cardboard and my wife
had called clovelike, we failed the test-misidentifying four of the five wines.
Had I lost my wine aptitude or was my nose just fatigued? An hour later, I
retook the test and scored 100. I had heard my nose, loud and clear.

            Although my anecdotal evidence suggests that Noble's method
works, I don't expect winemakers to begin printing labels that brag about a
gewürztraminer's wet-cardboard finish. The French will continue to eschew back
labels altogether, and the more conscientious American vintners will limit the
label lingo to useful information about the winery's location, the soil in
which the grapes were grown, and the climate. And make no mistake, a winery
need not cram a label with absurd adjectives to sell a wine. Recently, I bought
a bottle of Napa's Schuetz Oles on the strength of its label alone: "Planted in
the early 1960s, above Calistoga on a rattlesnake infested rocky hillside, this
Petit Sirah produces a dangerously red wine," the label reads. "BE PREPARED: DO
NOT DRINK IF WEARING WHITE CLOTHING!"

            Now that's stylish.

         
      
   
