
   
   
      
         
            Microsoft Kremlinology&nbsp;

            During
the Cold War, pundits entertained themselves with a parlor game called
Kremlinology. Every time a Soviet premier was ousted or a new man joined the
Politburo, Western analysts spun fresh theories about who was up, who was down,
why the chairs were being rearranged, and what those wily old Russians were up
to. The triumph of capitalism spoiled the old game but replaced it with a new
one: corporate Kremlinology.

            The
most Kremlin-like of corporate headquarters, in the eyes of many conspiracy
theorists, lies in Redmond, Wash. Last week's announcement by Microsoft CEO
Bill Gates that he is turning over his job to his deputy, Steve Ballmer-and
assuming the new post of "chief software architect" instead-has set
Kremlinologists abuzz. Here's how Microsoft is spinning the handover and how
cynics are reinterpreting those spins.

            
               1.
Gates is meeting Microsoft's challenge. At a press conference Thursday,
Gates and Ballmer denied that the handover was prompted by America Online's
merger with Time Warner. Instead, they linked Ballmer's promotion to
Microsoft's new strategy of focusing on "Next Generation Windows Services,"
which are supposed to become the platform for all devices that communicate
through the Internet. "We have Bill now focused 100 percent as chief architect
of this transformation," said Ballmer.

            

               Cynics' translation: He's acknowledging Microsoft's mess .
Skeptics don't care whether Gates planned the handover before the AOL merger.
They interpret the "next generation" strategy, Gates' assignment to it, and his
adversarial references to AOL as a belated concession that AOL was right about
the primacy of the Internet, Microsoft was wrong about the primacy of the PC,
and Microsoft now has to play catch-up. And why is Gates going back to
supervising software development? Cynics figure that if Capt. Kirk takes over
the engineering room, it means Scotty has botched his job.

            
               2.
Gates is doing what he does best. On the Today show, Gates said
software architecture is "a job that draws on my strengths more." Microsoft
Vice President Jeff Raikes agreed that the new job puts Gates "in his element."
The company's overall message is that the "next generation" project will
determine the industry's future and that Gates is the genius who can pull it
off.

            

               Cynics' translation: He's sinking back to his level of
competence . If Gates is better at what he'll be doing next, then he
must have been worse at what he was doing before. Critics link this point to
the Peter Principle, which holds that everyone rises to his level of
incompetence. They suggest that being CEO was Gates' level of incompetence and
that he's going "back to the garage," where he belongs. They attribute all
Microsoft's missteps to Gates-bad PR, bad legal strategy, underestimation of
the Internet-and infer that Gates must have been bad at everything Ballmer is
good at: administration, finding new revenue sources, and avoiding bad
investments.

            
               3.
Gates is psyched up. "I'm returning to what I love most-focusing on
technologies," Gates said Thursday. "Steve's promotion will allow me to
dedicate myself full time to my passion-building great software and
strategizing on the future." On Today , Gates said his new job would be
"more fun."

            

               Cynics' translation: He's burned out . Again, critics invert
Microsoft's spin: If Gates needs a new job in order to have fun, he must hate
his current job. Some say he lost interest because he made too much money and
has nothing left to prove. Others say the antitrust siege, the attendant PR
damage, and constant media scrutiny have worn him out. A few offer the ultimate
macho corporate insult, speculating that he wants "more time to concentrate on
his family." But the condescension of these ill-wishers is trumped by the
contempt of those who say Gates is too coldblooded to put his family first.

            
               4.
Gates is getting a puppy dog. The media always look for contrasts. Since
Gates is a nerd, they've cast Ballmer as a frat boy. While Gates and Ballmer
stress their similarities, Microsoft optimists and Ballmer supporters spin the
nerd-frat boy dichotomy as a good thing: Whereas Gates understands gadgets,
they suggest, Ballmer understands people. He's "outgoing," "affable,"
"tactile," and "back-slapping." He's a "salesman" who can help Microsoft by
focusing on customers. He's a deal-maker who can break the ice with Justice
Department negotiators and settle the antitrust case. He's the puppy who can go
for a walk with his master, wag his tail, win over strangers, and help Gates
make friends.

            

               Cynics' translation: He's getting an attack dog . Sure, say the
critics, Ballmer is tactile and outgoing-like a pit bull. They call him
"ruthless," "bombastic," "in-your-face," an "aggressive hardliner," a
"bulldog," and a "hit man." Ballmer played into this critique in Thursday's
press conference, calling the notion of breaking up Microsoft "reckless and
irresponsible" and dismissing speculation about such a plan as "ludicrous."
Reporters deemed his tone "strident" and belligerent. Gates isn't unleashing
Ballmer to make friends, the cynics argue. He's unleashing Ballmer to fight and
intimidate Microsoft's enemies.

            
               5.
Gates is taking a bullet for his company. Despite Gates' and Ballmer's
insistence that the handover has nothing to do with the antitrust case, dozens
of market analysts, legal scholars, and reporters suspect that it must. They
think Gates is "stepping down"-contrary to Ballmer's insistence that Gates is
"stepping up" to his new job-in hopes of "appeasing" Justice Department
warriors who want Gates' head. Pro-Microsoft analysts spin this as a heroic
sacrifice, removing the "lightning rod" whose "seemingly disingenuous
testimony" has ostensibly driven the DOJ to the verge of demanding the
company's breakup. Many attributed a rise in the company's stock to optimism
that a freshly sated DOJ will back off the alleged breakup plan.

            

               Cynics' translation: He's playing dead . Anti-Microsoft analysts
spin the same theory the other way: Gates, having been pulled over by the cops
for aggressive driving, is sliding into the "passenger seat" and giving the
wheel to Ballmer, whose record is clean, so that the cops will go easy on the
company. But Ballmer is just a "student driver," and as soon as the cops leave,
Gates will retake the wheel. Gates is just "putting a new face on the
company"-a "kinder, gentler look"-to cleanse Microsoft's corporate image and
soften up the DOJ.

            
               6.
He's calling all hands on deck. At the press conference, Ballmer outlined
Microsoft's challenges and listed several members of the company's "leadership
team" who would work with "chief architect" Gates to "integrate" the company's
products and services. Having lost top executives in recent months, Gates and
Ballmer sought to convey that Microsoft has divisional leaders who can work
together to beat AOL and other rivals.

            

               Cynics' translation: He's manning the lifeboats . Conspiracy
theorists think Gates is organizing his commanders not to save the ship but to
abandon it to the government. "They are putting their affairs in order," said
tech guru Jeff Eisenach. "If we are going to see the death of Microsoft as we
know it and the creation of something new, then they would want to prepare
their most capable people for CEO types of positions." The Los Angeles

               Times speculates that "Gates would run the Windows operating system and
a new Internet operating system. Ballmer would take control of the applications
division." The Chicago Tribune agrees that with Gates and Ballmer at
their new posts, if the DOJ breaks up Microsoft, "at least two Baby Bill CEOs
will be in place."

            
Ballmer dismisses such talk as nonsense. But when a company spends two decades
impressing everyone with its ruthless practicality and wily resilience, it
can't easily brush off rumors of plots. "One still can't escape the feeling
that Microsoft knows something is coming and is positioning itself," said a
CNNfn correspondent the day of the handover, alluding to a hypothetical
court-ordered breakup. "It thinks smartly, and this change is going to position
it for whatever comes down the road." On this, Microsoft haters and worshippers
agree: The only thing of which Bill Gates is incapable is coincidence. 

         
      
   
