
   
   
      
         
            No. 374: "Kids Tough"

             

             

             

             

             

            
               Johnny and Luther
Htoo, the chain-smoking 12-year-old twins who lead the Christian fundamentalist
rebel group God's Army, made a horrible mistake Tuesday. How so?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com.

             

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 373)-"Courtier":
            

            

               On Monday the Supreme Court ruled in Nixon vs. Shrink Missouri
Government PAC . Fill in the blank as Justice John Paul Stevens sums up the
majority opinion: "Money is property; it is not ___________."
               

               
            

            "An
animal!"- Jill Pope, Steven Davis
            

            
"Eligible to vote except by proxy."- Mary Anne Townsend ( Michael J.
Basial had a similar answer.)

            "For
everyone, that's why they're called 'have-nots.' "- Julie Anderson
            

            
"Snowing, is it? It is? Good lord! We'd better ditch work
immediately!"- Daniel Radosh
            

            "The
contents of an overnight bag tossed on a bed which you roll in screaming, 'I'm
rich! I'm rich! Now no one's gonna step on me no more! And that goes for all
you chicken-shit mugs with your Aqua Velva shaves and your Grecian Formula
comb-overs.' "- Marshall Efron
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            A Yahoo search for
"money" turns up 31 categories and 1,750 sites, confirming the notion that we
Americans want a lot of information about it, and not just from pouty blond
financial reporters on CNNfn. Of course, a Yahoo search for "sex" yields 46
categories and 3,145 sites, most of which expect you to hand over the money you
made applying what you learned from your first search. (And I, for one, am
proud to live in a country with 46 categories of sex, most of which Orrin Hatch
objects to, but he's history, so the hell with him.) Euphoric with thoughts of
money and sex and the crushing defeat of Orrin Hatch, I'm sobered to learn that
these totals are surpassed by a search for "cats"-83 categories, 3,432
sites-which I presume means that a lot of people are spending a lot of money on
cats, and they expect something more than a handshake and the meowed suggestion
that "It's been such a lovely evening; let's not spoil it." Perhaps the ASPCA
isn't screening quite as thoroughly as it should. You know, like the DNC. And
the RNC. And that intolerant loser, Orrin Hatch.

            
               Money Talks Slightly
Quieter Answer
            

            Money is property; it is not speech .

            Although it did not
overturn Buckley vs. Valeo , the notorious 1976 case that defined
political expenditures as speech, the court determined that political
contributions were not speech. Antonin Scalia cast his two votes (his own and
Clarence Thomas') with dissenting Justice Anthony Kennedy, who argued that the
decision might limit the influence of the very rich, or so I understand it.

            
               Mike Gerber's
Cartographic Quibble
            

            I grew up in St. Louis, so I must say: Shame!
Shame! Shame! Geography aside, St. Louis is part of the East: It's more like
Pittsburgh or Ohio than Kansas City. The Midwest-which doesn't suck as much as,
say, Queens-starts at the western edge of St. Louis. I've lived on both sides
of the divide, so I know. Brrr. (I cannot defend Nashville.)

            [ I believe I've seen
that on your tourist brochures: "St. Louis: We're a lot like Pittsburgh!" and
so I stand corrected.-Ed. ]

             
               More and Moira
Extra
            

            "My name is Moira Forbes. I am a junior at
Princeton University, and my dad, Steve, is running for President, and I am an
alcoholic." So begins a "letter from Moira" touting Youth for Forbes, except
for the part about her being an alcoholic. While it makes my head go all funny
trying to imagine a young person enthusiastic about the pudgy wealth-inheritor,
Moira says there are many reasons kids should dig her daddy the most, and now
that she's not drinking, perhaps we should pay attention to what she says.
Which of the following are among Moira Forbes' reasons for youth to support her
father?

            

               

                  To show that young people do, indeed, care about
the future of America.

               

               

                  Just to piss off G.W.

               

               

                  We've been called lazy, apathetic, selfish, and
worse. I know better than that.

               

               

                  To find out just what worse things we've been
called. And by whom. And then go over to his house and kick the crap out of
him.

               

               

                  (To say) "yes" to a leader who will protect our
fiscal future while cleaning up the moral mess of today.

               

               

                  To join in the moral mess of today.

               

               

                  Take it from me, boys: Chicks dig guys who say
"fiscal."

               

               

                  To make a real difference.

               

               

                  Free "Forbes Rules" bong to all registered
voters.

               

               

                  Another of dad's embarrassing failures might cause
me to slip back into the alcoholic fog that marred my childhood, had any such
fog actually existed, which it did not.

               

            

            
               Answers
            

            1, 3, 5, and 8 are genuine.

            Read the rest of Moira
Forbes' hip, hot, and happening letter to today's youth here.

            
               Matthew Singer's Amtrak
Slogan Ongoing Extra
            

            He's still soliciting new safety slogans so he can
stuff the ballot box of a contest being run by MARC, the Baltimore-Washington
commuter line he rides to work. Already taken: "Cleaning up the moral mess of
today."

            Reponses to run
Thursday.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Can't-or perhaps can-buy
me love.  

         
      
   
