
   
   
      
         
            No. 369: "Pig 'n' Pearl"

             

             

            

               "At Harvard, they called it 'throwing the pearls to the swine,' " says
Dr. Alan Kling. What's it called off-campus?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 368)--"Baby, It's Scold Outside":
            

            

               On Sunday a distinguished visitor lambasted a gathering: "Please join
the modern world. Why are you lagging behind? Why do you allow yourselves to be
regarded as leaders without talent, leaders without a vision?" Who chided whom
for what?
            

            "As
much as I admire Jimmy Carter, I think he was being a little hard on the
Amish."- Andrew Staples
            

            "Bill
Gates taunted jury members for using 1-month-old PalmPilot models."- Francis
Heaney
            

            "I
think Michael Jordan is beginning to get a bit frustrated with his new cohorts
in the Washington Wizards front office."- Aaron Schatz
            

            "Geoff
Ward, goateed sophomore, chides each of the Canterbury Tales, for being written
during that Great Vowel Thing and for being 'boring and stupid.' "- Laura
Miller
            

            "All
right, so I lost my cool with those Hasid guys on Broadway who come right up to
you and ask if you're Jewish. I don't see why you have to put it all over the
Internet!"- Katha Pollitt
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            To
many participants, Steve Case is the apotheosis of modernity, reason enough to
note that the salient feature of AOL Time Warner-aside from its ability to
crush all before it like a mighty juggernaut-is its massive blandness. It's the
family restaurant of media conglomerates. A clue to the popularity of such
dullness can be found in the Sports Illustrated swimsuit issue, the
innovative merging of journalism and soft-core porn that put that magazine in
the black and millions of frat boys into a swoon. Why, in an era of readily
available pornography, does AOL thrive by blocking it and SI by selling
it in so watered-down a form? Because it is undemanding. Passionate involvement
with sex, politics, or dinner can be exhausting. Each intense encounter demands
alertness, ingenuity, and a willingness to overturn old assumptions. Each
challenges. On the other hand, McDonald's, Time , and SI swimsuits
are essentially reassuring. Their appeal is their familiarity. They comfort the
participant, reinforcing his preconceptions. That's the moneymaking way to
appeal to the timid, the plump, and the contented-i.e., to those who enjoy the
status quo. McDonald's, Time , and SI swimsuits: Each lulls. Like
a warm glass of American cheese.

            
               Averting an Even Bigger
Catastrophe Answer
            

            Nelson Mandela upbraided the leaders of Burundi's
warring factions for bringing death and misery to their nation, shaming it
before the world.

            Mandela denounced their failure to stop the civil
war that has killed 200,000 of the country's 6 million people since 1993. He
was especially critical of their not having included the leaders of all armed
rebel groups in their negotiations.

            Burundi's conflict is a
frightening echo of the Hutu's slaughter of at least 500,000 Tutsi in Rwanda,
its northern neighbor. Recently the government of Burundi ordered 350,000 Hutu
to leave their homes and move to 50 camps to deter them from aiding guerrilla
fighters.

            
               Cold Comfort
Ongoing Extra
            

            

               

                  "Helen
Ross of Inverness, Scotland, is covered with frost after cross-country skiing
in Stowe, Vt." (Associated Press/ USA Today )

               

               

                  
"Passengers on the Staten Island ferry, left, were bundled up against the
bitter cold yesterday. Frank Dedario, above, the mate on the ferryboat, the
Gov. Herbert H. Lehman, said he was freezing." ( New York Times )

               

               

                  " 'The
Sopranos,' America's greatest television series-no, make that the most
magnificent example of dramatic writing in the history of the world-continues
brilliant work despite current cold snap." ( New York Times )

               

            

            Above, actual "Winter
Turns Cold; People Don Hats, Gloves" photo captions from various news sources
(except the third one which I simply made up). Participants are invited to
concoct similarly clichéd captions from photos that should run in any other
news outlet during the current meteorological unpleasantness. Results to run
Thursday, if my hands aren't too cold to type and my scarf doesn't become
entangled in the keyboard, Isadora Duncan-style.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Modern guy Steve Case.

         
      
   
