
   
   
      
         
            No. 372: "Stakes Sauce"

             

             

             

            

               Sunday's contests determined that the Tennessee Titans will face the
St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXIV. Inevitably the mayors of Nashville and St.
Louis will wager well-known local products on the big game. What's their bet?
(Question courtesy of Jon Delfin.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com.

             

             

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 371)-- "Measured Response":
            

            

               Eight feet, pondered Justice Stephen Breyer. What about 3 feet? asked
Chief Justice William Rehnquist. Two inches, or even an eighth of an inch,
considered Justice Antonin Scalia. At Wednesday's Supreme Court session, the
justices were quite concerned with the size of something. What?
            

            "The
distance from a homeless shelter that a family of four must remain if both
parents have been unemployed for more than six days."- Daniel Kahn
( Larry Amoros had a similar answer.)

            "They
were pondering the ideal distance from Pat Buchanan a person should be when
that person spits on him."- Marshall Efron
            

            "How
wide a jail cell has to be before it constitutes cruel and unusual
punishment."- Francis Heaney
            

            "The
space allotted for Abe Rosenthal's Daily News column."- Matt
Sullivan
            

            "Could
you please not stand so close to me when you ask that? And get out of my way.
I'm deliverin' PIZZA for chrissake."- Dr. Jonathan E. Snow
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Cruel, dim, and out of
touch with American life-no, not the evil bastards who killed Charles
Schulz-the U. S. Supreme Court, at least that's how they look to quiz
participants. Scorn for the court has been a consistent theme of quiz
responses; that's one of the things I've learned as we near the second
anniversary of the quiz. (Yes, there will be a party; yes, gifts are
appropriate; and yes, my clothing sizes and preferences in porcelain figurines
[drunken belligerent clowns] will be posted as soon as those lovable bumblers
at Shining Path get the site up and working.) A second thing I've learned is
that Schulz is actually alive; apparently they just beat him so badly that he
can no longer draw. And a third observation is that, judging by the higher than
usual number of responses, quiz participants love an invitation to a penis
joke. So here's a gift for you, a question I didn't run today. In 1949, Harry
Truman did it 88 times; in 1997, Bill Clinton did it 545 times. What? (See
below.)

            
               If You Can't Harass
From 8 Feet You Don't Deserve To Be Called a Religious Fanatic Answer
            

            As I understand the law, the court was considering
how big a distance might be maintained between a woman going to the doctor and
a shrieking Christian wishing to intimidate her.

            
               Hill vs. Colorado (No. 98-1856) challenges a
1993 law establishing a 100-foot zone around the entrance to any health-care
facility. Within that zone, people may not, without consent, approach anyone
within 8 feet to engage in "oral protest, education, or counseling" on a public
sidewalk.

            Anti-abortion activists say this abridges free
speech. Colorado, supported by 18 other states and the Clinton administration,
says that at 8 feet one can speak in a normal tone of voice and be clearly
heard, and thus the law does nothing to curb "uninhibited debate on all
topics." It merely allows a woman to go to the doctor without someone screaming
in her face.

            The ACLU has filed a
brief on the plaintiff's behalf.

            
                
               Matthew
Singer's Amtrak Slogan Ongoing Extra
            

            The commuter train I ride from Baltimore to
Washington each day, MARC, is having a contest.

            "Amtrak and MARC take the safety of our passengers
very seriously. Almost every day a customer is injured while boarding or
getting off of a train. They slip on the stairs or fall between the gap between
the train and the platform, etc., etc. Amtrak and its Commuter Division try
very hard to raise Safety awareness of its Passengers by using simple, short
Safety Slogans such as 'Walk, Don't Run,' 'Watch the Gap' or 'Stay Alert, Stay
Alive,' etc., etc. Amtrak would like our Commuter Customers to help us find
some new slogans."

            I'd like News Quiz participants to provide those
slogans.

            Reponses will run
Thursday and be forwarded to Amtrak for a shot at the big prize, a one-month
free pass on the MARC.

            
               Answer to Bonus
Penis Joke Question
            

            Sent goons over to beat
the hell out of Charles Schulz.

            
               Actual Answer to
Bonus Penis Joke Question
            

            Gave speeches.

            
                
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Thomas hearings nostalgia.

         
      
   
