
   
   
      
         
            Bill Bradley's Vietnam&nbsp;

            A year
ago, Bill Bradley and John McCain faced a daunting challenge in Iowa. Each man
was up against a well-financed front-runner who could marshal interest groups
and local politicians to bring out a big vote on caucus night. Each man had
taken a principled position during his Senate career-McCain against ethanol
subsidies, Bradley against Midwestern flood relief funded by federal
borrowing-that could be used against him in Iowa. Bradley decided to go into
Iowa anyway. McCain decided to stay out. That difference says a great deal
about where each man comes from and where he goes from here.

            
Bradley is an idealist. Unlike the technocrats, party hacks, and angry
populists who have contended for the Democratic presidential nomination over
the past three decades, he echoes the valor and innocence of the early 1960s.
The class warfare of Rep. Dick Gephardt and Sen. Tom Harkin is as foreign to
him as the incrementalism of Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton. Bradley
looks instead to the programs and principles of the New Frontier and the Great
Society. He preaches faith, boldness, and big solutions to national problems.
He sees distrust of government not as educated skepticism but as uneducated
cynicism. He calls for a new war on poverty. He wants to outlaw anti-gay
discrimination by reopening the 1964 Civil Rights Act. He speaks constantly of
"racial unity" without defining it, as though the very concept were as
controversial today as it was then. His campaign slogan distills the idealism
of that era: "It can happen."

            The
case against that idealism is that it didn't happen-that big government
solutions failed or backfired, that the War on Poverty was lost, and that the
racial equality that liberals promised in law remained frustrated by cultural
and economic factors they had thought government could easily overcome. These
setbacks brought discredit to the whole idea of government activism, converting
practical failure into political failure. Liberalism became a dirty word.
Democrats, banished from the White House, learned to temper their ambitions.
The courage of Al Gore Sr., who lost his Senate seat to a liberal-bashing
campaign in 1970, gave way to the caution of Al Gore Jr.

            But
caution can be frustrating. Why not guarantee health insurance for all
Americans? Why not outlaw all cheap handguns? Why not ban soft money and fund
elections publicly? This is Bradley's inspiration and message: He's tired of
"timid" Democrats who "nibble around the edges." With confidence and principle,
he argues, Americans can create "a world of new possibilities, guided by
goodness," in which all obstacles can be surmounted. Gore's entrenched assets
in Iowa seemed just another obstacle. Bradley didn't flinch. He joined the
battle on Gore's terrain. He poured millions of dollars into the state. He
offered a vision of a better world, confident that he could win over the hearts
and minds of Iowans.

            John
McCain witnessed that kind of confidence in Vietnam: the courage to fight on
unfamiliar terrain, the will to spend freely, the faith in hearts and minds. He
spent years in a prison camp paying the price of those ambitions. He learned
the skepticism of the soldier. Like Bradley, McCain is an idealist. But unlike
Bradley, he came away from the 1960s chastened by nobility's limits. McCain
sees a world not of "new possibilities, guided by goodness" but of threats
abroad and hubris at home. To those who believe gun control will cure school
violence, he replies that the Internet is full of Web sites illustrating how to
build pipe bombs. To those who promise big tax cuts based on projected
surpluses, he replies that the government must first pay off its debts and
trust funds.

            Having
experienced war firsthand, McCain respects prudence more than bravado. He sees
the battles before him as tests not of manhood but of strategy and discipline.
His objective is to get the job done. He saw that Iowa was a quagmire. He saw
that New Hampshire, with its open primary and penchant for mavericks, was more
favorable terrain. The book on presidential politics says a candidate must
compete in Iowa to be taken seriously. But soldiers throw out the book all the
time. So McCain spurned Iowa. He gambled that he could raise enough money and
drum up enough support in the New Hampshire polls to guarantee his credibility
until the primary.

            
McCain's mantra is that he's willing to fight. "I am not afraid," he repeated
over and over in his announcement speech last fall. But his strategic advantage
is the opposite: Having proved his courage as a soldier, he can get away with
ducking fights as a candidate. No one who avoided the Vietnam draft by signing
up as an Army journalist or Texas Air Guardsman can call a POW a coward. So
McCain's fellow candidates gave him a bye on Iowa. And just in case anyone in
the press corps thought of accusing McCain of chickening out, he framed his
evasion of Iowa as a sacrifice he had to endure for his principled opposition
to ethanol subsidies.

            McCain
got 5 percent of the Republican vote in Iowa last night. Bradley got 35 percent
of the Democratic vote. Yet the media consensus is that McCain is ready for
Bush in New Hampshire, while Bradley has suffered a grievous blow and faces the
likelihood of a conclusive defeat next week. Front pages and TV pundits now
speak of Bradley in the past tense while bubbling with excitement over a
Granite State showdown for George W. Bush, Steve Forbes, and McCain. "Tonight,
I have a little more humility, but no less confidence that I can win and do the
job," Bradley conceded as the unhappy returns came in. The confidence may well
be warranted. But the humility may have come too late. 

         
      
   
