
   
   
      
         
            Bill Bradley's SAT Scores

            The papers of the late Kingman Brewster Jr., who
was president of Yale in the '60s and '70s, include a letter from one E. Alden
Dunham III, a former director of admissions at Princeton. Dunham argued that
Ivy League universities were overemphasizing the importance of SAT scores. For
example, Dunham wrote, consider a recent Princeton graduate named Bill
Bradley.

            "Here is a guy who graduated Magna Cum Laude in
history, the greatest basketball player in the Ivy Colleges, Rhodes Scholar,
probably a governor of Missouri someday-and all with a 485 verbal SAT!"

            Bill Bradley, the
thinking presidential candidate, scored a 485 verbal on his SAT? That's lower
than George W. Bush, the allegedly slow-witted presidential candidate. As
reported recently in The New Yorker , Bush got an SAT verbal score of
566.

            So what conclusions should we draw? The important
conclusions aren't about whether Bradley is really smart or Bush is really
dumb. They're about ways in which these two are actually similar. Above all,
both of them are beneficiaries of affirmative action. A 566 verbal would not
have gotten you into the Yale Class of 1968, especially with mediocre
prep-school grades, if you weren't also the son-and grandson, for good
measure-of a Yale alumnus. Likewise a 485 verbal wouldn't get you into the
Princeton Class of 1965, if you weren't also a star basketball player.

            By the
time Bradley applied to college in the early '60s, selective schools such as
Princeton and Yale viewed themselves as intellectual training grounds, not the
clubby enclaves of previous times. In this new era, a score below 500 on either
the verbal or math section of the SAT normally meant rejection. A 1960 New
Yorker article described the case of an African-American applicant to Yale
who was valedictorian and president of his high-school class and a stellar
athlete to boot. His application was rejected-because his 488 SAT average
"would certainly be the lowest in the entire Yale class." But the cutoff point
was more flexible for top athletes, for alumni "legacies," and starting in the
late '60s, for blacks and other minorities.

            This leads to the following non-multiple-choice question
for Bradley and Bush: If you got into an Ivy League college for reasons other
than "qualifications"-narrowly defined as grades and test scores-what is so
terrible about bending the same rules on behalf of African-Americans? Bradley
would probably have an easier time with this question than Bush, because as a
Democrat he is not required to believe that "reverse discrimination" is
necessarily a terrible thing, and because athletic talent can plausibly be seen
as a legitimate aspect of "merit," while choosing a father who went to Yale
cannot. But both examples undercut the argument against affirmative action.

            The examples of Bradley
and Bush also illustrate the fallacy of taking the SAT as a measure of
intelligence or much of anything else-let alone of qualification to be
president of the United States. This is not because Bradley scored worse than
Bush, but because both have led successful lives and are patently better
qualified for the presidency than many citizens with higher scores.

            Of course, any analysis
of individual SAT results must be taken with a grain of salt. Bradley and Bush
sat for the test in the days before score-raising courses like Kaplan and
Princeton Review. The SAT has been "recentered" in recent years, boosting
overall scores by up to a hundred points. Bradley, knowing he would be offered
athletic scholarships at dozens of non-Ivy schools, may not have taken the test
seriously. And in any case, Bush and Bradley actually scored quite respectably
when considered apart from the lofty standards of Ivy Leaguers. Both were
probably in the top third of all test-takers and would have been in the top
quarter (at least) if the SAT had been administered to all high-school
seniors.

            All the SAT even purports to measure is likely first-year
college grades. Indeed, the test admirably predicted the freshman year academic
difficulties of both Bradley and Bush. While Bush remained mired in a
"Gentleman's C" groove for the duration of his undergraduate years, Bradley was
able to pull himself out of his first-year struggles by dint of hard effort and
went on to an honors degree and a Rhodes scholarship.

            Judging from their undergraduate careers alone, you
might well argue that the examples of Bill Bradley and George W. Bush
illustrate a subtler point about affirmative action than mere thumbs-up or
thumbs-down. That is, affirmative action is more likely to succeed when it
takes into account personal qualities like drive and motivation, which may not
be captured on the SAT. Affirmative action is likely to fail when it is merely
a special preference bestowed upon those who have the right parents, whether
"right" means educational pedigree or skin color.

            Even four decades later,
Bradley's appeal as a presidential candidate-contrary to some of his own
campaign slogans-is not that he was ever the epitome of effortless cerebral and
athletic superiority but that he has made the most of his talents. No test,
whether it takes the form of the SAT or a pop quiz on foreign affairs, is
conclusive proof of a person's potential. Scores alone cannot be the sole basis
for making decisions about college admissions, hiring decisions, or
presidential elections. Affirmative action (even for athletes and preppies)
sometimes has a place in this land of second chances, where anyone can grow up
to be president. Bill Bradley and George W. Bush ought to know.

         
      
   
