
   
   
      
         
            No. 370: "Hot Spot"

             

             

            

               Using a helicopter equipped with a heat-seeking device, Suffolk County
cops located two cinderblock warehouses in Holbrook, Long Island, and arrested
two men for theft of electricity. What was going on in the warehouses?

            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 369)--"Pig 'n' Pearl":
            

            

               "At Harvard, they called it 'throwing the pearls to the swine,' " says
Dr. Alan Kling. What's it called off-campus? 
            

             

            
"Dating people from other schools."- Francis Heaney ( Jonathan E.
Snow and Colleen Werthmann had similar answers.)

            
"Speaking without an honorarium."- Tim Carvell
            

            
"Teaching. And what's so hurtful is not that they say that but that
they make those nasty little pig faces when they say it."- Jay D.
Majors 
            

            
"Freshman Natalie Portman attending her first frat-house kegger."- Matt
Sullivan
            

            
"There's an off-campus? Do people live there? What do they do all day?"- Dale
"Enmeshed in Harvard Final Exam Week" Shuger
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

             

            If you ran a Nexis
search or, like me, made up some data, you'd find that the two nongovernmental
organizations most assiduously covered by the New York Times are the
Vatican and Harvard. But while the Times swoons before these cradles of
power, the general public-by which I mean my deadbeat friends-disdains them
both, and it's not entirely jealousy. For one thing, within five minutes of
meeting one of these guys they inevitably let you know: I attended the College
of Cardinals. Or the constant name-dropping: my old roommate, Stinky, is the
papal nuncio. Or the vanity disguised as humility: Does this vestment make me
look fat? Or the way, 30 years later, 40 years later, some guy is still talking
about where he was an altar boy. We hate that sort of thing around the Penn
State Club. Puts us right off our scrapple.

            
               Medically Necessary, or
So My Accountant Tells Me, Answer
            

            Liposuction.

            And eye jobs, tummy
tucks, tooth whitening, wrinkle removal, and other cosmetic procedures. These
vanity treatments, once scorned around the med school, are now enjoying
increased respect because there's money in them. Doctors weary of the
income-limiting effects of HMOs find it more lucrative to deliver unnecessary
medicine to rich folks who pay for it themselves. "Now, in terms of survival,
it is what you do," said Kling, who has a dermatology and cosmetic surgery
practice on Park Avenue. "And of course by 'survival' I mean able to afford a
solid gold hat like the one on my pet monkey, over there in the Jacuzzi filled
with champagne," he did not add.

            
               Garden Statements
Extra
            

            Tuesday, Jan. 18, was
the last day New Jersey Gov. Christine Todd Whitman could act on bills passed
during the legislative session that just ended. Which of the following did she
sign, and which did she veto?

            
               Bills
            

            1.   Police may stop drivers for not wearing a
seatbelt.

            2.   "Driving while black" reduced from felony to
misdemeanor.

            3.   Minors may be fined $25 for purchase or
possession of cigarettes.

            4.   Judges may require ignition locks on cars of
convicted drunk drivers.

            5.   Bruce Springsteen named state tree.

            6.   Three-year statute of limitations on parking
tickets.

            7.   "Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get Camden"
named state song.

            8.   Underage drinking on private property
prohibited.

            9.   Cherry Hill Mall named state tree because
Bruce Springsteen is so damned sensitive.

            10.  "I'm Black and I'm
Proud, Don't Shoot!" named new state motto.

            
               Whitman Action
            

            1.   Signed.

            2.   Not an actual bill.

            3.   Pocket vetoed.

            4.   Signed.

            5.   Not an actual tree.

            6.   Signed.

            7.   People in Camden too poor to sing, can only
afford to hum.

            8.   Vetoed.

            9.   Ignored on flimsy grounds that no such bill
exists.

            10.  Ignored; State
Police so damned sensitive about nonexistent bills.

            
               Quote of the Day
for Days We Feel Like Having a Quote Extra
            

            "You don't see fancy
high-society types at a camel fight; look-it's Donald Trump!"- Omer Demir,
Turkish fight fan (as quoted in the New York Times , except for the part
about Donald Trump)
            

            
               Cold Comfort
Ongoing Extra
            

            Participants are still
invited to devise a photo caption cliché of the "Winter Turns Cold; People Don
Hats, Gloves" variety that should run in any news outlet. Results to run
tomorrow if my eyelids don't become frost-encrusted as I bundle up against
blustery Arctic winds and walk in front of a bus stalled by frigid air, then
stagger to the pavement, trip over a frozen dog, and break my spine.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Faculty disdain for students; student disdain for
students at other schools. 

         
      
   
