
   
   
      
         
            Downsizing Hell&nbsp;

            
               
                  Time , Jan.
31
            

            The
cover
piece regurgitates the conventional wisdom on the presidential
candidates. Bill Bradley is running on a "goodness platform," George W. Bush
"believes Republicans were put on earth to cut taxes," etc. … An
article
argues that Bradley has crippled his campaign by spending too much money and
time in Iowa. … An article
on the hyped-to-the-hilt launch of Oxygen notes the obstacles to the women's
cable channel's success. Despite the promise of an Oprah Winfrey show, a yoga
program, and Web tie-ins, the channel will debut in only 10 million homes and
faces a powerful competitor in Lifetime.

            
               
                  Newsweek , Jan.
31
            

            The
cover
story says that vitamin E, estrogen, and anti-inflammatory drugs reduce
the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. Pharmaceutical companies are also
rushing to develop medications that will stall the disease by slowing the brain
plaque formation that causes Alzheimer's. … In an essay ,
Maureen Reagan reveals that Ronald Reagan is losing his motor skills and can no
longer put his thoughts into words. … A profile
describes how Israeli-American Lyor Cohen became "the most powerful executive
in hip-hop." Clever street-marketing techniques and "all-out advocacy of his
artists" earned him the loyalty of superstar rappers such as Jay-Z and Foxy
Brown.

            
               
                  U.S. News &
World Report , Jan. 31
            

            The
cover
story predicts that hell will survive, despite its downsizing. Pope
John Paul II envisions hell as a state of perpetual angst rather than as a
fiery pit. Most Americans agree that the netherworld is merely "an anguished
state of existence." … A piece argues
that prosperity and nationwide effervescence have "softened the political
culture." Both parties are advocating a blend of tax cuts and social
investment.

            
               
                  The New Yorker ,
Jan. 31
            

            A
profile portrays George W. Bush as a man driven by the desire to avenge his
father and to best the intellectual elite who bugged him in college. Bush is
the last of the silver-spooners, born to privilege before meritocracy ended
easy access to elite universities and golden-ring jobs. "He'll come to the
presidency with a lighter résumé than anybody has in at least a hundred years."
… An article weighs David Hockney's ingenious theory that Ingres and
Caravaggio used refracting technology to trace the outlines of their subjects.
Hockney argues that the assured lines in Ingres' sketches are optical evidence
that his work was "lens-assisted." There is no known documentary evidence to
support Hockney's claim.

            
               
                  Business Week ,
Jan. 31
            

            The
cover story describes how Europe is cultivating its high-tech economy. Ireland
is the world's second-largest software exporter, Barcelona is a center for
e-startups, and Strasbourg is sprouting biotech firms. Monetary union and
relaxed fiscal policy are sparking the boom. … An article applauds a new
commercial artificial-vision system. For about $50,000, the blind can have a
circuit board inserted in their brains that will stimulate the visual cortex
and produce grainy black-and-white images out of optical data captured through
a tiny camera. The product could make the blind more independent.

            
               
                  Weekly Standard ,
Jan. 31
            

            The

cover story calls for renewed dedication to planetary exploration. The
Mars Polar Lander disaster threatens to cripple NASA's space exploration
program, which has struggled since the "national psychic letdown that followed
the moon landings." Colonizing other worlds would be "the ultimate
adventure."

            
               
                  The Nation , Feb.
7
            

            An
editorial
advocates the redistribution of political power through a $100-$200
campaign-contribution tax credit. (Today, contributions to political campaigns
are not tax-deductible.) A tax credit would increase public confidence in
government by enabling ordinary Americans to participate in the political
process. … The cover story blames
public apathy on the professionalization of politics. Polling has whittled
politics into a science, and money has monstrously deflated the importance of
grassroots support.  

            
               
                  New Republic ,
Jan. 31
            

            The
cover
story applauds John McCain's ideological apostasy. McCain opposes GOP
orthodoxy on campaign-finance reform and tax cuts. Unlike George W. Bush,
McCain preaches fiscal conservatism, advocates universal health insurance, and
refuses to divert public school funds to private voucher programs. His
candidacy has started a healthy debate within Republican ranks. … An
article
blasts the latest campaign-finance abuses. Although Bill Bradley accepted the
single biggest bundle ($209,500 from Goldman Sachs), Bush is "the undisputed
bundling king." (
                  Slate
               's "" explains why bundling corrodes
democracy.) … A piece
mocks the anti-campaign McCain is waging in Iowa. To lower expectations for the
upcoming caucus, his representatives deny they are even organizing
supporters.

            
               
                  Economist, Jan.
22
            

            The
cover
editorial argues that the level of debt in Japan and the United States
leaves the world's two biggest economies vulnerable to economic crises.
America's Fed should raise interest rates to discourage further borrowing.
… The cover
story warns that the next debt crisis is likely to occur in Japan or
the United States. Japan's stimulus packages have widened the government's debt
to 128 percent of GDP. Inordinate government borrowing discourages private
investment. Last year, America's private-sector debt was 103 percent of
personal income. Soaring private debt will "amplify any economic downturn."
… An article
condemns former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl for harboring secret party bank
accounts and refusing to divulge the names of donors. Corrupt party financing
"strikes at the heart of democracy." Kohl's misdeeds have earned him the name
"Don Kohleone."

            
               
                  Rolling Stone ,
Feb. 3
            

            The
cover story reveals that David Crosby fathered the two kids of Melissa
Etheridge and her partner Julie Cypher. Crosby gave his sperm to Etheridge and
her longtime girlfriend because he wanted to encourage lesbian parenting.
Crosby comments, "I think everyone will understand, except maybe the Christian
Coalition."  

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , Jan. 23
            

            The
cover story chronicles Al Gore's remedial education in politics. The early
incompetence of the Gore campaign forced the candidate to eschew his
ambivalence about politicking and come "to terms with his outer politician."
Gore's political performances often "reek of the greasepaint he rightly
scorns," but there are signs "that he can make a style of substance." …
An article champions former Los Angeles Times publisher Otis Chandler's
decision to speak out against the paper's current management. Chandler's
protest against the crude commercialization of the Times has made him "a
latter-day hero to many newspaper journalists." (
                  Slate
               's ""
criticizes the Chandler cult.) … A piece ridicules "fauxhemians"--rich
folks who dress up conspicuous consumption "in the artfully tattered guise of
the downscale and democratic." Example: the new VW Beetle.
(
                  Slate
               's "" laments the decline of genuine American bohemians.) 


             

            
               
                  Harper's ,
February 2000
            

            An
excerpt of Oval Office recordings captures Richard Nixon's most hateful
ravings. On Chicanos: "They're dishonest, but … [t]hey don't live like a bunch
of dogs, which the Negroes do live like." On Catholicism: Popes "were layin'
the nuns; that's been goin' on for years, centuries." … A George W. Bush
cover story argues that Bush's record of crony capitalism is a poor omen for
his presidency. Despite "catastrophic losses," Bush's oil company was
repeatedly bailed out by businessmen who hoped to profit from his influence. By
hiking his share in the Texas Rangers from 1.8 percent to 12 percent, the
governor's cronies helped him realize a 2,400 percent return on his investment.
Bush appointees used their state power to benefit GOP donors.

         
      
   
