
   
   
      
         
            Flytrap on Capitol Hill

            The dirty little secret of
my journalistic career is that, despite having lived in Washington for 23 years
and having been a reporter for five, I have never seen a president in the
flesh. (Well, I watched a Clinton speck through binoculars during his first
inauguration, and I once saw George Bush running, but he was still vice
president.) Today is my chance to remedy that.

            The
president is visiting Capitol Hill for a private session with House Democrats.
Everyone knows Clinton won't say anything to the press assembled outside, but
the horde has gathered anyway. We are hoping that he'll tell the Democratic
House members something about the scandal in private, and they will pass it on
to us.

            By the time I arrive at 9:15 a.m., the president is already
inside the conference room. (He ducked the press and entered through a side
door.) Nearly 100 reporters are swarming outside, and a dozen cameras are
trained on the microphone bank by the room's exit. (Capitol Hill security is
treating the press with all the respect we have come to expect: We are penned
behind Tensators, and anyone who dares step past the guide ropes is yelled at,
then moved back by Capitol police officers. Even Bob Schieffer, star of CBS
news, is herded like livestock.)

            When reporters gather, rumors
follow. Among the utterly unsubstantiated rumors circulating today: 1)
The FBI found DNA on the dress; and 2) Clinton aides are quietly calling
members of Congress and asking how they would respond to a mea
culpa .

            Cameramen
and reporters buttonhole members as they begin trickling out around 10, and it
is immediately and disappointingly obvious that the president said nothing
about Topic A, and his Democratic allies didn't ask him about it. One by one
the Dems file past, and one by one they are drilled with the same question by
the 100-mouthed monster: "Was there any discussion of the president's, ah,
legal troubles?"

            
And one by one they answer.

            Gene Green of Texas: "No
discussion at all. ... No one brought it up. ... NOTHING was brought up. ... AT
ALL."
            

            Ron Klink of Pennsylvania:
"No one did. ... No one talked about it. ... No one did. ... NO
ONE."
            

            Is it possible, dear reader,
that 200 Democratic members of Congress--who are congenitally incapable of
silence on any subject--can spend an hour in private with the president and not
talk about the 800 pound gorilla in the room? It is.

            After a
few of these futile interviews, I begin to discern three distinct genres of
nonanswer:

            
               The High-Minded
Dismissal. This is the favorite of the savvier Dems, notably House
Democratic Caucus head Vic Fazio and Minority Leader Richard Gephardt. How does
the high-minded dismissal work? Put on a tight, sour smile when Flytrap
question is asked, sigh deeply, then say exactly this sentence: "The
meeting was very, very positive. [Always "very, very." Never just "very."] We
discussed issues . Issues that the American People care
about: Social Security, the patient's bill of rights ..." It never fails: As
soon as the horde hears the words "Social Security," a silence falls. Pens stop
scratching, cameramen turn off their high beams. Then reporters turn away and
start talking to each other.

            
               The Logorrheic
Dismissal. The choice of more awkward Dems, this requires dismissing talk
of Lewinsky, then talking endlessly about why you're not talking about her.
Pennsylvania's Paul Kanjorski is today's master, lecturing reporters on why he
would not talk about Flytrap, why reporters should not ask him about it, and
why they should be ashamed for even mentioning the subject. Time spent on
Flytrap: 15 minutes. Time spent on the "issues voters in my district care
about": 4 minutes.

            
               Dismissal
Interruptus. Practiced by a few, perhaps more squeamish, members. This
involves a disjuncture between mouth and brain. The mouth becomes literally
incapable of talking about the scandal: "He has already addressed this once. He
announced that he did not have a relationship with, a ... a ...," trails off
one well-coiffed member. "There was no discussion. We did not get into any of
the diff ...," says Norm Dicks of Washington, swallowing his words. (If that
were my name, I might not want to talk about the scandal either.)

            Istill don't get to see the president. While the Democrats
are mouthing these sweet nothings by the front door, the president heads out a
side door and leaves through a blocked-off corridor. (Reporters used to
complain about Reagan avoiding the press. How long has it been since Clinton
answered a question?)

            Since I
was in the neighborhood, I thought I should drop by another scandal landmark on
the Hill: the House Judiciary Committee. Any presidential impeachment will go
through this committee. This is a prospect all America should anticipate with
glee. The Judiciary Committee offers as fine a display of intellect and
surliness as can be found in Washington. If impeachment comes, the Judiciary
Committee may or may not be judicious, but it will certainly be
intemperate.

            
Today's business is a class action lawsuit
reform bill that everyone seems to agree with. But the Judiciary Committee,
bless its heart, is a committee that can disagree to agree. After a few minutes
of collegial discussion, presided over with mountainous dignity by Rep. Henry
Hyde, R-Ill., Capitol Hill's genial uncle, the committee reverts to type.

            Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass.,
who has never found a subject he doesn't like arguing about (and has never
started an argument he didn't win), introduces an amendment. It would, and I'm
hazy on this, make it either harder or easier to dismiss class action suits.
Whichever it is, Virginia Rep. Bob Goodlatte vehemently disagrees. Goodlatte,
one of the new breed of Republicans who looks like a choirboy and acts like
Savanarola, counters Frank at high volume.

            Frank responds by yelling
Congress' parliamentary mantra: "Will the gentleman yield his time?" Since
Frank: 1) talks incredibly fast; 2) has a thick accent (Bayonne, N.J., not
Boston); and 3) seems to have cotton wool lodged in his cheeks, this sounds
more like "Wildegenmenyeelistime?" Goodlatte ignores Frank and raises his own
voice further. Frank counters by yelling the phrase again and again and again.
By the fifth iteration, all that remains is "Wigenyeel?" Meanwhile, Frank is
being goaded on by Democratic allies New York's Jerrold Nadler and California's
Howard Berman (a Jerry Springer lookalike, incidentally). Ohio Republican
Steven Chabot has buried his head in his hands and is yanking his cheeks in
frustration. Impeachment-crazed Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., who looks explosive even
in repose, has turned an even beetier shade of red than usual. (Whenever I see
Barr, I think of Yosemite Sam, steam pouring out of his ears.) In the corner,
Rep. Stephen Buyer, R-Ind., seems to be flirting with Rep. Mary Bono, R-Calif.
Hyde, who's trying desperately to be patient, is fingering his gavel like he
wants to heave it at Frank. And this is what happens when they agree!

         
      
   
