
   
   
      
         
            The Death of the Cuppa?

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            As newspaper headlines
around the world were dominated by the bomb attacks on U.S. embassies in Kenya
and Tanzania, a Monday op-ed piece in Nairobi's Daily Nation called the incident "a wake-up call." Set to "throw
Kenya into a political turmoil, it has turned out to be the unifying factor
that this country has so badly needed." After all, if Kenyans are appalled by
the damage caused by outsiders, it asked, why don't they similarly condemn the
internal ethnic clashes that, despite having cost thousands of lives, "did not
result in the kind of humanitarian response as has been seen in Nairobi the
past few days"?

            In the
wake of the bombings, Britain's Independent counsels against a precipitous response. In an
editorial Monday, the paper opines, "Revenge is a dish that
shouldn't be eaten at all; certainly not by a state. The Israelis have always
pursued it as a policy of deterrence as well as populist satisfaction. But can
anyone really say Arab terrorism has decreased as a result? The opposite is
probably true."

            In South America: Jamil Mahuad took over the Ecuadorian
presidency Monday. Meanwhile, his predecessor Fabián Alarcón appears to have
created a border crisis by sending Ecuadorian troops into Peruvian territory
late last week. (Ecuador denies the invasion.) El País of Spain described the apparent foray as "the most serious incident since
a short frontier conflict between the two countries cost the lives of dozens of
soldiers in 1995." According to Peruvian daily La República , Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, and the United States (who together form the Ecuador-Peru
Military Observation Mission, designed to guarantee peace between the feuding
countries) will stand firm against the Ecuadorian incursion. A Pentagon
spokesman declared that the "hemisphere's peace and stability cannot be
endangered by a confrontation that can be resolved at the meeting table."

            In addition to resolving the
frontier crisis, Peruvian President Alberto Fujimori must also name a new prime
minister. El País reported that Javier Valle Riestra, who held the
position for just two months and two days, resigned Friday. The naming of Valle
Riestra had been a surprise, since he was a political opponent of Fujimori's
military-supported party, but La República suggests his short term in office indicates "the opposition,
divided, weak, and confused, doesn't take proper advantage of the government's
mistakes."

            In another
Latin American transition, Andrés Pastrana assumed the presidency of Colombia
Friday, as guerrilla groups FARC and ELN bade farewell to his predecessor
Ernesto Samper with at least 20 attacks throughout the country. In an editorial
Sunday, La Nación of
Argentina was guardedly optimistic that Pastrana, who is supported by a
coalition, could bring reconciliation and reform to a nation wracked by
criminality, corruption, and inequality. "His success depends on the extent to
which he can assimilate into the political life of the country groups that
until now have been opposed to its institutions," it concluded.

            
In Canada, the continued decline in the value
of the "loonie" (Canadian dollar), which last Thursday experienced its largest
one-day plunge since the October 1995 referendum on Quebec separation, is at
the forefront of domestic concerns. Toronto's Globe and Mail reported
Saturday that the "latest slump ... has reawakened calls
for the country to adopt a fixed exchange rate, pegging the Canadian currency
at some set rate against its U.S. counterpart." However, the stability of a
pegged rate would come at the cost of Canadian independence: "By adopting a
fixed exchange rate, Canada would essentially cede control over monetary policy
to the United States Federal Reserve Board, yielding one more lever of economic
policy to international forces."

            The silly
season is clearly in full swing in Britain. Last week a leader in the
Independent called for a "campaign for real tea." Apparently,
consumption of the nation's signature drink is slipping--a victim of coffee
chic. The paper's tone was more funeral dirge than rallying cry: "One of the
more regrettable consumer fads of the 1990s has been the invasion of ersatz
American-style coffee bars, all stainless steel and froth and cool. Their
meretricious charms have proved all too attractive to us, especially for those
who want to live out a Sleepless in Seattle fantasy lifestyle in Wapping
or Wolverhampton. It looks all too much like a re-run of the grey squirrel
versus the native red or McDonald's versus the chippie. Now it is the espresso
macchiato versus the cuppa."

             

         
      
   
