
   
   
      
         
            Forgive and Forget?

            The dress, the dress. Hold
your horses for the dress. I'll get to it later.

            First, the new Flytrap
motto, brought to you by kindly inquisitor Sen. Orrin Hatch: "We are a
forgiving people."

            As
Flytrap II enters Week II, it is segueing gracefully into the second stage of
scandal: The initial glee of Clinton's enemies has matured into thoughtful
magnanimity. The sound of young conservatives baying for DNA has subsided. If
last week's theme was high dudgeon, this week's will be high-mindedness. The
Republicans' new strategy seems to be: (Possibly) Forgive and (Maybe)
Forget.

            The strategy, which Hatch, Sen. Arlen Specter, Bob Novak,
and others hinted at over the weekend, seems to go like this:

            The
president is trapped, and everyone else is embarrassed. The only remedy is a
presidential mea culpa (or rather, since the ones pushing the
culpa are not the person who would actually apologize, a tua
culpa ). If Clinton admits his affair to the grand jury and the American
public, explains that he lied to protect his daughter and wife, and apologizes
with sufficient breadth and--this is important--abjectness, then, well, we'll
probably forgive him and call off the dogs. On Meet the Press , Hatch
said that he and House Judiciary Chairman Henry Hyde (who would supervise
impeachment proceedings) are inclined to be forgiving (unless, of course, there
is evidence of other high crimes). Other Republicans, he implied, could also be
big-hearted.

            
Any time I find myself agreeing with Hatch
and Novak I grab my wallet, and the cynic in me says this magnanimity
may have been arrived at only after much jujitsu with public opinion polls. The
Forgive and Forget strategy has this virtue for Republicans: It is the only way
they're going to win a clean PR victory. The polls are impossible for them.
Surveys have been jiggered and rejiggered to find some way, any way, 50 percent
of Americans would back impeachment. No luck. The best effort so far was a
Wall Street Journal poll that found that 45 percent of Americans--up
from 39 percent last month!--would favor holding impeachment hearings if
Clinton had an affair and perjured himself. This is a number made absurd by the
fact that 1) A 6 percent rise is hardly a tidal wave; 2) in no universe is 45
percent a majority; 3) impeachment hearings are not impeachment; and 4) similar
polls registered impeachment support at 24 percent or 14 percent. This does not
a winning issue make.

            The only
poll that I've heard about that makes any sense, which may be the one the GOP
is reading, is the ABC News survey (I think) saying that 69 percent of
Americans would clear Clinton if he makes a clean breast of it.

            Whether they've reached their conclusion for cynical or
idealistic reasons, Hatch and Co. do seem to have hit on the only solution to
this mess, the only outcome that will punish Clinton adequately, satisfy his
persecutors enough to quiet them, and save us from two more years of this
horror. (All this assumes the allegations are true. Insert usual caveats here:
"till Aug. 17," "DNA testing by the FBI," "unreliable witness," etc.)

            Why would Clinton agree to
apologize?

            1) It would shock no one and
disappoint few to find out that Clinton and Lewinsky did have an affair despite
his earlier claims.

            2) Clinton has the rhetorical
grace to pull off such an apology in a way that doesn't seem phony (he'll blame
it on his own big heart, his fierce desire not to hurt wife and child).

            And most
important: 3) An apology cuts off Starr's investigations at the knees. Without
an apology, Clinton is doomed to enervating, fratricidal, interminable
impeachment hearings. An apology would prevent them. The Flytrap investigation
is the only part of Starr's work that America a) understands and b) actually
cares about. Would an admission of lying about Monica weaken Clinton's claims
in the other Starr matters? I doubt it. After a mea culpa , the public or
Congress are unlikely to muster much enthusiasm for chasing Clinton through the
dull, impenetrable thickets of Whitewater, Travelgate, and Filegate. Even if
Republicans decide later that they don't actually forgive and forget, it may be
too late. An apology could wipe away all the scandals but campaign finance.

            
There is no sign yet that the administration is
tempted by mea culpa/ Forgive and Forget. All leaks out of the White
House suggest that the president is sticking to his denial. Lanny Davis, the
closest thing to an official source who is talking, deflected the idea of an
apology when quizzed about it. But if the administration isn't buying, its
allies are. Democrats are matching Republicans big heart for big heart. Barney
Frank, the president's best friend in the House, has suggested that Clinton
should 'fess up if he had an affair, as has Leon Panetta. On This Week ,
George Stephanopoulos all but implored his former boss to cut his losses and
apologize.

            Will the White House come
around? If I were a betting man, I would wager that during this week, other
prominent Democrats--as they did when Clinton hesitated over Starr's
subpoena--will make increasingly obvious pleas for Clinton to apologize. And,
unless the dress is a red (navy blue) herring, I would wager that Clinton will
listen. Surely he's willing to tarnish the legacy he cares so much about in
order to save his presidency.

            Tomorrow: more on the
dress.

         
      
   
