
   
   
      
         
            Virility Tests

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and Friday
morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit
Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click
here.
            

            Viagra is now a household
word everywhere. This was proved Wednesday in New Delhi's Asian Age, which carried a
cartoon showing a sick-looking fellow identified as the Indian "coalition
government" being addressed by a doctor holding a phallic, rocketlike object
labeled "nuclear test." The caption: "This will definitely cure your ailment.
It's made with Viagra." On this, two days after India's first three underground
nuclear tests, the Asian 
               Age joined the rest of the Indian press
in praising the government for carrying out the tests and urging the rest of
the world to "welcome India, not isolate it." It said no one had ever doubted
that India and Pakistan were both de facto nuclear powers and that "the
simplest answer would be for both to emerge from a rather inadequate closet and
then sign the nuclear proliferation treaty."

            In an
editorial
the following day, after India had carried out two further nuclear tests, the
paper was rather less upbeat. It urged the government to cut down drastically
on spending and to devise an economic policy "attractive enough for foreign
investors to continue patronising India." It pointed out that Japan, not the
United States, is India's largest trade partner, that Japan had "categorically
counselled" New Delhi about six weeks ago not to proceed with the tests and
would now "take measures which correspond" with its outrage. "It is here that
Indian diplomacy faces its severest test, because unless there is a concrete
action plan to tackle the political and economic fallout of the tests, the
country will be faced with a real crisis."

            The Times of India said Thursday that U.S., Japanese, and German
sanctions against India were "hardly going to cause sleeplessness in New
Delhi," but it also urged the Indian government to "adopt a more welcoming
stance towards foreign capital than it has so far." The newspaper attacked "the
hypocrisy which governs US policy on nuclear matters" and said "no country has
the right to dictate to another what policies it can and cannot follow."
Therefore, the U.S. move "needs to be condemned in the strongest possible
terms."

            Another
Indian paper, the Deccan
Chronicle, said it is in India's interest that Pakistan also join the
nuclear club. "If the theory is correct that a credible nuclear deterrent makes
war unnecessary, if not impossible, then another war between India and Pakistan
will automatically be unnecessary if both acquire nuclear weapon capability."
The same paper quoted a minor Indian government minister--Bandaru Dattatreya,
union minister of state for urban development--as stating at a press conference
after the tests that a war would bring unity to India. "We need not have to be
afraid of wars," he said. "If there is a war, we have to fight." Asked by a
surprised reporter if he really meant what he said, the minister replied, "Yes,
I mean it. ... I am on record."

            
The Pakistani newspaper Dawn counseled prudence and
said it was
reassuring that India's nuclear tests had "failed to push Pakistan into some
sort of knee-jerk reaction." But it added Pakistan must "undertake a
wide-ranging review of its foreign policy, economic planning and defence and
security strategy" if it is to be "adequately prepared to meet the critical
situation which India's brazen nuclear ambitions have created in South Asia."
In an op-ed piece, Dawn commentator Sultan Ahmed said that India's
aims mirror U.S. strategy during the arms race with the former Soviet Union--to
bring about the economic collapse of the enemy. Pakistan's spending on defense
is 6 percent of the gross national product, while India's is only 3.3 percent,
he said; but India's armed forces were double the size of Pakistan's.
"Ultimately, a strong defence needs a strong economy," Ahmed added. "Japan's
military spending is one per cent of the GNP but that is equal to 35 billion
dollars or ten times what Pakistan spends on defence."

            In Japan, the daily Mainichi Shimbun
condemned India in an editorial Thursday for "foolish actions, which go against the
universal desire to wipe such weapons of mass destruction from the face of the
Earth." But it also attacked the United States "for excluding certain tests
that do not involve the detonation of nuclear devices" from the provisions of
the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. It went on to point out that the U.S. Senate
has yet to ratify the treaty:

            The United States is the
world's largest nuclear power, and its failure to take nuclear disarmament
seriously provides encouragement to countries like India. We must insist that
the nuclear powers meet their disarmament responsibilities in order to prevent
other Indias from emerging in the future.

            In Australia, the Age of Melbourne said the tests
made "everyone on this planet feel less safe" and that India's "flaunting of
its nuclear credentials comes down to nothing more reputable than a desire for
national prestige."

            In Hong Kong, the South China Morning Post, under the
headline "U.S. Policy Blown Wide Open," ran an opinion piece by Simon Beck
saying the tests have "driven a truck through what Washington believed to be
its well-conceived South Asia policy." It said that cancellation of President
Clinton's planned visit to India this fall would be disastrous and only
intensify nationalist fervor in that country. "Instead of feigning horror over
this week's developments, the time is ripe for Mr. Clinton to accept the
realities of another major member of the nuclear club, and use his visit to
make sure its government knows that its future lies in forging closer ties to
the democratic West," Beck concluded.

            In Britain, where the
government has refused to impose sanctions on India, the Times said that President
Clinton needed British support and "should have it."

             

         
      
   
