
   
   
      
         
            Slate Exclusive

            The grand jurors are not the
only people who heard Monica Lewinsky in the courthouse this morning. I present
a scoop--Monica's only public, audible statement: "Can I put a phone in
here? Is that OK?"
            

            More
later on how I collected this tidbit. First, an exegesis. Monica asked these
two questions to the marshal manning the X-ray machine at the courthouse door.
They are not, admittedly, gripping remarks. They are not, sadly, a muttered
"I'm going to destroy El Schmucko!" Still, let's milk these 10 words for
all they're worth.

            First, a critical question of interpretation: From my sense
of her body language and tone, Monica was clearly checking to make sure the
phone would not disturb the X-ray machine. She was not asking whether
the X-ray would damage the phone. She was not, in short, making a selfish,
materialistic inquiry.

            That
settled, what do we glean from her two sentences? 1) Monica is the kind of
woman who has a cell phone; 2) Monica is deferential to authority; and 3)
Monica is not feeling too confident. She didn't need to ask "Is that OK?" The
first question sufficed, but Monica felt so unsure that she asked the second
question.

            
The more revealing aspect of her comments: her
voice, which has remained a tantalizing mystery. From 40 paces down a corridor,
it sounded like the voice of a typical educated 25-year-old woman, with none of
the Valley Girl stupidity or helium-squeakiness it has been rumored to
have.

            This
analysis is, of course, an absurd exercise, but no more absurd than anything
else about today. Because of Monica's testimony, this is the biggest day in
Flytrap since the scandal broke. But it is also a pointless day--or at least a
pointless morning. (Monica's lawyers have called a press conference for 5:30
p.m., after my deadline.) Every camera crew, TV correspondent, and newspaper
reporter gathered on Pennsylvania Avenue knows, to a nearly perfect certainly,
that we will report nothing of substance this morning. The mob has assembled to
see Monica get out of a car, open a courthouse door, walk 10 feet down a
corridor, and disappear. Something momentous may be happening in the grand jury
chamber but, as far as news goes, it is a complete vacuum. No matter: Her
presence makes the D.C. federal courthouse the undisputed center of the media
world.

            Ifigure that if I'm going to be part of a pointless media
frenzy, I might as well do it right. So I have arrived at the courthouse at 5
a.m. to scope the scene. I am not the first. A gaggle of journalists camps by
the side door. Why? Two words: "The List." The List, which holds 10 names,
filled as soon as it was opened Wednesday afternoon. Representatives from ABC,
CBS, NBC, the Associated Press, the Washington Post , and other outlets
have pulled all-nighters to protect their spots. (A Newsday reporter
arrives at 5:30 in hope of getting Listed. As he tries vainly to cajole the
marshal, another newspaper reporter gloats, "He's totally screwed.")

            In fact,
the List is a dubious honor, an excellent example of the pathetic running
battle between the Flytrap authorities and the Flytrap media. The Flytrap
authorities are winning: The List entitles you to stand in the hall outside the
third-floor grand jury room (everyone else must wait on the first floor).
Listees may not eat, drink, or sit down. They may not speak to lawyers or
witnesses. They cannot even see anyone enter or leave the grand jury chamber,
because Judge Norma Holloway Johnson has installed partitions to block the
view. The Listees have been reduced to staring at the shiny marble walls in
hopes of seeing the reflection of a lawyer or witness.

            
By 7, the rabble has arrived. Channel 11 from
Pittsburgh. The Action News team from Raleigh-Durham, N.C. I count 25 TV trucks
and 53 TV cameras. Because no one knows where Monica will arrive, the cameras
cover every line of sight to every courthouse door. CNN has even mounted a
camera on a cherry picker to get a better shot of the most likely entrance. A
minute before 7, the courthouse plaza lights up like a fairyland: All the
20-odd correspondents are bathed in TV light as they begin delivering their
morning spiels.

            As I
watch this, I am waylaid by two wispy-bearded, chin-pierced college kids, Spike
and Jimi. They are interns from the local alternative rock radio station, sent
to make trouble. They hand me a phone, where I find myself live on the air. I
sputter through an interview with the disc jockey. They start chanting into a
megaphone behind me: "If you can't find the sperm, let the worm finish his
term!" and other, less printable, rhymes. Spike and Jimi are the only street
theater going, but the cameras ignore them.

            By 8, a few of us have adjourned to the first floor of the
courthouse in anticipation of Monica's arrival. An AP reporter spreads the
latest unsubstantiated rumor: Monica had a breakdown last night and won't be
testifying. False: A couple of minutes later, cell phone reports say she has
left the Watergate. Only 15 of us are waiting inside the courthouse. The TV
folks have stayed outside, because cameras are banned, and others haven't
arrived yet, because they don't expect Monica till 9. Too bad for them.

            A guard
shoos us well back from the door where she will enter, and at 8:25 a black
sport utility vehicle pulls up outside the glass door. Monica gets out first
and opens the courthouse door. She is wearing a blue suit--not quite navy blue,
but a bit closer to that notorious color than I would have chosen--and white
pumps and is carrying a white purse. She looks neither relaxed nor nervous.

            
It is weird, inexplicably weird, to see her in
the flesh. The 15 of us, who had been talking loudly, fall into a spooky
silence when she opens the door. (It is during this quiet that I hear her two
questions.) The silence continues for 30 seconds till she walks around the
corner and disappears into a closed back corridor, followed by her legal team.
At that point the reporters break ranks, some sprinting up the stairs, some
(like me) clambering into an elevator in hopes of seeing her enter the grand
jury room. No such luck. She's inside and hidden, and there's nothing more to
see.

            The
courthouse is not the only political circus in Washington this morning. After
Monica vanishes, I stroll to Capitol Hill to see the Rep. Dan Burton spectacle.
Burton, who's the chairman of the House Government Reform and Oversight
Committee, the force behind the campaign finance investigation, and an
all-around nutter, wants his committee to cite Attorney General Janet Reno for
contempt of Congress. Reno, Burton claims, is breaking the law by refusing a
subpoena for confidential FBI and Justice Department reports about the campaign
finance investigation. The contempt measure is expected to pass but,
appropriately for this theatrical day, it is a theatrical gesture: The full
House is highly unlikely to approve such an inflammatory action.

            The contempt scheme is such a stupid, vicious, wrongheaded
idea that it is a joy to watch Rep. Henry Waxman, Burton's Democratic nemesis,
grandstand against it. "For the past two years we have seen this committee
systematically demean and abuse almost every tool of congressional
investigations. ... Today, Mr. Chairman, you are demeaning perhaps the most
serious power we have--the power of contempt," Waxman announces to the
committee. "Today if the Republican majority supports the chairman, our actions
will be added to the growing list of travesties that this committee has
inflicted on the oversight and congressional process. We have made a shambles
of any pretense of seriousness and dignity.

            "The chairman seems to relish
every fight and go out of his way to provoke every imaginable showdown. What
does it accomplish? Nothing. Any fight, of course, attracts some media
attention. But are we doing anything of consequence today? No."

            And that, I suppose, is
today's moral.

         
      
   
