
   
   
      
         
            Fifty-First State?

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday morning
delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit Central"
(Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click here.
            

            Taking up a cause recently
promoted by its Canadian proprietor Conrad Black, the conservative British
Daily Telegraph (circulation 1 million) argued Britain should apply for membership--or associate
membership--in the North American Free Trade Agreement. It said in an editorial
Monday that Black's proposal was supported not only by Margaret Thatcher,
several leading members of the opposition Conservative Party, and Britain's
largest circulation newspaper (Rupert Murdoch's Sun ) but also by House
Speaker Newt Gingrich and Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas.

            The
notion that the United States wants Britain to remain part of a European bloc
is "becoming out of date," the paper said. "US commentators are waking up to
the fact that the [European Union] contains an important anti-American
component. Henry Kissinger, perhaps the most influential of post-war foreign
policy thinkers, recently warned against further European integration." The
Telegraph said the case for "associating with the New World" doesn't
rest simply on an affinity of culture, language, or political values but is
based on hard economic calculation.

            Black's Israeli newspaper, the Jerusalem Post, congratulated Jordan's ailing King Hussein Monday on the fact
that the longevity of his rule--46 years next month--"has been achieved mainly
through consensual rule rather than despotism." The paper's editorial recalled
American journalist Walter Lippmann on the death of Franklin D. Roosevelt--"the
genius of a good leader is to leave behind him a situation which common sense,
without the grace of genius, can deal with successfully"--and suggested Hussein
has achieved this.

            India's
Asian Age led its front page Monday with the news that India plans to
cash in on the Viagra craze by exporting its essential chemical ingredient to
countries not yet covered by Pfizer's patent. In a report from Chennai
(Madras), the paper said Orchid Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals plans to start
exporting sildenafil citrate, the active ingredient in Viagra, to countries in
South America and eastern Europe at the end of August. Orchid has had trade
inquiries from China, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Bangladesh; it has the necessary
licenses from the Indian government to manufacture and export the chemical and
has already started importing the raw materials.

            
In an editorial about a U.S. decision to
suspend all scientific collaboration with India and to send several Indian
scientists home, the Asian Age said "few scientists from the erstwhile
Soviet Union faced such treatment as has been meted out to Indian scientists
now, even at the height of the Cold War." If the United States continues to
behave like an international bully, "the result will certainly not be greater
peace and cohesion in the world: that much is for sure."

            
Pakistan's main English-language newspaper, Dawn, focused Monday on the crisis in Kosovo, Yugoslavia. Accusing the
United States and other Western governments of "inexplicable delay" in checking
"Serbia's relentless offensive" against Kosovar Muslims, it warned that if the
world community continues "to waver and dither over what is happening in Kosovo
for long," it will find a "Bosnia-like conflict in [its] lap."

            The Russian newspaper Segodnya , commenting on Vice
President Al Gore's visit to Russia, said President Boris Yeltsin, vacationing
in Karelia, had deliberately distanced himself from Gore because he didn't want
to look as if he was begging for American money. But the daily said this "must
have left an unfavorable impression."

            In Japan, Mainichi Shimbun
criticized the new Liberal Democratic Party leader Keizo Obuchi
for being "devoid of fresh ideas" for reviving the Japanese economy. "Obuchi
should remember that while the Japanese public has an intense desire to see an
economic upturn, it is not waiting for easy-to-swallow solutions," the paper
said in an editorial. "Even if the measures implemented require painful
sacrifices, people are willing to bear them if they promise a secure and
healthy future."

            The Japan Times said Tuesday
that Chinese Prime Minister Zhu Rongji "may be obliged to reconsider his pledge
to hold steady the value of the currency. That in turn could--most likely
would--trigger another round of devaluations in Asia and set back the region's
recovery." It concluded, "Japan cannot afford to stand idly by: China's
difficulties make ours look small in comparison."

             

         
      
   
