
   
   
      
         
            Lame Ducks, Etc.

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            Under the main front-page
headline "Clinton Bombed Civilians on Purpose," the liberal Observer of
London reported Sunday that the president knew he was bombing a civilian target
when he authorized the U.S. attack on a Sudan chemical plant last week. Tests
he had ordered showed there was no nerve gas on the site, the paper claimed. An
editorial described the missile attacks as a disaster: "The hasty resort to
violence shows that yet again the US is failing to grasp the political reasons
for Islamic anti-Americanism. ... Until it addresses its failure to pressure
Israel into making concessions to legitimate Palestinian claims, and recognises
that the continuing presence of US troops in Saudi Arabia, the home of Mecca,
creates deep offence, ... the cycle of attack and retaliation will continue."
The conservative British Sunday papers the Sunday Times and the
Sunday Telegraph supported the missile strikes.

            La Repubblica of Rome
published an interview Sunday with Sheik Omar Bakri, described as Osama Bin
Laden's spokesman in London. Bakri has pledged global war against the United
States "until every American soldier has been withdrawn from Saudi Arabia and
the whole Persian Gulf and until the embargo which is starving the Muslim
people of Iraq has been lifted." Clinton, he predicts, will never be able to
lay his hands on Bin Laden's fortune--which he estimates at nearly $1
billion--because it is held in secret by various financial and commercial
agencies in Europe and the Arab world and managed by surrogates who don't even
know who Bin Laden is.

            Following President Boris Yeltsin's new purge of the
Russian government, his forthcoming meeting in Moscow with President Clinton is
being discussed in western European newspapers as a summit of two lame ducks.
Under the headline "The Blind Man and the Paralytic," an editorial in the Paris daily Libération called Yeltsin "a man old before his time,
diminished by sickness and by his obsession with power, who fails in everything
he does and who is leading his country to ruin." Clinton, it said, is hardly
less handicapped. "In contrast to the dollar, but just like the ruble, he is
devalued, ridiculed and lacking credibility," Libération said. "It is a
far from ideal position from which to negotiate with a partner who has nothing
more to lose and who cunningly exerts an effective blackmail by threatening
even greater chaos." In a front-page editorial in Sunday's La Repubblica
titled "The Crisis of the Lame Ducks," the paper's founder and former Editor
Eugenio Scalfari attributed the world's financial crisis to the absence
everywhere of political leadership.

            In Israel Sunday, the
conservative Jerusalem
Post said it is "a disgrace" that President Clinton's war against
terrorism is not getting the full backing "of all politicians in Congress, all
US allies in the democracies, and all its so-called friends in the Arab and
Islamic world." It said, "A 'Lewinsky motivation' can be dismissed as tabloid
trash--for except in the world of movies and conspiracy theories, that is not
how the vast machinery of United States intelligence, military, and diplomatic
services operate. In any case, since Clinton's presidential approval rating
remains barely dented by the Kenneth Starr investigation, it is nonsense to
suggest he needed a cruise missile strike against terrorists to enhance
it."

            By
contrast, the liberal daily Ha'aretz said Clinton's military initiative is "doomed to
failure" unless it is accompanied by diplomatic efforts to promote
reconciliation between Israelis and Arabs. "That," it said, "is America's
challenge."

            
In the Muslim world, the Pakistani daily
Dawn announced a
"new American doctrine of unilateral brinkmanship" by which the United States
claimed to be sole "international sheriff, judge and hangman, all at one and
the same time." It asked: "If the US is to replicate the judicial standards of
the Wild West across the global stage, what need for the flummery of the United
Nations and all the talk that goes with it of international law and morality?
If the US thus, in the best Hollywood tradition, is to shoot from the hip, why
not push the whole UN edifice into the Atlantic Ocean?" In Bangladesh, the
Daily Star called
the U.S. missile attacks "utterly injudicious and irresponsible" and "a wanton
display of vengeance by the world's only super-power."

            Russia's biggest-circulation
newspaper, Komsomolskaya
Pravda, gave a horrific account of the experiments inflicted on Soviet
cosmonauts in the 1960s. Their training, kept secret from even their wives,
involved making them lie motionless for two months with their heads lower than
their legs, keeping them for long periods in isolation chambers in total
darkness and silence, making them give samples of bone marrow and muscle and
bone tissue without anesthesia, and starving one man for 20 days while showing
him pictures of food. Only now are the stories leaking out, the paper said.

            Japan's
biggest daily newspaper, Asahi Shimbun, published an interview Sunday with Woody
Allen, who, asked to sum up the 20 th century in a single word,
replied, "Disappointing." He told interviewer Hiroki Fukuda that this century,
more than any other, has been steeped in blood and controlled by the power of
insanity. Its pre-eminent symbol is the concentration camp, or perhaps the
nuclear bomb, he added, and one cannot look forward to the 21 st
century with any optimism.

             

         
      
   
