
   
   
      
         
            Odd One Out

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday morning
delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit Central"
(Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click here.
            

            The United States came under
worldwide fire Monday for refusing to support a permanent international war
crimes tribunal. In London, the Financial Times criticized the United States' "unfortunately
petulant" opposition to the court, which was established by an accord signed in
Rome this weekend. Describing the agreement as "a landmark in the quest for a
more decent world," the FT said "there would be more reason to celebrate
... if the United States had been a signatory" instead of joining "China, Sudan
and Libya as one of the handful of countries voting against it." The
"superpower that sees itself as guardian of the world's conscience should think
again," the FT added. "Otherwise, it could jeopardise its claim to the
moral high ground in international affairs."

            Die Welt of Germany said Monday in
an editorial page article signed Katja Ridderbusch that "if the United States
wants to be consistent with its own pretensions, it has no choice but to
approve the idea of a world system of justice." And whether or not the United
States and the court "love each other," it predicted they will have to "work
together in both their interests."

            Passionately welcoming the agreement, the Times of India lamented
that the "intransigence of the US, Britain, France and other countries [flawed]
the court's mandate ... in several crucial respects." Its main complaint was
that an Indian proposal to rule the use of nuclear weapons a war crime was
rejected "by the five officially-recognised nuclear-weapon states." The
opposition was "completely irrational," said the paper, "[b]ut since the
nuclear five did not want their right to commit mass murder to be compromised
in any way, they ultimately had their way."

            In Israel,
under the headline "Another UN obscenity," an editorial in the conservative
Jerusalem Post
stridently condemned the Rome agreement's inclusion, on Arab initiative, of
a paragraph that defined as a war crime an occupying power's transfer of a
civilians to territory it has occupied. "This attempt to place the relocation
of Israelis to Judea and Samaria on the same moral plane as genocide and ethnic
cleansing is obscene," the paper said in an editorial Monday. It described the
U.S. failure to exempt its citizens and soldiers from the court's jurisdiction
as "a stinging diplomatic rebuff."

            
In Johannesburg, South Africa, the Saturday
Star published one of many extravagant eulogies of President Nelson Mandela
as he celebrated both his 80 th birthday and his marriage to Graça
Machel. Calling him a man "who came to be revered by kings and vagabonds
alike," the Star said: "Madiba, we wish you health, wealth, happiness
and, most of all, we wish you love. When we look at you, Mr. President, we see
all that is and can be good about our beloved country."

            The
Johannesburg
Star said in a Monday editorial marking World Population Day that the projected
increase in Africa's population from 758 million to 1,454 million between now
and the year 2025 (compared with an expected 28 million decline in Europe's
population over the same period to around 700 million) "need not spell only
doom and gloom." It said that if the widely used term "African renaissance"
signifies "a deliberate developmental revival" in Africa, the future of the
continent might still provide hope for all its people. But if "political
chicanery and corruption" continue, the term might be "soon enough consigned to
the already substantial scrap heap of meaningless African catch phrases."

            The Independent of London reported Monday that the queen of England may be restored as a
kind of sovereign to her former colony, the Republic of Fiji. Though committed
to keeping the country a presidential republic, the Great Council of Chiefs in
Suva might approve, in a two day meeting starting Tuesday, the queen's symbolic
return as "paramount chief." Last year Tuvalu, a chain of atolls in the South
Pacific, reincorporated the Union Jack into its own flag after people
criticized its removal, the paper said.

            The
British tabloids gave major coverage to a recent photograph of Cherie Blair,
the British prime minister's wife, showing her wearing a "bioelectric" pendant
round her neck to protect her from harmful energy rays. The Daily Mail
Monday quoted the pendant's inventor, chiropractor Dr. Charles Brown, as saying
that it "contains a 'magical configuration' of quartz and other crystals which
deflect electromagnetic radiation from modern office equipment--and counter
'negative vibes.' " The secret formula for the pendant was closely guarded by
its U.S. manufacturers, the Bioelectrical Shield Co., the newspaper said,
quoting its British representative as saying "he believed that Mrs. Blair had
decided to buy one after a recommendation from Hillary Clinton."

             

         
      
   
