
   
   
      
         
            Diversionary Action?

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            Thursday's U.S. airstrikes
against targets in Sudan and Afghanistan were met by strong protest in the
Pakistani press. According to Pakistan Press International, "large
anti-American demonstrations are underway in Pakistani cities ... condemning
America's violations of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Pakistan."
Dawn reported that
"Pakistan received the news of US attacks ... with a complete sense of shock."
According to Pakistani daily the News, Osama Bin Laden contacted one of its correspondents "on satellite phone at 9:00
pm on Thursday to convey his statement through another Islamic leader." Bin
Laden denied responsibility for the African bombings but called for the
continuation of "Jehad against Jews and Americans."

            The
airstrikes received qualified approval from most British newspapers. The
Times of London
described the attacks as the "beginning of America's fightback against
terrorism." In an editorial Friday, the newspaper said, "This was a legitimate
and necessary response which should not be understood as blind retaliation for
the appalling crimes committed in Kenya and Tanzania. It was far from blind;
and there is good reason to credit President Clinton's claim that this was a
pre-emptive assault on operational terrorist bases preparing to carry out
further attacks on American targets which would have cost, as they did in
Nairobi, the lives of hundreds of non-Americans as well."

            The Independent reported that "Tony Blair welcomed the US action. 'The atrocities
this month in Nairobi, Dar es Salaam and Omagh have shown the pain and
suffering terrorism can bring to innocent people,' he said. 'I strongly support
this American action against international terrorists.' " The story concluded
with a dispatch from Independent correspondent Jason Burke, one of few
Westerners in Afghanistan when the airstrikes occurred: "Our hope is that the
Taliban may have struck a deal with the Americans, perhaps giving them the
details of Bin Laden's whereabouts in return for recognition by Washington as
the legal government of Afghanistan. If so, the Taliban might be expected to
protect us against the anger of the mob which everyone expects to materialise
any minute."

            By
contrast, the liberal Guardian signaled its attitude to the American actions with the
headline of its editorial: "Diversionary action." The paper clearly laid out its Wag the
Dog theory: "After a weekend of sexual revelations and lies, which have
taken a severe toll on his reputation, the President with the help of the
Defence Secretary, William Cohen, has found a means of rallying the country
behind the presidency and the Stars and Stripes." It concluded, "[F]or Mr
Clinton the firm action against those who have taken American and other lives
is [a] clear way of demonstrating that the institution of the US presidency is
about much more than the first DNA test taken at the White House."

            
In Spain, the right-wing daily ABC took
a similar tack. The newspaper's pictorial
cover juxtaposed a shot of a statesmanlike Clinton with one of Monica
Lewinsky arriving for her deposition accompanied by the headline "Clinton
Bombed Sudan and Afghanistan While Lewinsky Testified Before the Grand Jury."
Inside, an opinion piece suggested that on hearing news of the bombardment,
"no impartial judge could avoid the immediate suspicion that it was a desperate
maneuver to distract world public opinion." The more liberal Spanish daily
El País was more
supportive, though it counseled fewer U.S. surprise attacks and more U.N.
involvement.

            According to
Israel's Ha'aretz,
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu welcomed the U.S. airstrikes despite concerns
that they could lead to retaliation in the Middle East. A Netanyahu aide
observed, "If we allow our fear of retaliation to dictate our action or
inaction, we will have handed the terrorists the ultimate victory." An analysis said,
"The United States yesterday invoked the old Israeli method in the war on
terrorism, which tries to deter terrorists and make them pay a price for their
actions. Although the results of the strikes in Sudan and Afghanistan could not
be immediately confirmed, the critical factor here is not the damage that was
caused but the signal that Washington sent in response to surging international
Islamic fundamentalist terrorism."

            Elsewhere
in the same paper, however, writer Zvi Bar'el sounded a more
negative note: "In the absence of precise intelligence, the administration
has ... adopted two general methods of operation: bombing targets of some kind
... and imposing sanctions. In the case of Sudan and Afghanistan, the states
that have given sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, imposing sanctions would be
ineffective. Apart from the export of opium, Afghanistan has no commercial ties
with the United States; and partial sanctions have already been imposed on
Sudan--sanctions that do not interfere with the business interests of American
petroleum companies. Because of those interests, Sudan was removed from the
sanctions law last year, even though it is included on the list of countries
that support terrorism."

             

         
      
   
