
   
   
      
         
            Hiccups in Iraq

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            Tuesday, Britain's Financial Times presaged the latest
Iraqi brouhaha with a brief account of Iraq's objections to the current weapons
monitoring program. According to the U.N. chief weapons inspector, Richard
Butler, the Iraqis had asked for an accelerated schedule of inspections so that
sanctions could be lifted immediately. They recoiled at the specifics of
Butler's plan, with Iraq Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz reportedly saying
U.N. inspectors were up to their "old games and tricks." The conservative
Daily Telegraph saw the widening clash--in which Iraq announced it
would no longer cooperate with U.N. inspectors--as a Middle East vs. West
face-off, prompted by Saddam Hussein: "Iraq maintains that the inspection
regime is being abused by the Americans and by Britain to maintain the embargo
indefinitely." The Telegraph also voiced the United Nations' reaction to
the scenario, with Secretary-General Kofi Annan calling it a "hiccup." The
hiccup could lead to "another stand-off with the United States of the sort that
almost led to war in February, and before that last November," the paper
speculated.

            By
Thursday, the liberal Guardian had united with its conservative counterpart to accuse
Iraq of prompting another confrontation. The Iraqis continue to attack the U.N.
program for "serving United States and British interests," rather than the
world's.

            The appointment of a new minister of finance in
Japan--Kiichi Miyazawa, who also served as finance minister in the 1980s--will
do little to pull that country out of its economic mudslide, wrote the
Financial Times . Japan's is "an economy from which confidence is being
drained by the minute." The gravity of the crisis is underlined continually,
and the growing concerns are (appropriately) illustrated on a global scale,
since any injury felt by Japan would also be felt internationally. The Japan Times reported that
the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry had called on the government for a
bailout "for small- and medium-sized companies, which have been hit especially
hard by the prolonged economic slump." The paper also noted that Prime Minister
Keizo Obuchi that he "may be one of the most globally criticised prime
ministers in Japan's history." As the crisis escalates, the critics pile on
further.

            Uganda's New Vision
("For a Better Uganda") scored a scoop of sorts in its coverage of the
rebellion against President Laurent Kabila by Congolese troops in the eastern
regions of Congo. New Vision reported that rebel front man Arthur
Z'Ahidi Ngoma had announced on the radio that the uprising was a nationwide
movement, even though the rebellion is led by the Tutsi minority that is
closely allied with Tutsi-dominated Rwanda. Ngoma insisted that the fighting
was not an incipient attempt by the Rwandans to colonize Congo. No paper
appeared to have collected any comments by Kabila himself on the uprising.

             

         
      
   
