
   
   
      
         
            Plagiarism

            An indignant Barbara
Chase-Riboud filed a $10 million copyright-infringement suit against Steven
Spielberg and the makers of Amistad in October, claiming that the movie
contained characters and scenes unique to her historical novel about the slave
rebellion. In 1991, she brought a similar suit against a playwright and won.
Last week, the New York Times accused Chase-Riboud herself of pinching
several paragraphs from a nonfiction work for her 1986 book, Valide: A Novel
of the Harem . Chase-Riboud acknowledged her debt to the previously
published work, but claimed that she had done nothing wrong because the book
was a "reference" and her novel was intended to be a "seamless narrative using
both documents and fiction."

            
               When Did
Borrowing Become Theft?
            

            Prior to the 18 th
century, writers borrowed freely from each other without shame or punishment.
(The Latin word plagaria referred only to the act of physical
kidnapping.) Shakespeare borrowed passages from Plutarch and contemporaries.
Books were copied by hand prior to the rise of the printing press, and
amanuenses were given liberty to rework texts. England passed the first
copyright laws in 1709, as mechanical reproduction of works and new ideas about
individuality became widespread. These laws provided legal remedies for
authors--writers and composers mainly--who believed their works had been
unfairly lifted. The U.S. Constitution required Congress to pass similar
copyright laws.

            Copyright laws prohibit
plagiarism. The courts have ruled that a work cannot be legally copied if it is
1) an original, creative product--not merely a fact or something found in
nature, like the sound of the wind, or 2) written or recorded--not just an
idea. Fifty years after authors die, their works enter the "public domain" and
are no longer protected by law.

            

               Plagiarized? Prove It!
            

            Proving plagiarism in the
United States requires the plaintiff to show that 1) the defendant had access
to the earlier work and 2) the defendant's work bears a "substantial
similarity" to the plaintiff's original. It sounds like a legal blur because it
is. Different courts have different opinions on what constitutes "substantial
similarity." For example, jazz drummer Bernard "Pretty" Purdie filed a
copyright-infringement suit against a rapper who lifted a lone cymbal crash
from one of Purdie's recordings. He claims that his cymbal crash--a single
beat--is so recognizably his that any use of it violates his copyright.

            
               When Is
Borrowing Just Borrowing?
            

            Parody--as long as it is
immediately recognizable as parody--is largely exempt from charges of copyright
infringement. Also, the doctrine of "fair use" allows writers to quote limited
sections of a work, as long as it is germane, properly attributed, and doesn't
undercut sales of the original. The courts ruled that The Nation
exceeded its fair-use rights in 1985 when it excerpted key sections of Gerald
Ford's memoir in an article that was published slightly before Ford's book
reached stores. The courts can be as fuzzy about what constitutes fair use as
they are about what constitutes substantial similarity.

            
               I Think
I've Been Plagiarized and I Wanna Sue. What Are My Chances of Winning?
            

            Slim. In practice, the
courts find infringement only in instances where language, images, or music
were lifted wholesale. They rarely consider cases in which a character was
copied or a plot was stolen. Thousands of writers bring suit each year claiming
their copyright has been violated, but almost none win satisfaction in court.
However, the courts strictly police the unlicensed "sampling" of music (the
insertion of a passage into another artist's musical collage). Book and
software pirates are prosecuted under the copyright laws, but pirates are not
really plagiarists.

            
               Who's
Minding the Store?
            

            Most professional and
academic groups (Writers Guild of America, American Bar Association, American
Historical Association, etc.) investigate formal charges of plagiarism.
Reprimands can come from the associations or from colleges and universities
themselves. Accusations of plagiarism seem to be the greatest deterrent.

            Some say accusations of
plagiarism fly too freely. In a celebrated case, Abraham Lincoln biographer
Stephen Oates was said to have ripped off a widely read 1952 Lincoln biography
by Benjamin Thomas. In 1991, the American Historical Association criticized
Oates for not adequately footnoting his use of Thomas' book. No legal charges
were brought. (Click for a comparison of passages that the historians
considered most damning.)

            

               Plagiarism on the Silver Screen
            

            Most copyright suits in the
entertainment industry are nuisances, but not all. A biographer of William
Randolph Hearst claimed that Citizen Kane screenwriters Orson Wells and
Herman Mankiewicz plagiarized him. The author of a 1941 nonfiction book about
swindlers filed copyright-infringement charges against the screenwriter of
The Sting in 1973. Look Who's Talking screenwriter/director Amy
Heckerling was accused of stealing whole passages of dialogue from a screenplay
shown to her three years before her film's release. These cases, like most
credible suits brought against the studios, were settled out of court.

            To ward off lawsuits,
directors and producers avoid signing rejection letters, making it difficult to
prove that they had prior access to the material, a legal prerequisite to prove
copyright infringement. (As a gesture of kindness, the actor/producer Michael
Landon signed rejection letters, some of which became the basis for expensive
litigation against him.) Still, examples of Hollywood's sloppiness and
disrespect for intellectual-property rights abound, as Film Comment
magazine proved with this prank in the '80s: It shipped the screenplay of
Casablanca to 85 agents. Only 33 of them recognized it as the basis for
the Bogart film; 3 agents offered to represent it.

            

               Psychoplagiarism
            

            Many alleged victims of
plagiarism are later accused of having plagiarized. For instance, David Lodge
accused a romance writer of stealing the plot from his novel Nice Work .
Later he admitted that he had borrowed it himself from a
19 th -century novel.

            Author Thomas Mallon argues
that plagiarism is pathology, akin to kleptomania. Accused plagiarists are
often repeat offenders. Stephen Oates faced accusations of plagiarism in
his biographies of Lincoln, William Faulkner, and Martin Luther King Jr. Poet
Neal Bowers was plagiarized by a writer who submitted a half-dozen of his poems
to different publications. Plagiarists want to get caught . Most steal
from obvious sources (from their colleagues or authoritative works). Academics
plagiarize more regularly than nonacademics, prompting Mallon's theory that
professors are let off the hook to plagiarize again because their colleagues
are too embarrassed to punish them.

            

               Meanwhile, Back at the Amistad Case
            

            Chase-Riboud's suit claims
that the film's screenwriters read her historical novel about the slave
rebellion, Echo of Lions , and appropriated its fictionalized characters
and plot twists. In a legal brief, her lawyers claim that:

            1) Credited screenwriter
David Franzoni received a copy of Echo of Lions .

            2) Franzoni worked with
Punch Productions for six to eight months as a writer on the "Echo of
Lions Project" while Punch was licensed to use Chase-Riboud's book and
helped pitch this project to Warner Bros.

            3) Franzoni's screenplay for
Amistad contains historical "errors" also contained in Echo of
Lions, including:

            a) a letter from Queen
Victoria to President Martin Van Buren;

            b) the portrayal of the
interpreter as a person that speaks near-perfect English; and

            c) the number of children
Cinque had.

            4) Amistad and
Echo of Lions contain the same fictional character--a wealthy, erudite
black man involved with the printing of abolitionist literature.

            5) An early Amistad
shooting script was titled "The Other Lion."

            A motion to block the
opening of Amistad was shot down by a U.S. District Court judge who
found that 1) the similarities between the two works were not substantial 2)
fictional characters cannot be copyrighted, and 3) Amistad 's
screenwriters rendered the similarities irrelevant.

            The judge ruled that the
suit has virtually no likelihood of success.

         
      
   
