
   
   
      
         
            When Irish Eyes Are Smiling

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            The Irish press gave an
unqualified welcome to President Clinton Thursday. Editorials dwelt not on his
personal troubles but on his contribution to peace in Ulster. In the Republic
of Ireland, the Irish
Independent called Clinton "an invaluable friend of Ireland" and said that
foolishness in his personal life "does not justify the persecution to which he
has been subjected," nor take away from his achievements as president. "Among
these, his role in Irish affairs ranks high," it said. "His interest in Ireland
is not sentimental, or designed merely to attract Irish-American votes and the
friendship of Irish-American leaders. It is intelligent, well-informed--and
fruitful." The first lady, who was described in the main front-page headline as
"radiant," received high praise from conservative Catholic
columnist Mary Kenny, who said that
the president "would probably fully agree that in terms of strength of
character, Hillary is the better of the two."

            In the Irish Times, republican
Catholic columnist Mary Holland wrote that even before the president's arrival in Ulster, his
"visit to Ireland has had a dramatic effect." Saying she shared "the sense of
disappointment and bewilderment" over the Lewinsky affair and the bombings in
Sudan and Afghanistan, Holland said she also believed "there are very many
people alive in Ireland, and further afield, today who would be dead were it
not for President Clinton's commitment to the search for peace in Northern
Ireland."

            In the
North, the Protestant Belfast Telegraph said that "the mere fact of his presence ...
has achieved more progress in the last two days than in the previous two
months, since the June election." The Catholic Ulster paper Irish News said in its main
front-page headline, "Clinton flies in with a brave message of hope."

            The Moscow summit received less enthusiastic press around
the world, though the daily Novye Isvestiya said that although "Clinton
did not have much space for maneuvering between support of Yeltsin and
instructing potential Russian presidential candidates," everything that he did
in Moscow was "correct." Nezavisimaya Gazeta , a paper controlled by
financial magnate Boris Berezovsky, reported that the Moscow Institute of
Economic Analysis would show, in research to be published Friday, that Russia
faces inevitable bankruptcy and that, by the end of the year at the latest, it
will have to admit it can't make payments on its foreign debts.

            India strongly criticized the
summit because of Clinton's request that Russia sever its defense links with
the country. The Times
of India said that New Delhi need not take this too seriously, because it
is "just one of several banana skins the US leader dropped and stepped on in
Moscow." The Hindu
said, "Mr. Clinton is not known for his adherence to commonly accepted norms of
behaviour, either in his personal conduct or in terms of international policy,"
noting that "nothing was right about the summit, least of all its timing."

            In Italy,
Corriere della
Sera ran an interview Thursday with former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev,
who, asked if the West had made mistakes in its behavior toward post-Communist
Russia, said it had made several: regarding Yeltsin as the sole guarantor of
Russian democracy, trying to impose economic policies that were completely
unsuited to Russia, and closing both eyes to the corruption of the system. "I
sometimes think that the West prefers a Russia that is weak and
half-wrecked--not actually in pieces but nevertheless not in a state to raise
its head," Gorbachev said.

            
In Japan, Mainichi Shimbun
predicted "significant repercussions" for North Korea's firing of
a long-range ballistic missile over Japan last Monday. It criticized the
Japanese government for its slow response and its delayed release of
information to the Japanese people. "In cooperation with the United States,
South Korea and other concerned parties, the Japanese government must adopt a
resolute posture toward North Korea while demanding that it terminate its
ballistic missile program," the paper concluded.

            Japan's biggest paper,
Asahi
Shimbun, published an article Thursday by Tetsuo Maeda, an arms control expert and
professor at Tokyo International University, saying that the U.S. missile
attacks on Islamic terrorist targets have expanded the definition of war. They
will "be remembered as the first case in which a permanent member of the U.N.
Security Council, which has special responsibilities for the maintenance of
'international peace and security,' has openly applied the 'state's right of
self-defense' to irregular fighters," Maeda said. "Terrorists are criminals and
should be treated as such. However, they should not be punished without due
process in the name of 'national security' or 'protection of citizens' lives.'
In light of U.S. history, such punishment is virtually a return to the lynching
that was practised during the frontier development period."

            
               Asahi
Shimbun also reported that the Japanese National Personnel Authority is
drawing up regulations to try to stamp out sexual harassment based on a new
report defining what kind of behavior is "inappropriate." It said, "Such
behavior ranges from demanding sex from co-workers to forcing female office
staff to serve tea or to clean the workplace." Ogling colleagues or forcing
female employees to sit beside their bosses at social events is also
unacceptable. "[W]omen mocking men by calling into question their masculinity
is also classified as sexual harassment," the paper added.

             

         
      
   
