
   
   
      
         
            Seeds of Disaster

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and Friday
morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit
Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click
here.
            

            The conservative Daily Telegraph of London
published an op-ed article by Prince Charles Monday attacking the
proposed introduction into Britain by multinational companies of genetically
engineered crops. His article follows the launch of a British advertising
campaign by Monsanto, the U.S.-based biotechnology company, arguing that such
crops will help consumers and the environment. The prince said he will not eat
food made from such produce; nor will he give it to his family or friends:
Genetic engineering "takes mankind into realms that belong to God and to God
alone."

            The
Telegraph also ran an editorial warning the British government against
sending ground forces into action against the Serbs in Kosovo, saying it should
consider air power instead. "If Slobodan Milosevic still refuses to cede
meaningful autonomy to Kosovo, that power should be used to inflict heavy
destruction on the Serb military machine," it said.

            An editorial in Japan's popular Asahi Shimbun
called on President Clinton to "clear up doubts" on his land mine policy. The
provocation: a statement by National Security Adviser Samuel Berger, in a
letter to Democratic Sen. Patrick Leahy, to the effect that the United States
intends to sign the international treaty banning land mines by 2006. "It is
significant that the United States, one of the largest producers of mines, has
shown--if belatedly--a willingness to join a comprehensive framework for
eliminating land mines," said the paper, wondering why such a major policy
shift should have been "made public in such an unusual form." It asked the U.S.
president to "show a more specific course of action leading to an early
signing." Considering that an estimated 100 million anti-personnel land mines
are deposited around the world and people are being "killed or injured at a
rate of one person every 20 minutes," it said, "the world cannot wait until
2006."

            The
Times of
India ran an editorial, headlined "Mission Fusion," Monday about Albert
Einstein's recently revealed, post-World War II love affair with Russian spy
Margarita Konenkova. Referring to affairs she reputedly had with other famous
men, the newspaper said, "Apparently, the lady who came from Russia with love
was a firm believer in relativity in her relationships." Einstein "must have
pined when the affair ended and Konenkova returned to her masters, her mission
over. The parallel lines did not meet, a unified field could not be found."

            
In South Africa, the Cape Times warned
that "millions of South Africans could find themselves effectively
disenfranchised barely five years after the country became a democracy" if the
government continues insisting that all citizens possess a new identity
document if they are to register as voters in next year's general election.
Meanwhile, Johannesburg's Saturday Star mocked the South African
minister of sport's promise to "intervene decisively" to democratize sport and
put an end to its being "a predominantly white affair in a predominantly black
country." What about women, the paper asked in an editorial. What about the
disabled? "They, too, should be allowed to play in the national rugby team. One
is not referring here to the mentally disabled, who are already well
represented. ... One is talking about the physically disabled. They, too, have
rights." There is also the question of "the Third Sex," the paper went on. "It
is disgraceful that we do not know whether gays and lesbians are represented in
statistically correct proportions on the sportsfield."

            In Hong Kong, the South China Morning Post, taking up
the cry of several Australian papers, attacked Australian Prime Minister John
Howard for failing to marginalize the resurgent, racist One Nation party, whose
leader, Pauline Hanson, rejects Aboriginal rights and warns that Australia is
being "swamped" by Asians. "A return to institutionalised [immigration]
restraints and bigotry is an ever-present danger, despite One Nation's minority
support, because the larger established parties see Ms. Hanson grabbing a chunk
of their own vote," SCMP said. It is vital that the prime minister "hit
back and distance his party from her divisive and hate-mongering politics."

            Reporting on crime in
Chechnya, Russia's biggest-selling newspaper, Komsomolskaya Pravda , said
that at the central market in Grozny, handguns, machine guns, and grenade
launchers are openly on sale. But pork or liquor, to which the Shariat (Muslim
religious law) police objects, are not. The authorities are also waging war on
drugs and sex, the paper said, and owners of "love houses" sometimes hire a
mullah to sit at the entrance to pronounce every entering couple "man and wife"
so as not to infringe Shariat law.

             

         
      
   
