
   
   
      
         
            Apocalypse Now

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            While papers across the
world led Thursday with apocalyptic headlines about the collapse of Russia,
none were more apocalyptic than those in Russia's own press. Izvestiya warned that the
addition of a political crisis to the existing economic crisis might result in
"a revolutionary situation." The possibility that the country might be left
without legislative power for the next three months is "fraught with the most
dangerous consequences--including the disintegration of the state," it
said.

            
               Segodnya reported
that Dagestan is on the edge of civil war and that the halting of ruble-dollar
trading on the financial markets means that Russia is facing the threat of a
return to a fixed ruble-dollar exchange rate, as in Soviet times.

            Nezavisimaya Gazeta said
that Russia could be facing hyperinflation, as in 1992, and that the country's
general situation is rapidly approaching the critical point: It faces
simultaneous financial, industrial, social, and political meltdowns; it must
also deal with the fighting already taking place in the Northern Caucasus, and
with the danger of Afghan military action on its southern border.

            Wednesday's Russian papers concentrated on the
reappointment of Victor Chernomyrdin as prime minister. Izvestiya said
that, with this, President Boris Yeltsin has effectively given up power and
Novye Izvestiya that his second coming is attributable not to any
failings by Chernomyrdin's predecessor, Sergei Kiriyenko, but to Yeltsin's
decision not to seek re-election in 2000.

            In Rome,
La Repubblica said in
a front-page comment by Sandro Viola that "seldom in history has a country
received from the same person so many reasons for hope and then so many
afflictions as ... Russia with Boris Yeltsin."

            
Under the headline "Stop This Bloody
Terrorism," the Cape Times of Cape Town, South Africa, condemned
Tuesday's bomb blast at the Planet Hollywood restaurant as "cold-blooded,
mindless, unjustifiable terrorism" going to "the heart of the tensions in our
troubled society." Making no reference to the United States or to the
possibility that the attack might have been a reprisal for U.S. missile attacks
in Sudan and Afghanistan, it blamed terrorists who "want our communities to
remain divided." It urged people to "use this opportunity to recommit ourselves
to a united city and isolate all those who have different and sinister
intentions."

            In an editorial
Thursday, the Pakistani newspaper Dawn warned that Pakistan's economic crisis will reach "a point
of no return" by mid-September failing a miracle. It proposed stopping
negotiations for a bailout package with the Islamic Development Bank--with
which "it is not Islamic fraternal feeling, as some of us would like naively to
believe, but pure profit motive which seems to have weighed." Instead, it
advocated a closer look at a prospective International Monetary Fund package,
even though "[o]f course, an IMF programme would bring massive hardships for
the common people."

            In
Canada, the Toronto Star
accused Britain and the Irish Republic of riding roughshod over civil liberties
in the new laws they are drafting to make it easier for the police and courts
to convict suspected terrorists. Referring in an editorial Thursday to the "firestorm of anger and revulsion" that
had followed the recent bombing in Omagh, Northern Ireland, the paper said that
this "new crackdown, so late in the day, smacks of over-reaction." It
concluded, "Civil liberties, once eroded, are not easily regained." The
Irish News of Belfast
led its front page Thursday with the news that President Clinton will meet more
than 100 members of the new Northern Ireland assembly next Thursday. He will
also visit Omagh.

             

         
      
   
