
   
   
      
         
            Counting the Hours

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            The pocket cartoon on the
front page of London's Daily Telegraph Thursday showed a little boy on his father's knee
learning about Monicagate. "And if the daddy bee is caught with a lady bee who
isn't the mummy bee, then the daddy bee might have to resign as President of
the United States," said Dad. The resignation or impeachment of the president
now seems taken for granted in much of the European press.

            The scandal story got more
attention in Europe than in other parts of the world, and much more in Britain
than in other parts of Europe. Rupert Murdoch's British tabloid, the Sun
(circulation 4 million), carried a massive front-page headline, "Clinton: The
Last Hours," and an editorial saying about the White House "soap opera," "The
world knows how the plot will end, and there are few episodes left." But the
Sun added that "for all the personal shame of Clinton, America can hold
its head high. The land of the free has upheld the finest democratic
traditions."

            The
political cartoonist of the Times of London showed the American eagle stealing the arrows off
the presidential seal and defecating on Clinton's head as it flew away. The
Financial Times ran an
editorial titled "The Indignity of It All," blaming the president fully for his
misfortunes. "His words are weasel ones, his actions based forever on political
expediency," it said. "He still appears to think that the affair is a
right-wing conspiracy, and he cannot see what he did wrong."

            The conservative Daily Telegraph ran a two page
scandal chronology compiled by Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, who, as its Washington
correspondent, began investigating Clinton in 1993 and, according to the paper,
was "vilified by the White House aides" as a result. "Once the members of the
judiciary committee have examined the text [of the Starr report], in all its
shocking and prurient detail," Evans-Pritchard wrote, "they will acknowledge
that the President is a borderline sociopath who must be removed at once." In
an editorial, the Telegraph described the president as
sitting "in a political wheelchair." "He may beat his breast. He may blacken
his opponents. His charm and theatrical abilities may see him through for a bit
longer, but it is, sadly, to no purpose. He cannot save himself; he can only
degrade his office further."

            Le Monde of Paris restricted its
editorializing Thursday to publishing on its front page, under the rubric
"Point of View," the full text of Sen. Joseph Lieberman's speech to the Senate
Sept. 3. Clinton didn't make the front page of Le Figaro, the conservative
Paris daily, but led the foreign news section under the headline "Clinton
Paralyzed and Demoralized." The paper also ran a short and unoriginal comment
on the dilemmas facing Al Gore as he comes daily closer to fulfilling his
presidential ambitions.

            In Italy,
the story of the delivery of the Starr report was touched upon only briefly on
the front pages but was covered extensively on the foreign pages. La Stampa of Turin ran a comment
by Gabriele Romagnoli, who asked why nobody has asked Clinton the most
important question: "Mr. President, who the devil ordered the bombing of Sudan
and why?"

            
In Asia, which is preoccupied with its own
problems, and in Australia, which has its mind on elections, the fate of the
U.S. presidency did not dominate the news, though the Sydney Morning Herald ran a
report Friday, headlined "Lame
duck looks like a dying duck," from its Washington correspondent, Jennifer
Hewett. "Mr. Clinton is in for the fight of his life just to remain in a
much-diminished Oval Office," she wrote. In Israel, Ha'aretz led its front
page Thursday not with Clinton's troubles but with the news that U.S.
special Middle East peace envoy Dennis Ross, currently in Jerusalem, is hoping
to draft a new Israeli pullback package before the end of this week.

            Earlier
this week, the Pakistani paper Dawn ran an editorial about reports that Pakistani poppy growers
are planning to recultivate opium on a bigger scale because they haven't
received promised compensation for switching to other crops. "The authorities
must take the challenge of crop substitution seriously," it said.

             

         
      
   
