
   
   
      
         
            Stumped by Stumpage

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and Friday
morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit
Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click
here.
            

            The South China Morning Post goes
ballistic, running an immense "Clinton in China" package. Adding to reams of
news coverage, an analysis piece reports on the careful press manipulation of
the president's tour. Clinton aides are relieved that a controversial ceremony
in Tiananmen Square will take place only after Friday's evening newscasts in
the United States, relegating it to less-watched weekend programs. The article
wonders if this was the result of dumb luck or devious engineering. A separate
SCMP story illustrates the rampant Americanization Clinton will
encounter in China. In addition to obvious infiltrators (McDonald's, Microsoft,
Titanic ), the entire American "way of thinking" has invaded the country.
President Jiang Zemin loves Elvis and FDR (both Clinton favorites); the central
banking system is being modeled after the U.S. Federal Reserve; the judicial
system is moving toward the American style; and the military is taking its cues
from West Point protocol. Still, leaders have warned against adopting American
values--the "sugar-coated bullets of capitalism."

            China Online
posts the complete text of an article from People's Daily , the official
newspaper of the Chinese Communist Party. The essay, written on the occasion of
Clinton's visit, generally trumpets this summit as a positive step in warming
Sino-U.S. relations. A few passages stand out, however:

            As far as the Taiwan issue
is concerned, the American leaders have time and again reiterated their
promise: The United States persists in its one China policy ... does not
support the view of 'one China, one Taiwan,' or 'two Chinas'; does not support
Taiwan independence; and does not support Taiwan to join the United
Nations.

            In the
United States, the majority of people hope for Sino-U.S. friendly ties.
However, a handful of people, who have a Cold War mentality, will spread rumors
and create trouble to obstruct and undermine Sino-U.S. relations once
opportunity arises. This definitely does not enjoy popular support.

            Apair of essays in two different papers demonstrates
conflict over the visit. In the Sydney Morning Herald, an editorial laughs at the notion that the
United States could build a "strategic partnership" with China, which is
crumbling from within and is a poor country whose Communist leadership no
longer has the support of its people. We need not fear China, and Clinton
should press without compromise on human rights and political reform.
Meanwhile, an editorial in the Free China Journal of Taiwan argues that China holds the
upper hand in negotiations with the United States. Clinton's agreement to
appear in Tiananmen Square marks a huge victory for Jiang, and the entire trip
has been played according to Chinese terms. The piece quotes a U.S. official in
Asia who predicts "Clinton's going to kowtow all over Peking."

            The Buenos Aires Herald is
all abuzz over a daring one-man invasion of the Malvinas Islands (known in
Britain as the Falklands, site of a 10 week war that killed 1,000 military
personnel). An Argentine flew his twin-engine aircraft toward the islands in a
"surprise" mission of peace. When he was picked up on British radar, a Royal
Air Force Tornado fighter jet intercepted him and forced him to land in
Malvinas. "Apart from relatives of soldiers who were killed in the 1982 war,
[the pilot] was the first Argentine to step onto the islands since the
conflict." He was arrested as an illegal immigrant and immediately
deported.

            The Vancouver Sun reports in
its lead story that Canadian logging companies and officials will vigorously
fight the United States over stumpage rates. Canadians want lower stumpage so
they can compete. American loggers think lower stumpage will give Canadian
firms an unfair advantage. What's stumpage? "Stumpage is the fee per cubic
metre that government charges forest companies for the right to harvest timber
on Crown land." And now you know.

             

         
      
   
