
   
   
      
         
            The End of History

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            Love for President Clinton
is undiminished in the Emerald Isle. Le Monde of Paris, over a report from Dublin, carried the
headline "The Most Important Visit Since That of St. Patrick"--a quotation from
a senior citizen in Armagh. The Irish Times, in an editorial Monday titled "Trouble Ahead for Mr Clinton," hoped he
will survive his present crisis. "His visit here was exemplary in its political
substance and confirmed the sure touch he continues to demonstrate on the
Northern Ireland peace process," it said. The paper quoted his golf caddie in
Ballybunion as saying, "This has been the greatest day of my life."

            In
Belfast, Northern Ireland, the Catholic Irish News said that "although his trip helped strengthen
the Irish peace process, it will be remembered for one thing: his first ever
apology over the Monica Lewinsky scandal." The Irish Times read his
statement on receiving the freedom of the city of Limerick--that he was pleased
to know he could go there when he stopped being president--as a reference to
the possibility that he might not stay in office for long.

            Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan's warning last week
that the United States cannot remain indefinitely untouched by the troubles in
Asia and Russia aroused anxious comment around the world. London's Financial Times said in its main
editorial Monday, "With US savings so low, and consumption sustained in good
part by stock market gains, a continuing slump on Wall Street will slow growth
as well as inflation. If this proves to be a correction, the Fed's task will
become easier. But Mr. Greenspan's speech shows he is thinking of darker
possibilities that would require prompt and decisive action."

            The rest
of the British press was largely taken up Monday with fresh argument about the
future of the monarchy after Demos, a think tank close to the Tony Blair
government, published a report proposing the removal of the queen's last
remaining powers and a referendum to decide if Prince Charles should be allowed
to succeed her. The conservative Daily Telegraph, in its main editorial, called this a
demand for a "republic by another name." The conservative tabloid Daily
Mail said that "last week's pictures of embattled Presidents Clinton and
Yeltsin clinging to one another like drunks trying to stay upright do not
exactly lend weight to the think tank's call for an elected monarchy."

            
Dominating the news pages of the British and
Australian press Monday was Rupert Murdoch's $840 million bid for the English
soccer team Manchester United, with the British press--in particular the
liberal Guardian and
the Independent--generally demanding it be resisted. "Blair must stop
Murdoch taking over our national sport," said the Independent . The
Times of London,
which belongs to Murdoch, made no comment.

            Iran's
military threat to Afghanistan was the subject of a front-page editorial in the
conservative Le Figaro
of Paris. Titled "American Ambiguities," it pointed out that U.S. demands that
Iran respect Afghanistan's frontiers come from a country that violated them
just last month with its airstrikes.

            Aweek after the anniversary of the death of Princess Diana,
Le Monde reported on the low-key ceremonies in Calcutta to mark the
anniversary of the death of her heroine, Mother Teresa. The paper predicted
that it will be a long time before she is canonized, but quoted her successor,
Sister Nirmala, as saying, "We know she is a saint, so it's not important
whether that is declared now or later."

            In Canada, under the headline
"Highway to NAFTA?," the Globe and Mail lamented the state of Canada's road system.
Praising President Clinton for his federal transportation law to upgrade U.S.
highways, the paper said that "without a similar effort on our part, American
superhighway traffic will come grinding to a halt at the Canadian border."

            Interviewed by the British
Journalism Review about the extent of his personal interference in the
editorial policies of his newspapers, which include the Independent ,
Tony O'Reilly, chairman of the Heinz food company, said he gives his editors
"absolutely free rein" provided they abide by "some general rules." These, he
explained, were a "constructive" editorial policy for the country in which the
paper is located and an appreciation of history: "We are all moving towards
what is in a sense the end of history, the fin de siècle , and I believe
this is the right time to be alive. The rules are very clear."

             

         
      
   
