
   
   
      
         
            So You Want to Immigrate to the United States

            The United States, a nation
of immigrants, has a love-hate relationship with newcomers. Despite its
reputation as an international melting pot, only 7.9 percent of the country's
population was born overseas, compared with 22.7 percent of Australia's, 18.5
percent of Switzerland's, and 16.1 percent of Canada's.

            Not
surprisingly, the immigration system is set up to benefit the United
States--only a small percentage of the people who would like to come here are
allowed in, and only a tiny fraction of the ones who make that cut are allowed
to stay indefinitely. In the 1996 fiscal year, almost 23 million foreigners
entered the United States on tourist visas, 418,117 on student visas, and
227,440 as temporary workers with extremely restricted temporary work visas
(most are seasonal workers--only 65,000 people are allowed in annually as
"persons in a specialty occupation"). In FY 1996, 915,900 people received an
immigrant visa (a "green card"--it's actually pink), which makes them eligible
for permanent residence and most of the benefits of citizenship, with the
important exception of the right to vote.

            
               Who Gets
a Green Card?
            

            In 1996, 596,000 people--65
percent of all green-card recipients--were "family-sponsored immigrants." About
half were immediate relatives of U.S. citizens (spouses: 56 percent; parents:
22 percent; and children: 21 percent), and the rest were "family-sponsored
preference immigrants"--spouses and children of alien residents, siblings (and
their families) of naturalized citizens and their families, and adult sons and
daughters (and their families) of naturalized citizens.

            Homosexuality ceased to be
grounds for exclusion from the United States in 1991, but since gay and lesbian
couples cannot legally marry in this country, there is currently no legal way
for them to benefit from family-preference laws.

            
Employment-based preferences account for an annual minimum of 140,000 entrants
of whom a maximum of 10,000 may be unskilled workers. There are basically five
categories of work-related "preferences": skilled workers, priority workers
(including "multinational executives or managers" and "outstanding professors
or researchers"), "professionals with advanced degrees," investors or
employment creators, and unskilled workers.

            
Since 1991, there has been an annual lottery
for "diversity" immigrants, designed to allow citizens of countries with low
levels of emigration to the United States to jump the queue. (Such countries
are currently defined as those with fewer than 50,000 emigrants to the United
States in the previous five years.) The 1999 lottery, with 55,000 green cards
up for grabs, closed Nov. 24, 1997. (This page provides
more details.) The dates for next year's diversity-visa lottery haven't yet
been determined.

            Within
these complex categories, there are national quotas to ensure that no country
can take up more than 7 percent of the annual green-card allocation (though
some family-reunification categories are exempted from this limit).

            
               What's
the Difference Between a Resident Alien and a U.S. Citizen?
            

            Until
recently, millions of green-card holders were content to live in the United
States as resident aliens. But of late, lawmakers have indicated a change of
attitude toward legal immigrants, and this has affected the number of
applications for citizenship. A 1996 federal welfare law separated rights from
entitlements, denying legal immigrants access to government housing and welfare
while still requiring them to pay taxes. This loss of benefits has almost
certainly precipitated the jump from the long-standing annual average of
300,000 citizenship applications to 1.6 million in 1996. (Immigration and
Naturalization Service estimates show that 5.8 million of the 10.5 million
green-card holders resident in the United States in 1996 were eligible to apply
for U.S. citizenship.)

            
               I Won the
Lottery. How Do I Become a Citizen?
            

            Candidates for citizenship
must 1) be 18 or older; 2) have resided in the United States continuously for
five years--or three years if married to a U.S. citizen--(short absences are
OK); 3) demonstrate the ability to speak English, and a basic knowledge of
American history and government (click here to see if you pass the test); and 4) be of "good moral
character." Candidates must submit a set of fingerprints for review by the
FBI.

            The
increase in citizenship applications has led to longer processing periods and,
according to critics, to some immigrants being wrongly naturalized. In May
1997, an INS audit of the 1.1 million people who were granted citizenship
between September 1995 and September 1996 revealed 4,946 cases "in which
criminal arrest should have disqualified an applicant or in which an applicant
lied about his or her criminal history." A more recent press release from the INS suggests that the agency has made a
"dramatic turnaround" as a result of new policies initiated last June.

            
               Evading
the System
            

            According to INS estimates,
300,000 illegal immigrants come to the United States each year, and there were
5 million illegal immigrants living in the country in 1996. About 2.1 million
of this group are "nonimmigrant overstays," that is, people who entered the
country legally on a temporary basis and didn't go home. Most illegal
immigrants, an estimated 2.7 million, come from Mexico, but only 16 percent of
Mexican illegal immigrants are overstays, compared with 26 percent of those
from other parts of Central America and 91 percent from all other countries.
The INS deported 111,794 "criminal and other illegal aliens" in 1997, and
recent changes in the law, summarized here, establish new grounds for denying admission to the United
States. For example, nonimmigrant overstays can now be denied readmission for
up to 10 years.

            Access to
jobs attracts illegal immigrants. Although the INS negotiated its largest
work-site settlement last year, when a Texas restaurant chain agreed to pay a
$1.7-million fine for hiring and employing illegal immigrant workers, critics
claim that Congress doesn't do enough to punish employers who make extensive
use of illegal labor. Unscrupulous employers see these workers as more
manageable and less likely to complain. Despite regulations that punish
employers who knowingly employ them, pressure from business groups like the
National Federation of Independent Business and the National Restaurant
Association scuttled an attempt to include computer verification of employee
eligibility in the 1996 immigration bill.

            
               What
About Refugees?
            

            A fact sheet prepared by the State Department's Bureau of
Population, Refugees, and Migration outlines the U.S. refugee policy. Around
120,000 refugees are allowed into the country each year if they flee their
country "due to persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution because of
race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or membership in a particular
social group." Recent changes in the law prohibit asylum applications from
persons who have been in the United States for more than a year. Cuban
pitchers are also offered refuge--unless they can get a better deal in the
Bahamas, of course.

         
      
   
