
   
   
      
         
            Hell in the Pacific

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            The Pacific press is rife
with headlines of economic foreboding. Singapore's Straits Times
reports the "slowdown in growth for the second quarter was across
all sectors--and is the lowest growth rate in 12 years." The government pledges
that the country's competitiveness will not erode. Papua New Guinea's Post
Courier announces that the PNG government, which depends on
substantial foreign aid from Australia, is asking the Aussies for a six month
dole advance. Even so, Prime Minister Bill Skate assures the interviewer that
this is not a sign of "dire economic strife." The data dump from the Korea
Times predicts that country's economy will shrink by 5 percent to 6
percent this year. Bank of Korea spokesman Lee Seong-tae opines that the
"economic outlook is getting worse than was anticipated."

            The
economic news in Australia highlights a surprising budget surplus. The national
papers are varying in their response to this good news. The Sydney Morning Herald reports the treasury is aware that the $1.2 billion surplus does
not mean Australia is now immune to the Asian crisis. Melbourne's Age sees the new figures as denoting "bigger-than-expected tax cuts"
in the future, a sentiment that dueled with a quotation from the minister of
finance in the Morning Herald : "This Government is not in the business
of looking for cuts." The proposed tax package, described by the prime minister in the Australian as the
biggest tax change in Australia since World War II, includes a fixed 10 percent
goods and service tax, which would "clean up the indirect tax system" and
create jobs in the process. The package will also reduce taxes on families,
extend various personal tax cuts, make changes in the social security tax, and
make way for an "overhaul" of business taxes.

            Aunified press criticizes the ruling coalition (the Liberal
and National parties) for using the tax plan as an election trump card, and an
Age editorial blasts the government, noting that there has been
"little headway against unemployment, manufacturing export growth has slowed,
and the innovation culture was receding."

            Covering
its citizens abroad, the Australian reports that a Somalian arrested in connection with the embassy
bombing in Tanzania was carrying an Australian passport. Many Pacific countries
are tightening their security as a result of the bombings in Africa. The U.S.
State Department has warned that its embassy in Malaysia (along with those in
other countries) is under threat. Malaysia's prime minister responded in Kuala
Lumpur's Star, saying the announcement was misleading, as it would
displace attention from other countries where the threat is very real, whereas
"there are no terrorist activities" in Malaysia. Sri Lanka's Sunday Times also
reports increased security precautions by the United States in
that country.

            
Indonesia's Daily Express
also reports rumors propagated on the Internet predicting
disturbances between Indonesian Muslims and non-Muslims in a popular shopping
district. The Indonesian press and Singapore's Straits Times discount
the rumors as utterly false, citing the deplorable readiness of people to
believe everything they read on the Internet.

            Thailand, meanwhile, has
discovered a solution to its ubiquitous drug problem. Two high government
officials were reported as discussing the matter, with one condoning extreme
measures when it came to treatment of drug dealers. "Does that measure mean
shooting them?" asked one. The response: "You can do whatever with them. We
have a population of 61 million, 30 million should be sufficient. Do a
vasectomy!"

             

         
      
   
