
   
   
      
         
            Heartbreak Hotel

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            The first anniversary of the
death of Princess Diana dominated headlines worldwide. The British press
credited her untimely demise with the greatly increased popularity of the
monarchy in Britain today. The dramatically diminished shows of public mourning
compared with a year ago were generally interpreted--though without any
evidence--as a sign that grief for her had not declined but had become
"private." Turning mystical, the conservative Sunday Telegraph said in an
editorial that "she restored to royal life the quasi-religious ideal of the
exalted coming down among the meek. ... Without knowing it, Diana revived and
modified the medieval tradition of the 'royal touch,' bringing hope if not
healing to the suffering and the dying."

            Britain's
biggest-selling newspaper, the Sunday tabloid News of the World , said
"the princess who would not go quietly has humbled an arrogant, remote dynasty.
... Now the time for mourning is at an end, but those in high places should
never forget--the time for learning goes on." Scotland on Sunday
rejoiced that "the hounding of the Queen" has ended and that "instead of
demanding that the Queen be made to dance to the tune of the mob, the country
appears to be taking its lead from her and her family." On Monday, the Financial Times noted "a growing
impatience with the attempts to turn her [Diana] into a secular saint" and
pointed out that Prince Charles' "popularity rating is now equal to that of
Tony Blair, the prime minister who so adeptly expressed the nation's grief a
year ago."

            The anniversary was the subject of massive press comment
around the world, with even an austere newspaper such as Le Monde of Paris devoting three
whole pages to it Sunday. On the cause of the princess's death in a car crash
in Paris, Le Monde rejected all conspiracy theories and said the French
investigating magistrate has already concluded it was fundamentally a banal
road accident. The paper published full page profiles of the two chief
custodians of the Diana cult--her brother, Lord
Spencer, and Mohamed al-Fayed, the father of her boyfriend Dodi. Both
were portrayed as thorns in the side of the royal family.

            In Milan,
a front-page editorial in Corriere Della Sera titled "The Memory of Lady Diana in
Ashes" sought to explain why "the river of tears has slowed down and the
dissenters from the myth have become bolder and more numerous." Unlike other
still powerful icons such as Evita Perón and Mother Teresa, "Lady Diana has
left nothing behind ... not a word, not a phrase that might give nourishment to
her worshippers, that might render her myth lasting, or at least a little more
lasting," the paper said. "Through his songs, even Elvis Presley has left
behind an infinite number of memorable words, and 20 years after his death, his
fans are battling strenuously to save from the bulldozers the theater in which
he last performed." In contrast, the followers of the dead princess are
"groping about in silence" and losing "the faith which seemed so solid only a
year ago."

            
Overlooking President Clinton's visit to Russia
this week, the Pioneer of India ran an editorial
Monday about his "homecoming" to Washington after his vacation in Martha's
Vineyard, saying he is sure to be comforted by Robert Frost's lines "Home is
the place where, when you have to go there,/ They have to take you in." The
daily drew a parallel "between the Clinton-Saddam standoff on the one hand, and
the Clinton-Lewinsky affair on the other," suggesting that "both are adventures
of convenience activated by unprecedented power that makes one unmindful of
consequences." Monica Lewinsky is useful "as a palliative for personal
boredom," while Saddam Hussein is useful "as the excuse for the continued
American presence in West Asia and as a regional bully to checkmate
fundamentalist Iran's geopolitical ambitions" (which had been why the United
States "deliberately stopped short of unseating Mr. Hussein" in 1991). The
editorial concluded by saying Americans might refuse to put the Lewinsky affair
behind them, "especially if they have daughters who could be interns in the
White House, or any other house for that matter."

            A reader's letter Monday in the South China Morning Post of Hong
Kong blamed Kenneth Starr's determination to crush Clinton on sexual envy. "Ken
Starr, it seems by all accounts, unlike Mr. Clinton, was never any great shakes
with the ladies," the writer said. "Unlike Mr. Clinton, Mr. Starr is not
exactly what one would describe as charismatic. He is not the sort of guy who
would light up a room when he walked inside."

            In an
editorial headed "A sorry summit in Moscow," London's Financial Times
said that neither Clinton nor Russian President Boris Yeltsin "is in any
position to help the other" and that the best to be hoped from them is that
they will arrange the closest possible cooperation on security issues because
of the danger in Russia "that political weakness at home might lead to
adventurism abroad."

             

         
      
   
