
   
   
      
         
            Flytrap Fatigue

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here. And
if you missed the most recent installments of this column, here they are:
posted Tuesday, Sept. 29, and Friday, Sept.
25.
            

            Flytrap fatigue has been
spreading like wildfire across Europe. The German daily Hamburger Morgenpost lighted the
flame last week by leaving two of its pages blank under the headline "Clinton's
Porn Interrogation: We Have Had Enough." Since then, 14 media organizations in
Portugal--three TV companies, four radio stations, six daily newspapers, and
one newsmagazine--have signed a statement saying, "It is our profound
conviction that the intimate life of a human being, even if he is the president
of the United States, does not justify this obscene official inquiry. We
therefore declare that the media for which we are responsible will not, as from
today, continue to focus on aspects of the intimate life of Bill Clinton that
are not of obvious interest to the public."

            In Britain, the press has
generally failed to catch up with the idea that impeachment is becoming
increasingly unlikely. The satirical magazine Private
Eye, in this week's edition, says that "President Clinton, like beauty, is
in the eye of the beholder." It takes two British commentators on Flytrap--the
liberal Guardian's
Washington correspondent Martin Kettle and the conservative Daily Telegraph's
"resident Bill-baiter"Ambrose Evans-Pritchard--and points out that "what both
papers have in common is that their reporting simply reflects their
prejudices--thus leaving the poor readers hopelessly confused and surprised by
every new turn of events." It takes quotations from both journalists' articles
over several months to show, convincingly, the repeated inaccuracy of their
predictions.

            After its
final quotation from Evans-Pritchard, who wrote Sept. 22 that "those who say
that this scandal does not rise to the level of Watergate may have to eat their
words," Private Eye says, "Perhaps they could be joined on this verbal
banquet by Evans-Pritchard." And to Kettle's warning, issued the same day, that
the Clinton presidency may be seen by future historians "as a huge historic
disappointment consisting mainly of strategic retreats in a right-wing era and
as a catastrophic personal let-down for a generation of American liberals," the
magazine adds, "And for a certain British liberal hack, too?"

            The crisis in Kosovo figures prominently in most European
newspapers. The Times of London led its front page Thursday with "Nato Ready for
Strikes on Serbia." But an editorial seemed skeptical about whether NATO will
actually do anything. It recalled that six years ago George Bush, in his
"Christmas warning," said that if Belgrade used force against Kosovo's Albanian
majority, the United States would intervene: "Then Mr. Milosevic listened. But
now, although he is politically weaker, neither Nato nor Washington has given
him cause to believe that the West means business."

            The visit
to Paris Wednesday by Germany's new Chancellor-elect Gerhard Schröder was also
the subject of much comment. The Süddeutche Zeitung of Munich ran an editorial Thursday pointing
out that Schröder presented the French with "a new Germany," one in which the
Roman Catholic Rhinelander Helmut Kohl has been replaced by a northern
Protestant less likely to be sympathetic to the French. But President Jacques
Chirac was reported in the French press to be reassured by Schröder's
assurances that Germany will continue to pursue the same European policies
while extending the Franco-German relationship to take more account of
Britain.

             

         
      
   
