
   
   
      
         
            Cruel Britannia

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and Friday
morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit
Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click
here.
            

            The South China Morning Post reports on
President Clinton's public declaration of the United States' Taiwan policy. The
Chinese strongly pressured him to state the policy in clear terms, something he
had avoided doing. In Shanghai, he was unwavering: "We don't support
independence for Taiwan, or 'two Chinas,' or 'one Taiwan, one China,' and we
don't believe Taiwan should be a member in any organisation for which statehood
is a requirement." The Taiwanese government asserted that the United States and
China have no right to determine Taiwan's future without input from Taipei.

            British papers delve deep
into England's World Cup soccer loss to Argentina. The London Daily
Mirror headline: "It's
Just Too Cruel to Take." General conclusions: 1) Star player David Beckham was
an idiot to have committed the foul that got him kicked out of the game ("an
astonishing display of petulance," says the Mirror ); 2) Beckham's
infraction was harmless and did not warrant an ejection; and 3) 18-year-old
phenom Michael Owen is a brilliant talent. The Guardian interviews coach
Glenn Hoddle, who says Beckham's retaliatory strike "wasn't violent conduct.
...Why do we always need a scapegoat in a case like this?"

            The
Daily Telegraph salutes England for playing "brilliant and brave
football," noting the team's fortitude in playing a man down for almost the
entire second half. The Telegraph also nabs a quote from the queen: When
asked if she'd been rooting for the team, Her Royal Highness responded, "Well,
I think one should." The Guardian wonders why the English team is bad at
penalty shots (the match was decided in a penalty shootout). Dismissing the
possibility of inferior talent, the paper decides it has something to do with
the national character: "Is there some cancerous part of the English psyche
which produces serial chokers. ... Might not last night's performance be seen
as the classic example of a nation on the dither?"

            Oddly, one must go all the way to Japan for the
unattractive griping one might expect. Asahi Shimbun
quotes several English fans declaring they were "robbed" by a missed call
against the Argentines. Other whines: "They don't want the English to win. ...
It appears that there is some bias against us. ... I haven't seen such rubbish
in a long time. ... We've been cheated." The paper downplays any leftover
bitterness from the Falklands War or the 1986 World Cup match in which
Argentina beat England on an illegal play: "Maybe during the war we were angry.
But it's a game," says one English fan. Offering a less cavalier attitude
toward the sport, a Brazilian soccer columnist has this to say in the O Estado
of Sao Paulo:

            Here in Brazil, the
every-four-year event shows a much more positive and spontaneous Brazilian
patriotism than that of all national holidays and elections together. ... I
wonder what would happen if Brazilians were allowed to choose between two types
of election: the president of the nation or the coach of the national team. I
have a feeling that many Brazilians would perceive more reasons to pick the
second choice.

            Newspapers across the Great
White North celebrate Canada Day with pride and patriotism. The Ottawa Sun reports that,
despite their hatred of the very nation being celebrated, "Canada Day even
touches separatists."

             

         
      
   
