
   
   
      
         
            Trouble in Russia

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday morning
delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit Central"
(Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click here.
            

            As Russia prepared for
Friday's controversial, low-key burial of Czar Nicholas II's remains in St.
Petersburg, the English-language St. Petersburg Times reported that "as
in life, so in death, Nicholas II has served only to divide Russia." It quoted
a new opinion poll showing that only 47 percent of Russians believe that the
remains, which a government commission has found to be those of the last czar,
are in fact authentic. In an editorial, the paper said that "[b]etween rampant organizational
chaos, a stingy funeral budget, sound and fury from the Russian Orthodox Church
and a growing list of prominent no-shows, this proposed 'act of national
repentance and reconciliation' is shaping up as one lousy historical event."
Even if Boris Yeltsin were to have a last-minute change of heart and decide to
attend, despite the church's refusal to accept the authenticity of the remains,
the damage has already been done, the editorial said, and "[a] historical
occasion which at the very least deserved both gravity and grace has been
irrevocably reduced to pure spectacle."

            

               Izvestiya 's lead story Thursday claimed the Russian government is
playing down the crippling effects of drought on the country's grain harvest
because it knows it cannot afford to provide compensation to farmers. The paper
rejected a government claim that the drought's cost to agriculture is around 2
billion rubles, saying that the drought has hit 35 regions and has caused a
loss in the Volgograd region alone of around 1.2 billion rubles. The daily
Egodnya predicted that the U.S. Congress would seek to attach strict
conditions to the disbursement of the multibillion dollar credit recently
agreed by Russia with the International Monetary Fund. Among the demands it
expected the Republican majority in Congress to make were pledges by Russia not
to place S-300 missiles in Cyprus, not to conduct trade with Iran, not to
interfere with the blockade of Iraq, to reduce Russian gas supplies to Europe,
and to give American companies greater access to Russian markets.

            German newspapers led Thursday with an announcement by
Interior Minister Manfred Kanther that he wants to get tough with Germany's
football hooligans now to prevent further violence at the next international
football tournament--the European championship--which is to take place in
Belgium and Holland in two years' time. He proposed to place a travel ban on
known German troublemakers, but to back this up with fiercer measures such as
immobilizing their cars or, as a last resort, locking them up. The conservative
Die Welt backed the proposals
in a front-page editorial that urged German liberals to accept them in the
interests of the country as a whole.

            The French
newspapers were also preoccupied Thursday with a sports problem--that of drug
abuse by cyclists in the Tour de France. Following the arrest of the trainer of
the Festina team, Bruno Roussel, accused of possessing large quantities of
forbidden substances, there were several editorials Thursday about the
potentially disastrous effects of this scandal on the world's greatest cycling
marathon. Libération
praised the Ministry of Sport for having apparently decided "to burst the boil"
of drug abuse, which has overshadowed the tour since 1966, when competitors
went on strike rather than submit to drug tests. Le Figaro said that the tour had
been "poisoned" by the scandal.

            
The French press also gave heavy coverage to
the visit to Paris of President Hafez el Assad of Syria who, Le Monde said, was seeking to
advance the role of the European Union in the Middle East peace process at the
expense of the United States. In an editorial Thursday, the newspaper said the
French government might not be wrong to want to integrate the Syrian president
into the process rather than exclude him, but asked, "All the same, can one
tolerate the imprisonment of more than two thousand prisoners of conscience in
a country which one is seeking to make one's 'strategic partner'?"

            The conservative Israeli
paper the Jerusalem Post
published an opinion piece Thursday by Palestinian journalist Daud Kuttab
attacking the United States for demanding new direct Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks. "This is a cop-out," he wrote. "If the Clinton administration, which has
been described by many Israelis as the most pro-Israel administration ever, is
unable to press Israel, how will the weak Palestinians" fare.

            In
Britain, the London Evening Standard reported that British scientists were
"coming forward in droves" to claim fatherhood of the impotence drug Viagra
after two members of Pfizer's British research team had been recognized as its
inventors by the British Patent Office.

             

         
      
   
