
   
   
      
         
            A Dreadful Crime Against Humanity

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here.
            

            European newspapers were
dominated this weekend by the Saturday car bomb explosion in Omagh, Northern
Ireland. The blast killed 28--including nine children--and injured more than
200 in the worst atrocity in 30 years of the "Troubles."

            Britain's Sunday Telegraph reported
that the town was crowded with back-to-school shoppers and people attending a
carnival and parade. All the papers decried the misleading warning--police
cleared the area named in a phone call to the media, only to have the explosion
occur at the evacuation point. As the chief constable of the Royal Ulster
Constabulary told London's Sunday Times , "[m]en, women and children were
led to their slaughter."

            The
British Sunday newspapers were filled with grotesque eyewitness accounts of the
carnage and unusually unanimous condemnations from politicians of all stripes.
Ken Maginnis of the pro-British Ulster Unionist Party declared the bomb "a
dreadful crime against humanity." Martin McGuinness of Sinn Fein, the political
wing of the Irish Republican Army, blamed "those opposed to the peace process."
Even Sinn Fein President Gerry Adams was moved to his first "unequivocal
condemnation of a republican paramilitary action," reported Dublin's Irish Times.

            The fragile peace settlement is another potential victim of
the blast. The renewal of terrorist activity has rekindled demands that Sinn
Fein comply with the Good Friday peace deal by turning in its cache of
paramilitary weapons. Reflecting suspicions that the bomb was set by the "Real
IRA," a breakaway branch of the IRA (the initial telephone warning was made by
a caller using one of that group's code words, though official spokesmen denied
responsibility Sunday), Ulster Unionist Party leader and Northern Ireland First
Minister David Trimble told the London Sunday Times that "this bomb
would not have been made or detonated if Sinn Fein had handed over its
explosives and weapons." Peter Robinson, a Democratic Unionist Party MP, echoed
this sentiment in the Sunday Telegraph : "We shouldn't be sitting down
with Sinn Fein at all until [there is] substantial decommissioning."

            While
politicians urged that the bombing not be allowed to disrupt the peace process,
several newspapers in both Britain and Ireland called for the return of
internment--imprisonment without trial for suspected terrorists--which was
recently removed from British law. An opinion piece Monday in the Irish Times said, "Internment
will not merely put the Nazi wing [of the IRA] behind bars; it will also serve
to strengthen the conciliatory Adams/McGuinness wing in their arguments with
dissidents inside the larger Sinn Féin/IRA family."

            Financial panic struck Russia last week, the Moscow
Times reports,
after financier George Soros called, in a letter to London's Financial
Times , for Russia to set up a currency board and proposed a 15 percent to
20 percent ruble devaluation. According to the Moscow paper, some Russian banks
experienced a "liquidity crisis," some restricted U.S. dollar withdrawals, and
the Central Bank "stepped in with emergency credits ... to prop up several of
the country's biggest banks, which were in danger of default." There was a
slight rebound in the market Friday when Russian President Boris Yeltsin
pledged to defend the ruble. The Moscow Times claims: "Devaluation would
threaten the banking system with collapse. In June, Finance Minister Mikhail
Zadornov said that a fall in the ruble's exchange rate would leave only about
30 of the country's 1,500 banks still standing." Nevertheless, Monday Russia's
Central Bank gave up its efforts to defend the ruble--a de facto devaluation.
Toronto's Globe and
Mail suggested Saturday that the deepening Russian financial
crisis could be Yeltsin's undoing. It reported poll results that show that "his
popularity has slumped to an all-time low" and that "[i]f an election were held
today, only 4 per cent of Russians would vote for him."

            In South Asia renewed tensions are building around
Pakistan's support for the Taliban government in Afghanistan. Pakistani daily
Dawn repeated a foreign
office spokesman's claim that the allegations of Pakistani complicity in
Taliban military campaigns are "propaganda." Meanwhile in India, an opinion piece in the Hindu called Pakistan "the breeding ground for religious
extremism, terrorism, narcotics trafficking and money laundering." It
concluded, "One can only hope that in the wake of the brutal bombing of the
U.S. Embassies in East Africa and the victory of a mediaevalist force in
Afghanistan, the international community will recognise that the war against
terrorism cannot be selective."

            With the Aug. 31 one year
anniversary of her death approaching, British newspapers are drowning in Di,
though Monday's Guardian reports that more than 2,000 anti-monarchists are expected to
march on Buckingham Palace in October. Among the protest's promised attractions
are a Princess Diana look-alike stripper and a homemade guillotine. On a more
sober note, Britain's Observer offered an exclusive report Sunday:
"Diana's legacy ignored in Bosnia landmine scandal" said that
political and bureaucratic blunders have left equipment "desperately needed to
clear Bosnia's minefields ... unused for months." According to the story, the
European Union "set aside

         
      
   
