
   
   
      
         
            Open Skies

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and Friday
morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily), "Pundit
Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning), click
here.
            

            In London, the Financial Times devoted its main
front page story and its principal editorial Thursday to the European
Commission's approval of the planned alliance between American Airlines and
British Airways and the partnership between United Airlines, Lufthansa, and the
Scandinavian Airlines System. The editorial said, however, that this is "far
from the end of the story." Once the BA-AA deal is also approved by the British
and U.S. governments, Europe should proceed to negotiate an "open skies" policy
with the United States. "The U.S. has used 'open skies' agreements as a
divide-and-rule tactic, to secure privileged access to the European market for
its carriers," the FT said. "Now that most EU members have signed up,
they should have a strong incentive to support Brussels' efforts to negotiate
on their behalf a broader and more balanced deal, which would liberalise
transatlantic aviation." Meanwhile, air transport needs to be brought within
World Trade Organization rules, the editorial added. The long-term aim should
be "to get governments out of the airline business, other than to the extent
required to ensure safety, essential infrastructure, and free competition."

            Tina
Brown's resignation from The 
               New 
               Yorker to manage a new
Miramax affiliate was the subject of a short editorial Thursday in the
conservative London Daily Telegraph, which described her as one of Britain's "most
exuberant exports." She "put life back into a dreary over-intellectual magazine
that was little read and even less talked about," it said. "She axed the
interminable essays on African land reform, commissioned glitz, and went
determinedly down-market in search of circulation--most successfully. ... Tina
knew how to inflame debate. She will be missed--by some, at least."

            The Guardian of London reported from India on a warrant issued by a court in New Delhi
for the arrest of Rupert Murdoch for screening "vulgar" films on his Star
Movies TV channel. The warrant was issued on the initiative of an obscure,
self-appointed guardian of family values, a lawyer named Anil Goel, who had
objected to four films-- The Jigsaw Murders , Dance of the Damned ,
Stripped to Kill , and Big, Bad Mama --that were broadcast in
November 1996, the newspaper said. The case is due to be heard Aug. 22.

            In Russia,
Izvestia said
Thursday the "honeymoon" has ended between Russia and Iran because of serious
disagreements over the division of the Caspian Sea. This is bad for the Russian
diplomatic service, which has long regarded Iran as its key partner in the
region and gone so far as to "risk its standing in the eyes of the
international community by continuing to sell weapons to Iran and building
nuclear power stations on its territory," the paper said. But it concluded that
a cooling of relations between Russia and Iran isn't a bad thing in the long
run, because cooperation with one of the world's most hateful regimes is
"unnatural."

            
Financier Boris Berezovsky' small-circulation
Nezavisimaya 
               Gazeta said Thursday that Russia might soon be "on
the brink of total instability." A "wave of people's wrath" is already
spreading across the country, it said, despite forecasts by analysts that mass
civil unrest will not break out until the fall. Referring to protests by
defense industry workers, miners, teachers, doctors, and energy sector workers,
the newspaper noted that demonstrators outside the Defense Ministry in Moscow
Wednesday paid no attention to attempts by government ministers and trade union
leaders to appease them but continued to shout slogans such as "Send Yeltsin's
gang to trial." Underestimating the present threat could be fatal not only for
the government but also for the whole country, the paper added.

            In
Nigeria, the Post
Express reported Wednesday that the Environmental Protection
Agency of the northeastern state of Yobe has appealed to the state government
to help meet the cost of burying armed robbers, lunatics, and unclaimed bodies.
The head of the agency's sanitation unit, Malam Adamu Bajob, said he has
sometimes had to pay for such burials out of his own pocket. The cost is often
high: Delayed release by authorities means the bodies are decomposed and
require "extra burial materials." Since the state stepped up its campaign
against banditry, the agency has been burying an average of three such bodies a
week, the newspaper said. In an editorial titled "Starr Should Not Tarry," the Post Express cautioned
the independent counsel not to "lose sight of the broader picture": It said his
office was created not only "to assure the unfettered investigation of charges
against the highest government officials" but also to ensure "that a
prosecutorial judgement be rendered in a timely manner." And in the case of
Clinton and Starr, "that time is rapidly approaching."

             

         
      
   
