
   
   
      
         
            Give It Away, Ken

            Soul-searching is always a
great story (as long as it's someone else's soul). So those in the media who
assume he did it--that is, all of us--agree that between now and Aug. 17,
Clinton had better do some. He must, as the phrase goes, test his own
character: Am I going to be a sleazy liar forever? Or will I finally tell
the truth even if it hurts?
            

            But I am
beginning to think the real character test in the next few weeks is not for
Clinton but for Kenneth Starr: What kind of prosecutor am I? This
question can be asked in a more direct, more pragmatic way: Will Starr tell
Clinton the results of the DNA tests before he testifies?

            You can get a headache trying to game all Starr's possible
DNA-test tactics. Consider a few:

            Initial test shows DNA, Starr
asks Clinton for blood sample, doesn't reveal results.

            Initial test shows DNA, Starr
doesn't ask for blood sample, hopes to trick Clinton into thinking he's in the
clear.

            Initial test shows no DNA,
Starr doesn't say anything, hopes Clinton will assume he's pursuing Option B,
etc.

            But for
the sake of argument, let's assume FBI tests show there is DNA on the dress:
Should Starr tell the president this before Aug. 17?

            
Prosecutorial wisdom shouts: Of course not!
Starr has been working this case for years, and he has the chance to hook the
biggest fish in the biggest pond. Why on earth would he give away precious
information that might help Clinton wriggle free? Starr, needless to say, has
no obligation to show the evidence to Clinton. Prosecutors may reveal
sensitive evidence to a witness they are trying to protect (i.e., if a witness
who is helping you might perjure himself in front of a grand jury, you tell him
information so he won't lie). Prosecutors do not reveal sensitive evidence to
those they are trying to prosecute. Why treat Clinton differently?

            (The
president, of course, is not a regular target of investigation, because a
regular target would never testify in front of a grand jury if he had something
to hide. The president, because it's politically impossible, can't take the
Fifth. It seems unfair to trap him in a lie that he would never have had to
tell if he were a regular citizen.)

            Starr's setup may be a perjury trap, but that does not
necessarily mean it's unfair. Imagine Starr doesn't tell Clinton about a
positive test result. The president, of course, ought to tell the truth, but
Clinton being Clinton, he might not. (The White House so far is adamant that
Clinton is sticking to his denial.) He might brazen it out by lying to the
grand jury. The dress and Monica's story would nail him, an open-and-shut
perjury case. By the prosecutor's code, Clinton has hanged himself.

            But what
Starr can do as a prosecutor and what he ought to do as a public
servant differ.

            
What will happen if Starr reveals a positive
result to Clinton? He probably destroys his own case. No matter how much
Clinton might want to brazen it out, advance warning from Starr would compel
the president to admit and apologize. So Clinton wouldn't perjure himself and,
as I argued Sunday, an apology is likely to kill the appetite for any
impeachment hearings (over obstruction, Whitewater, Filegate, etc.). Starr's
criminal case goes up in smoke.

            Whether Starr gives it away
depends on what kind of prosecutor he is. If he wants to expose criminal
behavior by the president and punish it no matter what--if, in short, he is the
vindictive avenger Clinton's defenders say he is--Starr will sacrifice no
advantage. He will blindside the president with test results if that will build
a stronger case. But if he's a prosecutor who wants to turn up the truth as
much as to get his target, then Starr will give it away.

            "The decent and sensitive
thing to do is tell the president. There is no advantage whatsoever to getting
the president to lie before the grand jury," says former Deputy Attorney
General Philip Heymann. "[Starr should] not put himself in the position of
having called the president and inviting him to lie unnecessarily."

            Or, as
Washington, D.C., criminal lawyer Robert Luskin puts it, "You just don't play a
game of chicken like that with the president of the United States."

            There are strong public policy reasons for Starr to give
the results away. Do we really want the president's career to rise or fall
based on prosecutorial cleverness in a secret grand jury proceeding? Telling
Clinton the results makes it more likely he'll go public, and that makes it
more likely Flytrap will be played out in the open rather than in private legal
proceedings. And the public political realm is where Flytrap belongs.

            One of Starr's obligations as
a prosecutor is to protect the honorable institutions of government, and one of
those institutions is (believe it or not) the dignity of the presidency. That
dignity has been much squandered by Clinton, but this is a chance for Starr to
protect what remains. Starr protects the presidency by exposing criminal
behavior by the president. But he can also protect the presidency by preventing
more criminal behavior. Not telling the president of a positive DNA result may
induce Clinton--admittedly because of his own hubris--to lie, to trap himself,
to damage the office of the presidency even more. Telling the president lets
Clinton avoid committing a new crime.

            The person who would benefit
most of all by telling is Starr himself. He has been demonized as the
prosecutor who is destroying the president over sex. He can become the
prosecutor who let the president save himself.

         
      
   
