
   
   
      
         
            <i>The Sopranos</i>: TV's Only High Note
            

            Tucker:

            The Times thing sounds reprehensible--I agree. If, I don't know, Bob
Herbert sent around a mass e-mail with dirty jokes about the wives of Texas
executioners, do you think he'd get fired?

            I want to move away from all this witty banter about politics and media
ethics and move on to something more serious: TV. I noticed in several papers
today that HBO plans to rerun all 13 episodes of The Sopranos starting
the day after Christmas (a holiday that Nancy Marchand's character, Livia
Soprano, would no doubt say is a racket for the non-Jews). I don't know about
you, but I love television. Some people have sports; other people have
politics. I have digital cable: 500 channels of bliss. Watching The
Sopranos last spring was like gazing at a Rothko or eating at Chez Panisse.
It was art, pure and simple, and it was immensely nourishing--and if you don't
believe me, ask the half-dozen or so guys I play poker with every week. They're
not your average beer-bellied slackers (well, only one is), and they're not
alpha-wave-overdosed geeks. They're sophisticates, and to a one they savored
every episode, every frame, every line. It's all we talked about then, and
again all we talked about when the series was rerun for the first time over the
summer. What makes it so good? All the usual things: wonderful writing, great
casting (the co-casting director is Christopher Walken's wife), and a very
contemporary story line that has already been copied to ill effect by other
movies and TV shows. What The X-Files was a few years ago and Ally
McBeal was last year, The Sopranos is this year: A masterpiece
fraudulently imitated by lesser men--the sort who wouldn't be let into the Bada
Bing Club. (Don't ask.)

            One reason I think The Sopranos is so far superior to everything else
on the tube is that everything else on the tube is dreadful. Even The West
Wing , a shabby small-screen version of every big-screen movie about the
inner workings of government (which are themselves shabby versions of the real
thing, which is itself a shabby version of what the real thing should be), is a
hit; it ought to be canceled, if only to send a message to the dentist who
capped Martin Sheen's teeth. Only a little while ago, it seems, everyone was
marveling at how TV had eclipsed the movies in terms of quality, which led to
an exodus of film folks for the friendlier confines of the blue glow. This
season, I think, the tide has turned back. It's been a banner year for the
movies, at least in my opinion. I really liked American Beauty , Three
Kings , The Sixth Sense , The Blair Witch Project , and Being
John Malkovich , to name but five of the very solid flicks that lived up to
and even exceeded my expectations in the past few months. Whereas, except for
The Simpsons and The Practice, there are no TV shows worth
watching regularly anymore. This is probably the reason for the rise of the
magazine shows on VH-1, E!, and the like. Not that I need to rationalize the
existence of Behind the Music . The minute I saw Leif Garrett in his
bandanna hopefully talking about a comeback in 2000, I was hooked. He had me at
hello.

            Tucker, you have little kids, right? I have a 3-year-old, and she is much
more optimistic about the future of television than I am. Not a day goes by
when she doesn't ask to watch Arthur or the new hip Zoom , whose
cast is as diverse ethnically and, for all I know, in its sexual orientation as
the first Clinton cabinet. Lately, though, our favorite--hers and mine--is the
animated series based on the George and Martha books. The main characters are
two hippos, friends rather than lovers, and I've always suspected that George
is gay--the first homosexual lead, as it were, in children's entertainment.
(I'm not counting Professor Brown in Bednobs and Broomsticks . The Brits
are simply effete.) And, wouldn't you know, I'm right. Nathan Lane does the
voice of George with such flamboyance and relish that it puts the actors on
Will and Grace to shame.

            What's Will and Grace ? Uhh, maybe we should go back to talking about
politics.

            Regards,
Evan

         
      
   
