
   
   
      
         
            First Lady in Spliff Shocker!
            

            Tucker:

            I spent much of the latter half of yesterday on planes bound for San
Francisco, which is where I am as I write this. We hovered above the city for
more than an hour before landing--a combination of bad weather and President
Clinton taking off from the S.F. airport. I didn't find out until much later
that he'd been here, and I didn't find out why he was on the West Coast, or
rather one of the reasons he was supposed to be on the West Coast, until I
picked up the morning papers. Riots? What decade is this? (And over trade
issues? Is Pat Buchanan trying to jump-start his campaign?) I don't know about
the coverage back east, but it's quite something out here. If you covered the
headline in the San Francisco Chronicle --"Turmoil in Seattle
Streets"--and just looked at the picture of official-looking guys with clubs
and helmets and prole-looking folks in heavy coats and scarves, you'd think it
was some Eastern European war zone.

            Also on the front page of the Chronicle , a story about W.'s tax plan
(is there no escaping the guy?), which I gather he'll detail today in that
hotbed of economic-policy analysis, Des Moines. Tax breaks for the working poor
and no reduction in capital gains taxes ... hmmm. I'm sure the conservative
Republican establishment will fall right in line. Here's my favorite part of
the article: "Response to the Bush tax plan was swift. Even before knowing the
details, Vice President Al Gore criticized it yesterday." Even before knowing
the details. Sheesh, couldn't he have waited five seconds before attacking the
guy? I can see it now: "Republican candidate George W. Bush said today that
Tipper Gore is the sexiest woman alive. Even before knowing the details, Vice
President Al Gore criticized Bush's choice as a 'hog.' " Actually, my fave Gore
quote is that Bush's plan is a "truly reckless tax scheme." The new bogeyword
of American politics: scheme. When a pol hates something these days, it's never
a proposal; it's a scheme, as if Snidely Wiplash cooked it up in his evil
lair.

            And then there's Hillary, attacking Rudy's plan for the homeless in the
Times and elsewhere. Let's put aside the relative merits of how Rudy's
treated everyone but Christyne Lategano the last few years. The mayor has
cleaned up New York City, made it liveable again--made it visitable again. Even
if he's been cruel to the squeegee guys--and, c'mon, he has--this is not an
issue with legs for the first lady. There are a lot of Upper West Side libs who
will publicly nod at her in assent but privately want the streets free of
moochers and hookers and the like. I had hopes for Hillary, who seems senator
material to me: smart and pompous and possessed with a regal bearing totally
out of proportion to her dime-store roots. I've been saying for months that she
can win--I've even got a $50 bet on the race with one of W.'s media guys,
Stuart Stevens--and I still think her chances improve if your favorite
political candidate of the millennium, Dollar Bill, gets the Democratic
presidential nod and brings Knicks voters out of the stands and into the
polling place. But she's shown absolutely no traction so far, and if the next
11 months go the way I expect for the GOP, she's gonna have to pull a rabbit
out of her hat to win.

            Or a joint. For a fleeting moment late last night, I thought I saw a
reference on Drudge to some story about Hillary having acknowledged smoking
pot. (Oh, do you think?) Sadly, it did not carry the typical
inflamed/outraged/engorged Drudge headline -- "First Lady in Spliff Shocker!"
I'm with you on this: I think I'd respect her more knowing she spilled her
share of bong water way back when. Maybe she even bongoes naked.
Hillary-McConaughey in 2004: Talk about your Democratic par-tay.

            Regards,
Evan

         
      
   
