
   
   
      
         
            The Trouble With Summaries
            

            Dear Gerald:

            You're absolutely right--it may be a long time until we see anything like
Africana again. Even if I'd been able to throw it at my television--just
lifting it violates the instructions my orthopedist gave me last week
concerning my arthritic shoulder--I wouldn't have, and not just because I like
football, baseball, and AMC. Africana is as least as good as the two or
three other encyclopedias of black history and culture that sit in storage
while I wait for my shoulder to heal enough so I can build bookshelves.

            At the same time, though, admitting that I need to keep Africana
because it's all we have right now is too much like how some older folk I know
feel about Ebony and BET (which, one wag I know quips, stands for the
Brothers' Excuse for Television). In their heart of hearts, they know neither
is really very good, but they nonetheless can't resist claiming pride of
ownership.

            Still, in the spirit of fairness, before I get back to beating the boy, I
have to list a few things I like about Africana . The brief essay on
Kathleen Conwell--also known as Kathleen Collins--acknowledges a filmmaker who
deserves wider recognition. She was also a playwright and a novelist, but I
like best her film Losing Ground . When I was still editing Black Film
Review , the magazine I founded (shameless plug!), I spent a wonderful two
days with her at a film festival in Atlanta. When she died, in 1988, we
published a special issue about her. I didn't know her well, of course, but I
often think about the two hours we spent talking that afternoon so long
ago.

            It's also good to see documentary filmmaker St. Clair Bourne here, though I
wonder why Donald Bogle--a pioneer in black film studies--isn't. (That's
another one of those glaring omissions that make you wonder whether the editors
of Africana didn't really have an agenda after all.) And I like the
entries on countries in Africa and the Black Diaspora and the accompanying
"ready references" summarizing demographic and economic data about those
countries. I spent much of last year tutoring one of my godsons--if we'd had
Africana then, we wouldn't have had to leave my house to walk around to
the library.

            That's both the strength and the weakness of Africana , that it
provides so much information in such a truncated form. Like you, I wish Gates
and Appiah had taken the time to compile a truly comprehensive encyclopedia. If
you must have monuments to validate your worth as a people, then build lasting
ones.

            At the heart of my criticism, though, is my conviction that our experience
as blacks and Americans--like any human experience--is just too complex to be
summarized. More and more, since I quit reviewing books, I think that's the job
of fiction. Andre Schwartz-Bart's The Last of the Just (for example) is
a far more moving evocation of the Holocaust than any account in any reference
work, because it focuses on the experiences of one man--a man who, if he
continues to deny his Jewishness, has a reasonable chance of escaping the death
camps. Jim McPherson's stories have something of the same power. They, too,
bring representative individual experience alive, and McPherson confronts the
places where things intersect, then reports on what he finds.

            When I look at our place in American history, though, what intrigues me are
the missed opportunities--as when, for example, legal and societal distinctions
were first made between white indentured servants and black slaves. I'm also
intrigued by the contradictions. A few months back, black and Native Americans
at a West Coast conference took each other to task over the role of the Buffalo
Soldiers in the opening of the West. I'd like to have been there for that
one!

            I'd like to have seen some evidence in Africana of our humanity and
resourcefulness, the kind of thing you find in the work of Ralph Ellison and
Albert Murray, both of whom were, if memory serves correctly, Henry Louis
Gates' mentors. Remember how Robert Penn Warren tells Albert Murray in South
to a Very Old Place that slavery "was also a human thing ... not to say
humane" and so "every possible, every imaginable combination of human
social relationships is likely to exist. And did exist ." [Italics
original.] Where is that kind of insightful and original thinking in
Africana ?

            Which isn't at all to excuse or make apologies for slavery, of course, but
only to argue that our collective memory needs to include men like Robert
Harlan, Justice Harlan's half-brother (or cousin, depending on which biographer
you believe), who was educated by his master, escaped to California, made a
fortune in the gold fields, returned to Kentucky and bought his freedom, then
moved to England to race horses. Or the mulatto barber and real estate magnate
of antebellum Natchez (I can't remember his name, but remember, my books are in
storage). He was freed by his father, then became wealthy enough to lend money
to prominent whites. He was killed in a dispute over timber by a Pamunkey
Indian from Virginia who would have been considered black in Virginia but
escaped prosecution because he was considered white in Mississippi.

            I feel like I'm rambling here, and with more than 800 words written, I
haven't even gotten round to responding to your points about the responsibility
of the black intellectual. Like you, I wish Gates and Cornel West would take
sabbaticals and embark on the kind of lasting work they're both capable of. And
there's an interesting paradox here with Africana : Gates is probably the
only black intellectual in America with the charisma and clout to get it
published. The work itself, alas!, is solid and workmanlike, nothing like what
I think we have the right to expect from the sage of Cambridge.

            Take care. It was a pleasure working with you.

            David

         
      
   
