
   
   
      
         
            Triumph of the Middlebrow?
            

            This book comes with a triumphant blaring of publishers' trumpets, and one
supposes that it is a signal sort of triumph for black studies or Africana
studies (take your pick of names). The field has arrived to such an extent that
a publisher thinks that it can make money, significant money, publishing such a
work. Assignments in black studies have filtered down to the high-school,
junior-high, and even elementary-school level (and remember the black
liturgical occasions we now have on the calendar that beg for special
schoolchild reports of one sort or another: the King holiday, Black History
Month, Black Music Month, Kwanzaa, Malcolm X's birthday, Juneteenth), and while
not every school does all of this, most schools must do some of this. (And
this, of course, has nothing to do with the occasional racial killing or major
protest that took place or may be taking place somewhere that require a report
and discussion in a current-events or social-studies class.) Moreover, blacks
cannot be left out of Women's History Month or Veteran's Day or, for the truly
daring, Gay Appreciation Month. So, a book like Africana is bound to get
a great deal of use, to be sold to virtually every school, public, and
university library in the country, as well as to a number of churches, to say
nothing of the private homes that will have a copy right next to the
Britannica . (In some more Afrocentric black homes, it may replace the
Britannica entirely, that Eurocentric collection of lies, although
Britannica has become as multicultural as everyone else these days.)
Those of us who have labored in the field of black studies (politically
incorrectly such as the present author or very much politically correctly like
a good many very good scholars) are heartened by this commercial venture.
Indeed, it would be disheartening, as well as entirely untrue, if one were to
think that this book was published as an act of philanthropy, as something that
ought to be done. (It is so tiresome as a black person to be the recipient of
charity all the time, to be the object of the moral imperative.)

            It is good to know that, partly through the energetic offices of Henry Louis
Gates, black studies can, as it were, pay its way these days and not be
dependent for its existence on a kind of political and cultural moralism on the
part of whites and a kind of fetishlike piety on the part of blacks. It can be,
alas, a business of an entirely good sort or needful sort, justifying itself in
the marketplace. But I would think that most black-studies scholars are only
partly heartened by this; for this rather triumphalist book (and Gates is
important in black studies, in part, for the promotion of a triumphalist view
of black history and black culture--globally speaking--which is why he is hated
by Afrocentrists who take a somewhat different view of the long-term meaning of
"the coming of the white man") is nothing less than the middlebrow arrival of
black studies in American culture. Encyclopedias, after all, are middlebrow,
bourgeois books that tend, in the end, not to promote intellectual inquiry on
the part of the people who use them but rather to stifle it. Children tend to
copy verbatim from such books without ever reading what they are copying.
Adults, with far too much deference for the printed word, tend to consult such
a book in much the way they consult the dictionary or the Bible (or in the way
baseball fanatics consult the official record books): as the final arbiter, as
that which settles all arguments. Why, for goodness' sake, would anyone
actually read a book like this? Knowledge, in the instance of the definitive
reference book, becomes entombed and sanctified, very much serving the
anti-intellectual ends of the middlebrow, who want not to encounter knowledge
and to wrestle with it but to store it as an authority on the bookshelf.

            But I suppose it is something of a triumph, which the publication of this
book is meant to acknowledge, that black studies has achieved middlebrow status
in the United States, that bourgeois people, both white and black, feel bad if
they don't know something about the history and culture of African-descended
people, in much the same way they feel bad, inadequate, if they don't know
something about opera or a bit about Impressionist painting or if they have
never seen a film by D. W. Griffith or Fritz Lang. How terrible at a party to
discover that one has never seen The Grand Illusion --one of the all-time
great films--or that one has not read, alas, a Toni Morrison novel or one does
not own a Wynton Marsalis album. (The truly knowing coves own albums by
Thelonious Monk and John Coltrane, no less, and do reports for their book clubs
on the blues.) What most thinking people in black studies find dangerous about
the middlebrow apotheosis of the field is that it usually leads to the
enshrinement of what Jacques Barzun calls thought-clichés, half-truths or
non-truths that are accepted as the truth because someone said so in some
reference book like Africana . Thought-clichés are like narcotics; people
love them because they relieve them of the very thing they do not wish to do in
any case, that is, think, think hard, and think critically and against the
grain of their own beliefs or psychological needs or neurotic fantasy
projections. Thought-clichés confirm one's stupidity and one's laziness. With
all the goodwill in the world, a book like Africana cannot help but
produce thought-clichés; it is, indeed, why most people will consult such a
work, to find them and be comforted by them. No intellectual or scholar can,
therefore, be fully at ease with a work of this sort, no matter his or her
ideological stripe. Such a book as Africana simply washes the
practitioners in the field in a sea of ambivalence, with a sense of lost faith,
as we all stand before it a bit as Matthew Arnold stood before Dover Beach.

            Now, Gates and Appiah published a multicultural dictionary about a year ago,
and Gates and Nellie McKay published the Norton Anthology of African
American Literature shortly before that. With Africana , where Gates
and Appiah, rather sentimentally and opportunistically, see themselves as the
descendants of Du Bois, whose unfilled dream was to produce such a book, Gates
seems to have cornered the market on black reference books that shape the canon
of black studies, that define the field and its major players. Building a canon
is very important to Gates, and it is, without question, an important
pedagogical pursuit. A field must have order and it must have pioneers and
heroes. It is also a power pursuit. He who defines the field controls it, in a
manner of speaking. Some are jealous that Gates wants this sort of power.
Others find it unseemly. I think Gates is wasting his considerable talents in
the pursuit of it, but that is another issue for another type of review. It is
amazing that Gates has done this volume so successfully and so quickly, that he
has flooded the market with first-rate black reference books in such short
order. It took him and Appiah only four years to produce Africana . Even
with modern technology, that is an astonishing feat, so astonishing that some
will dismiss the book (I have heard some comments of this sort even before the
book was published) as some half-baked enterprise. That would be a mistake, for
this is an incredibly polished work. This is a beautiful book, one of the most
striking reference works I have ever seen. Gates and Appiah must be quite the
field marshals to have hustled together this army of academics and to have
gotten the work from them on time or nearly so. They deserve much credit for
this. Most academics would have felt lucky to have finished this enterprise in
10 years.

            That Du Bois--who exists in the field of black studies these days as rather
the black equivalent of Einstein (theorist), Dr. Johnson (wordsmith), Emerson
(humanist), and Kant (moral philosopher), separately and together, as it
were--is evoked by the editors in their introduction provides this volume with
a pedigree that I suppose they thought it needed, making Gates and Appiah our
intellectual knights who have given us the Holy Grail. (The editors called the
quest for producing a black encyclopedia "a Holy Grail." More triumphalist
history!) The introduction offers a good and useful account of Du Bois' attempt
to produce an Africana encyclopedia, the professional jealousy he
encountered, the racism that sometimes thwarted his efforts. It should be read
by all who purchase the book.

            But the history of the publication of this book is only incompletely told by
the editors. After 1970, when black studies was established on the white
college campus, a number of reference books about the black experience were
published and continue to be published. The editors make no attempt to place
their book within that particular context, a more accurate historical context
for understanding the appearance of this book, as it was made possible not by
Du Bois' dream in any respect but by the rise of multiculturalism and black
studies as intellectual industries in the United States after 1970. The
increasing professionalization of black studies made this book possible, more
scholars in the field, both black and white, being produced since 1970, more
scholarship being produced. This book was also made possible by the rise of
professionalism among African-Americans since the 1960s and the rise of a black
middle class that has demanded more artifacts and objects, more "education"
about its experience (more institutionalization of it, in other words, and more
orthodoxy about its significance), that are all meant to reinforce its sense of
identity, its psychological well-being, its sense of race mission, all
important reasons for the existence of black studies, but all clearly
anti-intellectual. In other words, the forces that brought this book into
existence had little enough to do with Du Bois--although evoking him is of
critical importance to the book's audience as a kind of typology about the
struggle of black people to gain self-knowledge, a story that black people
never tire of reciting, even today with a plethora of black bookshops and
publishers grinding out books on black subjects or with a black point of view
with ever-increasing regularity--and a great deal to do with the shift that has
taken place within the black population of the United States in the last 25
years and the dramatic change in its status. This book is the product of both a
strong movement toward the intellectualization of black experience among an
elite and the anti-intellectualization of black experience by the public at
large (earnest and respectful of black experience as it has now generally
become) and those who cater to the public's access to intellectual material by
rounding off the rough edges and making it thoroughly anti-intellectual by
designing and evoking certain emotional markers about "struggle" and
"resistance."

            I shall begin my next entry with a discussion of a set of entries in
Africana , those dealing with aspects of Philadelphia, my hometown, and a
response to David Nicholson's impressions of the book.

         
      
   
