
   
   
      
         
            Babar's Gay Friends
            

            Evan:

            I think you need to take another look at the relationship between George and
Martha. If they're "friends rather than lovers" it's only because Martha's
holding out on George. He wants to seal the deal. Badly. It's obvious. I admit
I've never seen the Nathan Lane TV version, but my kids and I just finished the
unabridged, 300-plus-page George and Martha collection last night. After a deep
reading of the text I can tell you that George is one of the more aggressively
hetero hippos in American literature.

            Take the scene (I believe it's in Volume 1, Book 3) in which George gets
caught peeping in Martha's window as she takes a bath. Or the chapter in which
George establishes the Martha Fan Club ("George, president"). George is forever
giving Martha flowers, holding her hand, gazing into her eyes. At one point he
has his missing front tooth replaced with a gold one in tribute to her. There
is, I concede, a somewhat confusing interlude where George takes up modern
dance. But it is only as a means to woo Martha. And as I recall he wears a
sombrero with his leotard.

            In short, George isn't gay (not that there's anything wrong with that). But
if it's gay children's book characters you're searching for, look no further
than the Babar series. I, for one, am convinced that there's a good reason the
Old Lady is a lifelong spinster. Others (my wife) disagree, so let's not even
argue that point. Instead, I suggest you get to know Bouver and Picardee, the
unmarried middle-aged male friends of Babar's who rescue his youngest daughter
when she becomes lost on a family picnic. The two live together in a
suspiciously well-decorated castle on a lake outside Celesteville. They're into
yoga. They wear turtlenecks. One of them may even have a trim mustache.
(Unfortunately, the book is in my daughter's room and she's asleep, so I can't
check.) They look like elephant versions of the Village People. They're very,
very gay.

            I suspect they'd be ever gayer in a television version, but I wouldn't know
because--here's the bombshell--my kids have never watched TV. Every time I
admit that (which isn't very often), people give me the "Oh, so you're a Branch
Davidian" look, like it's deeply weird to shield your children from television.
Maybe it is, but they don't know it yet (our daughters are 5 and 6 months; our
son is almost 3), and we plan to keep the streak going until they do. At some
point some nasty little kid at school is going to mock them for not knowing
what Pokémon is and we'll have to crumble and introduce them to cartoons and
action-figure ads and "School House Rock" and all the rest. But I don't want
to. They're so happy with Richard Scarry and crayons. I don't want them to join
the consumer culture. That will mean they're getting older. And that makes me
sad.

            Also--and here I'm going to sound like a real crank--I don't want them to
develop the same distorted attitudes about television that everyone else seems
to have. Just one example: Yesterday, the AP ran an obit with the headline
"Hazel Frederick Dies at 91." I saw it and thought, Hmmm. Hazel Frederick,
Hazel Frederick. The name sounds familiar. Must be some long-forgotten civil
rights hero, a friend of Daisy Bates' perhaps. Then I read the story.

            As it turns out, Hazel Frederick's obituary had nothing to do Orval Faubus
and everything to do with TV. According to the story, one day in 1969, while
shopping in downtown Minneapolis, Frederick accidentally walked into the view
of a camera crew shooting the opening of the Mary Tyler Moore Show and
was captured on film. For years after, she could be seen every week looking
confused as Mary Tyler Moore tossed her beret into the air.

            That was it, the whole reason for the obit. The AP never even mentioned what
Hazel Frederick had done with her 91 years, only that for a second and a half
she was seen in the background of the opening scene of a television show
(wearing, the AP noted, "a green coat with fur collar and matching scarf.") Her
life was significant only to the extent it had been televised. "She never got a
big head about it," said her daughter. I'm surprised she didn't.

            Best,
Tucker

         
      
   
