
   
   
      
         
            Is Drudge Done?
            

            Tucker,

            Let me choose my words carefully: Donald Trump is the single most repulsive
person on the planet. Not since Anna Nicole Smith has such an extraordinarily
big boob been mistaken for a celebrity. For me, the problem is only partly his
hair, which is absolutely a toupee. (Trust me. Some people have gaydar; I have
rugdar). And it's a terrible toupee. Can't he pay someone to tell him how bad
it looks? If I left the house looking like that, my wife would change the
locks. But even worse is the slit-eyed, phony-baloney pout, the one he
presumably thinks makes him look serious-minded. I've spent the last eight
years watching one middle-aged lothario manipulate his lower lip for emotional
effect in the Rose Garden; I don't need to see another. Both problems, of
course, pale by comparison to the Her Issue, as in: What the hell is a girl
like her doing with a guy like him? How does he get supermodels to spend more
than a minute with him? Not that I really want to know the answer. Donald Trump
dating--and other unmentionable gerunds--is more than I care to
contemplate.

            But I'm happy to contemplate the sorry state of the Reform Party. Other than
the Donald, not a peep from those quarters lately, huh? Ventura has dropped out
of sight. Perot has remained out of sight. Beatty is watching Out of
Sight (OK, a stretch, but work with me). And Buchanan is probably out
buying Hanukkah gifts. The undoing of Pat, whom you wrote about quite nicely in
the last Talk , is arguably the most interesting story of this campaign.
He's incredibly smart and telegenic--it's always fun to watch him spar on TV,
even if I disagree with him--but he's shown himself to be a helpless captive of
another era, a two-prong outlet in a world of three-prong plugs. His tin ear on
the Hitler stuff--his inability to recognize that it wasn't what he said but
what he seemed to say--was baffling; imagine what he'd have said if Al Gore had
played footsie with the Commies. And his cozying up to Lenora Fulani, whose
great contribution to society is to make Al Sharpton seem statesmanlike, is
nuts. When George W. hugs Hispanics and calls it compassionate conservatism, we
all think: OK, this is who he is; he's credible. But any time Pat's in a room
with an African-American, you wonder: When's he gonna call 911? The shame is
that the old Pat is buried beneath all that. I just saw an early cut of a great
documentary on George Wallace that will play Sundance in January and then air
on PBS's American Experience in April. Pat's on camera defending
Wallace, sort of, but his energy and intelligence and authority are
unmistakable. You walk away just plain liking the guy.

            Apropos of not liking someone and not having any authority to speak of: Do
you think Matt Drudge's days are numbered? First he goes all Randall Terry on
us and gets bounced from Fox. Now the Hartford Courant says he's
irrelevant. (Yes, the Hartford Courant . Aren't you surfing the Web site
of Connecticut's finest papers?) The essence of the story, which I found on the
hidden gem of the Internet, mediagossip.com, is that he hasn't broken any stories since Monica
and has seen his unique selling proposition usurped by other would-be Web
Winchells. That sounds about right. But damned if I don't look at the Drudge
Report every day.

            Regards,
Evan

         
      
   
