
   
   
      
         
            Brill's Follies
            

            Evan:

            Between the toilet and the bowl. I'm shifting in my seat just thinking about
it. I'm also thinking of about a dozen crude and ugly things to say in
response, but since this is the Breakfast Table and not the Bar Stool, I won't
share them.

            But speaking of dicks, I'm glad you brought up Steve Brill. The saddest
thing about Brill is that he's a genuinely smart guy who has destroyed his
reputation, become a joke among his peers, and wasted a ton of cash, all for
the sake of ... what? That silly magazine? The chance to make morally superior
noises on cable once in a while? I don't understand it.

            A few years ago I went out to lunch with Brill and came away impressed. He
spent the entire meal explaining why we ought to put television cameras in
every courtroom in America. The O.J. spectacle was in full bloom at the time,
and I remember thinking that it took pretty hefty stones to contend that anyone
(apart from, say, those with a financial stake in Court TV) could benefit from
a televised trial. But Brill did. Ludicrous, I said. He came back at me with
such force and with what seemed like such a tight argument that by the end I
was almost ready to agree that what the Supreme Court really needs is more
TelePrompTers, maybe a lavaliere mike or two. That'd make the legal system more
efficient and just.

            I'm happy to say I recovered my senses shortly after leaving the restaurant.
But my impression of Brill as a vigorous, capable guy remained. Until he put
his own name in the title of his magazine, and in a thousand other ways made an
ass of himself. What a waste. It still depresses me to see him on
television.

            Just as it depresses me to see a magazine I work for flayed in the Monday
business section of the New York Times . I hope you won't think less of
me for taking a huge, cringing pass on that story. Media conglomerates and the
use of actors to sell magazines are two topics that make me pretty
uncomfortable (though I know so little about Hollywood that most of the time I
have no idea who's being synergized and who's not), so yesterday's Times
piece was particularly hard for me to get through.

            It did leave me wondering, and not for the first time, who these people are
who buy magazines based on the celebrity cover photo. Here's my thinking on the
subject: Magazine buyers are people who've chosen reading over watching
television or going to the mall or playing video games as a form of
entertainment. This is a relatively small group of people, presumably more
literate--or at least interested in becoming more literate--than the average
person. Yet these are also people who will buy a magazine simply because it has
a photograph Ricky Martin on the cover (though not necessarily a real story
about him inside)? Can this be true? Help me here. I'm getting depressed
again.

            Best,
Tucker

         
      
   
