
   
   
      
         
            Impresario Gates
            

            Dear Gerald:

            We're probably more in accord on Africana than not, but I think you
were too easy on Gates. Years ago, before blackness became really marketable,
it used to be said that the publishing industry would admit only one black
writer at a time. Langston Hughes was succeeded by Richard Wright, who in turn
was succeeded by James Baldwin. A few years ago, we thought that notion was
disproved when Toni Morrison, Alice Walker, and Terry McMillan were
simultaneously on the bestseller list. Then along came Henry Louis "Skip" Gates
Jr.

            He's the modern-day impresario of black culture, the Joyce Carol Oates of
black studies, producing with daunting regularity. James Brown used to be
called the hardest-working man in show business, but he ain't got nothing on
Gates.

            Would somebody puh-leeze stop him before he writes again?

            Unlike you, I don't labor in the fields of black culture, and I'm
glad--though as a fiction writer who keeps hearing rumors that Gates is working
on a novel, I'm constantly checking my rear-view mirror for his headlights. You
guys are in an unenviable place. Gates must seem like he's everywhere. Still
and all, I wonder how much of his work will survive, and whether, in a hundred
years, say, anyone will read anything by Gates, in the same way we still read
The Souls of Black Folk .

            Oh, well. At least Gates had the decency not to include himself in his own
encyclopedia. Or did I miss that entry?

            I wish he'd left out bell hooks and Cornel West, though, two prominent
public intellectuals (that's what they call people who get paid hundreds of
thousands of dollars to lecture the rest of us about what we're doing wrong).
There are biographies of both, though, thankfully, we only have to read
about hooks. Not so with West. He writes a 15-page "interpretation" of
W.E.B. Du Bois. (I think what "interpretation" really means is that, like
Gates, West wants to be Du Bois when he grows up.) But why West and not David
Levering Lewis? Lewis is an award-winning historian (not a preacher manqué),
and though only one volume has been published, his is already the standard
biography of Du Bois.

            I suppose the explanation is that when you get to be HNIC, as Gates has, you
reward your friends and ignore everyone else. Which would explain why there's
nothing here on Ward Connerly, Stanley Crouch, Glenn Loury, or Thomas Sowell. I
couldn't even find anything on black conservatism.

            Of course, I'd rather have Africana than not, but did they have to be
so slavishly politically correct and populist? There are at least three
articles on homosexuality, including one titled "Homosexuality in Africa: An
Interpretation" (there's that word again!), and the popularization begins on
the box with a blurb from Michael Jordan. (And I thought he was just a
basketball player and TV huckster.)

            There's an entry on rap music (what an oxymoron!). I suppose you could make
an argument that it's a significant enough phenomenon, so that it deserves to
be here. But what's the rationale for separate biographical entries on Queen
Latifah, Snoop Doggy Dog, Tupac Shakur, and a host of other dubious thugs? And
what about Rupaul? Why is he here? I thought he'd already used up his 15
minutes of fame.

            And what would Du Bois have made of that ?

            You think black studies has achieved middlebrow status. I'm less sanguine
that many whites feel bad when they don't know something about black history
and culture. Years ago, a white woman told me about how her son's teacher let
the class dance to a Michael Jackson record for 10 minutes to celebrate Black
History Month. And I wonder whether the choice of reviewers here--we're both
black--doesn't say something that makes me uncomfortable and, well, a little
bit angry.

            We'll be closer when we have two white reviewers, or a Korean and a Jew.
Black history--in America, at least--is American history. There ought to be
room in the retelling of it for the letters Mark Twain and Frederick Douglass
exchanged, for the similarities between Invisible Man and Ben Franklin's
Autobiography , for the presence of Charles Chesnutt at the banquet to
honor Twain shortly before the latter's death, and for the monument in
Mississippi to the slaves who rode with a band of Confederate irregulars.

            Sadly, I don't find that here,
David

         
      
   
