
   
   
      
         
            Does OPEC Have Us Over a Barrel Again?
            

            It may not be the greatest comeback in business history, but the
re-ascendance of OPEC is certainly one of the more surprising turnarounds in
recent memory. Back in March, the benchmark price of West Texas Intermediate
crude oil was $13 a barrel, and it seemed to be a foregone conclusion that the
ability of the world's key oil-producing nations to keep prices high had
forever vanished. In an earlier
incarnation of this column, in fact, I argued that the combination of new
oil-discovery and oil-recovery technology with the advent of the spot futures
market in oil meant that the OPEC's glory days were long gone. So why are oil
prices now at $27 a barrel, with consumption actually outpacing production, and
the OPEC nations holding firm?

            The simplest answer--and the simplest excuse for that earlier column--is
that no one ever suggested that transformations in the oil industry were going
to have the effect of repealing the laws of supply and demand. Oil prices have
doubled because the global economy has made a powerful recovery in the past 12
months. The U.S. economy has grown faster than it did in 1998, Europe is now
humming along nicely, Japan has crawled out of recession (at least for the
moment), and much of Asia is now moving again. (Some predictions call for
Korea, for instance, to grow at 12 percent next year.) Since oil prices are
prospective, the markets do not anticipate a global slowdown any time soon. And
the more oil consumers want, the more expensive it will become.

            Until, that is, more oil becomes available, either through expanded
production by the leading oil-producing nations or expanded exploitation of
existing reserves by the giant oil multinationals. And here's where the
"foregone conclusion" looks a little less foregone, primarily because both OPEC
and non-member countries, such as Mexico and Norway, have shown restraint in
the face of rising prices. The history of OPEC, at least since the mid-1980s,
has been one of massive cheating on the part of its members, who have regularly
violated their production quotas in order to reap as much profit as possible.
That, of course, has sent prices tumbling. At the same time, OPEC has had an
impossible time dealing with its non-member competitors, who were prone to
flood the market at any time.

            Prices have also stayed high because the major oil companies, having been
burned in the past, have been temperate in expanding their exploration and
production budgets. Although most of the majors will do more capital spending
in 2000 and 2001 than they did last year, their annual budgets for the next
couple of years will probably not equal what they were as recently as 1996.
That's what a few of years of $13-a-barrel prices will do for you.

            Still, there's another way to look at the relatively tempered way the oil
giants are expanding those budgets, and that is that they do not see prices
going, as some have suggested, to $35 a barrel. In fact, the oil companies
appear to be planning on prices between $20 and $25 a barrel, which would mean
that while filling up your tank is going to be more expensive than it was nine
months ago, any inflationary impact from oil prices will be seriously
muted.

            There's no guarantee that the oil companies are right. But there's an
excellent chance that they are, because the structural transformations in the
world oil market are real, and so too is the fact that running a cartel has not
gotten any easier in the past couple of years. Price-fixing cartels can work
quite well in the short term. But over the long run the incentive to cheat is
simply too high, and the measures of coercion and punishment simply too weak,
to keep everyone in line. At the moment, the memories of what low oil prices
were like are probably strong enough to keep Venezuela, for instance, from
pumping oil as fast as it can. But memories fade, and cash in the bank can
sometimes look like forever.

         
      
   
