
   
   
      
         
            No Relation No. 6: Moore Than Meets the Eye
            

            By the looks of it, Michael Moore has had a busy decade. First, Michael
Moore won critical acclaim for his documentary films. Then, Michael Moore led
46 states in their lawsuit against big tobacco. And now, Michael Moore is
heading the WTO as it meets in Seattle. How does he do it all?

            Quite easily: There are three Michael Moores.

            
               Michael Moore , the documentary filmmaker, has made a name for himself
as a "professional gadfly." His breakthrough film, 1989's Roger and Me ,
tracked his 2 ½-year effort to bring GM Chairman Roger Smith to Flint, Mich.,
to view the effects of plant closings. With two other films, two television
shows, a Web
site , and a book ( Downsize This ), Moore has continued to promote
his left-leaning political views. Among his irreverent made-for-TV stunts:
driving a pink "Sodomobile" filled with gays and lesbians through states that
ban sodomy, and presenting an executive with a giant 80-cent check to pay for
an hour of a Mexican employee's labor. Corporate greed being one of his
favorite targets, Michael Moore has come to Seattle to protest the WTO.

            
               Michael Moore , the WTO director-general, is a former prime minister
of New Zealand. He has long been involved in international trade, serving as
New Zealand's trade minister, and working to launch both GATT and APEC. He took
the helm of the WTO in September.

            
               Michael Moore , the Mississippi attorney general, filed the first
state lawsuit charging that cigarette manufacturers were liable for the health
costs of smoking. He helped lead 46 states in negotiations with tobacco
companies that resulted in a $206 billion settlement. His role in the dispute
landed him a small part--as himself--in The Insider .

            
               Previously in this series, the 
               Explainer sorted out the
Cohens
(two Stephens, three Richards), the Rays

               (two Elizabeths), the Hirschfelds
(Abe and Al), the Strausses
(Robert and R. Peter), and the Broders
(Jonathan, John M., and David).
            

            
               Have you noticed people in the news with confusingly similar names? The
Explainer welcomes your
suggestions for future installments.
            

         
      
   
