
   
   
      
         
            Yes, There <I>Are</I> Easy Answers!

            It's official: Over the past week, in rapid succession, the editorial pages
of both the New York Times and the Washington Post endorsed what
the Post called a "disarmingly simple alternative to traditional
affirmative action" when it comes to college admissions. The solution?
Guaranteed admission to college for a fixed percentage of the top students in
each high school, regardless of grades or SAT scores. Although race-blind, this
policy has the effect of boosting minority admissions--basically because it
admits the top students at predominantly black high schools even if those
students score lower than white students who aren't at the top of other
(generally richer and whiter) schools.

            Call it the X Percent Solution. In Texas, where race-based admissions at the
University of Texas were struck down by the courts in 1996, the state
guaranteed admission to the top 10 percent of each public high school--and
black admissions at UT rebounded. California adopted a 4 percent rule after a
voter initiative, Prop. 209, banned race preferences at state colleges and
universities. More recently, in Florida, Gov. Jeb Bush issued an executive
order guaranteeing state university admission to the top 20 percent of each
high school graduating class--again, as a replacement for a race-based
affirmative action program.

            The Times hailed the Texas policy in an editorial last Saturday (even
though last year it dismissed the idea as "tinkering"). The Post
followed on Monday, saying that if the X Percent Solution "turns out to get the
job done without explicit resort to race or ethnicity . . . why not?" The
Solution also has support on the right--from governors George and Jeb Bush,
most obviously, but also (at least in its diluted, 4 percent form) from Ward
Connerly, the University of California regent who has led the fight against
race preferences in his state.

            So, hey, everybody's happy! But has anyone really thought through the full
implications of this convenient fix? Has the divisive, decades-long debate over
affirmative action really been defused by a clever policy gimmick? It's not
impossible. But there's at least one obvious problem: The gimmick depends on
high school segregation. If there weren't all-black ghetto high schools, then
admitting the top X Percent of each school wouldn't have the effect of
admitting so many blacks. Indeed, if schools were perfectly integrated by race,
and equal in quality, then automatically admitting the top 10 percent at each
school probably wouldn't make much difference in admissions at all (when
compared with a straight policy of simply admitting "top" students regardless
of where they went to school.)

            The Post seems to think this contradiction is really a delicious
irony. ("The residential segregation that persists in so much of the nation
becomes an instrument for desegregating higher education.") But it's more than
that. The dynamic could easily work the other way--with the X Percent solution
in education becoming an instrument for furthering residential segregation, as
black families with high-performing students decide to keep their kids in
all-black neighborhoods because that will virtually guarantee their kids a
ticket to college.

            This dilemma is particularly acute for supporters of school choice (mostly
on the right) who hope that vouchers, or other choice mechanisms such as
charter schools, will encourage motivated black students to leave bad schools
and attend better ones. But why would a black student who is near the top of
his class at a lousy public high school--and therefore guaranteed college
admission under the X Percent Solution--leave to go to a much better high
school where he's apt to rank in the middle of the class? Indeed, why would any
good student, black or white, leave a bad school for a good school if he ranks
much higher at the former than at the latter? The X Percent Solution seems to
subvert the basic mechanism that is supposed to make school choice work. What's
your answer, Gov. Bush? (Either one of you!)

            There are other problems with the X Percent Solution: Even if there's no
school choice, won't it remove a major incentive for poor schools to improve?
After all, their top 10 or 20 percent get into college anyway! And what happens
should society become more integrated, and the need for an X Percent set-aside
diminish? Do you want to be the politician who tries to take away a
neighborhood high school's traditional X percent quota? The
guaranteed-admission slots could become an unassailable entitlement, as hard to
cut as a Social Security COLA.

            Time for public-policy journalists, especially on the right, to investigate
these complications. It may turn out that the X Percent gimmick is just that,
and that if you want to substitute class-based preferences for race-based
preferences, there's no short-cut that miraculously avoids the need to examine
each individual's record--or that automatically produces high minority
admissions.

            
               Assigned to: Richard Kahlenberg--you've probably written this
already! Jeff Rosen ( New Republic ); Nicholas Lemann ( New Yorker );
David Tell ( Weekly Standard ); Paul Gigot ( Wall Street Journal );
Abigail Thernstrom.

         
      
   
