
   
   
      
         
            See Hillary Run
            

            Issue 1 is the New York Senate race. Issue 2 is the GOP presidential
campaign.

            Interviews: On Fox News Sunday , Newt Gingrich compliments current House
Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., for being a better dealmaker than he was.
Gingrich says he prefers his current life on the lecture circuit to being
speaker because lecturing better suits his idealistic temperament and doesn't
require day-to-day detail work. Gingrich says the GOP should stick to five
campaign themes in the 2000 election: 1) the rescue of Social Security through
Personal Savings Accounts (a type of privatization); 2) the establishment of a
"global missile defense"; 3) the limitation of taxes in peacetime to 25 percent
of income; 4) the abolition of the inheritance tax; and 5) the securing of
patients' rights through health-care reform. On CNN's Late
Edition , Donald Trump says he would personally spend $100 million if
he ran for president (in addition to spending the Reform Party's more than $12
million in federal funds).

            Despite Hillary Clinton's pointed announcement last week that she "intends
to run" for a New York Senate seat, several pundits--Fred Barnes ( Fox )
and Kate O'Beirne (CNN's Capital Gang )--and politicians--Donald Trump and Rep. Guy
Molinari, R-N.Y. (both on Late Edition )--think she has left some
wiggle room and may yet duck out at the 11th hour. Some Giuliani supporters
point to Harold Ickes' remark in a new Gail Sheehy book that Clinton's Senate
run will be about personal "redemption" (to buy Hillary's Choice ,
click here). Asked about this on Late Edition , Ickes
doesn't own up to the statement, but he doesn't deny it either. Mark Shields
(PBS's NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ) notes that both Giuliani and
Clinton have negative ratings topping 40 percent; only 8 percent to 9 percent
of voters are undecided, an unusually low number with nearly a year until
Election Day. Susan Page ( Late Edition ) says that a new Giuliani TV ad
questioning Hillary's devotion to Israel is smart, because the Jews are one of
the few swing votes left.

            Several programs cite Friday's Time /CNN poll showing John McCain and George W. Bush in a statistical dead
heat in New Hampshire--37 percent to 35 percent, respectively, with a 4.5
percent margin of error. (Tim Russert [NBC's Meet the
Press ], Cokie Roberts [ABC's This Week ], and Wolf Blitzer [ Late Edition ]
assert that McCain is ahead in the Granite State; only Bill Kristol [ This
Week ] points out that McCain's two-point lead is statistically
meaningless.) George F. Will ( This Week ) notes that even if McCain
wins New Hampshire, Bush still leads by over 40 points in South Carolina. But
Kristol points out that when Gary Hart beat Walter Mondale in New Hampshire in
1984, Hart's polls suddenly rose by 20 points nationally (left unspoken: Hart
lost the nomination anyway). Tucker Carlson ( Late Edition ) argues that
Steve Forbes' poor showing in the Time poll (8 percent), despite his
millions of dollars, should give pause to advocates of campaign-finance reform.
George Stephanopoulos ( This Week ) says that Forbes could still hurt
Bush in Iowa, which would add to McCain's momentum should he win New Hampshire.
But Steve Roberts ( Late Edition ) says that Bush's New Hampshire
numbers will improve once he spends some time there, and Matthew Rees
( NewsHour ) thinks that McCain's New Hampshire numbers have peaked.

            
               And You Thought Buchanan and Fulani Made an Odd Couple
...
            

            On Late Edition , Reform Party hopeful Donald Trump ticks off
members of his ideal presidential Cabinet:

            Vice President: Oprah Winfrey
HUD: Rep. Charles Rangel, D-N.Y.
State: Gen. Colin Powell (Ret.)
Defense: Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz.
Treasury: Jack Welch, outgoing General Electric CEO

            
               Last Word
            

            

               I think that it would be a very, very bad thing to have Bill Bradley as
president. He's almost Marxist in his leanings.

               [Hillary] stays in Trump Tower when she's in New York. ... At least she has
great taste.

               I do shake hands, [but] I think it's a terrible custom. ... It's almost
barbaric in a certain way.

               I don't take drugs--I've never had drugs in my life--I've never had a glass
of alcohol, I've never had a cup of coffee, I've never had a cigarette. I do
love women. But I'm single, [so] I'm allowed to do that, I guess. But I respect
women, I admire women, and if that's supposed to be bad, then I'm guilty.

                     --Donald Trump ( Late Edition )

            

         
      
   
