
   
   
      
         
            George W.: Teflon Candidate
            

            Tucker:

            If you figure out who buys which magazines for what reason, I will pay you
cash money to tell me. This is a question I mull over and over because it's
part of my job to answer it--to try and figure out how to please the 35,000 or
so kind souls who (hopefully) buy Texas Monthly on the newsstands each
month without mortally offending the 275,000 or so who subscribe. It's no easy
task. One year, Lady Bird Johnson sells, the next she doesn't; or rather, one
way we spin a story about her (icon in repose) works, but another way
(long-suffering wife of a serial philanderer) doesn't. Authentic Texan Matthew
McConaughey on the cusp of his hunkdom dies an agonizing newsstand death, but
recent Texas transplant Sandra Bullock is huge. Troy Aikman in Armani scores,
but Nolan Ryan in a cowboy hat whiffs. Not even George W. Bush, the Ricky
Martin of presidential politics, is a guaranteed winner. When he was running
against Ann Richards in 1994, he sold OK (a nice cover line, though: "Son of a
Bush"). When he was first exploring the possibility of a White House bid in the
summer of '98, he did worse, actually, than the first time. But this past June,
when we did our comprehensive, seven-segment story on the guy, it was one of
the year's best sellers. Most of those extra copies were probably sold to
Howard Fineman, Dan Balz, and their national press corps brethren, but we'll
take it. Their money's green.

            Bush is apparently a hot ticket on TV, too. The ratings for Meet the
Press were 91 percent higher than Sam and Cokie 's on the day Tim
Russert flew to Austin and interviewed the guv at the mansion. A cynical part
of me wants to believe that one of every two viewers tuned in hoping to see a
gaffe, but not even the now-famous pop quiz--the You're No Jack Kennedy of the
2000 campaign--has slowed the juggernaut. (I'm duty-bound to point out, by the
way, that Bush's answers--General and Lee--may inadvertently tell us something
about him: He's a Dukes of Hazzard fan.) Everyone covering the race is
looking for a comparison point for Bush, and I've decided it's Reagan: amiable,
genial, an advocate of broad principles instead of specific policies, and
blessed with good fortune and an utter coating of Teflon. For instance: Thanks
to Jay H. Hatfield, no one talks about his druggie past anymore. The story was
always going to be hard to prove, but the burden got damn near impossible when
Fortunate Son 's thoroughly implausible afterword withered under the
slightest cross-examination. Now anyone who hopes to persuade voters and the
media that W. stands for Wasted is going to have to invent a time machine, take
us back to the Chateau Bijon in Houston, and put us in the physical presence of
the Bombastic Bushkin with a spoon up his nose. Rotsa Ruck.

            I don't know about you, but I've always thought the potential peril for Bush
wasn't "younger, wilder" but "older, milder"--that is, he's not nearly as
conservative as the GOP would like to believe. Everything to this point had
confirmed that sense: his softish stance on abortion, his attacks on the
congressional right, his compassion rap. And then he goes to refuses to meet
with the Log Cabin Republicans. I thought Anthony Lewis had him dead to rights
in today's Times . Why shouldn't he meet with them? What's the harm?
Maybe, as Steve Forbes says, he'd do it if they called it a fund-raiser. The
Bush we know in Texas--the Bush I know--has too much class to snub anybody,
ideology aside. A longtime confrere of his from Dallas, a gay man, called me
yesterday in despair, dumbstruck by the decision. If Bush's good friend Bob
Bullock--who as state comptroller and lieutenant governor brought blacks and
browns and women and gays into the white-male Texas government--were alive,
he'd give him hell. The rest of us should too.

            Regards,
Evan

         
      
   
