
   
   
      
         
            Racial Integration

            Black and white critics of
the integrationist ideal now abound. Even the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People, once integration's most stalwart advocate, is
reconsidering its goal of racial integration. Who are integration's critics?
What is their position? Who advocates separatism for blacks? Why are critics of
integration gaining momentum?

            The
integrationist ideal holds that blacks and whites should live, work, and
study together. Government policies designed to accomplish these goals include
school busing, affirmative action in public schools and in the workplace,
forced integration of public housing, and laws barring discrimination in
housing and employment.

            The most surprising new critics of integration are
found in traditional civil-rights groups like the NAACP and the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference. Although the organizations still support
integration, their dissident members are dissatisfied with the outcomes
produced by government policies. They note that while the African-American
middle class is expanding, nearly 26 percent of all African-Americans still
live below the poverty line.

            
               Black
separatism dates back to the 19 th century , when Martin Delaney
and others promoted the "Back to Africa " movement. The literal return to
Africa was seen as the only option for blacks because, they argued, white
supremacy could never be displaced. Marcus 
               Garvey and
Father 
               Divine led the movement in the '20s. Separatism fades in
and out of media attention: Separatists of the '30s and '40s received little
notice.

            
Still, segregationists and integrationists have
always coexisted within the civil-rights movement. In the mid-'60s, when
the integrationist ideal reached its peak, the black-power wing of the
civil-rights movement grew by advocating black self-determination--the
establishment of exclusively black schools and a self-sustaining black economy.
More radical elements called for a black nation in the American South.
Even ultra-integrationist Martin Luther King Jr. cast the civil-rights movement
as an anti-colonial liberation struggle late in his career. Also, some black
leaders in the '60s sought control over their local public schools, which
prefigures the current enthusiasm many African-Americans have for running their
own charter schools within the public-school system.

            Recent
markers of black separatism include the Louis Farrakhan-sponsored Million
Man March of 1995, to which only African-American men were invited; the
debate over the teaching in public schools of Ebonics , the so-called
African-American dialect; the establishment of exclusively African-American
dorms on college campuses; and single-race schools , which are even
supported by Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, because he believes they
will promote the self-esteem of African-American students.

            The best-known separatist leader is the Nation of Islam's
Louis Farrakhan , although his followers probably number fewer than
50,000. (Click here
to read a "Gist" on the Nation.) Many consider it portentous that former NAACP
President Benjamin Chavis is now a Nation of Islam minister.

            The
separatists have new academic allies, the critical race
theorists, led by New York University's Derrick Bell and University of
Colorado's Richard Delgado. They argue that despite its guise of neutrality,
the American legal system is riddled with mechanisms for oppressing black
people. Some critical race theorists argue that black jurors should acquit
guilty black defendants in protest of the unjust system.

            

               What accounts for separatism's current
vogue? Some attribute the new separatism to black demagogues in politics
and the academy who deliberately exploit black anxieties to further their
careers. Black conservative Shelby Steele argues that African-Americans
embrace separatism to cover for their embarrassing lack of skills. Steele also
says that separatism appeals to unqualified students admitted to college under
the protection of affirmative action. These students compensate for their
shortcomings by clinging to one another and striking the defensive pose of
separatism.

            Another
explanation holds that integration is out of favor because the Democratic
Party has retreated from the goal. In hopes of attracting more white votes,
the Democratic Party has distanced itself from civil-rights leaders like Jesse
Jackson, and from issues like welfare reform and affirmative action. Cut off
from the political mainstream, some civil-rights leaders and grassroots
supporters have embraced separatist politicians and positions.

            In the past, the most obstinate white opponents of
integration (the Goldwater wing of the Republican Party and
conservative Southern Democrats ) argued that people should have the
right to associate--or not to associate--with whomever they wish. Goldwater
later recanted this view, and even the most conservative Southern politicians
now laud the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which removed barriers that legally
prevented blacks from living and working where they wished. Many conservatives
still endorse the segregationist line that government shouldn't
interfere with people's preferences.

            White
critics of integration include the neo-conservatives , former liberals
who supported the civil-rights mainstream until the early '70s. Theirs is now
the dominant right-wing critique of integrationist programs. While continuing
to endorse the ideal of integration, they say affirmative action, busing, and
the rest do more harm than good. In 1984 Charles Murray wrote, in
Losing Ground , that government programs sap the initiative of the black
population, creating feelings of dependency and entitlement. Black
conservative critics like Thomas Sowell concur, adding that government
programs allow blacks to blame racism for their self-inflicted wounds.

            
Also attacking integration is social democrat
Randall Kennedy of Harvard Law School. Government-mandated integration
is wrong, he writes, because any endorsement of racial preferences is
immoral.

            Keeping the integrationist
faith are black liberals like Professors Henry Louis Gates and
Cornel West . Joining them is black economist Glenn Loury , a
conservative who broke ranks to endorse affirmative action as a necessary
policy.

            
               Has integration
succeeded? Not really, say neo-cons Abigail and Stephan Thernstrom. Their
new book, America in Black and White , says that the playing field has
been leveled in spite of government programs. The black middle class benefited
from the postwar economic boom, not affirmative action, they say. Orlando
Patterson writes in his new book, The Ordeal of Integration , that
government programs have helped many African-Americans to join the economic and
cultural mainstream, but the programs can't be expected to further expand the
black middle class.

         
      
   
