
   
   
      
         
            Kosovo

            Last week, Serbian police
massacred at least 51 Albanians in the Yugoslavian province of Kosovo. The
dead, Yugoslavian President Slobodan Milosevic says, deserved their fate. They
were Islamic terrorists promoting the secession of this remote southern swath
of Serbia. Balkan watchers say the killings will provoke the Albanians--90
percent of Kosovo's population--into armed revolt, sparking a conflagration
that could involve the rest of Europe. Why the long history of Albanian-Serbian
acrimony? Will Kosovo be Bosnia redux--another bout of ethnic cleansing and
warfare, or worse?

            According
to the conventional wisdom, last week's murders were the latest chapter in a
centuries-long feud between Albanian Muslims and their Serbian Orthodox
Christian neighbors. Serbs still sting from their defeat at the hands of the
Ottoman Turks in the 1389 Battle of Kosovo, which began the Turks' 522-year
occupation of Serbia. Blame for the defeat is pinned on Albanian Muslims, who,
like the Bosnian Muslims, are accused of having collaborated with the invaders.
But this interpretation misrepresents the record: Most Albanians resisted
invasion; they didn't collaborate with the Turks any more than their Serbian
neighbors did.

            In the mid-19 th century, with the growth of
nationalism across Europe, Kosovo became an obsession among Serbian
intellectuals, a symbol of Serbia's past grandeur and current
mistreatment. Poets wrote epics, with anti-Muslim subtexts, romanticizing the
Battle of Kosovo. And Kosovo morphed into Serbia's Jerusalem. The liberation of
Kosovar Serbs and Serbian holy places from Muslim tyrants became the
nationalist rallying cry, as did the redemption of Albanians who had converted
to Islam during the Turks' rule.

            The
nationalist myth of Christians vs. Muslims belies a pluralistic reality.
Albanians and Serbs coexisted--peacefully--under Ottoman rule. Only when
Serbia beat back the Turks in 1912 did leaders in Belgrade begin to transform
their nationalist fantasies about Kosovo into policy. Serbs exported colonists
to Kosovo and expelled Albanians. Even so, Albanians have always vastly
outnumbered Serbs in the province; there are now 2 million Albanians, compared
with 200,000 Serbs.

            
When Communist dictator Josip Broz Tito took
over in 1945, he attempted to quash Serbian nationalism . He preached
that there was no room for ethnic differences in the class struggle. But Serbs,
suspicious of Tito's Croatian and Slovenian background, said he was giving them
short shrift. To allay fears of anti-Serb chauvinism, Tito prohibited
Albanian-language publications and gave Kosovo's most desirable jobs to Serbs.
When Albanians staged protests in the late '60s, Tito attempted to pacify them
by strengthening local government (largely dominated by Albanians) over local
affairs and by restoring jobs. This satisfied no one: It was not enough to dent
Albanian unemployment and just enough to rile Serbs. Following Tito's death in
1980, malcontents on both sides rioted.

            In 1987,
while other Yugoslav leaders ignored the Kosovo mess, Slobodan Milosevic, then
a little-known Communist Party apparatchik, began accusing Albanians of
perpetrating genocide against Kosovo's Serbs. Milosevic organized mass
rallies in Kosovo --one of them attended by 2 million Serbs--where he
charged Yugoslavia's leadership with ignoring the crisis. His attacks won him
popular support, which he ultimately parlayed into control of Yugoslavia's
Communist Party. Milosevic's demagoguery over Kosovo helped convince the
Croatians, Slovenians, and Bosnians that they could no longer deal with Serbia.
In 1991, they seceded from Yugoslavia.

            Under Milosevic, Albanians lost all semblance of
autonomy . They were removed from jobs in the party and government. Separate
but unequal Albanian-only school and health care systems were established. (It
is credibly alleged that Serbs poisoned Albanian schools' water supply with the
nerve gas Sarin.) Unemployment among Albanians reached 85 percent, higher than
in war-torn Bosnia. Arbitrary arrests and searches increased, as Serbs
implemented de facto martial law.

            The Serb
crackdown spurred the first organized Albanian opposition. In the early '90s
Ibrahim Rugova , a writer, created the Democratic League of
Kosovo , modeling it on Gandhi's and King's nonviolent campaigns. Rugova
established a shadow government and sent envoys abroad to make the case for
independence. But Milosevic remained intransigent. Smarting from losses in the
Bosnian war and from the collapse of the Serbian economy, opposition parties
took to the streets in the winter of 1996 to demand Milosevic's resignation.
Although Milosevic survived the protests, his position remains tenuous. He
believes he cannot afford the loss of prestige that would accompany a
compromise on Kosovo. Even opposition leaders agree that it is Serbia's
manifest destiny to control Kosovo.

            
Meanwhile, Albanian discontent increases.
Albanians feel slighted by the 1995 Dayton Peace Accord, which gave autonomy to
Bosnian Muslims but stayed silent on their fate. The lesson they have drawn:
Liberation comes from armed struggle, not nonviolence. Support grows for the
Kosovo Liberation Army , a band of militants, many of whom fought on
behalf of Bosnia. The KLA now controls several mountain villages and has
smuggled a sizable cache of weapons across the border from Albania.

            One rumor has Milosevic
funding the KLA because he needs an excuse to start another nationalist
war to boost his popularity. Another says he ordered last week's crackdown only
after he received the implicit green light from the Clinton administration's
special envoy to Yugoslavia, Robert Gelbard. Last week, Gelbard called the
KLA a terrorist group . The Clinton administration has tried to play it both
ways on Kosovo. It rejects Albania's claims for independence but decries the
crackdown. Last week, the U.S. government and European allies agreed they would
stiffen sanctions on Serbia to protest the massacres. But the United States is
afraid that the 500 peacekeeping troops stationed in neighboring Macedonia will
get drawn into battle.

            Various nightmare
scenarios describe how the conflict in Kosovo might escalate . One
has Albania, which has said it won't tolerate further attacks on its people in
Kosovo, entering a bloody war with the Serbs. Another has the war spreading to
Macedonia, where ethnic Albanians would come to the support of their fellows in
Kosovo. This, in turn, would inspire Greece to intervene to restore order and
protect the Greek minority in Macedonia. Once Greece, a NATO member, gets
involved, the whole of Europe, bound by treaty, could follow.

         
      
   
