
   
   
      
         
            The Baldwin Brothers

            In February, Daniel
Baldwin--the second-oldest and least well-known of the four Baldwin
brothers--overdosed on crack and was arrested in New York's Plaza Hotel. Before
getting hauled off by police, he ran naked through the hotel's halls screaming,
"Baldwin!" A month ago, Kim Basinger, wife of eldest Baldwin brother Alec, won
the Best Supporting Actress Oscar for her role in L.A. Confidential .
Last week Alec's new action movie, Mercury Rising , opened to tepid
reviews. Which Baldwin is which? How did all four brothers become actors? How
are they alike? How are they distinguishable?

            First, a quick review of the
Baldwin oeuvre . Alec (age 40) claims the greatest screen success.
His critical hits include a lead performance, opposite Sean Connery, in The
Hunt for Red October (1990). Last year, he starred with Anthony Hopkins in
David Mamet's The Edge . Daniel (37) is derisively referred to as
the "TV Baldwin." Aside from bit parts in B movies, his only major role was as
Detective Beau Felton in NBC's acclaimed Homicide: Life on the Street .
Hollywood always touts 35-year-old William (or Billy, as he abhors being
called in the press) as the Baldwin most likely to break through to major
stardom. But he has done little since his box office hits Backdraft
(1991) and Sliver (1993). Stephen (31) remains consigned mainly
to teen flicks (though he won acclaim for his supporting role in The Usual
Suspects ). Textbook example: the 1996 comedy Bio-Dome , where he
plays opposite ex-MTV star Pauly Shore.

            (There
are two Baldwin sisters : Jane [32], a physical therapist in Syracuse,
N.Y., and Beth [42], a Long Island housewife. Both say they will never take up
acting.)

            Profiles chalk up the brothers' success to 1) good looks
and 2) on-screen intensity. The Baldwins say they inherited both from their
handsome, demanding father, Alexander, a devoutly Catholic social studies
teacher from Massapequa, N.Y. (Alexander died in 1983, and the brothers claim
still to be driven by their devotion to him.) Because they are Irish-Catholic,
tightknit, and play touch football, the Baldwins constantly compare
themselves to the Kennedys . It is a Baldwin commonplace to say that either
Alec or Billy will become president. The Baldwin matriarch, Carol, sometimes
refers to herself in interviews as Rose.

            Had the Baldwin patriarch
lived longer, many speculate, the brothers wouldn't have taken up
acting . According to this theory, Alexander was adamant that they become
lawyers, and his objections would have stymied their careers. However,
Hollywood proved irresistible. While a student at New York University, Alec was
spotted by a talent scout and offered a spot on the soap opera The
Doctors . Stephen claims he has always been a thespian, performing in
regional theater and singing with the Long Island Philharmonic. But his acting
career took off only when an agent spotted him working in a Manhattan pizza
parlor. Billy and Daniel say they both got into acting after they saw how easy
it was for their brothers to make it.

            Is there a
Baldwinian essence ? If so, what are its dimensions?

            
               1 The Baldwin Look. Many note similarities in their
sinuous, full lips; dimpled chins; and "intense eyes." Profiles also dwell on
the Baldwin mane. All but Stephen, who wears a bowl cut, are known to slick
back their hair with vast amounts of gel and mousse. (Famous story: It once
took two days to shoot a 30 second scene of Billy driving a convertible. Afraid
his hair would get out of place, he stopped every few yards to get regelled.)
But there are differences too--for example, body hair. The Los Angeles
Times noted that Alec has chest hair "like a gorilla." Meanwhile, Billy has
a decorative tuft on his chest, Stephen is baby-smooth, and Daniel has yet to
take off his clothes on-screen.

            2 The Stanislavskian Baldwin. All the Baldwins claim
to have been schooled in Method acting, studying under teachers with
Russian-sounding names. Alec especially worships Marlon Brando, quoting
incessantly from On the Waterfront and playing Stanley Kowalski in the
Broadway revival of A Streetcar Named Desire . Film critics like to gripe
that none of the Baldwins has any range: They're character actors with
leading-man bodies. (Each has a niche: Alec is the ideal psychopathic villain,
Daniel the hard-drinking cop, Billy the slimy pretty boy, Stephen the screwball
comedian.) Several studio executives have jokingly responded that if their
talents were combined in a single actor, he would be the next Cary Grant.

            
               3 The Baldwin as Crusader. Alec has been the most
outspoken politically. Touted as a potential Democratic senatorial candidate in
New York, he was the main attraction of a bus tour in the Northeast, promoting
campaign finance reform. He has also lobbied for funding for the arts. Alec
makes news with his caustic condemnations: He called Newt Gingrich "evil" and
Alfonse D'Amato "the bozo pool attendant from Island Park." After graduating
from the State University of New York at Binghamton, Billy interned for
Congressman Tom Downey. Both Billy and Alec have headed the liberal actors'
advocacy group the Creative Coalition. Stephen and Daniel are apolitical.

            
               4 The Baldwin Bad Boy. With Daniel's arrest, tabloids
have dredged up the long history of Baldwins run amok. Only Billy has a
reputation as a straight arrow. Most famously, Alec was arrested--and later
acquitted--for allegedly punching a paparazzo and spraying shaving cream
on the photographer's car windows. On the set, he is known for his temper,
smashing cell phones and lobbing insults at colleagues. He once called studio
executive Jeffrey Katzenberg "the eighth dwarf: Greedy." Post-college, Daniel
worked as runner for a big-time bookie. (When his father died, Daniel was in
jail for driving a car with stolen tags.) Stephen has abused drugs.

            
               5 Baldwin Babes. By reputation, Baldwins play the
field, sleeping around Hollywood, then settling down with a beautiful woman.
Before marrying Basinger, Alec was known as a playboy and heartbreaker. He is
most famous for dumping Northern Exposure star Janine Turner weeks
before their wedding. Billy married Chynna Phillips of the pop group Wilson
Phillips, after flings with Madonna and Jennifer Grey. Daniel's second wife is
his Homicide co-star Isabella Hofman. Stephen is married to a Brazilian
artist named Kennya Deodato.

            6 Baldwin Exhibitionism. Physical modesty is not a
Baldwin trait. Alec and Kim Basinger actually did the deed in their sex scenes
in The Getaway (1994)--unheard of in Hollywood. All but one of Billy's
major movies include shots of his rear, and frontal nudity scenes from his
movie Sliver were trimmed at the last minute. In Threesome
(1994), Stephen participates in a ménage à trois . (A very Baldwin
coincidence: Both Stephen's Threesome and Billy's Three of Hearts
[1993] are about bisexual love triangles.)

            

               7 Baldwin Birth Order. No profile makes
the obvious application of Frank Sulloway's controversial birth-order theory.
Sulloway contends that firstborn children are moralistic, eager to please their
parents, and easily angered. (All of which apply to Alec.) Middle children are
compromisers. (Billy is said to be the family peacemaker.) And later-born
offspring are rebellious (the case with Stephen). In Sulloway's theory, as in
life, Daniel is the category-defying, black sheep Baldwin.

         
      
   
