
   
   
      
         
            Why Clinton Screws Around

            Asking
why President Clinton would have sex with all the women he is alleged to have
had sex with is like asking why a hungry man would want to eat. How many
50-year-old men would refuse oral service from attractive 21-year-olds if they
could get away with it? Yet Clinton's circumstances are a little different:
Every indiscretion puts his presidency at stake. Here's a roundup of the top
theories on why Clinton would sleep around.

            
               1 He's "Schmucko." According to this theory, the affair
exposes Clinton's legendary capacity for empathy as a front for his fundamental
rottenness. "He has a bad habit of using people and discarding them" (Gloria
Borger, U.S. News & World Report ). Meanwhile, right-wing conspiracy
theorists, like the British reporter Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, gloat that they
have sounded the alarm about Clinton's basic wickedness (Whitewater, the Vince
Foster murder, etc.) from the start. (See 
                  Slate
               's "International
Papers" for Evans-Pritchard's latest.)

            
               2 He's psycho. The Wall Street Journal editorial
page speculated that the president suffers from an "anti-social personality
disorder," before concluding that "in Mr. Clinton's case a strict diagnosis
does not hold." Clinton has no compunction about his multiple sexual relations
or the lies he tells about them. Like a serial killer, he's so self-obsessed
that he's lost his sense of shame and can't comprehend his culture's mores.

            3 He's stupid. Disappointed Clinton supporters
embrace this argument. His rampant infidelity is caused by his idiocy. "Anyone
who is that dumb should obviously not be President of the United States"
(Russell Baker, the New York Times ).

            
               4 He's a misogynist. Monica Lewinsky's lawyer, William
Ginsburg, advances this view, as do several right-wing women. Seeing women as
sex objects, Clinton has no qualms about coercing and bribing them into
servicing him. Thus, goes this theory, he sexually harasses women who work for
him (Paula Jones and Kathleen Willey), trades jobs for sex (Gennifer Flowers),
and has affairs with subordinates (Lewinsky).

            
               5 He's a sexaholic. The American Psychiatric
Association doesn't classify sex addiction as a medical condition, but that
doesn't prevent the pundits from making the diagnosis. Newsweek 's
Jonathan Alter blames Clinton's alleged sexcapades on the rush that some
addictive personalities experience from the release of the neurotransmitter
dopamine during sex. The New 
               York 
               Post reports a Lewinsky
claim that the president boasted of bedding hundreds of women over the course
of his marriage. If this is true, he's either a Don Juan or a sex maniac. It
would also explain why he (allegedly) falls back on phone sex when he can't
have the real thing. The president's family tends toward addictive behavior.
Mother Virginia Kelley loved gambling, brother Roger got hooked on coke, and
grandmother Edith had a morphine problem. Corollary theory: The risks of
getting caught with Lewinsky added to the thrill and kept him coming back for
more. Alter says that he may even "get off on" the "brush[es] with political
death" that his adultery precipitates.

            
               6 He's self-deluded. Or, as Monica Lewinsky put it,
he's "in denial." Some say Clinton learned to compartmentalize misdeeds in his
Hot Springs, Ark., childhood. Many of his neighbors were devout Baptists
despite running the resort town's illegal gambling industry--the largest in the
South. His mother also admitted to habitually blocking out problems by denying
their existence.

            
               7 He learned it in Arkansas. According to biographer
David Maraniss, Clinton picked up his promiscuous ways early from Hot Springs'
men, who "got away with whatever they wanted to." Clinton also picked up lax
attitudes about sex from his mother, who dressed provocatively in short shorts
and tube tops, and his biological father, allegedly a bigamist.

            
               8 He needs love. Another wounded-child theory. Clinton
craves the affection that his abusive, alcoholic stepfather and abused,
fun-loving mother didn't provide him as a child. This explains his love of
campaigning and his wishy-washy, please-everyone political agenda, as well as
his many girlfriends. An Oedipal permutation of this theory blames his affairs
specifically on an early deficit of motherly attention and notes that many of
his alleged lovers bear a resemblance to Virginia.

            
               9 He's a hippie in a suit. Some conservatives,
including reporters at the New York Post and Washington Times ,
blame Clinton's philandering on the '60s free-love attitudes he adopted as an
anti-war radical and never jettisoned.

            
               10 He's a boy-man. He remains the kid in the candy
store, without control over his appetites for sex and food. Time 's Lance
Morrow says Clinton constantly pushes the envelope to see what he can get away
with, like a 2-year-old who "tests the limits of his independence by toddling
off."

            
               11 This is a midlife crisis. Instead of buying a
motorcycle or taking up bungee-jumping, the graying Clinton paired off with a
21-year-old to affirm his youth and virility.

            
               12 The Clintons' is a marriage of convenience. There are
several versions of this: 1) Hillary knows her husband is a sexaholic but
overlooks his infidelity to advance her own political career. 2) Hillary is a
prude, forcing Clinton to satisfy his sexual needs elsewhere. 3) The Dick
Morris angle: Hillary may not be "into regular sex with men," forcing Clinton
to sate his sexual appetite elsewhere.

            
               13 Presidents are egomaniacs. The best estimates are
that 13 out of 42 presidents cheated on their wives. Presidents are surrounded
by servile sycophants who convince them they are invincible and forgive their
sins, and this paves the way for sexual affairs. Men of presidential quality
tend to be arrogant, with a sense of "entitlement and lordly expectation"
(David Remnick, The New Yorker ). The best example of presidential
bravura ever: When told of John F. Kennedy's womanizing, Lyndon Johnson
responded, "God damn it, I had more women by accident than he ever had by
design!"

            
               14 Presidents are alpha male studs. Evolutionary
psychologists explain presidential philandering as an atavistic impulse left
over from the early days of the human race. Natural selection rewarded men who
clawed their way to positions of power with many sex partners (i.e., gave them
many chances to reproduce their genes). Proponents of this theory recall
ancient rulers such as the Pharaoh Ramses II and Aztec King Nezahualpilli, both
of whom sired more than 100 children. (Click here to read Robert
Wright's explication.)

            
               15 Power is the ultimate aphrodisiac. Women throw
themselves at powerful men, and powerful men are too weak to resist. The
star-struck Lewinsky appears to have instigated a relationship with Clinton.
According to her friends, she had long fantasized about sleeping with the
president in the Oval Office.

            
               16 Miserable childhoods bring lovers together. This is
the most pleasant spin on the whole affair, which ascribes no deviant
intentions to the president or Lewinsky. They were simply two lonely souls who
bonded over their shared experience of abusive parents. This theory initially
emanated from the White House.

            17 We're his enablers. The public's capacity for
forgiveness only encourages Clinton's rogue ways. We don't make him pay the
price for his dalliances, thereby convincing him that the risk is worth it.

         
      
   
