
   
   
      
         
            Bill Clinton vs. Clarence Thomas

            When
Anita Hill accused Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment in 1991, right-wingers
dismissed her as a "liar" and an "erotomaniac." Now the same right-wingers have
embraced Paula Jones' sexual-harassment case against Bill Clinton. Meanwhile,
Hill's feminist supporters, who once claimed that women "don't make these
things up," have rallied to the president's defense or are silent about the
accusations involving Jones, Monica Lewinsky, and others. Each side accuses the
other of hypocrisy. What are the similarities and the differences between the
two cases?

            1 The evidence: Similar evidence supports Jones' and
Hill's accusations. Their credibility depends on corroboration by people who
claim they were told of the harassment soon after it occurred. Six affidavits
say that Paula Jones spoke of her encounter with Bill Clinton on the same day
it allegedly happened. Four witnesses testified under oath that Hill told them
about Thomas' harassment during the period it allegedly occurred. Possibly
because Hill's corroborators didn't testify until eight years after she had
stopped working for Thomas, their statements contain more contradictions than
those made by Jones' corroborators. (Evidence supporting the contention that
Clinton groped Kathleen Willey--his other alleged victim of harassment--is much
shakier. A friend of Willey's disputes key facts about the claim, and Willey
has yet to make her case publicly.)

            
               2 Ulterior motives: Critics argue that Hill and Jones
have allied with opportunistic ideological zealots. And they are right. Hill
testified only after liberal Senate aides had tracked her down and leaked her
story; feminist groups such as the Women's Legal Defense Fund advised her.
Professional Arkansas Clinton-hater Cliff Jackson coaxed Jones into filing
suit; Robert Bork has coached Jones' lawyers; and the religious right's
Rutherford Institute now helps fund her case. While right-wing and left-wing
groups have helped trumpet the two women's causes, nobody has shown
convincingly that either side trumped up the accusations.

            
               3 Lingering doubts: Fundamental logical flaws in the
stories of both Hill and Jones continue to create doubts: If Thomas was such an
intolerable boss, why did Hill leave a secure job to follow him from the
Department of Education to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission? Why did
she continue to telephone him after she no longer worked for him? If Jones is
interested only in clearing her name, why did she decide to make such a public
case against the president?

            
               4 What the men (allegedly) did: The behavior at issue
is very different in the two cases. Which is worse? Are Clinton's alleged short
episodes of physical assault more reprehensible than Thomas' alleged
two-and-a-half-year verbal assault? Thomas may have talked about porn films,
asked Hill out on patently unwelcome dates, bragged about his sexual prowess,
and referred to pubic hairs on Coke cans, but Hill says that Thomas never
flashed his genitals, touched her sexually, or propositioned her
explicitly.

            
               5 Just say no? Some Clinton defenders note that he
always flags his lascivious intentions before expressing them. He flirted with
Willey over the phone before putting the moves on her. When State Trooper Danny
Ferguson invited Jones to Clinton's hotel room, he told her, "The governor says
you make his knees knock." Once Clinton realized these women wanted none of
him, he backed off. He purportedly told Jones, "Well, I don't want to make you
do anything that you don't want to do." By contrast, Thomas failed to pick up
on Hill's lack of interest, her repeated assertions that she didn't want to
date Thomas and her "obvious discomfort" with his "wild talk." (Hill's critics
say she should have emphatically told Thomas to stop.)

            
               6 The Jordan connection: One unnoted similarity between
the two cases is the role of Vernon Jordan. Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson report
in their book, Strange Justice: The Selling of Clarence Thomas , that
Clinton buddy Jordan spent a day prepping Thomas for his confirmation
hearings.

            

               7 Did Thomas and Clinton violate the
law? If "the law" is the one against sexual harassment, the answer in both
cases is: Probably not.

            According
to the Supreme Court's interpretation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964--the basis for most harassment cases--harassment is actionable when it is
"sufficiently severe and pervasive to ... create an abusive working
environment." Because Jones failed to file her suit before Title VII's 180-day
statute of limitations, her lawyers have used an obscure Reconstruction-era
anti-Ku Klux Klan law to make her case. Assuming she did qualify for Title VII,
her legal case is still weak: a) There is no evidence that Jones suffered any
retaliation for refusing Clinton. She received regular pay increases and
promotions after the alleged incident. b) Courts rarely consider a one-time
instance of harassment "severe and pervasive." c) Title VII doesn't prohibit
propositioning colleagues or exposing one's genitals to them.

            
Willey might have a better case against Clinton
if she wants to make it--and if her story is true. She was visiting the White
House in search of a job when he allegedly pawed her.

            Even if completely true, the
Monica Lewinsky tale is one of consensual sex, not harassment. The relationship
it describes may strike many as exploitative or ugly for other reasons, but it
is not illegal.

            Hill
never claimed that her unpleasant encounters with Thomas constituted actionable
sexual harassment. She would have had difficulty proving in court that Thomas
had created an "abusive working environment," because she never complained
about his harassment and maintained her friendship with him even after she left
the EEOC.

            
               8 Volume discount? There is only one public accusation
against Thomas. (Other women, though, were prepared to testify against him and
didn't get the chance.) There are at least three public accusations against
Clinton.

            
               9 Addiction: Following the Lewinsky scandal, much has
been made of Clinton's alleged "sexaholism," his pathological inability to
control his sexual appetites. Thomas is accused of having a problem keeping his
hands off pornography. According to Mayer and Abramson, his viewing pleasures
included films such as The Adventures of Bad Mama Jama , about the
interracial sexcapades of an obese black woman. They also say he papered the
walls of his apartment with nude centerfolds and meticulously maintained a
Playboy collection. (Right-wing investigative journalist David Brock
argues that many of Mayer and Abramson's sources for these allegations have
recanted/claim they were misquoted.)

            

               10 Lying: Defenders of both men have
argued that, even if true, the behavior they stand accused of is harmless.
Thomas' defenders, especially, have said that making such a big deal over a few
crass remarks reflects the excesses of political correctness. But neither man
has attempted to defend the behavior he is accused of. Rather, both insist it
never happened. Thomas specifically and emotionally declared that Hill's tale,
if true, was repugnant and would disqualify him to sit on the Supreme
Court.

            Thomas
proponents contrast his categorical denials of Hill's allegations with
Clinton's evasive legalistic denials. Even if Clinton had done Jones no wrong,
they say, his dissembling bespeaks a character unfit for his job. Thomas
critics say he cynically played the race card by accusing his opponents of
conspiring to bring down an uppity black man. Even if he had done Hill no
wrong, they say, his response bespeaks a character unfit for his job.

            
               11 Cover-up: If the allegations are true, both men lied
under oath about them--a criminal offense. Clinton also is accused of suborning
perjury. On the Linda Tripp tapes, Lewinsky allegedly says Clinton coached her
to deny a relationship. The Los Angeles Times has reported that Clinton
asked Ferguson not to testify about the encounter with Jones. No one has
accused Thomas of trying to silence Hill. (As the case arose, he had neither
the time nor the opportunity.)

            
               12 Special circumstances: Thomas' alleged harassment is
deemed especially damning because it occurred while he headed the EEOC and was
simultaneously approving regulations for workplace harassment. Clinton's
critics say he should be reprimanded as a CEO or university president facing
similar accusations would--by being removed from his job.

            
               13 Ideological cross-dressing: Both conservatives and
feminists seek to explain away their Jones-Hill flip-flop. Feminists say that
Hill came forward at a time when nobody believed victims of sexual harassment.
Because they advocated Hill's cause, they say, victims of harassment now have
more credibility. Case in point: Jones has no shortage of supporters and needs
no feminist help. Other feminists such as Susan Estrich concede that their
attacks on Thomas were indeed politically motivated. Conservatives explain the
table-turning by continuing to attack Hill's credibility and accusing the
feminists of class bias against the "big-haired" Jones.

            

               14 Timing: The accusations against
Thomas came when he was up for a job. Senators were about to vote on his
fitness for a lifetime appointment to the nation's highest court--and they
would have had to vote even if Hill had not come forward with her tale.
Clinton, by contrast, is in a job. He is in his second term as president and
can be removed only by impeachment. Some Clinton defenders argue that the
voters knew about the president's alleged proclivities, if they didn't know the
details of any particular case, and implicitly accepted them when they elected
him twice.

            Others argue that a
presidential impeachment would be far more disruptive and costly to the nation
than a Senate committee's rejection of a Supreme Court nominee; they say it
isn't worth it. This isn't exactly a defense of Clinton's alleged behavior, but
it has the same practical effect.

         
      
   
