
   
   
      
         
            Why Are We Using Chinese Rockets?

            The
latest scandal to implicate the Clinton White House revolves around accusations
that the president gave aerospace giant Loral Space &
Communications--headed by the Democratic National Committee's biggest donor in
the 1996 campaign cycle--special permission to export satellites to China,
despite Justice Department opposition. Even if there is no actual evidence of a
quid (donations) pro quo (permission to export), these allegations raise
questions. Why would a U.S. company launch satellites on Chinese rockets? Why
not use American ones? And if the rockets that launch satellites and nuclear
missiles are fundamentally the same, why would the United States authorize
cooperation with China's national aerospace company, which has clear links to
the military?

            

               Background. In anticipation of a booming
market, U.S. satellite companies began contracting launches with China in the
mid-'80s. To punish China's 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown, the U.S.
government prohibited the launch of American commercial satellites on Chinese
rockets, except with a presidentially granted exemption. The Bush
administration, however, granted waivers to the sanctions that soon put most of
the contracts back on track. Bush, urged on by Newt Gingrich and other
Republican leaders on Capitol Hill, authorized the export of nine U.S.
satellites for Chinese launch. (In fact, sanctions changed little. The export
of satellites to any country has always required government approval.)

            As a
senator, Al Gore was the most vociferous critic of these waivers . (Click
to read his criticisms from 1989.) Clinton campaigned against them. However,
aggressive lobbying by satellite manufacturers persuaded Clinton and Gore to
reverse their position. They have granted waivers for the launch of 11 more
satellites. No application for a waiver has ever been denied--by any
administration. Last month, before this scandal broke, Clinton aides told the
Christian Science Monitor that they hoped that the administration would
soon eliminate these sanctions altogether. (Click for a rundown of the specific
actions by Loral that underlie the current controversy.)

            

               Why do U.S. companies use Chinese
rockets? American commercial satellite manufacturers (of which Loral is the
third largest) do not rely on China for most of their launches. In the same
two-year period that China sent two Loral satellites into space, Loral launched
dozens of others on Russian, French, and American rockets. Although China
currently launches relatively few satellites, Loral, like its competitors
Hughes and Lockheed Martin, aims to increase its use of Chinese rockets for
several reasons:

            
               1) Cut-rate prices.
China charges about half the rate of Russia--its least expensive competitor
($70 million vs. $140 for a comparable launch). Attribute this in part to
massive government subsidies given to Great Wall, China's national aerospace
company. More important, to restore business that China lost after a spate of
rocket crashes in 1995 and 1996, Great Wall slashed launch prices. In the early
'90s, the Chinese launched three to four satellites a year. Last year they only
managed the successful launch of a single satellite (for the Philippines).

            
               2) Rocket shortage.
The proliferation of cell phones, digital television, etc., has caused the
demand for launches to outstrip the supply of rockets. This shortage forces
satellite companies to exploit all available opportunities. U.S. export policy
exacerbates the dearth. To protect its aerospace industry, U.S. quotas for this
decade allow American companies to arrange only 20 launches with each of the
French, Russian, Ukrainian, and Chinese national aerospace companies.

            
               3)
NASA policy. Fixated on politically popular manned flights, NASA has
devoted most of its resources to highly expensive Space Shuttle flights. NASA
neglected development of the cheap, disposable, reliable rockets that other
countries pursued. When the Reagan administration began authorizing commercial
space launches in the mid-'80s, American aerospace companies, which typically
collaborated on massive government projects, weren't equipped to build entire
rockets for commercial use. The companies are still catching up and are not
nearly as well stocked as their Russian and French competitors.

            

               Is it dangerous for the United States to use
Chinese rockets? It is indisputable that the technology used to launch
commercial satellites is largely indistinguishable from the technology used to
launch missiles. Like Russia and the United States, China ripped off its
commercial space capabilities from its weapons program. China's commercial
rocket, the Long March, and its intercontinental ballistic missiles use
precisely the same rocket boosters and guidance systems. Great Wall is partly
owned by the Chinese government and its upper management has intimate ties to
the Chinese military's top brass.

            U.S.
manufacturers, moreover, inevitably acquire a vested interest in improving the
accuracy and reliability of Chinese rockets, since failures, such as the 1996
crash that destroyed Loral and Hughes satellites, are very costly. In any case,
in the process of launching U.S. commercial satellites, it is unavoidable that
Americans will transfer some technology to the Chinese . To install a
satellite, for instance, American engineers work with Chinese engineers to
substantially rewire and reprogram the rocket. The law, however, requires that
Defense Department officials supervise these procedures. At least one official
remains with the satellite from the time it leaves the country until its
liftoff.

            
The Clinton administration considers the
risks of technology transfers negligible. Defense Department officials
told Congress last week that the Chinese have not upgraded their ICBMs since
1981. And they don't need to--the 13 missiles they supposedly have aimed at the
United States have always been judged capable of hitting U.S. cities by the
Pentagon (though China's difficulty in commercial launches casts doubt on the
Pentagon's assessment).

            
               Did
Loral harm national security? In the wake of the February 1996 Chinese
rocket crash, an executive of a Loral subsidiary chaired a panel composed of
other satellite manufacturers that reviewed the findings of Chinese
investigators. Loral says the review was meant to reassure the insurance
companies that indemnify their launches on Chinese rockets. Loral denies that
its report to the Chinese divulged sensitive information about rocket guidance
systems, as a Defense Department report claims. The 200 page report, the
company says, merely pointed out that the Chinese rockets had faulty soldering.
And this conclusion, Loral claims, was neither original nor based on first-hand
investigation. Finally, the Chinese say that the State Department impounded the
Loral findings before they ever reached them.

            
               If you
missed the links, click to read Gore's 1989 criticisms and for a breakdown of
the Loral controversy.
            

         
      
   
