
   
   
      
         
            Indian Gambling

            Gambling as an enterprise
among American Indian tribes has exploded in recent years. The first operation
started in 1979. Today, 280 operations are conducted by 186 gambling tribes
across 28 states; the 1996 take is estimated at $6 billion. Indian tribes are
now locked in competition: Three Wisconsin tribes have filed a suit claiming
they were denied a casino license in 1995 because wealthier tribes beat them to
Democratic campaign coffers. It appears likely that an independent counsel will
be appointed to investigate Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt's handling of the
affair. What is the legal basis for gambling on Indian reservations? What
accounts for the explosion in the number and size of such operations? Who
controls the gambling spigot: the tribes, the states within whose boundaries
the reservations lie, or the federal government?

            
               The
concept of tribal sovereignty. The " cases" of the 1830s framed
tribe-state-union relations thus: The tribes were neither foreign nor subject
nations; they were "domestic dependent nations," "wards" to the union's
"guardian." Since the reservations were federal protectorates, state law had no
force on their territory.

            

               Exceptions to the rule. Tribal immunity
from state law is not absolute. Tribes have, on occasion, opted for a blurring
of boundaries (asking that state cops patrol reservation land, for example).
And several court decisions since Cherokee have authorized exceptions to
the state-exclusion principle. A state may, for example, make enforceable laws
governing tribes if Congress delegates authority to that state.

            Congress
has used its delegation power to transfer its authority to states on several
occasions. For example, Public Law 280 (1953) gave several states on
reservations. Even without the specific delegation of authority, state law may
still be considered valid if it doesn't flout federal goals. Click for an
example.

            

               Limits on state control. Gambling did
not become an issue until 1979, when the Seminole tribe of Florida identified
bingo as a means of alleviating poverty on the reservation. The tribe's
decision put it in direct conflict with Florida's rather restrictive bingo
statute. Crying PL 280, Florida went to court--and the court ruled in favor of
the tribe. Its reasoning: Bingo was not universally prohibited in Florida;
nonprofit organizations were exempt. Therefore, the state had no right to
regulate bingo on the Seminole reservation.

            The
Seminole victory was the first in a series, and Indian gambling thrived over
the next several years.

            

               Enter Congress. The Indian Gaming
Regulatory Act (1988) sought to set regulatory standards and arbitrate
outstanding tribe-state conflicts. IGRA confirmed the tribes' "exclusive" right
to regulate reservation gambling as long as the gambling activity in question
did not violate federal or state law.

            The act
also divided Indian gambling into three classes. Of these, tribes were given
control of the first two (traditional/ceremonial games, bingo, and some card
games). But Class III operations--casinos and the like--required that the tribe
enter an agreement, or "compact," with the state.

            
IGRA obliged the state to enter negotiations in
good faith, failing which a tribe could sue in federal court. But when the
Seminoles, victorious in 1979, sued Florida after being denied compact
negotiations in 1996, they lost.

            Predictably, IGRA has come
under fire from all directions. Incensed tribes have pointed out that the
court's ruling stripped them of their safety net, making their sovereignty
moot. The Department of the Interior is exploring alternative procedures that
would let tribes negotiate compacts directly with the secretary, cutting the
states out of the equation. This July, Sen. John McCain introduced the Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act Amendments Act of 1997 in the Senate, seeking, among
other things, to establish an independent U.S. agency that would set minimum
federal regulatory standards for reservation gambling.

            Meanwhile, a few tribes keep
the bulk of the gambling prize: The General Accounting Office reports that of
the 126 tribes operating gambling facilities as of Dec. 31, 1996, eight
accounted for 40 percent of total revenues. Moreover, Tribal Allocation
Priority funds, as federal payments to tribal governments are known, are
divvied up based on tribe size and population density rather than income,
meaning that tribes with big gambling incomes often get federal subsidies as
big as those with none.

         
      
   
