
   
   
      
         
            Allergies

            Doctors predict that, thanks
to El Niño, the next two years will be the most allergy-ridden in history, a
fitting end to what doctors call the worst century for allergies ever. The
percentage of the population suffering from allergies has more than doubled
over the last 40 years, according to one study. Meanwhile, as part of a
dizzying parade of allergy remedies, the Food and Drug Administration has
recently approved the over-the-counter sale of cromolyn sodium, a nasal spray
trumpeted as the most effective nonprescription allergy combatant.

            
               What
are allergies? Who gets them? Is there any way to conquer them? Are they
really more prevalent than they used to be? Why hasn't natural selection
consigned this miserable condition to the dustbin of evolutionary history?

            Allergies share the same etiology: The immune

               system 
               overreacts to the presence of harmless proteins normally
not found in the body. During the first few encounters with a foreign protein
(or allergen), the immune system catalogs its characteristics and tailors an
antibody called immunoglobulin to purge it. Thereafter when the allergen enters
the body, the immunoglobulins send signals to trigger the release of a set of
nasty chemicals, most notably histamines, that destroy it. Side effects of
histamines include the tightening of airways, constriction of nasal passages,
release of mucus, and redness of eyes. Nobody knows how much of an allergen it
takes to set off this process.

            Some
typological 
               distinctions : Allergies are technically different
from adverse reactions to poison ivy, chemicals, and lactose, none of which
involves the immune system. Allergies are also distinguishable from colds,
during which the immune system combats viruses that can actually do harm.

            
The most prevalent allergy is hay

               fever . (The Centers for Disease Control's estimate: Twenty-six million
Americans suffer from the condition.) Here the immune system reacts to proteins
contained in pollen, tiny airborne particles released as part of the
reproductive cycle of trees, weeds, and grasses. ("Hay fever" comes down from
early 19 th century British farmers who misplaced blame for their
ragweed allergies on the hay reaped during the fall harvest.) Other common
allergies include reactions to the proteins found in food , the
excrement 
               of 
               mites , and the saliva 
               of

               some warm-blooded mammals (cats, dogs, horses). (Click for a sidebar on
the myth of the nonallergenic dog.) Reactions to food afflict relatively few
and, except for shellfish and peanut allergies, are most common among small
children.

            The
consequences of allergies are usually no greater than sneezing, a stuffy nose,
and itchy eyes. But if you suffer from asthma, allergies can cause an attack.
And in rare cases, allergic attacks can turn into anaphylaxis , where
toxic levels of histamines and other chemicals are released, causing
asphyxiation, vomiting, and death. More common are infections triggered by
stuffy noses. The scenario: Allergies inflame and clog a nose, precluding it
from draining mucus and fluids from sinuses and ears. The fluids become a
breeding ground for bacteria. (An estimated 40 percent of ear infections stem
from allergies.)

            Allergies are genetically 
               linked . Researchers
have correlated them with a single mutant gene inherited from the mother. But
statistics also point to the importance of other genes that come via the
father. Eighty percent of the children of two allergy-suffering parents are
also allergic. With one afflicted parent, there is a 50 percent chance of
inheritance; and when neither parent is an allergy sufferer, there's still a 20
percent chance.

            Allergies
are spread evenly across ethnicity and gender. Individuals, however, tend to
experience their effects in roughly 10 year cycles . The worst period
usually occurs from birth through adolescence, and then recurs in the mid-20s
for another decade. But allergies can start at any time. And nobody has a clue
as to why they wax and wane.

            
Pollen has its own patterns. In the early part
of the year (March to May) trees emit pollen; from June to August, grass is the
main source; from September to November, weeds are. There's no escaping
pollen. Allergists say some cities (Los Angeles and Denver) are better than
others (Atlanta and Washington, D.C.). But all are bad for at least a chunk of
the year. Even cities such as Las Vegas and Tucson, once famed for their pure
desert air, are now corrupted by trees and grass imported as part of so-called
"civic improvement" projects. The lowest counts occur in coastal areas and
mountains, where wind tends to blow pollen away, although pollen has been
detected as far as 400 miles out to sea and two miles up. (Other useful pollen
tips: During the summer, pollen counts tend to be lower before 8 a.m., after
dark, and following rain.)

            Every allergy season seems
to be touted by the media as being the worst one on the books. (Click for a
sampling of alarmist headlines from the Los Angeles Times. ) And there is
much dispute over whether El 
               Niño will cause as much trouble as
some allergists predict. The claim is that El Niño rains and mild temperatures
will cause plants to be more fecund and produce more pollen. Also, lack of
winter freezes means that mites normally killed off by the cold will
survive.

            Allergy
treatment is a burgeoning sector of the economy. Annually, $3.4 billion is
spent on medication and doctor visits . There is plenty of room for
growth--only an estimated 12 percent of hay fever sufferers seek medical
treatment. New drugs debut almost every year. (Recently, there has been a rush
to fill the vacuum left by the antihistamine Seldane, which was yanked from the
market after eight people died when Seldane reacted adversely with other
drugs.) None of the three major prescription antihistamines (Allegra, Claritin,
Zyrtec) seems to be consistently more effective than the others. All relieve
symptoms in a vast majority of patients. Unlike the pills, immunotherapy shots
attack the underlying problem, not just the symptoms. Each week patients are
injected with a small dose of allergens to build their immunity. Studies show
the shots cure 80 percent of patients after several years of treatment. But
they are a huge hassle and costly--nearly $1,000 a year.

            Why hasn't natural 
               selection corrected the
immune system's misguided response? Why do allergies afflict an increasing
number of victims if they serve no useful purpose? A few theories:

            
               The
Victorious Immune System: Evolutionary biologists speculate that a
hypersensitive immune system was needed back when parasites were ubiquitous and
deadly. Hay fever was the small cost of survival. And since allergies rarely
shorten life spans or discourage mates, it is unlikely natural selection will
ever weed them out.

            
               Theory
of the Leisure System: Modern medicine and hygiene have licked most of the
major problems that used to preoccupy our immune system. Now, with nothing to
regularly contend with, this theory argues, the system is set off by the most
harmless foreign particle.

            

               Western-Style Living: Here blame goes to the advent of poorly
ventilated, densely populated living spaces--allergy traps--and the increased
popularity of domestic pets. In addition, there is the onset of pollution,
which carries mites.

            
               Hypochondria: More
people are allergic today because more people are diagnosed as allergic rather
than as suffering from colds. The cynical spin is that pharmaceutical companies
have duped the public into believing that they have allergies and need drugs to
fix them.

         
      
   
