
   
   
      
         
            Exhumation

            This week, the Pentagon
ordered the opening of Arlington National Cemetery's Tomb of the Unknowns to
remove the remains of a soldier killed in the Vietnam War and submit them to
DNA tests to recover his identity. This is the latest in a spate of
high-profile exhumations. Celebrities exhumed in the 1990s include Czar
Nicholas II, outlaw Jesse James, civil rights martyr Medgar Evers, and
President Zachary Taylor. Some historians carp that conspiracy-minded publicity
hounds perpetuate this fad, rudely disturbing the dead. How do exhumations
work? What do religion and law have to say about them? Why do we now have so
many?

            Since the
1920s, it has been standard practice for American morticians to embalm corpses,
to disinfect them so decomposition is delayed. (For a cross-cultural study of
embalming techniques, click .) Even with most embalmed bodies, however, the
flesh eventually dehydrates and crumbles and is devoured by bacteria. (One
alleged origin of "ghost stories": Several breeds of bacteria, especially wood
fungi, which feast on corpses, are luminous in the dark.) The longevity of a
cadaver's flesh and innards depends largely on the embalming, the casket
(hermetic ones preserve better), the decedent's diet (certain bacteria thrive
on fat), and the warmth of the ground (a good freeze kills off bacteria).

            Here are the most common reasons for exhumation : DNA
extractions to settle paternity suits; criminal investigations; relocation to
familial cemetery plots; and accidental discoveries--e.g., when a construction
worker stumbles across an unmarked grave.

            Attitudes
toward exhumation vary wildly. Some Native American tribes assert the body's
spirit lives on and that to disturb a corpse is to disturb the spirit's life.
Both Jews and Muslims take nearly as strong positions against
disinterment. By tradition, Jews require funerals to take place within 24 hours
of death, with members of the community keeping vigil over the body until it
goes in the ground. Exhumation is allowed only when a body is to be reburied
with family or in Israel. Christians have a more liberal exhumation policy. The
Catholic and Protestant churches say bodies shouldn't be disturbed, if
possible. However, upon canonization, saints have frequently been disinterred
so their remains can be dismembered and turned into relics. And in the past,
exhumation has been ex post facto punishment for heresies. The classic
example is the corpse of the corrupt Pope Formosus (816-896), which was exhumed
and dragged through the streets of Rome. (Although his remains were reburied,
subsequent popes had Formosus' body disinterred and further mutilated.)

            
U.S. laws governing exhumation remain vague
and disparate , varying from state to state. Most state regulations derive
from English common law. Oddly, the common law prohibits the theft of items
from a grave--shrouds, clothing, etc.--but is silent on the theft or removal of
bodies themselves. This was a matter left to the church. (Only in the
mid-19 th century, when snatching corpses for medical experiments
became endemic, did states pass laws prohibiting cadaver theft.) Generally,
citizens can apply to their state's attorney general for permission to exhume
family members for any reason, and requests for reburial are usually
automatically granted. And the state can exhume a body when it deems a death
suspicious and improperly investigated. Many questions--what if family members
disagree on exhumation, and what if the dead person has no relatives?--remain
to be hashed out in the courts.

            
Pathologists say the number of exhumations skyrocketed in the 1980s and
then increased even more in the '90s. Click for a list of recent and proposed
celebrity exhumations. Why the trend?

            

               1 Scientific Advances: Forensic
pathology, the use of science to solve crime, has improved dramatically,
particularly with the development of new DNA tests. Until 1995, DNA tests
required fresh samples from very specific body parts--e.g., strands of hair
that include roots--that tend to decay quickly. Now, virtually any remaining
body part--a bone, a tooth--will do. The difference: Where old DNA tests
required a sample from the nucleus of a cell, the new tests work off sturdier
mitochondria--the energy-producing material that surrounds a nucleus. Although
the FBI considers mitochondrial DNA tests virtually infallible, many
anthropologists doubt their accuracy. (In the case of the Unknown Soldier, DNA
for his remains will be matched against DNA from the blood of people the
military suspects are related to him.)

            Other new
techniques include the use of computer animation to construct images of faces,
based on surviving jawbones and teeth, as well as information gleaned from DNA
about hair color. Previously, dental records had been the primary means of
identifying unknown cadavers. (Forensic legend has Paul Revere first utilizing
this technique during the Revolutionary War.)

            

               2 Transitions to Democracy: With the
collapse of Latin American dictatorships in the early '90s, human rights
workers tracked down mass graves containing the regimes' victims. In Chile,
more than 900 victims of ex-dictator Augusto Pinochet's regime have been dug up
and identified. Confronted with evidence of mass graves, Pinochet remarked that
they represented a "great savings of cemetery space." Similar exhumations of
mass graves in Bosnia and Rwanda are intended to obtain evidence that will
convict war criminals.

            In
Eastern Europe, exhumed bodies have been used as symbols by political parties,
as anthropologist Katherine Verdery explains in her forthcoming book, The
Political Lives of Dead Bodies in the Postsocialist Transformation . For
instance, liberal reform parties have disinterred Communist leaders from their
mausoleums while reburying pre-Communist nationalist heroes in elaborate
sarcophagi. In Serbia, President Slobodan Milosevic sanctioned the removal in
1987 of the body of Serbian hero Czar Lazar, killed 600 years before by Turks
at the Battle of Kosovo, so it could be paraded around Slovenia and Croatia in
a display of Serb power.

            
               3 Claims of Conspiracy: Many recent and proposed
exhumations have sought to prove that elites and historians have conspired to
withhold the truth about murders and assassinations. Was Ron Brown murdered? Is
Lee Harvey Oswald in his grave or in Russia? Did Meriwether Lewis really commit
suicide, as historians claim? It's conceivable that some of these allegations
are true, and there's no harm in checking them out, as long as the decedent's
family agrees to participate. But these sorts of exhumations have a track
record of turning up nothing. An exhumation of Lee Harvey Oswald's grave found
Lee Harvey Oswald.

            
               4 Corpse Fetish: Some anthropologists say the
technology is new but the impulse is old. We are heirs to the inexplicable
pagan obsession with corpses.

            
               If you
missed the sidebar on embalming techniques and their cultural significance
through the ages, click . For a list of recent and proposed exhumations, click
.
            

         
      
   
