
   
   
      
         
            Lying Lawyers

            President Clinton's lawyer
Bob Bennett last week heatedly declared that the allegations concerning the
president and Paula Jones, Monica Lewinsky, Kathleen Willey, and others were
"scurrilous" products of "Clinton haters." Jones in particular "has no case.
... She was never harassed."

            It is
possible that Bennett actually believes his client's story on all these
matters. But suppose, like almost everyone else, he believes Clinton is
lying to some degree. Is a lawyer free to tell, with as much passion as he
cares to muster, something he believes to be a lie?

            Lewinsky's lawyer, William Ginsburg, has made a
"proffer ": In exchange for immunity from prosecution, his client will
testify under oath that she and President Clinton had sex. So far, Special
Prosecutor Kenneth Starr has not accepted the proffer. Without a deal, is
Ginsburg free to revert to Lewinsky's earlier sworn testimony that she and
Clinton did not have sex? Having offered to tell one version of events,
may a lawyer really choose to tell a contradictory version--as if the offer had
never existed?

            
Officially, the American Bar Association's model code of professional
responsibility forbids a lawyer to "knowingly make a false statement of law or
fact." The code forbids lawyers from making any statement, true or
false, outside the courtroom that has a "substantial likelihood" of "materially
prejudicing" a trial. In practice, however, these restrictions melt
away .

            
Alawyer may not knowingly lie, but he or she is
under no obligation to know the truth or to draw logical inferences from what
he or she does know. Since the lawyer was rarely at the scene of the crime, she
can plausibly maintain that she doesn't know for sure what happened--and is
therefore free to argue whatever version of events best suits her
client . Indeed, in the absence of that very rare absolute certainty, the
ethical obligation of "zealous advocacy" virtually requires a lawyer to
argue his client's version of events--however implausible. To guard against
certainty, some lawyers take the precaution of not asking their clients to say
exactly what happened--or even of asking them not to say what happened.

            Lying
really only arises as an issue in the absurd warhorse of law school ethics
exams: a client who simultaneously confesses to a crime and insists on
testifying that he is innocent. The ethical issue, even here, is not whether
the lawyer is allowed to participate in the client's lie but
whether he is actually required to do so. The answer is: not quite. If a
lawyer knows with ontological certitude that a client is planning to lie on the
stand, she is not allowed to report this to the court. She is allowed to quit
the case. Or--to avoid being guilty of suborning perjury--she may put her
client on the stand and let him testify without asking him specific questions
beyond "Tell your story."

            If a lawyer finds that his client has "perpetrated a fraud
on the tribunal"--i.e., told a lie in court--the rules say the lawyer should
inform the court, unless the information was told to him in confidence or
secret. But, of course, just about everything that a client ever tells a lawyer
is a secret or a confidence . Similarly, there appear to be specific and
severe rules forbidding "extrajudicial" remarks, such as lawyers' statements to
the press about a pending case. But the reality is better characterized by the
conduct of Bennett and Ginsburg. It is almost unheard of for anyone to get into
trouble for giving interviews when a case is pretrial. The rule requires a
"substantial" chance of "material" impact on the case, both of which are nearly
impossible to prove.

            Just to
make sure they are not violating the rules against lying, lawyers can choose
their words carefully . Bennett clearly intended to communicate that his
position is the same as his client's: The Jones, Lewinsky, and Willey stories
are all false. But his words can be interpreted--if necessary--to mean
something else. For example, he could be saying that Jones was not harassed
because her description of Clinton's behavior, even if true, doesn't fit the
technical definition of harassment. To say that allegations are "scurrilous" is
not necessarily to say that they are false. And so on.

            
In a proffer session, a witness, defendant, or
potential defendant provides the prosecution with a preview of the
evidence he or she could provide or the testimony they would give. The
prosecution is invited to buy this information with leniency.

            Proffers
are increasingly common in the criminal justice system, especially since the
enactment of federal sentencing guidelines in 1987, which substantially
restricted a judge's discretion in sentencing. One of the few remaining ways to
obtain a coveted "downward departure"--a sentence below the official range--is
through cooperation with the government . In Lewinsky's case, lawyer
Ginsburg, rather than turning state's evidence after indictment, is asking for
immunity--a guarantee that his client will never face charges at all.
Unfortunately, this leaves Ginsburg trying to explain that if granted immunity
Lewinsky will testify one way, and if indicted she'll stand by her deposition.
This does not do well for Lewinsky's credibility.

            Normally, these discussions are kept secret. Not because
discussing them in public might violate the rules but because making proffers
public seldom makes tactical 
               sense . In discussing Lewinsky's
proffer, Ginsburg suggests that Lewinsky either has already lied or will do so
in the future for the right deal. This doesn't look good.

            But these contradictions
cannot be used against Lewinsky at trial. The federal rules of criminal
procedure prohibit the government from using any statements made in furtherance
of a plea bargain, and Lewinsky's attempt to gain immunity is essentially a
form of plea bargaining. Additionally, most proffer sessions involve what is
known as a "queen for a day" agreement, under which both sides agree that
information discussed at such a session will not be admissible against the
defendant at a trial. These protections, enacted to encourage truth before
trial, have the paradoxical effect , when publicized, of making Lewinsky
appear crazy, mendacious, guilty, or some combination thereof.

         
      
   
