
   
   
      
         
            Baitgate (or the Corruption of David Hale)

            With the closing of
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's Little Rock, Ark., grand jury last week,
the commentariat pronounced that the Whitewater scandal had passed, with the
president emerging unindicted and unscathed. But another Whitewater
scandal--which neither implicates the Clintons nor involves shady land
deals--still has legs. On the basis of evidence initially published in
Salon , the Justice Department has called for an investigation of charges
that the conservative American Spectator magazine paid off Starr's star
Whitewater witness, David Hale. Right-wingers bark back that Salon is a
mere conduit for White House spin.

            Did Hale
take money? Is he at the nexus of a right-wing conspiracy ? Or is this
alleged right-wing conspiracy an invention of a left-wing conspiracy?

            First, a Whitewater refresher: In 1993, Hale, the head of
an investment firm, accused Bill Clinton of pressuring him to make a
fraudulent $300,000 loan to Clinton's business partner, Susan McDougal, some of
which flowed into the Whitewater project. Hale's testimony helped persuade
Janet Reno to appoint an independent counsel--first Robert Fiske, then
Starr--to investigate.

            However, a March article by
Salon 's investigative reporters Jonathan Broder and Murray Waas implied
Hale's motives were less than pure. The reporters say Hale repeatedly received
payments that originated with Pittsburgh billionaire Richard Mellon
Scaif e--the alleged ringmaster of a right-wing conspiracy aimed at the
Clinton presidency. Between 1993 and 1997, Scaife gave the Spectator and
the foundation that runs it $2.4 million to track down dirt on Clinton's
alleged malfeasance. (Click to read about this "Arkansas Project.") A lawyer on
the Spectator 's board, Steven Boynton, in turn paid his friend Parker
Dozhier--a onetime TV reporter who now owns a bait shop in Hot Springs--$48,000
to be the magazine's Arkansas "eyes and ears." For two years, Salon
says, Dozhier used Spectator money to support Hale--an old friend.
Salon also alleges that on Hale's trips to Dozhier's bait shop, the two
concocted elaborate schemes to sink Clinton.

            Here's a
flow chart to help you track the alleged money trail.

            
Nobody disputes that Hale frequently
visited Dozhier or that the two discussed Whitewater--the investigation did,
after all, consume Hale's life. And Dozhier concedes he lent Hale a pickup
truck for two years, paid his auto insurance, and gave him about $300 to pay
bills. But he denies any intent to influence Hale's testimony.

            The
main 
               source for Salon 's article is Dozhier's
ex-girlfriend, Caryn Mann, who says Dozhier drastically underestimates the
payments to Hale. First, she told Salon that though she didn't have an
accurate fix on the amount paid, it was substantial. (Click here to read the Salon story touting her testimony.) In an
article that appeared six days later, she recovered her memory and fixed the
figure at $200,000. (Click here to read the story with this version.) In later interviews,
she backed down from this number, admitting that she doesn't recall seeing
Dozhier give Hale cash.

            Mann's credibility has been attacked by the
Weekly Standard and the Washington Times , who ridicule her for
using tarot cards and (allegedly) boasting about transporting soldiers
telepathically. They also say she's a former Democratic operative and still
seething from an acrimonious breakup with Dozhier. (Click to read about
Dozhier's own credibility problems.)

            The
testimony of her son Joshua Rand is far more vivid and detailed. He says he saw
Dozhier give Hale money on every occasion that Hale visited their trailer.
According to accounts that Rand gave both the Post and Salon , the
amounts ranged from $20 to several hundred dollars, with an estimated total
of $5,000 . Rand admits the figure he provides is only an estimate.

            
Broder and Waas say they have spoken with two
ex- Spectator employees who anonymously corroborate Mann and
Rand's assertion that the Arkansas Project paid Hale. No other reporter working
on the story has been able to track down these sources.

            Even if
the payments to Hale were conclusively proved, they don't necessarily undermine
his Whitewater testimony. Newsweek 's Michael Isikoff, then at the
Washington Post , reported Hale's story on Nov. 2, 1993--months before
the Spectator made any of the alleged payments to Hale. Hale's story
hasn't changed at all since he spoke with Isikoff in '93. Other reporters
covering the story posit another scenario: Financially ruined --Hale was
fined $2 million in 1994--he hung around Dozhier's bait shop, looking for and
receiving petty handouts.

            In addition to attacking the story's source, right-wingers
attack its purveyors--Broder and Waas. The Weekly Standard recycles the
story that Broder had been fired from his job at the Chicago Tribune
when he plagiarized from the Jerusalem Post 's Joel Greenberg. Others
point to Waas' supposedly shoddy reporting of a Pulitzer Prize-nominated
article on arms sales to Iraq that he co-wrote for the Los Angeles
Times . There is no evidence that the pair repeated any of these
alleged sins in their reporting on Hale.

            Broder and Waas never
explicitly claim that the Spectator money swayed Hale. They let others
tease out the implications of their story for them, connecting the dots
among Scaife, Starr, and Hale : The billionaire endowed a position for Starr
at Pepperdine University (which Starr has subsequently declined) and then
bankrolled Hale, Starr's chief witness. This is the scenario implied by U.S.
Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder, who suggested that the Justice Department,
rather than a biased independent counsel, should investigate Baitgate. Others
such as Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., have used the Hale case to call for Starr's
resignation.

            
Conservatives counter Salon 's posited right-wing conspiracy by charging
that the Webzine is a pawn in a conspiracy by the left. They note
Broder's friendship with Clinton's now famous assistant, Sidney Blumenthal. R.
Emmett Tyrrell Jr., editor of the Spectator , goes further. Salon ,
he says, is bankrolled by companies run by Clinton donors--Apple (Steve Jobs),
Adobe (John Warnock), and Hambrecht & Quist (William Hambrecht, now
retired). Last week, right-winger Larry Klayman, head of Judicial Watch,
subpoenaed Waas and ordered Salon reporters to produce all their notes
relating to the Monica Lewinsky allegation as well as to Whitewater. (To read
about how Klayman can do this, click .)

            
               If you missed the
sidebar on the American Spectator 's "Arkansas Project," click . And read
about Dozhier's and .
            

         
      
   
