
   
   
      
         
            Ira Magaziner

            Last month, U.S. District
Judge Royce Lamberth ruled that White House aide Ira Magaziner--the architect
of President Clinton's 1993 health-care proposal--and White House lawyers had
"deceived" his court in a 1993 affidavit. Officials had "run amok" in their
response to a suit filed against the government, said Lamberth, and he ordered
the government to cover the $285,864 legal bill incurred by the plaintiffs.

            The
"deception" that Lamberth complained about was contained in one sentence
of a 13-page affidavit filed by Magaziner in response to the suit. Did
Magaziner deceive the court, as Judge Lamberth insists he did?

            First, a little history: President Clinton formed a
12-member task force in the first month of his presidency, appointed Hillary
Clinton as chair, and gave them 100 days to draft new health-care legislation.
Magaziner, a member of the task force, organized an "interdepartmental working
group"--comprising bureaucrats and health-care experts--to supply the task
force with facts and policy proposals. Magaziner divided the working group into
12 "cluster groups" and 38 "subgroups." The number of working-group members
grew from 100 to 630 .

            The task
force and working group conducted their proceedings in secret. Soon after the
working group convened, the American Association of Physicians and Surgeons
Inc. and two government-ethics watchdogs filed suit, arguing that the closed
meetings violated the Federal Advisory Committee Act of 1972 . FACA,
designed to check the power and proliferation of presidential commissions,
requires that the meetings of working groups appointed by the executive branch
be open to the public. However, FACA exempts committees consisting entirely of
federal employees. AAPS argued that because Hillary Clinton and other members
of the task force and working group were not federal employees, the meetings
should be open. (Later, the courts ruled the first lady should be treated as a
federal employee.)

            
Judges routinely criticize FACA as ambiguous
and overreaching . The law even fails to define "government employee" and
does not specify what constitutes "membership" on an advisory board. Responding
to FACA's ambiguities, the courts have whittled down the law. For instance,
fact-finding panels that don't propose policy have been exempted. Congress has
further limited its scope, passing amendments that exclude from FACA an
American Bar Association committee that rates the qualifications of judicial
nominees for the government, the National Academy of Science, and other
lesser-known panels. But the courts have also upheld it. In 1983, the Reagan
administration beat back a FACA suit to make public the meetings of an advisory
panel of CEOs.

            AAPS's
request for a temporary injunction against Clinton's health-care task force was
rejected by a U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in
1993, which concluded that more information was needed to determine whether the
working group qualified for a FACA exemption. In 1994, the Clinton
administration abandoned the health-care initiative and released all
documents from the working group.

            On Dec. 21, 1994, Lamberth dismissed the suit against the
government, but he asked U.S. Attorney Eric Holder (now deputy attorney
general) to investigate whether Magaziner should be held in criminal
contempt for supplying false information in his affidavit, filed March 3,
1993. The investigation turned on a single sentence in which Magaziner states,
"Only federal government employees serve as members of the interdepartmental
working group." Lamberth insisted that this sentence contradicted indisputable
evidence that private citizens attended the working groups, and that some of
them played supervisory roles. The judge was especially irritated by the
presence of executives from managed-care conglomerates who stood to profit from
the new legislation--exactly the sort of conflict of interest FACA was intended
to check. Judge Lamberth says that the appeals court took at face value
Magaziner's "only federal government employees" declaration when it ruled
against the request for a temporary injunction.

            Although
Holder chided government lawyers for formulating a "sloppy," "overly
aggressive" response to the AAPS lawsuit and took Magaziner to task for using
ill-defined legalistic language supplied him by White House counsel Vincent
Foster, he concluded his investigation by declining to prosecute
Magaziner for criminal contempt. He found no factual errors in Magaziner's
affidavit, and no evidence that he had intended to willfully mislead the court.
Indeed, deep into the affidavit, Magaziner volunteers the information that
consultants who were clearly not government employees played a prominent role
in the working group. Charges of criminal contempt hinge upon proving beyond a
reasonable doubt that there was an intention to deceive, and even
Lamberth accepts that such proof is unattainable. Holder also acknowledged that
Magaziner's much-contested one-sentence statement was not an important element
of the government's FACA defense. Unlike recent Justice Department
investigations of the White House, Holder's earned near universal acclaim. Even
Lamberth deemed it "commendable" in his ruling last month.

            
Yet Lamberth still believes that Magaziner
deliberately misled the court and that government lawyers acted in "bad
faith," and he maintains that the appeals court might have issued an injunction
against the task force and working groups if Magaziner had not made his
now-famous one-sentence declaration. He writes, "The most outrageous conduct by
the government in this case is what happened when it never corrected or updated
the Magaziner declaration."

            The government's lawyers
suspect that the real source of Lamberth's ire is not the sloppy sentence in an
affidavit but the government attorneys' hardball tactics and unwillingness to
compromise, which drew the case out for four years .

         
      
   
