
   
   
      
         
            Book Publishing

            Among
authors it has become a cliché that book publishers obsess over bottom lines at
the expense of serious literature. Publishers carp back that they can't turn a
profit, no matter what they do. The latest industry tumult is over the
resignation of Random House Editor in Chief Harry Evans, who doled out mammoth
advances to celebrities such as Dick Morris and Marlon Brando, only to see
their books bomb. In June, Rupert Murdoch's troubled book division,
HarperCollins, canceled 106 book contracts to avoid big losses. Highbrow book
imprints have either been scaled back or sold off. Is publishing really in
crisis? Is the serious book dead? How has the industry changed? What are the
issues behind the publishing malaise?

            

               Conglomeratization: Book publishing is
dominated by seven media conglomerates : Paramount (Simon &
Schuster), News Corp. (HarperCollins), Bertelsmann AG (Bantam Doubleday Dell),
Advance Publications (Random House), Time Warner (Little, Brown), Pearson PLC
(Viking Penguin), and Holtzbrinck (Holt). W.W. Norton, Houghton Mifflin, and
Grove-Atlantic are among the few surviving big independents.

            Critics
say the conglomerates have damaged book publishing with their obsessive pursuit
of "blockbusters ." Last year, 212 hardcovers sold more than 100,000
copies, establishing a new record. The conglomerates pay huge advances and
spend outrageous sums marketing these titles in the hope that they will top the
best-seller lists. Critics also say that editors, who once patiently developed
writers, now spend more time marketing books than editing them, which results
in the production of longer, sloppier, less interesting books that
readers spurn. Also, the conglomerates are accused of having dumbed down books,
publishing titles that may be more easily adapted by their Hollywood
subsidiaries. (Last year, News Corp.'s HarperCollins opened an office in the
headquarters of its 20 th Century Fox unit.)

            

               Declining Sales and Profits: Most
conglomerates don't break out figures on their book divisions. News Corp.,
which does release HarperCollins' figures, reports that the book division's
operating profit fell 66 percent during the first six months of fiscal
year 1997. Industry analysts guess that most of the largest houses, such as
Bantam Doubleday Dell and Random House, turn between 4 percent and 8 percent in
annual profits--approximately the same percentage they have earned every year
since the '50s and well below their 12-percent to 15-percent projections.

            Book
sales are stagnating . Sales grew by only 6 percent in 1995 and 4 percent
in 1996. The textbook and computer-book markets continue to boom, but hardcover
sales sag. This year, they are off 10 percent . Some theorize a change in
leisure habits is behind the drop-off, as readers shift their attention to
cable TV and new media like the Internet and computer games. But census data
reveal that time devoted to reading books continues to expand, with the average
person spending more than 100 hours a year with the printed word. Also, the
book business has boomed in the '90s. In 1960, 710 million books were sold.
Those numbers grew to 897 million in 1992 and 1.06 billion in 1996. These
figures indicate that publishing isn't so much in crisis as it is in flux, and
that the conglomerates' financial expectations are unrealistic.

            

               Mega-Advances: The success of hit books
like Bill Cosby's Fatherhood , which set sales records, induced
publishers to compete for blockbuster authors. In frenzied bidding wars ,
publishers award record advances. (Click to see a list of big ones.) Even
authors of lesser-selling books now receive larger advances. Where a new book
would have received an advance of between $5,000 and $10,000 in 1980, it now
gets between $40,000 and $50,000.

            Publishing
houses complain that big advances hurt profits. The New Yorker reported
that last year, Random House had $50 million in unearned advances on its books,
and Simon & Schuster had $35 million. Book agents say that publishers
exaggerate the impact of advances, hoping thereby to drive the demand
for big advances down.

            

               Barnes & Noblefication: The imagined
golden age of publishing was the '30s and '40s, when gentleman
publishers like Alfred A. Knopf published only the authors they admired.
Book retailing was a genteel and polite profession, too, with few booksellers
owning more than one store. All that changed in the postwar era. The
paperback book emerged to tap the popular market, and mall-based
chains such as Waldenbooks and B. Dalton arrived to make the book market a
true mass market.

            The '90s brought the
superstore, typified by the still-expanding Barnes & Noble and Borders
chains. Thanks to the superstore chains, retail space devoted to books
expanded by 20 percent last year . (Industry giant Barnes & Noble has
455 superstores and does $2.45 billion in annual sales.) The chains sell 25
percent of all books; nonbookstores (department stores, grocery stores,
discount outlets, etc.) sell 53 percent; small independent stores sell 18.5
percent; and book clubs account for most of the remainder.

            Critics
complain that the chains exploit the industry's liberal "returns "
policy, in which stores pay for only the books they sell. (About 40 percent of
all hardcovers ordered by the chains are returned.) Chains overorder to fill
their expanding floor space, but sell a lower percentage of the books ordered
than independent stores do. Publishers must then absorb the high costs of huge
returns from the chains. The conspiracy-minded allege that the chains also
leverage their influence to persuade the big publishers to produce more
blockbusters at the expense of moderate-selling books. Although the book
business has grown more dependent on new blockbusters, 53 percent of Barnes
& Noble's sales, for example, come from "backlist" books, i.e., books
published more than 12 months ago.

            
               Overproduction: Fueled by conglomerate investment,
publishers released more than 60,000 new titles in 1995, at least 10,000 more
than in 1985. This growing number of titles leaves publishing houses with
less time and attention to edit and market books. Some houses--big and
small--have trimmed their lists, consulting closely with the chains to
determine what is commercial, and have seen their profits and sales rise.

            

               Midlist Crisis: Some charge that the
conglomerates are starting to ignore the "midlist " book, serious
nonfiction and literary fiction that sells fewer than 30,000 copies, preferring
to gamble on potentially lucrative blockbusters. Imprints that concentrate on
midlist books--like The Free Press, Basic Books, and Pantheon--have been
downsized, sold, or repositioned by their conglomerate fathers in recent
years.

            Some publishers say that the
proliferation of midlist books, not blockbusters, have injured the bottom line.
Incoming Random House editor Ann Godoff argues against this notion: She
plans to publish more literature and fewer celebrity memoirs, because the
big-market books ultimately earn lower returns.

         
      
   
