
   
   
      
         
            Feminism, Clinton, and Harassment

            Last month, feminist
foremother Gloria Steinem took to the New York Times op-ed page to argue
that the sexual harassment laws should not protect Paula Jones. Steinem's
position was roundly dismissed as a scholastic contortion of logic, performed
to protect her ideological friend Bill Clinton. Conservatives gloated over the
feminist's hypocrisy on sexual harassment, the movement's sacred cow. No less
than the New York Times editorial page accused Steinem of selling out
her cause. Did Steinem and the feminists sacrifice their principles to protect
Bill Clinton? What are the different feminist schools of thought on sexual
harassment? How have they changed post-Clinton?

            Here, in
descending order of sternness, are the five major groups (for a refresher on
harassment law and its history, click ):

            1 MacKinnonites. This, the so-called radical feminist
position, is trumpeted primarily by academics who take their cues from law
professor Catharine MacKinnon, who holds appointments at the law schools of the
universities of Michigan and Chicago. MacKinnon argues that sexual harassment
laws are a necessary corrective to the oppressive patriarchy of the workplace,
and she wants current laws stiffened. For instance, she would prohibit men from
having sex with subordinate female co-workers. MacKinnonites believe that the
disparities of power in these relationships render them exploitative by
definition.

            
MacKinnon's position, however, is hardly fringe. While a grad student at Yale,
she formulated the theory behind the current practice of sexual harassment
law--that the employment discrimination protections in the 1964 Civil Rights
Act could be used to regulate workplace behavior such as dirty jokes and
unwelcome advances. MacKinnon argues that many journalists distort her work, by
caricaturing her as a neopuritan. To prove her reasonableness, she concedes
that Clinton shouldn't be prosecuted--at least not for sexually harassing
Monica Lewinsky. The Lewinsky affair, she believes, has sparked a hysterical
backlash against sexual harassment laws.

            

               2 NOWistas. Mainstream women's groups
wouldn't go as far as the MacKinnonites and prohibit all sexual contact between
superiors and subordinates. But with the Clarence Thomas (1991) and Bob
Packwood (1995) controversies, these groups took the stance that female
accusers always deserve the presumption of veracity in sexual harassment cases.
Women, they claimed, "don't make these things up." And feminists have an
obligation to counter the prevailing tendency to dismiss accusers as "nutty and
slutty." But, when it came to Paula Jones, only a handful of feminists--e.g.,
The Nation columnist Katha Pollitt--consistently supported her case with
similar arguments. Initially, most women's groups--notably the National
Organization for Women--maintained a calculated silence. Only after months of
the press chiding them for their "double standard" did the groups begin to
invoke the presumption on behalf of Kathleen Willey.

            Now that
it appears the Jones case will do Clinton no harm, feminist groups have become
more vocal. NOW President Patricia Ireland worries publicly that the dismissal
of the Jones case will deter other women from bringing sexual harassment
claims. Jones' case illustrates how difficult it is for a woman to get her day
in court. Ireland and others also worry about a possible tumble down a slippery
slope, with men making passes at women now that they have seen Clinton get away
with it.

            
               3 Strict Constructionists. This group, led by Yale Law
School Professor Vicki Schultz, argues that harassment law unhealthily obsesses
over sex in the workplace. Conservative judges, Schultz argues, have used
sexual harassment law as a pretext for preserving "women's virtue." And in
precedent-setting decisions, judges imply that there is no such thing as
harassment if there is no sex involved. This, she argues, has led these judges
to discount the types of employment discrimination--unfair promotion practice,
workplace taunts, etc.--the law was originally intended to check. Pundits tend
to like the Schultz position because it allows them to continue to defend the
idea of sexual harassment law while attacking cases like Paula Jones', which
focuses on an alleged sexual act but makes no convincing showing of damage to
her career.

            4 One Free Passers. In her now-notorious op-ed,
Gloria Steinem argued that Clinton should not be penalized for his "boorish"
come-ons. Sexual harassment, she claims, was born out of the feminist
proposition that with sexual advances, "no means no; yes means yes." And when
Jones and Willey said "no," Clinton backed off. Steinem and others in her camp,
such as Backlash author Susan Faludi, argue there is no inconsistency
between their support of Clinton and condemnations of Packwood and Thomas:
Unlike Clinton, they argue, Packwood and Thomas interpreted "no" as "yes" and
repeated their unwelcome advances (although most of Packwood's alleged passes
were single tries). Steinem's distinction is one side of a longstanding legal
debate over whether a one-time unwelcome advance is enough to create a hostile
working environment. The courts divide on whether a one-time deed is
sufficient, but many feminist legal thinkers take Steinem's side.

            

               5 Libertarian Hedonists. The lib-hed
position goes a step beyond the strict constructionist position. Articulated by
self-proclaimed iconoclasts such as Camille Paglia and Katie Roiphe, it argues
that we've become paranoid about sexual harassment, criminalizing consensual
office sex and flirtation. Lib-heds note the proliferation of sexual harassment
cases referred to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission since Anita Hill
testified before the Senate--from nearly 8,000 to over 15,000 per year. While
the critique echoes conservative complaints about multiculturalism (harassment
law makes women helpless victims), it also incorporates a libertarian strain
(government should not pry into consensual sexual relations) and an Epicurean
one (we shouldn't penalize people with active libidos; so long as nobody gets
hurt--or helped--who cares?).

             

             

            
               If you
missed the link to the refresher on harassment law and its history, click
.
            

         
      
   
