
   
   
      
         
            Weatherbox: Call <i>This</i> a Blizzard?

            
               (Click here to read about the
snow shenanigans of our diarist, Walter Shapiro.)
            

            Among the duties of this column is to put weather events that cause
momentary media alarm into historical perspective. (See last summer's
heat-wave-inspired "Weatherbox"
and "Weatherbox:
Part II.") Yesterday, a "fast-developing storm hit almost the entire
eastern seaboard, leaving cities, towns, farms and mountains from Georgia to
Massachusetts blanketed with the heaviest snowfall since a blizzard four years
ago," according to today's Washington Post . Chatterbox, who lives in D.C.--a
place that's routinely paralyzed by snow flurries--isn't denying that the
snowstorm was disruptive. It was even more impressive in Raleigh, N.C., where
the 20 inches of snow that fell set a local record. As usual, however,
Chatterbox feels impatient with the provincialism of local records and asks:
What's the most snow that's ever fallen, anywhere ?

            This data isn't as easy to keep track of as temperature extremes, partly
because snow melts and drifts and does all sorts of other things that make it
difficult to measure, and partly because the world's extreme snowfalls tend to
occur at very high elevations where there aren't a lot of climatologists
hanging around. However , Mount
Baker, in Washington state, appears to have been certified by the Commerce
Department's National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration as setting a
record last year for "the most snowfall ever measured in the United States
[Chatterbox presumes that means the continental United States] in a
single season." This occurred during the snowfall season that stretched from
autumn 1998 through spring 1999. The snowfall amount was 1,140 inches of snow.
(The previous record was 1,122 inches, which fell on Mount Rainier, Wash., in
the 1971-72 season.) Fully 36 inches fell on Mount Baker on Dec. 2, 1998.
During the months of January and February 1999, there were only eight days when
it didn't snow. It even snowed a couple of inches on June 5, 1999. Now
that's a lot of snow.

            This information must, of course, be placed in context. In most places,
heavy snowfalls are considered a troublesome (albeit picturesque) natural
phenomenon. In places that depend heavily on revenues from ski resorts, like
Mount Baker, heavy snowfalls are considered manna from heaven. Chatterbox
doesn't mean to suggest for a minute that the misery of Durham, N.C., when it
snows there, is in any way preferable to the jubilation in Mount Baker, Wash.
Moreover, the very fact that Mount Baker is a place where people pray for
heavy snowfalls makes it likelier that the locals will collect potentially
record-setting data more energetically than people in other places. Surely this
skews the data, even assuming Mount Baker is scrupulously honest in its
record-keeping. Nonetheless : The quantity of snow that fell on the
eastern seaboard this week was a pittance compared with the quantity that fell
last season on Mount Baker.

         
      
   
