
   
   
      
         
            Weekend Cocktail Chatter
            

            Alan Greenspan appeared Wednesday in front of the Senate committee that's
voting on his renomination as Fed chair, and he turned in a bravura
performance. Of course, it's probably easier to turn in bravura performances
when you know that everyone in the room listening to you believes that you are
a true Zen master. Nonetheless, Greenspan was surprisingly interesting on
subjects like European hostility to genetically modified food and the
persistent anxiety that many American workers feel in the face of technological
change. He also remained definitively non-committal on the question of where,
exactly, we are on the curve of that technological change, keeping open the
possibility that there may still be many years ahead of rapid economic growth
propelled by rapid improvements in productivity.

            Of course, as always when Greenspan appears before Congress, it was fun to
watch the senators try to make their own dubious economic views appear to be
harmonious with the Fed chair's. But Greenspan's labyrinthine speaking style
serves him well in those situations. He can begin with "Well, yes, Senator" and
end with an effective "so, actually, no," without ever making anyone look bad.
Which is, perhaps, one definition of a Zen master.

            1. "Philip Morris announced that in the last quarter, its earnings missed
estimates and its revenue grew just 2 percent . So you have a company that
will have to pay the government billions for the foreseeable future, that
gets dragged into court (and sometimes loses) every week , and that keeps
seeing the price of its key product rise because of taxes, and that's
making less money than expected. It's all The Insider 's fault, no
doubt."

            2. "Business Week reported that among the myriad class-action
lawsuits filed against Microsoft in the wake of Judge Jackson's finding is
a brief claiming that Microsoft's principal place of business is Texas and
another describing Microsoft as a supplier of 'generic drugs.' That
brief adds that the term API stands for 'active pharmaceutical ingredient.' (It
doesn't.) I'm waiting for the brief accusing Microsoft of running Area 51 and
being responsible for the Roswell Incident. In that brief, API will presumably
stand for 'alien probe investigation.'"

            3. "Before entering into negotiations for a possible three-way deal with
Warner-Lambert and American Home Products , Procter & Gamble
reportedly made an unsolicited bid for razor giant Gillette. An article in
TheStreet.com this week said that 'the French company' had rebuffed
P&G . Well, we always thought that Boston was the Paris of
Massachusetts. But who knew that it was actually the Paris of France?"

            4. "The best ad for financial advice right now is one for something
called the Dines Letter, which will cost you only $195 a year. At the top of
the ad, in capital letters, are the words 'Buy Internets!' And James Dines, the
editor of the newsletter, is called '"The Original Internet Bug "
(TOIB)!' You could not make this stuff up if you tried."

            5. "Merrill Lynch announced dazzling earnings in the latest quarter,
propelled not only by a much-anticipated boom in its investment banking
business but also by a remarkable influx of $36 billion in new assets from
investors. The odd thing, of course, is that people keep pouring money into
Merrill , even though its market strategists have been among the most
bearish--and therefore most wrong--of any major bank in recent years. Never
underestimate the power of having a bull as your corporate symbol."

            6. "Latest sign that the apocalypse ... no, Y2K came and went, so this is
just the latest sign that things are getting too weird : The Wall
Street Journal headlined a recent article : 'Web Frenzy Sweeps Firms
Selling Goods for Cleaning .' Let's pray the last word in that headline
never gets changed to 'Burial.'"

            7. "Ben & Jerry's ice-cream shop owners from across the country rallied
this week to protest a possible takeover of Ben & Jerry's by a
company that has yet to be identified. The franchisees fear that the new
owner will wreck Ben & Jerry's commitment to 'social responsibility,'
presumably by doing things like changing the name of Cherry Garcia to Bing
Cherry Crosby and the name of Rainforest Crunch to Burn the Rainforest To the
Ground Surprise."

         
      
   
