
   
   
      
         
            The Kurt Warner Story
            

            Chris--

            You know sports are getting crazy when the Olympic movement looks tainted by
wretched excess and the Super Bowl is actually providing the inspirational
story of the week.

            Have you been following St. Louis Rams quarterback Kurt Warner this
year?

            It's hard to remember another athlete who went from nowhere to his sports'
summit in a single season, as Warner has. There was Fernando Valenzuela during
his rookie season with the L.A. Dodgers. And Boris Becker when he won Wimbledon
at age 17 as an unknown wild-card entry. Barry Sanders was a supermarket stock
boy and backup running back at Oklahoma State who won the Heisman Trophy his
first and only year as a starter.

            The only NFL example that Warner keeps getting compared to is Johnny
Unitas.

            When I was growing up in Pittsburgh, people there still talked about how
badly the Steelers erred when they drafted Unitas and cut him before he'd even
played a preseason game or broke training camp with the team. Pittsburgh
already had Jim Finks and Ted Marchibroda at quarterback then. Unitas had no
other NFL takers, so he played semi-pro football with a Pittsburgh sandlot team
named the Bloomfield Rams. Baltimore signed him for the next season, 1956, and
he was on his way to a Hall of Fame career.

            But even Unitas didn't have the season for the ages that Warner had this
year while winning the NFL Most Valuable Player award and leading the Rams to
the Super Bowl. Unlike Unitas, Warner wasn't even drafted out of college,
though he had sent highlight tapes of his best games to every NFL team. Warner
did wrangle an invitation to the Green Bay Packers training camp in '94. But he
was promptly cut. For the next three seasons, Warner didn't get another NFL
invitation, so he played for the Iowa Barnstormers of the Arena Football
League. St. Louis finally signed Warner before the '98 season, then thought so
much of him (not) they shipped him overseas to play a year for Amsterdam in the
NFL's European League.

            Crass as it may seem, we both know NFL coaches would rather loan out their
wives than loan their quarterbacks to someone. But the Rams' apathy about
Warner didn't stop there. They signed another young quarterback, Trent Green,
to a four-year, $16 million contract and installed Green as their starter. You
probably know the rest: Green got hurt early this season. Warner got to play.
Soon he was showing everyone why they loved him in Iowa.

            (The people in Amsterdam probably loved Warner too. They just don't remember
any of it. Between the legal drugs you can get there and the constant runs to
the 7-11 for munchies, I'm confident any survey of Amsterdam football fans
would show they've never seen a complete game. And if they do remember one,
it's usually only later. Much, much later. As a flashback.)

            But it's all ended well. Warner is now the hero of pluggers
everywhere--every worker who never got a mailroom promotion, every cop who
never made sergeant. His heroic loyal wife is constantly shown on TV clutching
her heart or anxiously clasping her hands during games (she's the one with the
k.d. lang early-career haircut.) And Rams coach Dick Vermeil is acting like he
knew what he was doing all along, even if he didn't protect Warner in last
season's expansion draft.

            It's a great story, the kind the Olympics used to give us all the time.

            Makes you want to watch Sunday's game just to see how it turns out.

            --Johnette

         
      
   
