
   
   
      
         
            Neck and Neck

            All the papers lead with President Clinton's last State of the
Union address. (The story also tops the Wall Street Journal 's front-page "Worldwide" box.) "Never
before has our nation enjoyed, at once, so much prosperity and social progress
with so little internal crisis or so few external threats," Clinton said,
asserting that "the state of our union has never been stronger." Most papers
note that the speech was surprisingly ambitious for a president in his last
year in office. Clinton proposed new tax credits for college tuition payments
(up to $10,000 per family), a $1 minimum-wage increase, a plan for Medicare to
cover prescription drugs, $1 billion in tax incentives to help spur the
development of vaccines for poor nations, photo licenses and safety tests for
gun owners, and more than $3 billion in education spending, including $1
billion for Head Start. True to form, Clinton also triangulated some Republican
issues, most notably a proposal to end the "marriage penalty" as part of a $250
billion, 10-year tax cut (about the same amount as he unsuccessfully pushed
last year, the Journal notes) and a plan to encourage charitable
contributions through tax incentives. At 89 minutes, the Washington
Post notes, it was his longest SOU , and included five mentions of
Vice President Al Gore.

            A WSJ /NBC News poll shows Al Gore in a statistical dead-heat with
George W. Bush, the vice president's most competitive showing in two years. And
he has nearly doubled his national lead over Bill Bradley, from 54 percent-32
percent in December to 64 percent -22 percent now. Bush, for his part,
increased his national lead over John McCain slightly, but Gore's increased
competitiveness could begin to hurt his standing in the GOP field, the
Journal notes. Potential Reform Party nominee Pat Buchanan drew just 5
percent.

            The New York
Times , Washington Post , and Los Angeles Times front an Israeli comptroller's
report that Prime Minister Ehud Barak's party, One Israel, illegally channeled
large donations from domestic and foreign sources through nonprofit front
groups in the months leading to Barak's victory over former Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu. (The Post says the donations totaled $2.1 million
out of a $22 million campaign budget; the NYT says it was only $1.2
million.) Barak pleads ignorance of his party's fund-raising details, but the
comptroller's fine and initiation of a criminal investigation is expected to
hurt the prime minister's credibility at home during negotiations with Syria
and the Palestinians. The Post notes that one of Barak's chief
fund-raisers, Tal Zilbersteiin, runs the Tel Aviv office of a political
consultancy headed by former Clinton administration campaign officials Stanley
Greenberg, James Carville, and Bob Shrum.

            
               Kodak moment: The Post 's Internet edition runs a
marvelous photo of President Clinton, post- SOU , embracing nonogenerian
Sen. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C. The president hulks over the former Dixiecrat--who,
it should be noted, ran for president when Clinton was 2 years old. ... 
Freudian slip? At one point in his speech, the Post
notes, President Clinton spoke about the "liberal" communities envisioned by
Vice President Gore. He then corrected himself with "livable."

         
      
   
