
   
   
      
         
            The Bridle of Frankenfood

            The Washington Post and the Los Angeles
Times lead with the adoption in Montreal of an international trade
agreement on genetically altered food products. The cornerstone of the treaty
is its support for the "precautionary principle," which allows countries to ban
the import of genetically altered products without conclusive scientific proof
that said products are hazardous. The New York Times off-leads with the Montreal
agreement, and leads with an article exploring the Prison Litigation Reform Act
of 1996. Under the act, cities and states are suing to take control of their
prisons back from the courts. Ten localities have sued successfully, with at
least ten more suits in the works.

            The NYT notes that the Montreal talks were focused on reducing
biotechnology's impact on the environment, and didn't address 1) potential
risks to human health caused by biotechnology products 2) regulations on human
pharmaceuticals. The treaty also requires exporters to secure permission from
target countries before importing "living modified organisms" such as
genetically altered seeds. The most contentious issue was the establishment of
a notification system for foods produced with genetically altered seeds. US
representatives claimed that such a system would be a bureaucratic nightmare,
and after four days of intense negotiation, the delegates agreed to table the
issue for at least two years.

            The American Civil Liberties Union and other advocacy groups mourn the
effects of the Prison Litigation Reform Act, saying that it leaves no way to
prevent prisons from backsliding into the inhumane conditions that warranted
judiciary intervention. Some also maintain that the act is unconstitutional:
the Supreme Court agreed last year to review a case claiming that the law, in
effect, allows Congress to dictate judicial policy. Supporters of the claim
that many judges had overstepped their authority, and that overly strict
standards made it very difficult to end court intervention.

            A story fronted by the NYT, reefered by the LAT, and
stuffed by the WP relates Al Gore's admission that his stance on
abortion has "evolved" throughout his career. Bill Bradley had attacked Gore's
previous claims that he always supported abortion rights, and produced letters
Gore wrote to constituents calling abortion "arguably the taking of human
life." Gore now maintains that while his view of the morality of abortion has
evolved, he has always stood behind Roe v. Wade. The NYT has good
evidence disputing this claim, but buries it below the fold: in 1984, Gore
backed a proposal to broaden the definition of "person" in civil rights laws to
include "unborn children from the moment of conception." The other big news
from New Hampshire is that George W. Bush has finally pulled out the big guns:
his parents. The WP and NYT front pictures of the Bushes on
the stump Saturday, and the NYT explains that, faced with a tough New
Hampshire contest, Bush finally overcame his reluctance to flaunt his political
pedigree. As this story went to press, Today's Papers was still unsure whether
it was endearing or alarming that George the elder referred to the 53-year-old
potential Leader of the Free World as "this boy."

            The LAT fronts the latest from Austria: the country's controversial
far right Freedom Party may join a ruling coalition this week. The party, which
finished second in October's general elections, is currently negotiating with
the conservative People's Party. The WP and NYT tuck the
story inside, but everyone mentions party leader Jeorg Haider's infamous
statements praising the employment policies of Nazi Germany. Coalition
negotiations between the People's Party and the Social Democrats broke down
last week.

            The NYT front notes that the price of oil, which has nearly doubled
since last winter, is inflating gas, heating, and airline ticket prices. The
raise in prices are a result of last March's OPEC production cut, and
diminished domestic stockpiles of heating oil, brought about by milder winters
and stricter regulations on storage facilities. Given the overall health of the
economy, no one believes that the price hikes will cause a recession.

            The Post runs a front-page obituary of Harold Greene, a "legend of the
American bar." Greene, who fled Nazi Germany with his parents in 1939, helped
draft the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and presided over the 1981 breakup of
AT&T.

            Unable to afford hefty bribes or airfare to Canada, Russian mothers are
looking for other ways to finesse Russia's Byzantine draft laws and keep their
sons out of the Chechen conflict. According to an NYT front-pager,
Russians are looking to student deferral, adoption, and a battery of illnesses
and injuries to keep off the front line. Some plans sound like they've been
hatched by sitcom writers: One woman said that she would divorce her invalid
husband to keep her son out of the army. He could then legally claim to be his
father's only able-bodied caretaker and evade the draft, even with mom living
under the same roof. There's just one problem: What are they gonna do if Mr.
Roper shows up?

         
      
   
