
   
   
      
         
            He Could Not Tell a Lie

            The Washington Post and the Los Angeles
Times lead with new Commerce Department indicators on the economy's
1999 performance. The good news: growth remains impressive. The bad news:
long-awaited signs of inflation have finally materialized, and the markets know
it. The New York Times tucks the story inside, and leads
instead with the latest glitches in implementing the Northern Ireland peace
deal.

            The papers' stories on the economic reports are virtually identical. The
U.S. economy grew 4% as a whole in 1999, but in the final quarter of the year,
wage and benefits costs to US businesses swelled by a higher-than-expected
1.1%. With interest rate hikes a foregone conclusion, the Dow dropped 2.6% and
the Nasdaq slid 3.77% on Friday. Analysts are predicting the Fed's 5.5% target
for overnight interest rates to climb by as much as a half point. The
prognosticators almost sound relieved to finally touch and feel the signs of
inflation they've been expecting for months. "It's as if there's been a murder,
and we still don't have the body, but now bits of DNA evidence are starting to
come in," one economist tells the LAT .

            The NYT reports that the Irish Republican Army will miss its crucial
Monday deadline for beginning to disarm. An impasse on disarmament could
paralyze the two-month-old power-sharing government in Belfast and may
ultimately spur the UK to re-impose direct rule. The piece does not speculate
on what's holding the IRA back: internal dissent, desire to alter the details
of the signed agreement, or sheer bad faith.

            In a striking contrast to today's reports about American prosperity, a
NYT front-pager says that Japan has resorted to borrowing directly from
local banks to repay its debts. Countries in debt usually prefer raising bonds,
which are cheaper to finance than regular loans, but Japan seems skittish about
issuing new bonds, which could upset its bond market or provoke scrutiny from
credit companies.

            A WP front-pager lends credence to Bill Bradley's recent assertions
that Al Gore has lied about his record. According to the story, Bradley has
successfully "identified several glaring misstatements or distortions by the
vice president." Among other things, Gore contended that Bradley didn't take a
stand on campaign finance until he ran for president (Actually, Bradley
co-sponsored several campaign finance reform bills during his time in the
Senate). This week Gore alleged that he has "always supported a woman's right
to choose." But early in his congressional career, Gore denounced abortion.

            A piece on the front page of the LAT bashes President Clinton's State
of the Union promise to use $4 billion in government funds to bridge the
so-called Digital Divide between wired haves and unwired have-nots. The Digital
Divide "is all but gone," argues the story, citing several studies that show
Blacks and Latinos flocking to the Internet in droves. "Despite such evidence,
Washington politics, a booming economy, and an unskeptical press have combined
to raise the notion of a digital divide from a contentious statistical claim to
a cause celebre," it accuses. While the piece dismisses the idea of a racial
split between Internet users and non-Internet users, it does acknowledge gaps
based on economics and education. If this is so, then why is helping more
Americans get online a "waste of money"?

            The WP and NYT report that for the first time, the federal
government is admitting that workers who handled early generations of nuclear
weapons were sickened by cancer-causing radiation. "In the past, the role of
government was to take a hike," Energy Secretary Bill Richardson said, "and I
think that was wrong." The story predicts that the federal government will soon
have to shell out tens of millions of dollars a year in compensation.

            Yesterday the NYT reported that as part of their welfare-to-work
efforts, New York City agencies have been recruiting former beneficiaries for
jobs as telephone psychics. "Clairvoyance is not among the qualifications
listed on the city's recruitment flier. Any public assistance recipient with a
high school equivalency degree, 'a caring and compassionate personality' and
the 'ability to read, write, and speak English'" could qualify, the story
reported. According to today's Times, the program was killed yesterday
after the story raised a fit of scorn. Apparently no one was more upset than
the professional astrologers, who consider the new recruits inadequately
schooled in, as the president of the New York chapter of Astrological
Federation of America put it, "astrological studies that have been around for
thousands and thousands of years."

         
      
   
