
   
   
      
         
            Bush Knows What "Regatta" Means!

            My first reaction on learning Bill
Bradley's verbal SAT score--485--was, "Gee, that's pretty low." My second
reaction was that this proves that the SATs, at least back in the '60s, really
were culturally biased. I've interviewed Bradley (as part of a group of
reporters) a couple of times--he seems like a smart guy with a lively sense of
Washington's absurdity. If, as an achiever from a small town in Missouri, he
scored lower than George W. Bush did as an unfocused rich
Connecticut/Texas/Maine WASP, it shows how skewed the tests were in favor of
rich WASPs. ...

            My third reaction was, "Gee, that's pretty low." ...

            
               Where Are the "
               Minutes of
the Media Conspiracy
               " When You Need Them? It's been obvious that
the press has doing its best to give Bradley a boost in New Hampshire. ("Former
Senator Bill Bradley was a candidate transformed today, stumping with renewed
vigor ..."--James Dao, New York Times .) Reporters needed a new story
line--the "New Gore" story having been done to death. "Bradley Battles Back" is
the story they've wanted desperately to write. ... More important, we
journalists are terrified the Democratic primary campaign might actually end
next Tuesday, stopping all the fun and giving us half as much to cover in the
next six months. We signed up for a race , dammit! If Bradley fails to
give it to us, as looks likely, the reaction against him by reporters will be
vicious. Don't expect Bradley to get the usual "He Raised Important Issues"
campaign eulogy. ...

            
               Who Speaks for the Paranoid Center? The appearance of the New Gore
suggests he may do to Bush what he's doing to Bradley--methodically chew him
up. And it's hard to believe that if Gore wins the presidency the Democrats
won't pick up at least six seats in the House. So there's now the distinct
possibility, maybe even probability, that my own chosen party will control both
the House and White House. It's hard not to be at least mildly alarmed by this
prospect.

            Think of all the mischief Chairman Rangel (Ways and Means) and his
unreconstructed colleagues could make if freed from Republican constraint.
Goodbye welfare reform, hello Urban Development Action Grants! I sort of
trusted Clinton, for all his faults--or maybe because of his faults--not to
give in totally to the congressional Dems most clichéd instincts. Even if
Clinton hadn't run as a New Democrat, he's self-confident and slippery enough
to avoid giving anybody more than he has to. It's not easy to have the same
confidence in Gore--one reason his gratuitous gay-litmus-test
pander was so disturbing. ...

            
               Actual Inside Dope : Where's Clinton's long-awaited book on "race"?
Nowhere to be seen, that's where. There are still some New Democrats
left in this White House. ...

         
      
   
