
   
   
      
         
            Republicans Test Their Metal

            During tonight's Republican presidential debate in New Hampshire, Gary Bauer
criticized his fellow conservative Republican Alan Keyes for flinging himself
into a mosh pit to the music of Rage Against the Machine.

            In case you didn't actually watch tonight's Republican presidential debate
in New Hampshire, this really did happen. The exchange raised a number of
urgent questions. 1) What was Ambassador Keyes doing in a mosh pit? (Answer:
trying to secure the support of Michael Moore, the left-wing filmmaker.) 2)
Does Bauer listen to a lot of heavy metal? (Answer: Apparently not, since he
first called the band "The Machine Rages On.") 3) Why is either of these
no-hope religious zealots still in the race? (Answer: For the same reason
they're flinging themselves into mosh pits at the behest of radical documentary
filmmakers; because they're running to get attention.) 4) What does Orrin
Hatch's wife, Elaine, think about Korn? (Answer: We may never know.)

            If you really want to get into it, Bauer had a bit of a point. Keyes, who in
a previous debate accused John McCain of lending aid and
comfort to fans of Nine Inch Nails, was participating, however facetiously,
in the Caucasian version of the gangster culture that he thinks is destroying
America. At the very least, moshing with Michael Moore was the height of
hypocrisy. But if you start to take Keyes seriously enough to criticize him in
this way, he has already won his battle, which is to not be ignored.

            With the exception of this and a few other sideshows, the debate was once
again mostly about George W. Bush. As the other candidates took potshots at the
leader of the pack for (according to them) coddling China, wanting to
federalize education policy, equivocating on abortion, and endangering Social
Security with a huge tax cut, Bush ducked, smiled and declined to take the
charges entirely seriously. His dodging was as artful as ever. What makes
Bush's brush-offs so effective is not what he says at a substantive level,
which is usually pretty evasive, but rather his jovial, confident demeanor.
Bush survives debates in which he is the constant target by refusing to get
riled. You can insult him, you can mock him, and you can patronize him, but you
can't ruin his fine, front-running mood.

            This attitude was on display when Bauer made his usual assault on Bush's
China policy. Bush grinned broadly, cocked his head back, and pointed at Bauer,
as if to say, "Bang, bang, I'm dead. NOT!" Bush was even more disarming when
Forbes went after him with a long and squirrelly question that accused him of
increasing the size of government in Texas, lowering educational standards, and
supporting a fraudulent tax cut--before compounding the indictment by asking
Bush if he intended to do to the nation what he did to his own state. Bush was
slow on some of the particulars of his defense. He didn't remember until the
second pass, for instance, that Texas's SAT scores might be down because more
underprivileged kids were taking the SAT. But Bush's facial expressions and
body language made the point that Forbes was full of hot air with perfect
eloquence.

            Thanks to CNN's split screen, you could watch Bush as Forbes went after him.
Right away, you saw the notorious smirk cross Bush's face. But it was a
suppressed smirk that said, "I'm trying to hide my contempt, but I can't hide
it completely." Then Bush turned away from the question, as if resisting the
effort to laugh in the questioner's face. Then he looked back at Forbes, his
semi-smirk giving way to the subtlest of eye rolls before the eye roll gave way
to a set of blinks suggesting disdain. As Forbes finished his question, Bush
squinted, smiled broadly and gestured by opening his arms as he said, "So many
half-stories, so little time." Forbes looked altogether different while Bush
was answering him. His pained, awkward expression suggested someone sucking a
lemon while receiving a proctologic exam. Perhaps Forbes is one of those
candidates who is better on radio than television. Bush is sort of the opposite
extreme. He's most effective on TV, with the TV set on mute.

            John McCain's performance was mixed. He had some effective rejoinders, such
as when he told Keyes to buzz off when Keyes asked him a question about how he
would handle his daughter wanting an abortion. But McCain also had some weak
moments, especially in the first part of the debate, when he seemed to be
playing back his greatest hits. "Feckless photo-op foreign policy" is a good
line, but less good the 150 th time you hear it. The most striking
thing to me about McCain of late is his continuing dalliance with American
Prospect- type liberalism. When all the candidates were asked about the
"digital divide"--the notion that poor people and minorities are suffering from
their lack of access to computers--McCain gave an answer that could have been
Al Gore's, lauding efforts to connect schools and libraries to the Internet and
decrying "the growing gap between the haves and have-nots in America." When
Bush suggested that fast-changing technology would quickly make any government
program obsolete, McCain interjected that it was a government program that
invented the Internet. This sort of response might be dismissed as McCain's
effort to connect with New Hampshire's independents, who can vote in either
party's primary. But I am increasingly getting the sense that McCain's various
liberal positions represent a change of heart, or at least an ongoing evolution
in his views. (Click here
to read William Saletan's "Frame Game" on McCain's evolution.)

            After a 36-hour trip back from Iowa that ended only a few hours ago, I'm too
zonked to say anything coherent about the Democrats. Check this space for
comments about Gore and Bradley tomorrow.

         
      
   
