
   
   
      
         
            Pair o' Military Leaders

            The New York
Times leads with predictions that Al Gore's popularity with African
Americans in the South will give him a distinct advantage there over Bill
Bradley in early March primaries. The story ran off-lead in the early edition,
swapping places with a lengthy piece on Israelis in the Golan Heights who are
anxious about the territory's possible return to Syria. The Washington Redskins
capture the top third of the Washington Post front but not a berth in the NFC
championship game. The Post off-leads a piece on presidential candidates'
maneuverings before the Iowa caucuses (Jan. 24) and the New Hampshire primary
(Feb. 1). The Los Angeles
Times lead reports that more and more employers may be breaking the law
by firing or threatening illegal workers. The trend is described as backlash to
unions that have been aggressively recruiting workers to beef up their
organizations.

            The NYT waits until the beginning of its jump to reveal the reason
Gore holds an advantage over Bradley among black voters: he's riding Clinton's
coattails. Clinton enjoys great popularity among black political leaders in the
South for opening doors to political appointments, affirmative action programs,
and other kinds of support. Bradley has ardently discussed the topic of
improving race relations, but has not been able to sway those content with
Clinton administration policies and Gore's place near them. Gore lands on the
LAT front, calling for better race relations and lambasting George W.
Bush for failing to take a stand against South Carolina for flying the
Confederate flag over its capitol. Both papers mention Gore's speaking
appearance tomorrow at Martin Luther King Jr.'s old church in Atlanta.

            Gore's and Bush's war chests seem to be giving them a boost in Iowa, and
both candidates hope strong showings in the caucuses will boost their chances
in New Hampshire the following week, the Post reports. All the Iowa
campaigns--save John McCain's, which has circumvented the state from the word
go--are scrambling in the final week to set their expectations and resulting
strategy.

            Employers have been cracking down on illegal workers to deliver a blow to
the unions that have been recruiting and organizing these workers, according to
the LAT . An Equal Employment Opportunity Commission policy released in
October protects all workers, including those without papers, but a) employers
do not have to rehire illegal workers, even if they were fired wrongly and b)
the workers themselves are afraid to unionize, for fear of being fired or
deported.

            Both the Post and NYT front follow-ups to the AOL-Time Warner
merger. The split in shareholder ownership turned out to be the sticking point
in negotiations, according to the NYT . Time Warner CEO Gerald Levin
wouldn't make the deal unless AOL granted TW shareholders 45 percent of the new
company (For a profile of Levin as CEO, see 
                  Slate's
                Assessment.) The
story follows the negotiations, occasionally lapsing into celebratory narration
("And so a pair of skilled corporate sherpas--one representing each
side--started gearing up for the climb to the summit.") The NYT Money
& Business section runs three articles on the merger, including a mock
oration of Levin to Time Warner shareholders. The Post front-pager looks
at AOL's growth during the '90s and Time Warner's abortive Pathfinder Web site.
The piece, like the Times' Money & Business lead, points out that
Time Warner gave early legitimacy to AOL when it sold the rights to post
Time magazine in 1993. The old media giant decided not to pursue buying
AOL a year later, figuring that the free Web would chase away private online
communities like AOL.

            The leader of Serbia's Tigers, a paramilitary group notorious for murdering
and/or terrorizing non-Serbs, was killed in Belgrade. Zeljko Raznatovic, known
as Arkan, was shot in one of his eyes at Belgrade's Intercontinental Hotel
yesterday afternoon, the Times' report. Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic
might benefit most from his death, since Arkan--indicted in 1997 on war crimes
charges--was thought to know a great deal about Milosevic's involvement in
"ethnic cleansing." Blame or credit?: The NYT reports that "no arrests
were made, as opposed to the Post , which runs inside a report filed from
Rome, explaining that "no one claimed responsibility."

            The NYT Golan Heights story, a Sunday early edition lead if there
ever was one, offers a glimpse at how Israeli settlers are coping with the
possibility that the territory will return to Syria as part of a peace deal.
The biggest strategic loss would be Mount Hermon, from which the Israeli
military peers out over Syria. Israeli army escorts learn a lesson in
journalism: "After escorting journalists to the off-limits peak last week, the
army announced that the two dense clusters of dish-encrusted antennae and
Buckminster Fuller radar domes were off the record and should not be
mentioned."

            The NYT Editorial Page runs an "Editorial Notebook" called "Why
America Loves 'The Sopranos'," in the midst of a boundless media campaign
pushing the show. The last paragraph begins: "Of course, half the fun of
watching 'The Sopranos' is watching a family that is really a paramilitary
organization." Not only is the piece already a gush for the show, but--not to
be a party-pooper--the last paragraph seems somehow overblown after reading the
news accounts of Arkan's slaying, since he headed what was really
"really a paramilitary orgainzation."

         
      
   
