
   
   
      
         
            Bellow the Fertility King

            Saul Bellow, 84, last month fathered a child born to his fifth wife, age 41.
As a result of this news, which trickled out last week, Bellow risks being remembered not as the
brilliant Nobel-laureate author of Herzog and The Adventures of Augie March , but as a Weekly World News
curiosity. Eighty-four is older than 77, the previous
famous-guy-becomes-dad-at-advanced-age record set by Tony
Randall. (Most, though obviously nowhere near all, men over 70 are
infertile.) It's so old, in fact, that Chatterbox wondered whether Bellow was
the world's oldest dad, period. The new Guinness World Records 2000: Millennium Edition ,
alas, doesn't say, though it does serve up as the "Oldest Mother" Arceli Keh, 63 when she gave birth (with a donated egg) in Los
Angeles in 1996. (Incidentally, Chatterbox must second Luc Sante's opinion, expressed in the Jan. 16 New York Times
Book Review , that the new Guinness is so glossied-up and
dumbed-down--these days, it's mainly an appendage to a Guinness World Records:
Primetime TV show--that it can no longer serve its hallowed function as
settler of ale-fueled pub arguments. Two whole pages are devoted to
world-record stats about supermodels; two more about "high fashion"; and two
more about "street fashion." Has anyone ever argued in a pub about who the
highest-paid supermodel is? Best arse maybe, but
best-remunerated ? The latter, if you must know, is Claudia Schiffer.)

            The hunt for the world's oldest dad led Chatterbox to a bookmark-worthy Web
site called "World
Sexual Records," maintained by someone who identifies himself as J. Means
and who appears to be affiliated with the University of Texas. (Means didn't answer Chatterbox's
e-mail seeking more information about his bona fides, but the UT directory
lists a senior in the engineering school named Jon Means with the same e-mail
address.) On the site's "Conception" page, the world's oldest father is identified
as Leslie Colley, a retired Australian mineworker who sired a son named Oswald
in 1992. Colley was 92 at the time; his wife, who had married Colley two years
earlier (he told her he was only 70) was 39. Colley died six years later,
shortly before his 100 th birthday. An April 1996 article in The
Independent of London (not available online) says that yet another
nonagenarian, "a bricklayer in his nineties," became a father in 1995, but it
doesn't supply any details, so it's impossible to know whether he broke
Colley's record. The Independent piece also points out that literal
interpretation of the Bible requires the faithful to believe that Abraham begat
Isaac at 100.

            To summarize: We don't know who the oldest dad ever was, but it may have
been Leslie Colley. It certainly wasn't Bellow. This means Bellow probably
will be remembered mostly, if not exclusively, for his literary output.
Caveat: Bellow may still be the oldest Nobel-laureate 
               dad in
history. Chatterbox awaits more information from Stockholm.

         
      
   
