
   
   
      
         
            Mental-Health Care for Republican Candidates
            

            For some reason, I find it easier to think about Relenza and antibiotics
right about now than--ugh--another Republican debate tonight. What colorful tie
will Orrin Hatch break out as he talks about himself in the third--or perhaps
by now, the fourth--person? How many boxes will Gary Bauer be standing on? Will
Alan Keyes finally go back on his medication?

            OK, I'll admit it, I almost never read the Los Angeles Times (I'll
tell you sometime the whole reason--it has to do with finding out how the paper
is edited), but there was a cute story in there today about the police
arresting seven people for feeding the homeless in downtown's Pershing Square.
The police explained that the seven were interfering with the temporary
ice-skating rink. Now, it helps to understand that there is no more desolate
example of urban-renewing a place into the ground in all of Los Angeles than
the once-charming Pershing Square. Green space was removed (attracted the
homeless). My nomination for the unspoken issue of the year in both parties'
debates is--what does society do with the mentally ill that we kicked out of
mental hospitals two or three decades ago and who have become, willy-nilly, the
homeless? Not to mention the fact that "a history of mental problems" turns up
in the résumés of more and more troublemakers, like the guy who attacked George
Harrison last week.

            Just saw a news conference featuring Jesse Ventura and Donald Trump, and it
makes me salivate with anticipation of the Reform Party convention this summer.
Those two, plus the Buchanan brigade--personally, I hope it's in Long Beach, so
I can drive down there, but wherever it is, it'll be the summer's best
show.

            Did you hear the story about Monica Lewinsky's sending notes to the White
House recently? Can't quite pin it down (heard it on Paul Harvey, which doesn't
say much for its accuracy, but, hey, those airbeds are great). But on the
subject of "those gals," if I paid the kind of money Linda Tripp's supporters
must have paid for her makeover, I'd be expecting the surgeon to keep his mouth
shut.

            It's been a variety of fun. Thanks for the ride.

            Harry

         
      
   
