
   
   
      
         
            Partial Court Press

            The Washington Post and the Los Angeles
Times lead with the Supreme Court's announcement that it will
hear cases on abortion rights and gay rights this spring. Specifically, it will
review a judgment overturning Nebraska's ban on late-term abortions, and a New
Jersey Supreme Court ruling that the Boy Scouts could not exclude a gay troop
leader. The LAT off-leads with the Supreme Court story, and leads with
the ongoing LAPD probe: police officials' request that charges be filed against
three officers. The charges would be the first in the Rampart corruption
investigation. The New York
Times
                lead focuses on the
partial birth abortion ban and doesn't mention the Boy Scout case. The
NYT and the WP front (and the LAT reefers) Russia's
publication of a new national security doctrine. The new doctrine broadens the
conditions under which Russia would use nuclear weapons, and describes the
West, for the first time since the Cold War, as a potential threat to Russian
security.

            All of the papers mention that the Supreme Court won't actually reevaluate
the constitutional status of abortion. Nor will the hearings affect the bans on
abortions after "fetal viability" (24 weeks into the pregnancy) currently
pending in many states. Nebraska's Supreme Court rejected the state's ban
because its loose definition of a "partial birth abortion" could apply to many
common procedures used in early stages of pregnancy, violating a 1992 Supreme
Court ruling against "undue burden" on access to abortion. The WP
scrutinizes how the timing of the hearings and rulings will affect the
presidential elections. The Court will most likely hear the cases in early
April and rule in late June, just as the Campaign 2000 kicks into high gear.
This timing should make the Supreme Court a major election issue, as the next
president will likely nominate three justices.

            The New Jersey case, according to the WP, turns on what sort of
organization the Boy Scouts are. The Scouts say that as a private organization,
they have the First Amendment freedom of association to decide who to include,
while the court argues that the group's size and tradition of "nonselectivity"
renders it a "public association" subject to federal anti-discrimination
laws.

            Everyone quotes Russia's change of heart about nukes. In 1997, they would be
used "in case of a threat to the existence of the Russian Federation," but in
yesterday's revised doctrine they are an option when "all other means of
resolving the crisis have been exhausted." It could have been worse: some
Russian officials had argued for a policy that included an "early first use"
option. The NYT also reminds us that U.S. doctrine is traditionally
more hawkish on the use of nuclear weapons, but no one mentions what today's
U.S. policy actually is. Analysts agree that the added chilliness towards NATO
is a result of the Kosovo crisis and more recent criticism of the Chechen
campaign by NATO members.

            A U.N. tribunal found five ethnic Croats guilty of "persecution" and crimes
against humanity for their role in ethnic cleansing in Bosnia. The decision is
groundbreaking because it is the first to declare ethnic cleansing a crime
against humanity. For their roles in a 1993 massacre that ended with over 100
Muslims dead, the convicts could spend up to 25 years in prison.

            The NYT front notes that South Korea plans to spend around $1
billion over the next five years to build a rocket capable of launching
satellites. US analysts fear that the plan is economically unfeasible, and
deleterious to the stability of the region: South Korea could export the
technology to countries who would use it to launch weapons, and fears that
South Korea might use the rocket to deploy their own weapons could set off an
arms race in northeast Asia. The WP continues to mine the aftershocks
of the AOL Time Warner merger, saying the incident has revived European anxiety
about technological inferiority: Europeans are far less likely than Americans
to be wired, and e-commerce revenues in the 15 EU nations are only a third of
what they are in the U.S. The story blames the gap on government subsidies of
failing industries (to save jobs) and a greater cultural aversion to risk.

             In a NYT op-ed, author and dog lover Caroline Knapp fans the
flames of New York's dog wars, lambasting snobbish humans who only want
properly sized, pedigreed dogs in their co-ops. Unlike many of these whiny
elitists, she says, the dog is "a noble and sensitive creature who, given
proper care, may make a far better tenant than many humans." Maybe so, but at
least we're housebroken.

         
      
   
