
   
   
      
         
            The Dems Debate Race

            The questions at tonight's Black and Brown Forum in Des Moines were the best
at any of the presidential debates so far. I especially liked NBC correspondent
Soledad O'Brien's one about why refugees from Cuba are allowed to stay in the
United States while refugees from Haiti or China are not. O'Brien's
co-moderator, Tavis Smiley of Black Entertainment Television, came up with an
equally shrewd question about whether the priority of lily-white Iowa and New
Hampshire in the presidential primaries is unfair to minorities. Yet another
sharp question came from one of the panelists, Erik Parker of the music
magazine The Source , who asked whether it was right to deprive convicted
felons of the right to vote.

            What was especially impressive about these questions is that they were
unexpected without being obscure, trivial, or overly clever. Each was
substantive, framing a significant problem in a surprising and fresh way. And
each was designed to make the candidates squirm, but without being merely a
trick or a trap.

            In each case, the answers were revealing. Gore stumbled over O'Brien's
immigration question by trying to argue that refugees from Communist countries
should be treated differently. O'Brien rightly pointed out that this answer
didn't account for China. Smiley's question on the primaries provoked both
candidates into utterly unconvincing defenses of Iowa and New Hampshire's
first-in-the-nation status. And the question about voting rights for felons
caused Bradley to say he'd reconsider whether non-violent convicted felons
deserved the right to vote. One could reasonably defend this position. The
problem is that Bradley never did so before being asked about it
tonight.Bradley's answer was an attempted constituency-pleaser on par with
Gore's gays in the military answer from two debates ago. The difference is that
where gays ought to have appreciated Gore's effort, I'm not sure blacks support
the idea of criminals voting any more than whites do.

            Like Bradley, Gore sometimes crossed the line from deeply felt concern into
pandering. In his answer to the voting felons question, Gore implied that the
disproportionately high incarceration rate for African-Americans was
principally the result of bias, which is preposterous. But Gore's
solicitousness expressed itself less in his specific answers than in his
slightly excessive effort to bond with the audience. When he said that the
Clinton administration not only talked the talk, but also walked the walk on
civil rights, Gore actually drew boos from the Bradley-friendly crowd for his
somewhat hokey-sounding appropriation of street language.

            Gore was also clumsy in the way he constantly invoked his close friend and
partner Bill Clinton. For months, Gore has been speaking to largely white
audiences and barely mentioning the President's name. Tonight, in front of an
audience composed of minorities and whites sympathetic to minority concerns,
the Vice-president bragged extensively about the record of an outfit he seldom
mentions: "the Clinton-Gore administration." When Bradley zinged Gore by
proposing that the Vice-president walk down the corridor to the Oval Office and
tell Clinton to sign an executive order banning racial profiling, Gore shot
right back in defense of his boss: "I don't think President Bill Clinton needs
a lecture from Bill Bradley about how to stand up and fight for
African-Americans and Latinos." This was an excellent rejoinder, but Gore will
get himself into trouble very soon if he doesn't figure out a single attitude
toward Clinton and stick with it.

            More persuasive was Gore's emulation of the president's style, which after
about a thousand tries finally came off in one portion of the debate. When a
doctor by the name of Paula Mahone asked both candidates about the
under-representation of blacks in medical schools, Bradley responded with a
routine defense of affirmative action. But Gore, who was either better prepared
or better clued-in, recognized the questioner as the doctor who delivered the
McCaughy Septuplets.

            "Dr. Mahone, I recognize you," Gore said. "And when you performed that
medical miracle, you made not only Iowa proud, but the entire nation proud. And
I think it is fair to say that there were countless young African-American
girls and boys and boys and girls of all backgrounds who saw you on the
national television screens at the very top of your profession demonstrating to
one and all that there's nothing you don't know how to do in the field of
medicine. And they thought to themselves: You know, I can do that."

            As Gore heaped praise on Dr. Mahone, he seemed truly moved, and the audience
seemed moved with him. For one brief moment, you even might have thought you
were listening to Bill Clinton.

         
      
   
