
   
   
      
         
            Not Gotcha

            My 
                  Slate
                colleague Jacob Weisberg
argues that the ... let's call it the unfolding of Vice President
Gore's position on the great Joint
Chiefs Gay Litmus Test issue was not sufficiently flip-floppy "to
constitute a 'reversal.'" Many commentators in 
                  Slate
               's "Fray"
echo this view, dismissing the whole controversy as a phony media game of
"gotcha." I respectfully disagree.

            First, of course it was a reversal. Initially, Gore said he would
require that any Chiefs nominee be "in agreement with" his gay policy. Then he
came back and denied there should "ever be any kind of inquiry into the
personal, political opinion of officers in the U.S. military." The only "litmus
test," explained his adviser Robert Shrum, was the banal "constitutional one,
civilian control of the military." Under Gore's Position No. 1, Colin Powell
and Norman Schwarzkopf get bounced. Under Position No. 2, it would seem, they
don't, since they presumably agree with the principle of civilian control.

            Weisberg says no, there is little functional difference between demanding
"agreement" and Gore's second position (demanding constitutionally-required
"support"), since Gore knows that those who disagree are likely to sabotage his
policy. The only difference, Weisberg says, is that demanding "'support' ...
leaves open the theoretical possibility of appointing a military officer so
honorable that he will work assiduously to implement a policy he personally
disagrees with." But under Gore's second position, Gore won't know who
personally agrees or disagrees with his policy, since he says he won't inquire
into the actual views of Chiefs candidates. (Don't Ask, Don't
Tell!)

            More important, Weisberg assumes that Gore would never appoint somebody who
disagrees, and might therefore sabotage the policy (among disagreers, only the
theoretical perfectly honorable officer would pass muster). But it's exactly
that assumption that bothers those who worry about a "litmus test"--the idea
Gore would give a privileged position to the gay issue, ruling out a candidate
who was otherwise a military genius and inspirational leader solely because he
had (in Gore's mind) retrograde views on gays.

            That implication, in Gore's answer No. 1, is what made it genuinely
troubling, a legitimate gaffe. It suggested the vice president was so keen on
his gay policy that he would give it higher priority than other military
issues, such as how to win wars (or counter the Chinese and Russian threats).
Actually, given the crippling effect of the gay controversy on the first six
months of Clinton's presidency, it implied Gore was willing to give the gay
issue priority over non-military issues as well. "Not that again!" you could
almost hear voters saying. There are other, more important concerns for a
president than integrating gays into the armed forces. It's time for some
sensible gay leader to point this out. (Andrew Sullivan, are you still reading
this?)

            At best, Gore's gaffe revealed a candidate so eager to pander to a
Democratic constituency that he lost his bearings and overstepped the bounds of
good political judgment. That's certainly forgivable--but wasn't Gore's unique
selling proposition supposed to be his dull-but-sound reliability? You mean
he's boring and a bit of a hothead too?

            P.S.: Weisberg's right to ridicule Gore's Position No. 2--why shouldn't a
president inquire into the personal views of a Joint Chiefs candidate, and try
to appoint someone who agrees with him? A general who disagrees with a policy
is indeed likely to implement it unenthusiastically. Gore could have said,
"Yes, I'll consider a candidate's views--I'd be naive not to--but I'll look at
the whole man, and the whole range of military issues, not just this one
issue." In somersaulting from personal-views-are-a-litmus-test to "I'll never
consider personal views," Gore leapt completely over this sensible, obvious
answer. But that doesn't make his performance any less of a reversal, or any
more reassuring.

         
      
   
