
   
   
      
         
            Is It Illegal To Do Favors for Campaign Donors?
            

            It is widely assumed that politicians are routinely influenced by campaign
contributions. That is usually why businesses and unions make such
contributions, and it is why many people--including many members of Congress
themselves--believe the campaign-finance system should be reformed. Yet
criminal investigations or prosecutions are rare (and usually involve
violations of the fund-raising limits rather than any quid pro quo). Isn't it
illegal for an elected official to trade a vote or other official action for a
campaign contribution?  

            Answer: If a senator were to write a letter saying, "Dear Big Donor: Give my
campaign $1,000 and I will vote to renew the tax break for your industry," and
if Big Donor were to donate $1,000, that would constitute illegal bribery. But
anything short of that, in terms of evidence or context, is either not illegal
or impossible to prosecute. For example, a campaign donation after the
fact--"Thanks for voting yes, senator. Here's $1,000 for your re-election"--is
perfectly legal, even though the connection between the donation and the vote
is explicit. And of course in most cases there is no evidence of an explicit
connection.

            After the "Keating Five" scandal of the late 1980s (in which five senators,
including John McCain, were accused of interfering with the investigation of a
large donor's savings and loan), the Senate ostensibly tightened its own ethics
rules to go beyond the legal requirements. "Rule 43" states that senators
can--and should--assist citizens in dealing with Congress and other
governmental agencies. But it bars them from doing so "on the basis of
contributions or services, or promises of contributions or services, to the
Member's political campaigns." In other words, a senator supposedly cannot
treat a donor differently from any other constituent. Doing so could result in
censure or expulsion. The Senate has not yet convicted any members of violating
this rule.

            NOTE: Many activities are wrong although they are not illegal. Timothy Noah
sorts out the rights and wrongs in an article to be posted Friday.

            Next question?

         
      
   
