
   
   
      
         
            Iowa GOP Debate: "Waiting for Godot"  Version

            
               Dennis Ryerson : Get started with opening statements.

            
               George W. Bush : Talk about tax cuts today.

            
               Orrin Hatch : I really want to see the Clinton-Gore team go.

            
               Gary Bauer : The sanctity of human life.

            
               Steve Forbes : Logged 12,000 miles in your great state.

            
               John McCain : Father was born in Council Bluffs.

            
               Alan Keyes : This is the father who is fighting for the life of his
son.

            
               Richard T. Meyer, Burlington : Forty-seven year-old brother with Downs
Syndrome.

            
               Bauer : Provide the long-term care your family needs.

            
               Hatch : I'm not just talking about it.

            
               Keyes : Shouldn't have government or other bureaucracies dictating to
people.

            
               McCain : Medical Savings Accounts, etcetera.

            
               Forbes : Vouchers and coupons.

            
               Bush : Encourage the purchase of long-term care insurance.

            
               Ryerson : You each have thirty seconds.

            
               Bauer : I don't want HMO bureaucrats running it either.

            
               Hatch : Hatch-Waxman bill.

            
               McCain : Republicans are gridlocked by the big money from HMOs.

            
               Forbes : You should be able to choose own doctor.

            
               Bush : Administration has used Medicare as a political football.

            
               Ryerson : Ask a question of one of the others.

            
               Bauer : On the China Issue, you've taken the same position.

            
               Hatch : I was there in China.

            
               Bauer : Being naïve

            
               Hatch : Deng Xiopeng rolled out the red carpet for me.

            
               Bauer : Might be the problem.

            
               Hatch : I slammed Jiang Zemin so hard that he gave me an hour and a
half.

            
               Keyes : Texas American town is to be conducted in the Spanish
language.

            
               Bush : No es la verdad .

            
               Keyes : Es la verdad, senor .

            
               Bush : Un momento .

            
               McCain : Vamanos
            

            
               Bush : Plus, we respect other people's heritage in this country

            
               Keyes : Made insulting and derogatory remarks about black
Americans.

            
               Bush : Comments are out of line.

            
               McCain : How anybody could defend our present system?

            
               Bauer : Politicians in Washington ought to be ashamed of
themselves.

            
               McCain : Influence of special interest money

            
               Bauer : Have to raise $30,000 a day.

            
               Hatch : A 28-minute fireside chat.

            
               Forbes : I hope the fire survived

            
               Hatch : The corruption of this administration.

            
               Forbes : Its tawdry scheme to try to make money for their friends.

            
               Forbes : Opening up Alaska for exploration?

            
               Keyes : Exploit God's precious resources for the good of our
people.

            
               Bush : What do you say to the single mom who's working?

            
               McCain : I've got a tax cut for you and Governor Bush doesn't.

            
               Bush : Not true.

            
               McCain : Yes it is.

            
               Bush : Not true.

            
               McCain : All hat and no cattle.

            
               Bush : Cute but.

            
               McCain : Cutest when they're true.

            
               Bush : Not true.

            
               McCain : Texas two-step here.

            
               Ryerson : The family farmer is self-employed.

            
               Forbes : Administration talks about but doesn't do.

            
               Hatch : Ten years ago, 22 million farmers.

            
               McCain : People in Beijing eating Iowa pork

            
               Keyes : Whole centralized banking system.

            
               Bush : That's what ethanol does, John.

            
               Bauer : Food controlled by a handful of corporations.

            
               Forbes : Whole worlds written on grains of sand

            
               Hatch : Fourteen billion gallons of gas.

            
               McCain : Helped neither consumers nor the environment.

            
               Keyes : Consolidated control of the banking system at the federal
level.

            
               Bush : We may have biomass fuel.

            
               Bauer : Ethanol isn't being subsidized.

            
               McCain : Everybody else thinks it is.

            
               Adam Glawe, Des Moines area : How to improve the dignity of the Oval
Office?

            
               Bauer : Ronald Reagan would not go into the Oval Office without a coat
and tie on.

            
               Hatch : Elaine and I have been married for 43 years.

            
               Keyes : Radical homosexual agenda.

            
               McCain : Feckless photo-op foreign policy.

            
               Bush : Women who will see service to our country as a great privilege
and who will not stain the house.

            
               Forbes : People of seemingly limited abilities could rise to the
occasion.

            
               Jessie Clark, student : Concerned about the government
overstepping.

            
               Forbes : Trust the parents, not politicians

            
               Keyes : Abolish the Department of Education.

            
               McCain : Choice and competition, that's the answer.

            
               Bauer : Ronald Reagan.

            
               Bush : No second-rate children, no second-rate dreams.

            
               Hatch : The founding fathers were much wiser than people today.

            
               Ryerson : Married couples and families paying an additional tax of
$1,400 a year.

            
               McCain : The Social Security Trust Fund is a ticking time bomb.

            
               Keyes : All these folks are gong to give you something.

            
               Bauer : Moving chairs around on the deck of the Titanic.

            
               Hatch : I like all the tax plans that have been given here.

            
               Forbes : Flat tax would help stay-at-home moms.

            
               Bush : Plan that is realistic. That is doable.

            
               McCain : The President of the United States is not a hapless
bystander.

            
               Keyes : What do we call that? Slavery!

            
               Bauer : Under my flat tax plan, American families make out well.

            
               Hatch : I can be for any of these programs.

            
               Forbes : Most Texans have never seen those tax cuts.

            
               Bush : Sixty-nine percent of the Texans said overwhelmingly, `you're
the man!'

            
               Forbes : Six out of ten districts in Texas never saw the tax cuts.

            
               Bush : Not true.

            
               Ryerson : How do you post the Ten Commandments in schools?

            
               Forbes : The basis of Western Civilization.

            
               Hatch : Muslims treat Moses as a great prophet.

            
               McCain : Begin proceedings every day with prayer.

            
               Keyes : Schools in the hands of people who pray.

            
               Bush : Seems like to me `Thou Shalt Not Kill' is pretty universal.

            
               Bauer : Giving each other the Nazi salute in the hallway.

            
               Ryerson : Tougher laws are needed to protect our environment?

            
               Bush : Standards set by agencies that rely upon science.

            
               Forbes : Fashionable things that have no real proof like global
warming.

            
               Baue r: Out of control federal regulators.

            
               Hatch : Kyoto Accords could add $3000 to everyone's fuel bills.

            
               Keyes : Is there any shortage of chickens in the world?

            
               McCain : Theodore Roosevelt was my hero and is.

            
               Ryerson : Trim the closing remarks

            
               Bush : Message that's positive and hopeful.

            
               Forbes : I'm an independent outsider.

            
               Keyes : Join me in a prayer to Our Creator.

            
               McCain : Give the government back to you.

            
               Bauer : Son of janitor.

            
               Hatch : I was a janitor.

            
               Ryerson : Goodbye.

         
      
   
