
   
   
      
         
            Roll Over, Diane Keaton
            

            Dear Jeffrey:

            What's misogynistic about saying, "I don't fall asleep when the Soprano
women are on screen." You're onto something here. The women are another way
The Sopranos breaks with the past. What was Diane Keaton doing in The
Godfather ? I always thought Michael married her because she was a
Wasp--because she embodied his abandoned dream of assimilation, and also
because she gave him cover. In other words, he married her because of what she
represented, rather than who she was, and the story never freed her from that
dehumanizing fact--never gave her any individuality, dignity, presence, which
meant that we never felt compelled and maybe even didn't want to watch her.
(Except in III , and Carmela Soprano and her loverboy-priest speak for
all of us on that one: What the hell was that?)

            Carmela's just the opposite. Or at least she used to be--they don't give her
much to do in what we've seen so far. She's been supplanted by Tony's sister
Pavarti, aka Janice, who, as you say, is an epic drag--a bullying,
self-important, unsympathetic, bohemian drag. But back when the writers were
interested in Carmela, which was the first half of last season, she had all the
qualities that Diane Keaton lacked. She was a real counterweight to Tony and
Silvio and Paulie Walnuts and Pussy and all the charm they hold for the likes
of you, which in a mob context amounts to a giant feminist manifesto. Edie
Falco does the hardest thing an actor can do--she makes Carmela's suburban
decency both fierce and interesting. Carmela sees through Tony, but takes
tender care of him anyway because, frankly, what else is she going to do? She
may not say much--hey, she's supposed to be emblematic of the mob's new yuppie
isolation, so who would she say it to?--but she's plenty smart and aware, as we
learned when she dressed down Father Paul for being a schnorrer who
plays head games with lonely women because he "likes the whiff of sexuality."
This being the Sopranos, however, which lets the moss of goodness gather on no
one, Carmela can also be a self-deluded, preening, Italian JAP. There was that
wonderful episode early last year where she's appallingly condescending to an
old friend, the wife of a restaurateur who's been burned out of his restaurant.
She hires the couple to cater some fund-raising party, then, in a room
presumably filled with all their mutual friends, waves her friend over as if
bossing around some maid. She's clearly forgotten upon what her higher
financial status rests, though the friend wastes no time reminding her.

            Which brings us to the Soprano marriage, which is, as you say, compulsively
watchable. Our editor suggested to me yesterday that it's a somewhat
Clintonesque marriage--Tony has a mistress whom he fucks rather joylessly and
with whom he never has an actual conversation, but he's really dependent on his
wife (although unlike with our president, you have the sense that Tony screws
around mostly because that's what mob bosses are supposed to do rather than out
of real need). In another likely Clinton parallel, the two of them have a long
history of hurting each other that makes it impossible for them to get the
important stuff out there, even though their desire to do so is palpable. All
this just hangs around in the air, unresolved, which makes you wish the writers
would get back to it. I dunno. Maybe I'm just getting my soap-opera yayas out
with a nighttime series. But I do think their marriage has the rare distinction
(on television, anyway) of feeling like something living, breathing, and
evolving--another feminist touch, in its way.

            So here's my question to you, who know so many mob children (as opposed to
Hasids--though weren't you once friendly with some big Hasidic rabbi? Didn't
you cover them back in your Forward days, before you abandoned the
chosen people to hang out with the people you claim are the envy of the world?)
What do you make of Tony and Carmela's kids, Meadow and Anthony junior? Do you
buy how easily Meadow swallows her father's bullshit about what he does for a
living, even after she has pointedly asked about it? I do, absolutely. I think
it's an excellent dramatization of the weird state of knowing-and-not-knowing
that mob kids are forced to live in. She's not deceived by her father's lies,
as she makes clear in lots of little sarcastic asides. But if he actually
'fessed up, then she'd have to deal with his unpleasant reality, which would
rock her world a little more than she's ready for right now.

            All this, in fact, is taking Meadow to the verge of becoming The
Sopranos ' next great female character. As far as I'm concerned, the best
thing that happens in the second season is a major discovery we make about her
in Episode 3, which for once I'm not going to give away. Suffice it to say that
she might not be an unbearably self-involved spoiled brat after all, though of
course she's that too. Maybe I just want to see her get in on the action 'cause
I was a huge self-involved spoiled brat in my day, but I think the girl has
potential.

            Spoiled or not, I was taught enough manners to say: It has been a pleasure
doing business with you, even if you did chop my herring up and stir it into
onions and cream sauce. I find that you are not, in fact, a mook. Quite the
opposite.

            Love,
Judith

         
      
   
