
   
   
      
         
            Weekend Cocktail Chatter
            

            AOL buys Time Warner. Bill Gates steps down as CEO of Microsoft. Sega now
has 13 percent of the U.S. video-game market. And American Mutual Holding, an
Iowa company, has agreed to buy the Indianapolis Life Insurance Company.
Who can possibly keep up? All the more reason to buy really expensive Internet
stocks, which can just keep going up. ... Actually, that doesn't seem to be
working so well. Perhaps it's time to think about the virtues of municipal
bonds.

            The truth is while the AOL-Time Warner deal was huge, it's more unusual now
for a week to pass without a similar announcement. (Though I can't quite
get over the shock of that insurance deal.) In a way, the most confusing part
of this week was the breathtaking volatility in the stock market, and in
particular in the Nasdaq. After a week in which tech stocks mainly moved in one
direction--down--they came rallying back powerfully, but instead of resuming
their steady upward ascent, they've begun swinging around wildly (even more
wildly than usual). Companies that have reported blowout quarters--like Yahoo
and Akamai--have been punished for no apparent reason, while other companies
are trading much higher or lower on no news at all.

            You might say, of course, that this is just par for the course. But it feels
a little different. It feels, in fact, like investors might be thinking a
little more seriously about risk. But then it could just be the sunspots. And
with that, on to this week's Cocktail Chat.

            1. "Ford unveiled its forthcoming line of electric vehicles , and said
they will be sold under the new brand name Th!nk. (An odd choice, given the
fact that thexclamationpointunk doesn't really trip off the tongue.)
Company spokesman will presumably be The Artist Formerly Known As ..., and I
imagine the advertising campaign will break new ground in the inventive use of
heretofore ignored punctuation marks."

            2. "The astonishing volatility of the Nasdaq has clearly driven some
people batty . TheStreet.com quoted one trader this week who said that since
you can look at a chart of the Nasdaq 100 and can see 'perfect
double-top' (which is like looking at a cloud and seeing an elephant), we
should 'buckle our seatbelts.' The trader requested anonymity, which isn't
surprising. Would you want to be quoted saying something that meaningless?"

            3. "Most curious headline of the week , from the Times : 'GM
Presses Bid for Daewoo, Vowing to Preserve Its Identity .' I don't know.
I may be naive, but I think that even if this deal does go through, GM will not
disappear. But, then, I'm a dreamer."

            4. "Tommy Hilfiger's stock was crushed Thursday after the company
announced that its earnings for the fourth quarter would be well below
analysts' expectations. Analysts attributed the company's problems to overly
subdued colors in Hilfiger's women's line . The company did say it was
'fully committed to enhancing long-term shareholder value.' But what we want to
know is: Is the company now fully committed to bright colors?"

            5. "Attacking America Online's acquisition of Time Warner as a danger to
the public , Jeff Cohen of FAIR included as part of his indictment of AOL
its use of controversial accounting methods . Why not? God knows that how
AOL used to amortize its marketing costs should certainly be front-and-center
in any discussion of this deal."

            6. "The Times ' Maureen Dowd, in a column about America's
obsession with the stock market , wrote that 'now your personal trainer
knows as much about one-day price movements as Warren Buffett .'
Actually, I think the whole point of investing the way Warren Buffett does is
that personal trainers have always known more about one-day price
movements than he has."

            7. "Jonathan Bulkeley, CEO of barnesandnoble.com, resigned in order to, yes,
spend more time with his family . In response, the stock dropped 63
cents . Must be comforting to know that's how much difference investors
thought his departure would make."

         
      
   
