
   
   
      
         
            More Minutes of the Media Conspiracy

            The central committee of the media
conspiracy met again today. (Click here
for last month's minutes.) We were all
supposed to be in Iowa to cover tonight's Democratic debate, but given the cold
weather and a series of interesting honoraria being given by the American
Enterprise Institute, we decided to gather instead for lunch at the Palm
Restaurant in Washington, D.C.

            All the usual luminaries were there, with the exception of the incredibly
dedicated David Broder, who video-conferenced in from Winterset, Iowa. Broder
was out there wrapping up a marathon outdoor focus group with Methodists
expected to attend next week's caucuses. It was a bit difficult to hear him
through his balaclava, but I'm pretty sure Broder's point was that Bradley and
McCain were peaking too early. He wanted to know what we should do to ensure
the longest possible primary season.

            Gerald Seib of the Wall Street Journal made the first suggestion: Why
not just continue to sprinkle McCain and Bradley with adoring coverage? Gerry
said he was planning to publish a column about how McCain was winning
admiration in Washington for his maverick stance on campaign-finance reform. He
added that every time he ran this column, he got a nice note from Fred
Wertheimer.

            Sam and Cokie could barely control their sniggering. It fell to Rick Berke
of the New York Times to explain to Gerry why this wouldn't work. For
one thing, the story had to change--we journalists couldn't very well keep
writing that McCain and Bradley were on the rise. What's more, Rick pointed
out, reporters were already flirting with EOB in favor of McCain. EOB, Al Hunt
explained to me, stands for "extreme & overt bias," and it's a violation of
the conspiracy's bylaws.

            Howard Fineman of Newsweek offered an alternative to Seib's idea. Why
not offer a round of seemingly harsh but actually harmless stories about
Bradley and McCain? This would create the appearance of media fair play without
doing either of our favorites much damage. Howard pointed to McCain's letters
to the FCC as an example, though he noted that this kind of story always has
the potential to get out of hand. The meeting dissolved into laughter when
Howard joked that he nearly had to sit down and read the 500 letters McCain
released last week.

            Syndicated columnist Steve Roberts said he thought a barrage of mild
criticism was a nifty idea because it would allow for two CWRs
("conventional-wisdom reversals," according to Hunt) between now and the New
Hampshire primary. McCain and Bradley could sag next week and then surge the
following week, achieving "come from behind" victories in New Hampshire. The
beauty of the plan, Steve said, was that it was possible without any actual
candidate movement in the polls.

            Seib loved the idea. He even offered to write the first draft of a column
about how McCain had a highly conservative voting record. While appearing
critical, this story could help McCain by putting distance between him and the
liberal media, Seib said.

            Roberts apologized for raining on Gerry's parade, but said he thought the
McCain-as-closet-conservative story would be more effective if it weren't
written by a columnist. He suggested handing the idea off to some "shoe-leather
guys" at the Los Angeles Times .

            Johnny Apple jumped in at this point to complain that shoe leather was what
he was eating for lunch. Shouting for the "garçon ," he complained that
his T-bone steak was overcooked and that he had powerful friends at the Bureau
of Weights and Measures who might be interested in checking to see whether it
really was 40 ounces as advertised. The waiter apologetically took the bone
back to the kitchen and quickly brought Mr. Apple another.

            Fineman then raised a new concern: Wouldn't it be unfair to McCain to
criticize him for being too conservative? According to conspiracy rules, all
politicians were supposed to receive credit ("new respect") for turning more
liberal. But this problem was quickly resolved when McCain, who was attending
the lunch as a guest of U.S. News & World Report , Time ,
Newsweek , 
                  Slate
               , and The New Yorker , said he
wouldn't mind the criticism a bit.

            What of Bradley? Lance Morrow of AOL-Time Warner asked.

            Sam & Cokie proposed that Bradley be charged with general arrogance
since he wouldn't say publicly what his favorite movie was (while acknowledging
off-the-record to reporters that it was Look Who's Talking II ). Fineman
added that McCain could also be charged with hypocrisy since "Mr. Sharp Elbows"
wasn't living up to his own elevated standard of positive campaigning.

            "Willis Hortoo, Willis Hortoo," Jack Germond exclaimed, perhaps referring to
a recent interview in which Bradley castigated Gore for discovering Willie
Horton in the 1988 campaign. "Martini."

            Morrow said Bradley's arrogance and hypocrisy were both fine issues and that
the newsmagazines would work out the details of these criticisms at their usual
Friday planning session. He reminded Fineman that it was Newsweek 's turn
to put together this week's outline. The Dean, who by this point was mostly
covered in a snowdrift, was impatient to bring the meeting to a close. He
wished everyone a lively campaign and reminded us to dress warmly for his
toboggan party in Dixville Notch. He said I could bring the hot cocoa.

         
      
   
