
   
   
      
         
            Who Are the Tibetan Lamas?
            

            Last week the Karmapa Lama, a 14 year-old Tibetan
Buddhist Leader, fled to India from Chinese-controlled Tibet. Five years ago,
the Chinese government sparked controversy by nominating a different boy for
the position of Panchen Lama than the one the Dalai Lama had chosen. Who are
all these lamas?

            Lama, which translates as "superior one," is a title officially extended
only to the few dozen Tibetan Buddhist monks who have achieved the highest
level of spiritual development. (In informal conversation, lama is used to
refer to any Tibetan Buddhist monk.) Most lamas are believed to be
reincarnations of previous lamas or holy men, and their places in the hierarchy
are determined by these reincarnated identities. Tibetan Buddhism is divided
into multiple branches. The Dalai Lama and Panchen Lama lead the largest sect,
and the Karmapa Lama heads the second largest.

            The Dalai Lama is considered Tibet's spiritual leader, since he holds
the highest position within the dominant Gelugpa ("Yellow Hat") sect. The title
was first adopted by the Gelugpa leader in the 16 th century, and 100
years later the Mongols deemed the position one of spiritual and
temporal power. The 14 th and present Dalai Lama assumed the post as
a five year-old in 1940. (When a Dalai Lama dies, his soul enters the body of a
young boy. The child is identified through physical and mental tests, including
familiarity with the previous leader's belongings.) The Dalai Lama fled Tibet
in 1959 after the Tibetans' failed uprising against the Chinese communists, who
had taken over in 1951. He has continued to serve as a religious leader in
exile and received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his peaceful efforts to
end Chinese rule in Tibet. (Click here to visit the Dalai Lama's official Web site.) 

            The Panchen Lama is the second highest Gelugpa leader, but does not
have civil authority. When the Dalai Lama fled Tibet, the Chinese government
tried to elevate the Panchen Lama to take his place. Although he partly
cooperated with the Chinese, the Panchen Lama continued to protest Chinese rule
and demand religious freedom. He was imprisoned in 1964, released in 1981, and
died in 1989. Six years later, the Dalai Lama, who traditionally determines the
Panchen Lama's successor, announced his choice for the position. The Chinese
government asserted that it had the authority to make the selection, and last
summer enthroned a nine-year-old as the Panchen Lama. The Dalai Lama does not
recognize the choice, and most Tibetan Buddhists continue to worship the
original candidate, who has been missing since 1995 and is assumed to be in
Chinese custody. (Click here to learn more about the Chinese-designated Panchen Lama, and
here
for information on the Dalai Lama's choice.)

            The Karmapa Lama is the leader of the Karmapa sect of Tibetan
Buddhism. The current Karmapa, a 14 year-old, is the 17 th
incarnation and is the only high lama accepted by both China and the Dalai
Lama. Beijing has pointed to its acceptance of the Karmapa Lama as an example
of its religious tolerance. But the Karmapa Lama is said to have fled because
of recent Chinese restrictions on his movement and teachings. India has not yet
decided whether to grant him asylum. (Click here to visit the Karmapa Lama's homepage.)

            
               Explainer thanks Slate reader Keith Gerritsen for suggesting the
topic .

            Next question?

         
      
   
