
   
   
      
         
            Big Is Beautiful

            When AOL and Time Warner announced their merger, the nation's media
reporters autodialed the usual critics of media conglomeration: Richard A.
McChesney, Tom Rosenstiel, Ben Bagdikian, and Mark Crispin Miller. Their
collective complaint, known to every reader of The Nation , was duly recorded:
Media conglomeration is bad for journalism and society.

            "It's a business thing," McChesney said in the New York Times . "Good
journalism is bad business and bad journalism is, regrettably, at times good
business." In the Miami Herald , Bagdikian fretted that AOL Time Warner's
devotion to the bottom line would injure democracy. Rosenstiel warned the
Washington Post of the conflicts of interest posed by the purchase.
Miller told NPR that the new conglomerate would stuff Warner Bros. movies down
our throats via AOL.

            The McChesneyite critique of big media misses the long-term trend that
started with Gutenberg and is accelerating with the Internet: As information
processing becomes cheaper, so does pluralism and decentralization, which comes
at the expense of entrenched powers--government, the church, the guild,
nobility, and the magazines and TV stations that Big Media God Henry Luce
founded. Do McChesney and company think we were better off in 1970, when there
were three TV news networks, than we are today, when there are six or eight?
Better off before the New York Times and Wall Street Journal
become national newspapers? Before FM radio and cable? Evidentially so.
McChesney obsesses about the nine global media companies, but as this Columbia Journalism Review page shows, there are
three dozen big media companies in the United States alone.

            Critics of big media suffer from the Fallacy of the Golden Era. They think
things were better in the past, but they never specify the status quo to which
they want us to ante. Was small really small enough to be beautiful in 1898,
when William Randolph Hearst ran the headline "How Do You Like the
Journal 's War?"? How about 1944, when the White House press corps
ignored the president's infirmities and poor health? Or the 1950s, when Scotty
Reston carried official Washington's water?

            From my vantage point, this is journalism's golden age--we just have a hard
time detecting its luster because golden ages always shine more brightly from a
distance. Another thing that tarnishes modern journalism is the recent
proliferation of media critics, who bring brisk scrutiny to every ethical
lapse. Editors and reporters of 20 years ago got a free ride compared with
today's journalists.

            As for McChesney's "good journalism is bad business" formula, I can only
offer a horse laugh. Only a fool would say that the New York Times , the
Wall Street Journal , the Los Angeles Times , and the Washington
Post haven't paired editorial quality with financial success. Nor does
McChesney acknowledge that as USA Today has become a better paper, it
has become more viable as a business. Truth be told, the anti-conglomerate
conglomerate seems less vexed by conglomerate meddling in journalism--the
Los Angeles Times ' Staples Center scandal, Time 's decision to put
Pokémon (a Warner Bros. release) on its cover, and Rupert Murdoch's
capitulation to the Chinese, who wanted the BBC off his satellite--than by the
ultra-evil the media conglomerates might do in the future.

            Essentially, the McChesneyites have four beefs: 1) Consolidation reduces the
number of voices. That's true only if you rig the tally, as McChesney
does. 2) Global consolidation promotes cultural imperialism. Cultural
imperialism isn't always bad, and new technology makes it easier for small
cultures to export their voices. 3) The more the press acts like a
business, the less attention it pays to its civic functions. See the
previous note on golden ages . 4) Big media treats its audience like
consumers, not citizens. Like WTO critics, the McChesneyites hate anything
that doesn't conform to their idea of democracy.
            

            The critique of big media invariably romanticizes small, independent
newspapers. But for every Emporia Gazette edited by a William Allen
White, there's a Manchester Union Leader piloted by a William Loeb. As a
reader, I care more about the newspaper I read than who owns it. Most of
today's independents are family-operated companies blighted by the biological
law of "regression to the mean," which dictates that heirs are rarely as bright
or motivated as founders (look at the San Francisco Chronicle ). So let's
not reflexively mourn the gobbling of small media by big media.

            Small, independently owned papers routinely pull punches when covering local
car dealers, real estate, and industry, to whom they are in deep hock. The
chains that buy up the Podunk Banner s don't necessarily do a better
journalistic job (look at Gannett), but they're not as beholden to the local
powers that be as the "independents" are. What's more, if the owners
(independent or corporate) of the Podunk Banner flinch from a story
about contaminated groundwater or police brutality, the big media New York
Times or 60 Minutes can parachute in and do the story without fear
or favor. Hurrah for big media!

            Whatever its shortcomings--and they are many--only big media possesses the
means to consistently hold big business and big government accountable. In the
'80s, Exxon's brass visited the Wall Street Journal 's top editors to
complain about the paper's coverage. According to a reporter who was present,
Exxon suggested that it might have to pull the company's advertising from the
Journal in protest. At that point, Executive Editor Fred Taylor
responded, "I didn't know advertising was one of Exxon's philanthropic
activities." The Exxon threat proved hollow. As big as it was, it couldn't hurt
the Journal . How would the Podunk Banner have fared against a
similar threat from the area Chevrolet dealer?

            If you don't believe big media has a leg up in making government behave, try
this. Call Attorney General Janet Reno's office. Say that you're from the
Podunk Banner and that you want to talk to her about some new policy.
Then make a similar call posing as a reporter from the Washington Post .
I needn't ask which call would get returned.

            Fundamentally, the McChesney brigade worries more about AOL Time Warner's
pulling journalistic punches than about any lost "independence." (Remember,
they weren't Time Warner fans prior to the AOL deal.) But they
exaggerate the propaganda power of Time Warner media. Not even a cover rave in
Time for Eyes Wide Shut --a Warner Bros. release--could turn that
plodding movie into a hit. (By the way, I believe the rave was genuine, and not
ginned up to sell tickets.) Any sustained effort--conscious or unconscious--by
a media conglomerate to slant the news in favor of its holdings will only
damage the long-term value of its journalistic properties. Bad press is bad for
anybody, but bad press is worse when it's directed at the press, as Disney
learned when it killed a story by its ABC News subsidiary that criticized
safety at Disney theme parks. Disney would have been better off letting the
negative story run.

            Some would have big media erect Fifth Columns within their walls, but
navel-gazing doesn't automatically impress, as the Times-Mirror flagship Los
Angeles Times learned after publishing a 30,000-word self-examination on
the Staples Center scandal. One prominent critic called the story a
"whitewash." What damaged the Los Angeles Times most after the initial
revelations seeped out (from an alternative weekly that didn't exist 20 years
ago, it's worth noting) was the beating it took from other big media. Big media
strives to be ethical for the same reason big government and big business do:
New technology prevents it from controlling information the way it used to, and
being exposed by others hurts too much.

            Media conglomeration runs in cycles, so the fish currently progressing
through the bellies of the media kings may not stay there for long. In 1980,
the media hysterics prophesied the end of literature when conglomerates bought
the family-owned book publishers for their "synergy." RCA snared Random House.
ITT took Bobbs-Merrill. CBS bought Holt, Rinehart, Winston, and other houses. A
few years later, RCA, ITT, and CBS abandoned their "synergy" plans and sold
their book divisions. Good publishing survived RCA. Good journalism will
survive AOL.

            
               [Full disclosure: I draw my paycheck from Microsoft, which co-owns MSNBC
with General Electric.]
            

         
      
   
