
   
   
      
         
            Vehicles of Blame
            

            Tim--

            Here it is Monday morning and already I feel like
there's too little space to give many weighty subjects the careful analysis
they deserve. There's the Chilean elections and the re-establishment of a
Socialist president there. There's the report by the CIA of the very real
possibility that Iran may now have nuclear capabilities. And let's not forget
the Tennessee Titans' improbable journey to the AFC finals.

            But my favorite story of the week is from yesterday's
New York Times . A group of researchers in Texas
tried to determine whether sports utility vehicles (which I like to call
"SUVs") clog intersections and slow down traffic. Professor Kara M. Kockelman
and her trusty graduate student sidekick, Raheel A. Shabih, authored a study in
which they videotaped thousands of vehicles as they stopped and started at a
busy intersection. (And you can be sure that like all grad-student/professor
relationships, the labor on this one was divided equally--"You know, Raheel,
normally I would be happy to stand out in the rain
and suck in all those exhaust fumes, but you know, my asthma and all. Besides,
you're so much better with the camera and I really need to finish working on
your recommendation ...")

            They determined that, compared with normal car drivers,
drivers of SUVs, light pickup trucks, and minivans put more distance between
themselves when they stop and accelerate more slowly at green lights, and when
you combine these factors with the increased length of the aforementioned large
vehicles, you get slower traffic and more traffic jams.

            Well, as far as I'm concerned, any story that knocks
SUVs is a good story. I've always hated SUVs. They guzzle gas, they pollute the
air, and as far as I'm concerned, they're rolling death machines--just ask my
cousin Marshall who was nearly crushed to death by one back in '97. (OK, not
really. I don't even have a cousin Marshall. But I needed something to justify
my unreasonable anger.) Anyway, nothing drives me crazier than to watch one of
these monstrosities lumber through Manhattan traffic when I
know-- know --that the toughest terrain that thing is
going to see is the gravel-covered driveway of the owner's summer home in
Westport. So now that Professor Kockelman and her trusty sidekick have proved
definitively that SUVs ruin not just the environment but our very quality of
life, maybe our elected representatives will stop worrying so much about
ethanol subsidies and do something to get these four-wheeled menaces off our
roads.

            (And yes, I noticed that Professor Kockelman and Raheel
also included minivans in the study, but I don't have a problem with minivans
'cause soccer moms drive them and there's no way you're going to trick me into
going after soccer moms on the record.)

            By the way, what kind of car do you drive?

         
      
   
