
   
   
      
         
            Like Father, Like Son?
            

            Dear Judith,

            Nice e-mail. I'm glad to see you're ending this exchange without busting a
cap in my ass.

            OK--Carmela Soprano is Hillary Clinton? I want to run this one by
Chatterbox.

            You've got it exactly right--it's evident from the first episodes of the new
season that the writers have lost interest in Carmela, which is a tragedy,
because, as you put it so well (have you ever thought of taking up a career in
writing?), Tony's sister Havarti, or whatever she's called, is an "epic
drag."

            Your observations about Carmela, and your questions about Meadow and Anthony
junior, her two children, bring us to one of the more interesting subtopics in
mobology: What do the families know, and how do they live with what they
know?

            The answer, especially to the second question, is mostly unknowable to
outsiders. I have never spoken to a child of a mobster who said, straight-out,
yeah, my father's a made man, and I'm not going to cover-up for him anymore.
Even when the father's are dead, the children still lie. One of Paul
Castellano's sons (a completely legitimate guy, as far as I could tell), told
me that there is no such thing as organized crime, and that his father was set
up by the government the same way Clinton was set up. Mob families (not
Families, but actual nuclear families) are among the most dysfunctional on the
planet--they lie, they wear masks on top of masks, and they live off dirty
money. I remember sitting with Vicky Gotti one day last year, asking her what
she thought her father really did for a living. Remember--this is years after
her father was convicted of being the boss of the Gambino family. No one in
America today believes that John Gotti was a simple plumbing-supply salesman.
But all she could come up with was this: "There's more to my father than people
know." I asked her what she meant. She said, "There's two sides to this story."
I asked her to explain further: "It's just more complicated than what you
think." She will never be able to say what she knows: that her father was boss.
And yet, here's the irony: I don't think she's embarrassed by her father's
career choice. In fact, after spending some time with her, I came to believe
that she sincerely loves him, even worships him.

            By the way, I don't think Meadow Soprano bought her father's cover story at
all. She's the one who explained to Anthony junior what their father really did
for a living. I think you're right, though: If Meadow heard the unadorned
truth, she would be miserable. You may also be right that Meadow is on the
verge of becoming the next great female character. But I'm waiting for Anthony
junior (there I go again, dissing the female characters) to ask his father when
he's going to be a made guy.

            This is the acid test of mob character, as I said before: He who makes his
own son--instead of keeping him far away from the gangster life--is considered
the ultimate scumbag. Carlo Gambino, one of the greats, would never induct his
own sons. Only after Carlo died did his sons get made. Sammy the Bull tells a
great story: When John Gotti, bursting with pride, told Vincent "Chin" Gigante
that he had just made John junior, Gigante said that he was sorry to hear
it.

            Talk about a great story line for The Sopranos : I'd love to see how
Tony Soprano reacts if and when his son asks to join the business. Tony Soprano
is an upwardly mobile gangster, so one assumes he'd recoil in horror, but I'm
sure the writers of The Sopranos could do something interesting with
this. (Despite my disappointment with the new season so far, I have a great
deal of faith.)

            Judith, it's been great doing this piece of work (as the button men would
say) with you. I find you to be quite lovable, for an intellectual herring.

            Jeff

         
      
   
