
   
   
      
         
            Libertarianism Is Not Anarchism
            

            I have been asked to kick off this
discussion with Larry about what may be termed the rapid colonization of the
Internet. As with all new spaces, someone has to figure out the rights and
duties of all the participants to that new world. And to do that it becomes
important to use, but not abuse, the analogies that are available to us from
existing spaces. In doing this inquiry, we can work the issue descriptively,
and ask how things have gone. But the focus, I think, of Larry's book, is to
ask the normative question, given who we are as people, what ought to be the
way in which this new space is occupied by its new tenants?

            In answering that question, I'll take my cue from Larry's favorite foil, the
libertarian, to see how he or she would inhabit that space. I might also state
from the outset that I take this tack with a certain rooting interest, since my
affection for libertarian thought (at least of the limited-government variety)
long antedates my concern with cyberspace. In so doing, I shall break ranks,
however, from those cyberspace devotees who think, on Larry's account, that
cyberspace is unique because its basic structure, or its "nature," rules out of
bound any form of effective state regulation.

            I confess that this is not my understanding of the problem at all. The use
of "nature" as a trope for libertarian thought goes back a long way before
cyberspace. There were lots of libertarians who thought that human beings were
by nature free, or that individuals could acquire property by first possession
(that is, for non-lawyers, the capture of animals or movables, or the
occupation of land): Indeed, occupation was called the "natural mode" of
occupation. But these efforts to win the libertarian battle by appealing to
some sort of natural law, natural right, or natural necessity, always turned
out to be losers. Someone could come along and argue that the brute fact of
possession did not translate itself into a right. But, of course, skepticism
could run in every conceivable direction at once, so that once the challenge
was made, at least one riposte was possible: Animals, lands, and chattels are
not communal by nature, either. Someone has to come up with an argument that
shows why their preferred form of social organization should induce the rest of
us as rational agents to sign on to their program. Stated in that way, the case
for private property rests on the incentives that it creates for the
preservation and spread of wealth, while the case against it rests on similar
utilitarian commitments: giving private ownership to a river blocks
transportation, recreation, and aesthetic values. And then one has to pair up
different regimes of ownership with different kinds of assets.

            So it is with cyberspace. It is quite possible to think that it is best for
government to have a copy of each and every communication that takes place
across the net; and someone armed with that conviction could think it proper to
stage nighttime raids in private homes to shut down nonconforming machines. Or
we could simply refuse to allow people to communicate over the net, much the
way in which the old Soviet system refused to allow private individuals to
communicate with each other by telephone. So I quite agree that the legal
structure, sensible or Draconian as it might be, can shape the nature of
interactions on the net, just as it has shaped interaction first on land and
sea, and then on the spectrum. If Larry wants to call the sum of regulation,
public and private, code, so be it. But I don't see what the use of that
terminology, which cuts at variance with ordinary English, adds to the
discussion of the matter.

            That said, I think that it is important to answer the question of why so
many people who are attracted to the Net call themselves or think of themselves
as libertarian. Here on earth, the libertarian is not an anarchist who
thinks that all government conduct is bad and all private conduct good. He does
not believe, as Larry would have him say, that "government, in the modern
libertarian's view, is the threat to liberty, private action is not" (Page 85).
Nor would a libertarian accept that his goal "is focused on reducing
government's power." That is surely the current objective, given the bloated
government that we have. But it is not the way in which a
libertarian--traditional or modern--thinks about government if we start, as
political theory often starts, in the state of nature. Rather, the libertarian
is someone whose objective function starts with the goal of minimizing the use
of force and fraud in human interactions. The hard part of the system is to
figure out a way in which that minimization takes place over both public and
private actors: Aggression by private persons produces small gains and very
large losses; which is why we allow force in self-defense. But aggression--that
is, the use of force by government--is subject to the same peril, and becomes
even more dangerous if the state falls into the wrong hands when it has a
monopoly of force against all persons. Unfortunately, the world is such that we
will not minimize the total amount of aggression by reducing the amount of
government aggression to zero: That is why the libertarian is not an anarchist.
But we would like, with some sense of rough justice, to create a system in
which each increment of government force results in a greater decrement of
private force, so that at the margin the sum of both is minimized. But even
that program is called into question at least in part because some government
coercion is justified, such as taxes to secure the creation of infrastructure
and the police force to prevent private aggression (while curbing the excesses
of rogue officers).

            One real dispute is just how much force results in the social optimum. If
one looks to the Internet it is clear that we can get along with a lot less
government force than in other places. Physical aggression against neighbors is
ruled out in part by the anonymous participation that is possible online. And
there is a widespread recognition of the inability to form a complex
infrastructure by largely private means. Someone, perhaps the state, has to organize some
infrastructure over which all communications must travel. But then it is
possible (as in physical space) to add on to that collective spine all sorts of
"gated" communities in cyberspace, which can be subject to their own internal
organization and rules. Larry is right to point out that the architecture of
the Harvard system is more centralized (to its detriment) than the Chicago
system. But to a libertarian, that is just fine, since each of these
organizations is internally organized under a principle of unanimous consent.
But it is the want of force and the successful nature of voluntary interactions
that allow people to see how much can be done without government.

            But still the idea that liberty converges onto anarchy seems to me to be
misguided. It is still possible to steal confidential information that is
transferred on the net, and so we need at a minimum some law of privacy and
trade secrets. It is possible to defame people over the net, and to do so far
and wide: The problem of multi-jurisdiction squabbles over libel and slander
does not disappear It is possible to blackmail people over the net, as well.
And so it goes. As a libertarian, I don't see the net as a safe harbor from
government regulation. But I do see it as a place in which the social successes
from following libertarian norms of force, fraud, and taxation, for example,
yield pretty positive results. And if those principles work so well in
cyberspace, then maybe we should have a greater attraction to them in our more
earthbound behaviors as well. That said, it's over to Larry to explain why the
same version of sensible libertarianism (private property, freedom of contract,
some state supplied infrastructure, and easy taxation) should not guide our
activities in cyberspace as it does on earth.

         
      
   
