
   
   
      
         
            Andrew Sullivan Flat Wrong on Flat Tax
            

            In his New York Times Magazine piece last Sunday arguing
for the virtues of a flat tax, Andrew Sullivan suggested that the flat tax
would be "the central political reform of the next decade," in part because it
fit so well with America's supposed newfound love of "simplicity." As the
Times' subhead put it, "[t]he flat tax is the perfect
artifact of our one-click era." For Sullivan, the "byzantine" nature of the
current tax system benefits the wealthy, who can afford to pay people to
decipher it. And all the loopholes make a "nominally progressive" system much
less fair than it appears, and much less fair than a one-size-fits-all system.
In fact, Sullivan suggests, a one-rate system is an answer to liberalism's
woes, because "by treating every taxpayer alike," it would eliminate so much of
the complexity and indebtedness to special interests that make people hate
government.

            Actually, though, even if the current system is nominally progressive, it's
much more progressive than any flat tax--no matter what reforms accompany
it--could ever be. Under any flat-tax system, the wealthy will pay much less in
taxes than they now do, and therefore everyone else will account for a much
higher proportion of tax revenue. (Sullivan wants to tax all capital gains at
the same rate as income, and the numbers would be skewed even more by that.)
Sullivan says that the idea that a flat tax is a "giveaway to the rich" is a
knee-jerk response. But it is a giveaway to the rich. As for the idea
that the wealthy benefit from the current system because they can trick it,
there's zero evidence for that. The percentage of revenue paid by those in the
top 10 percent of income-earners has risen steadily throughout the decade, just
as you would expect to happen in an era when the rich have gotten much
richer.

            Sullivan may really believe that rich people should get to keep as much of
their money as possible--actually, he does believe this--but if he does, he
should come out and say it, and not try to disguise the argument as somehow
about correct process or the imaginary salvation of liberalism. Nor should he
paint the flat tax as flowing logically from Americans' embrace of simplicity.
Especially since Sullivan has completely imagined this embrace.

            The irony, in fact, is that the flat tax is the perfect relic of an era when
a lack of computing power and of information made it difficult to make
meaningful distinctions between groups of people, let alone individuals. But
today the trend is in the exact opposite direction from the one Sullivan
conjures up. When it came to pay, we used to live in a world of job
classifications and pay grades, where everyone who did the "same" work got the
same pay. Increasingly, we now live in a world of dramatic differentiation in
pay. The whole idea of a "pay grade," in fact, would seem like complete
nonsense at most Silicon Valley and Internet companies.

            The same is true in marketing and manufacturing. Sullivan argues that
companies today try to "project a simple image, a single product, and a
recognizable, simple brand," and to be sure, there's plenty of nonsense out
there about the centrality of the brand. But what's really going on is the move
toward customization. Dell builds my computer literally to order. Amazon makes
recommendations to me based on other things that I've bought, not based
on what the masses are buying. Toyota is already talking about building custom
cars. Of course there will always be a place for the Gap, with its piles of
khakis and white T-shirts, and for Coke, with its one-taste-for-all soda. But
companies are getting much better, not worse, at treating each consumer
differently, which means, in some sense, becoming a different company for
everyone who buys from them.

            The same sort of fine-graining is going on with prices. Once, when you took
an airline flight, you could be fairly certain that most of the people on the
plane paid the same price for their tickets that you did for yours. Today, you
can be fairly certain most people paid different prices. And that's not because
of Priceline.com. It's because airlines have gotten increasingly adept at using
computers to distinguish between different kinds of fliers, and charging
different kinds of fliers different fares. On the Internet, shopping engines
perform the same function in reverse, while Priceline has taken the idea of
differential pricing to its market-driven extreme. And what is eBay if not the
antithesis of fixed pricing? There are places where one-price-fits-all thinking
rules, like in the current long-distance market. But even there, consumers
happily leap from plan to plan, and bargain with long-distance providers to cut
special deals. The real one-price-fits-all days, in fact, were the days when
only AT&T provided long distance. And I don't hear too many people calling
for the return of Ma Bell anymore.

            If anything, then, a tax system in which everyone paid his or her own
particular tax rate would be more in tune with our world, and the possibilities
created by the computer, than the flat tax. (There are, though, excellent
economic and political reasons not to want that fine-grained a system.) A
culture and economy of simplicity? I don't think things have ever been more
complex.

         
      
   
