
   
   
      
         
            Global Warning

            
               USA
Today leads with the Supreme Court's unanimous decision holding that
Congress can prohibit states from selling data it collects from drivers'
licenses and motor vehicle registrations. This paves the way, says the paper,
for tighter privacy laws governing personal financial, medical, and marketing
information. The Wall Street Journal puts the decision atop its front-page
news box. The New York Times goes
with another court ruling, a 5-4 decision that fleeing from the police in a
high crime area provides the reasonable suspicion that justifies a
stop-and-frisk search. The Washington Post lead, coming in the wake of yesterday's
USAT lead claiming that the government would be asking for Microsoft
to be broken in two, says the government is actually asking for it to be broken
into three. But the story doesn't claim to know along what lines. The
Post notes that Microsoft's chief resource is people, making relevant
the question, "Which company would get Bill Gates?" The Los Angeles
Times leads local but with the sort of California first that often
becomes a bellwether: Because diesel fumes are generally blamed for much of the
cancer risk posed by Los Angeles' air pollution, the Southern California air
quality agency plans to propose requiring all bus, truck, and car fleets
operated by public agencies to eventually be entirely composed of vehicles
running on electricity, natural gas, and other clean-burning fuels. The
LAT reefers, by the way, an independent scientific panel's finding
that global warming is "undoubtedly real" and accelerating.

            The NYT fronts Janet Reno's remarks yesterday that only federal
courts have the authority to decide the disposition of the Elián González case,
and not the Florida judge who ruled that the boy must remain in the U.S. until
an early March hearing.

            The NYT reefers the Food and Drug Administration's warning to the
nation's flu-swamped physicians against relying too heavily on the two newest
anti-flu drugs. The fear is that some patients might die (and that some already
have) because they are being given these drugs instead of antibiotics, and/or
oxygen, intravenous fluids, and hospitalization.

            The WP fronts a sports exclusive: Michael Jordan has been talking to the Washington Wizards
about possibly becoming an executive with the team and perhaps even taking on
an ownership stake.

            
               USAT top-fronts Hillary Clinton's appearance last night on the
Letterman show. The paper calls the interview "fairly benign," and notes that
at one point Clinton credited Rudy Giuliani with having "done a lot of stuff as
mayor." The NYT , in its inside effort, doesn't mention the Giuliani
comment. USAT reports that Clinton aced a New York quiz Letterman
served up, but the Times says that her spokesman suggested that
Clinton had been given "a sneak peek at the questions."

            The NYT fronts Britain's recision of its ban of openly gay men and
women in its armed forces. The paper notes this brings Britain into line with
the policy of almost all other NATO nations, including France, Canada, and
Germany. Pop culture prediction: British military clothing will become hot,
hot, hot on the streets of San Francisco, the Village, and West Hollywood.

            The WP reports inside that the White House yesterday proposed new
tax credits for low-income workers to convince them that even entry-level jobs
are preferable to welfare. The plan would be a further extension of the
earned-income tax credit, which already provides annual payments to some 19
million working families at or near the poverty line. It's hard not to feel
that Bill Clinton doesn't get his due on this one. His expansion of this tax
credit is actually one of the most successful federal anti-poverty programs
ever, yet he hardly ever gets press credit for it. The Post article
runs on Page 4.

            The WP business section observes that due to a provision in the AOL
employee stock plan, employees can be fully vested in their stock options one
year after any change of ownership that leaves AOL shareholders with less than
60 percent of the company. In other words, like the Time Warner deal. Which
means, says the Post , that a year from now, AOL's 12,100 employees
will get to cash in. Upshot: Housing prices in Northern Virginia will go
through the roof, and there will be a lot startups in the area, plus an influx
of bankers, money managers, and ... lawyers.

            The WSJ features an op-ed by Michael Lewis wondering why AOL would
want Time Warner. What AOL has done, he writes, is lower its credit rating,
acquire thousands of journalists and movie executives not particularly gifted
at making money, and transform itself from a sexy, fast-growing company into a
dull, slow-moving one. He concludes that 10 years from now an investment banker
will make a fortune breaking up AOL Time Warner again and selling off the
pieces.

            A NYT business section piece claims that the deal leaves America
with six independent media companies (down from 50 in 1983). Today's Papers
thinks this cries out for a new parlor game: Two random media businesses are
named and contestants vie to connect them corporately in the fewest steps. Call
it "Six Degrees of Gerald Levin."

         
      
   
