
   
   
      
         
            Is Bill Gates Dispensable as CEO?
            

            The last item in this week's "Weekend Cocktail Chatter" is a perhaps cruel joke (or
attempt at a joke) at the expense of the former CEO of barnesandnoble.com, who
announced his unexpected resignation and saw his company's stock price barely
move. The obvious question such an outcome provokes (so obvious that I had to
ask it) is: If the stock market doesn't care that I'm leaving, what good was I
doing in the first place?

            The irony, of course, is that Bulkeley's departure was immediately followed
by the resignations of two much-higher-profile CEOs, David Glass at Wal-Mart
and Bill Gates at Microsoft (which just happens to own 
                  Slate
               ).
And in both those cases, investors reacted pretty much as they had to
Bulkeley's departure. Wal-Mart's shares are down a tiny bit, while Microsoft's
shares are actually up almost three points. Apparently CEOs are not quite as
essential as one might imagine them to be.

            As it happens, that's true, in the sense that the underlying drivers of any
business are more important than the particular individual at the top (although
you do have to have someone at the top who can recognize and take advantage of
those drivers). In the case of Bulkeley, barnesandnoble.com has been struggling
for so long, without any obvious way of improving its business fundamentals,
that his departure wasn't seen as making a fundamental difference one way or
the other. In the cases of Glass and, particularly, of Gates, the economics of
the companies they run are so phenomenal that it's hard to imagine the
companies falling to pieces in their absence.

            But the picture is more complicated than this. Take Gates, for example. In
the first place, whatever the economics of Microsoft are, he played a major
role in creating them (certainly a larger role than any other person, though
probably not a larger role than the advent of personal computing). In his
single-minded focus on software, and his insistence that Microsoft create
programs that could run on multiple platforms, Gates shaped a business that was
almost a textbook example of how to achieve increasing returns on capital.

            At the same time, the biggest reason why the market did not react badly to
the news that Gates was stepping down as CEO is that this was truly a foregone
conclusion. The groundwork had been laid for Steve Ballmer's accession to the
throne, and it's been clear for a while that Wall Street is very comfortable
with Ballmer at the reins. This is, oddly, to Gates' credit. The paradoxical
answer to the question I asked in the first paragraph, in fact, is that one
measure of how well a CEO has done is the indifference with which the market
takes his leaving. As William Holden says at the end of Executive Suite ,
the 1954 film about the succession battle at an old-line manufacturing company,
a company can't depend on just one man and still thrive. Even when that one man
is the company's founder.

            This is not exactly a classic succession, of course, because Gates is not
leaving the company at all and because Wall Street likes the idea that he will
now have more time to think deep thoughts and not have to worry about whether
the latest version of Excel is shipping on time. But when you consider that in
the last month Microsoft has gotten a new CFO and a new CEO without even a hint
of investor discontent, it makes you realize that the strongest management
teams are also the deepest. Even in the age when intellectual capital
supposedly rules all, Wall Street doesn't invest in individuals. It invests in
companies.

         
      
   
