
   
   
      
         
            What's the Difference Between CEOs and Chairmen?
            

            On Thursday, Microsoft founder Bill Gates announced that
he was handing over the job of CEO to the company's president, Steve Ballmer.
Gates said that he would remain Microsoft's chairman. And on Monday, when
America Online announced its merger with Time Warner, AOL's Steve Case was
designated chairman of the new corporation, and Time Warner's Gerald Levin was
given the position of chief executive officer. What's the difference between
these two jobs? And which one is more powerful? 

            The CEO is a company's top decision-maker, and all other executives
answer to him or her. The CEO typically delegates many of the tactical
responsibilities to other managers, focusing instead on strategic issues, such
as which markets to enter, how to take on the competition, and which companies
to form partnerships with. This is in contrast to the chief operating
officer or president , who oversees day-to-day operations and
logistics. The CEO is ultimately accountable to the board of directors for the
company's performance.

            The chairman of a company is the head of its board of directors. The
board is elected by shareholders and is responsible for protecting investors'
interests, such as the company's profitability and stability. It usually meets
several times a year to set long-term goals, review financial results, evaluate
the performance of high-level managers, and vote on important strategic moves
proposed by the CEO. Directors appoint--and can fire--upper-level managers such
as the CEO and president. The chairman typically wields substantial power in
setting the board's agenda and determining the outcome of votes. But he or she
does not necessarily play an active role in everyday management.

            The balance of power between the CEO and the chairman varies widely from
company to company. Because the CEO cannot make major moves without the board's
assent, and his or her job security depends on their satisfaction, the chairman
of the board is technically his or her superior. And an active chairman may use
this power to effectively become the co-head--and ultimate boss--of the
corporation. But most chairmen are not so involved, which leaves the CEO with
considerable flexibility in running the company. The CEO can also affect the
composition of the board of directors through his or her selection of senior
executives, many of whom are guaranteed board seats by company bylaws.
Sometimes--as was the case with Gates until Thursday, and is still the case
with Case and Levin at their current companies--the chairman and CEO are the
same person.

            Case and Levin have not yet outlined how they will divide leadership
responsibilities. However, the press release announcing the AOL-Time Warner
merger says that Case will play "an active role" in leading the company and
that Levin will work "closely with Mr. Case" in setting its strategy. Most
analysts interpret this to mean that Case, as chairman, will use his power to
its fullest, giving him an upper hand over Levin.

            Next question?

         
      
   
