
   
   
      
         
            Strokes of Luck

            The Washington Post and New York Times lead with the British
government's finding, based on an independent medical examination, that Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, under house arrest in England, is too sick to be tried on the
human rights charges awaiting him in Spain. This means, say the papers, that
Pinochet could instead return to Chile soon. The USA Today
final edition leads with a saber-rattling leak from the DOJ/Microsoft wrangle:
that government prosecutors will shortly offer up during negotiations with
Microsoft a proposal for a breakup yielding two companies, one for the Windows
operating system, another for software programs. The story says that it's
unclear where Microsoft Internet activities would go. A Microsoft spokesman is
quoted saying a breakup "would do great harm to the industry." The top
non-local story at the Los Angeles Times (which fronts Pinochet) is the Supreme
Court's ruling Tuesday saying the nation's state workers, including teachers,
do not enjoy the federal government's protection against age discrimination,
yet another example, says the paper, of the court's recent championing of
states' rights. The NYT fronts the decision. The Wall Street Journal runs Pinochet and the court one-two at
the top of its front-page news box.

            The papers say that a decision to allow Pinochet--who was found to have
suffered a series of small strokes--to return to Chile is in the hands of the
home secretary and may come next week. The WP and LAT report that
Pinochet still may face charges back in Chile. The Post adds that
although Pinochet was granted legal immunity in Chile in return for his
step-down from power, it's not clear that the current government is willing to
honor it. On the other hand, the NYT reminds that while he's been in
England, Pinochet has received the support of former Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher, who, it says, was "delighted" with the doctors' report.

            The WP reports that Spain and even many human rights advocates will
accept Pinochet's escape of the Spanish charges because, as all the papers
note, the case has, via the British courts, created a historic precedent: A
former head of state can be brought to trial in another country for crimes
against humanity committed in his home country while in office.

            The WP off-leads yesterday's 11 percent drop-off in AOL's stock
price, significant, notes the paper, because AOL plans to purchase Time Warner
with its stock.

            
               USAT fronts the latest wrinkle in the Elián González saga. It seems
that the Miami family court judge who just delayed the INS plan to return the
boy to his father in Cuba employed--during her 1998 election campaign--the
spokesman for the boy's Miami relatives as well as the spokesman's wife. The
numbers vary a bit from paper to paper, but ballpark, the two received a total
of $60,000. The stories say the Miami court does not require judges in this
sort of situation to recuse themselves.

            The NYT fronts an Alex Kuczynski effort reporting a surprising image manipulation at CBS News. It seems that the
network's evening news broadcast for Dec. 30 and Dec. 31 included images of
Times Square with a billboard advertising CBS News. But the billboard and the
CBS ad are not actually in Times Square. They were digitally inserted by CBS
into the shot. The story says the anchor on the show, Dan Rather, learned about
the practice during the broadcast but did not protest. Rather did not return a
phone call from the Times . By the way, journalists who don't return
phone calls from the press are precisely the sorts who don't hesitate to
manipulate content--it's all part of the belief that the rules they constantly
apply to others don't apply to themselves.

            The WP 's "Reliable Source" says Hillary Clinton will appear on
Letterman tonight. Maybe the network can digitally give her a prayer in New
York.

            On the WP op-ed page, Cindy Williams, an MIT researcher, does a good
nuts-and-boltsy job of bringing some reality to the topic of military pay raises. The author notes that the alleged gap
of 13 percent between civilian and military pay fails to take into account
allowances for food and housing. Also, she notes that some of the allowances
are not taxed. Such details help to explain why soldiers typically earn more
money than 75 percent of civilians with similar backgrounds. And there are some
concrete earnings examples: a Marine master sergeant with 20 years in makes
more than $50,000, better than a senior firefighter or police officer, and both
of those civilian jobs are as dangerous or more so than the typical military
job. And a colonel with 26 years' service makes more than $108,000. And none of
this includes, the op-ed notes, re-enlistment and other special bonuses. The
one point the author leaves out that would make her argument even stronger: the
very young retirement ages available to military personnel. That colonel, for
instance, can retire on a nice pension at age 47.

            In a letter to the NYT , a working mother explains how her household
handles her child's homework: "First ask the babysitter for help; if that
fails, try Mom's fax if she's not traveling to close a deal; if that fails, try
Dad's fax if he's not in court, and if all of the above fail, call Grandma Ro.
(No fax available.)"

         
      
   
