
   
   
      
         
            The Mark of McCain

            
               USA
Today leads with President Clinton's expected proposal today of a $280
million increase in federal funds targeting the enforcement of current gun
control laws, a move the paper says is explicitly calculated to meet a
recurring NRA criticism: that federal firearms prosecutions have steeply
declined under Clinton. The New York Times carries the gun
enforcement money inside, but joins the Los Angeles
Times in leading with the abrupt postponement of the Israel-Syria talks
that had been scheduled to resume in West Virginia this week. Both papers
report that one factor was the publication in the Israeli press last week of
the working paper for the talks, which displeased Syria by revealing some of
its heretofore unpublicized concessions, such as allowing some sort of Israeli
intelligence ground station to remain in the Golan Heights and endorsing the
exchange of ambassadors and the opening of borders. The story also sits atop
the Wall Street Journal 's front-page news index box and
is fronted below the fold by the Washington Post , whose top non-local story is the paper's
new polling on the New Hampshire primaries showing that both the Democratic and
Republican races are "up for grabs." Meanwhile, the LAT 's front-page
poll detects strong leads for Bush and Gore in the Iowa caucuses.

            The NYT take on the Israel-Syria talks mentions a prosaic angle behind the sudden turn
of events: Yasser Arafat is scheduled to see President Clinton at the White
House on Thursday and the Syrians didn't much relish "languishing" down in West
Virginia during those festivities.

            The NYT top-fronts Kofi Annan's choice of former U.N. arms monitor
Rolf Ekeus to lead a new U.N. commission that will attempt to complete the task
of assessing the chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons capabilities of
Saddam Hussein. The NYT goes on to note that last night Russia
registered its objection to the appointment, throwing it into doubt and
inducing tension between Washington and Moscow, but the paper should have, like
the LAT does over its inside story on the matter, mentioned the Russian
balk in the headline.

            The NYT reefers last night's Gore-Bradley debate centering on racial
issues, while the others stuff it. The coverage notes that the only real harsh
disagreement between the two came on the question of police racial profiling.
Bradley challenged Gore to get President Clinton to sign an executive order
banning the practice immediately and Gore replied that he didn't think his boss
"needs a lecture from Bill Bradley." Both the NYT and LAT
top-front pictures of some 46,000 marchers in Columbia, S.C., protesting the
state's practice of flying the Confederate battle flag on the state Capitol.
The NYT says the protest was perhaps the greatest civil rights rally
since the 1960s and that it drew a surprisingly high number of white
marchers--about 5 percent to 10 percent of the crowd. Today's Papers doesn't
know what's more depressing--that the white turnout was so small or that it's
seen as so large. USAT sees only a "smattering" of whites in
attendance.

            The WSJ reports that a study to be released today finds that while
the income gap between rich and poor widened in the U.S. overall during the
'90s, the size of the gap depended on the state in question. The average income
of the top 20 percent of families was $137,500, or more than 10 times that of
the poorest 20 percent, which was $13,300, but in nine states--New York,
Arizona, New Mexico, Louisiana, California, Rhode Island, Texas, Oregon, and
Kentucky--the top figure was more than 11 times the bottom.

            A gap of another sort is detailed on the USAT front: The death rate
for liposuction is 20 times to 60 times higher than the death rate for all
operations performed in hospitals, according to a new study. The main reason
given by the paper is that liposuction is mostly performed in doctors' offices,
where the procedures aren't required to be so strict. But the reader can't tell
if this is enough of an explanation, because the story doesn't say what the
overall mortality rate is for all in-office procedures.

            Look for John McCain to take a bit of a beating over a remark reported inside the WP . In New Hampshire,
McCain said he'd served in the Navy with many gays. When asked how he knew that
given that they hadn't come out to him, he responded, "Well, I think we know by
behavior and by attitudes." He went on to say that he wouldn't "pursue" such
sailors, meaning apparently that he wouldn't try to get them expelled from the
service. The Post reports that an official of the Human Rights Campaign,
a major gay rights group, said McCain's remark was "a form of prejudice." The
paper doesn't say it, but it's worth noting that if McCain is right that gaydar
is pretty much universal, and suppressing awareness of gays in a unit so as to
maintain cohesion is the point of "Don't Ask Don't Tell,"--a doctrine McCain
supports--then well, the doctrine has no point, since everybody already knows
and hence unit cohesion is already threatened.

         
      
   
