
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movie
            

            

               
                  Trial and Error
                (New Line Cinema). While noting the film's cheap
gags and formulaic plot, critics end up smiling at this slapstick courtroom
comedy, which stars Michael Richards, Seinfeld 's Kramer. "[M]uch fresher
and sunnier than it has any real right to be," says the New York Times '
Janet Maslin. Richards' character is an out-of-work actor who fakes being an
attorney. But his performance is pure Kramer, "a hipster doofus just the same"
(Rita Kempley, the Washington Post ). Even British director Jonathan Lynn
is forgiven for indulging in the same lawyer jokes and romantic-comedy subplots
he used in My Cousin Vinny . (Click here for the Trial and
Error site.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Blood on the Dance Floor--HIStory in the Mix
               , Michael Jackson
(Epic). The megastar of '80s pop has hit bottom, critics say. Sales of his new
album are dismal, and reviewers complain that the music--five new songs and
eight remixes of old ones--is pathetically recycled material. Jackson, says
Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair, has "gone the way of the Jheri Curl
..., as removed from mainstream pop as Rosemary Clooney." Critics bash his
lyrics for their clichés and their misogyny, and Jackson for indulging in
self-pity that bleeds into self-parody. "Mr. Jackson seems like the elephant
man, screaming that he is a human being," says the New York Times ' Neil
Strauss. (The album is trumpeted on Jackson's own elaborate site.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Bill Clinton: Rock & Roll President
                (VH1; June 3; 8 and 10
p.m. EDT/PDT). This hourlong bull session with the president, in which he flips
through his album collection and reminisces about the Beatles, is called sappy
and boring. (The producer is the daughter of Carolyn Staley, a lifelong Friend
of Bill's.) "[T]he program has the puffy, adoring style of an image-building
campaign documentary," says the New York Times ' Caryn James. Despite the
show's folksy pretensions, Clinton is said to still come across as a political
beast, promoting funding for the arts and physical education. "There he goes
again, rambling around, unable to stay on message, unrestrainably throwing in
the kitchen sink" (Diane Werts, Newsday ). (VH1 offers clips.)

            

               
                  Port Charles
                (ABC; weekdays; 12:30 p.m. EDT/PDT). Top daytime
soap General Hospital spins off, to general approval. The new show is
set in the same hospital, but with younger, hipper characters, "as if the cast
of Beverly Hills 90210 had all graduated and become doctors" (Sharon
Bernstein, the Los Angeles Times ). Despite its unsoap-operatic
pace--prime-time quick, with rap music to boot--it basically sticks to the soap
formula of good and evil characters, love affairs, and tear-jerking scenes. It
"should have no trouble creating a solid place for itself among the young and
restless" (Marilyn Moss, the Hollywood Reporter ). Others predict
failure, since the soap genre has rarely attracted anyone under 30. (Click
here for
the Port Charles site.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Race, Crime, and the Law
               , by Randall Kennedy (Pantheon Books).
The Harvard Law professor's book on race gets plaudits for its
equal-opportunity attacks on both the left (for tendentiously seeing racism
everywhere) and the right (for willfully seeing racism nowhere). "An admirable,
courageous and meticulously fair and honest book," says Roger Parloff in the
New York Times Book Review . Kennedy's endorsement of extreme
race-neutrality--race shouldn't be a factor in stopping criminal-suspect
searches or in assembling juries, he says--does strike a few as naive.
Newsweek 's Ellis Cose says Kennedy never resolves "the battle between
the ethical ideal he cherishes and the moral muddle of the actual world."

            

               
                  Virginia Woolf
               , by Hermione Lee (Knopf). After umpteen
biographies celebrating "Bloomsbury's mad feminist," Lee's is saluted for
rediscovering the "real Woolf." A British academic, Lee contends Woolf wasn't
nearly as mad as previous biographers have alleged. Praise goes to Lee's
argument, her sensitivity, and her writing. "[W]e have a book worthy of its
subject--graceful, astonishingly well researched, yet imbued with a sense of
flow that is rarely achieved at this level of scholarship," says Daphne Merkin
in the New York Times Book Review . (See Sarah Kerr's
review in Slate.)

            

               
                  Kowloon Tong
               , by Paul Theroux (Houghton Mifflin Co.). What
critics like most about novelist and travel writer Paul Theroux's new work of
fiction--about a British family in Hong Kong as the Chinese government takes
back control--comes less from the novelist than the travel writer. His
evocation of Hong Kong is "full of sharp observations--on subjects ranging from
politics to food to sex to servitude" (Dwight Garner, Newsday ). But his
protagonist, a misanthropic businessman named Neville "Bunt" Mullard, is deemed
poorly drawn. Glimpses into his character "do not add up to a full motivation
for Bunt's aimlessness" (Thomas Keneally, the New York Times Book
Review ).

            

               Event
            

            
               The
Tony Awards (June 1, Radio City Music Hall, New York City). Broadway's
version of the Academy Awards, threatened with cancellation by CBS after years
of abysmal ratings, rebounds with viewers--drawing record Nielsens--but not
with critics. Hostess Rosie O'Donnell and a parade of non-theater celebrity
presenters get the credit for the big audience, but critics pan O'Donnell's
transparent rip-off of Billy Crystal's Oscars shtick. It was, says the
Washington Post 's Lloyd Rose, the same old "people wearing dresses of
varying embarrassment and crying and hugging and saying they loved each other."
(See "The Week/The
Spin" for more on the results.)

            

               Art
            

            

               "Objects of Desire: The Modern Still Life" (Museum of Modern Art). This
survey of 20 th century still-life art is derided as predictable.
"The exhibition almost never deviates from the Modern's pantheon of anointed
artists," says the New York Times ' Roberta Smith. Critics decry the show
for showcasing the old boys (Cézanne, Picasso, Jasper Johns) to the exclusion
of women, minorities, and newer artists. The New Yorker 's Calvin
Tomkins, however, gives it a hearty endorsement. "Exhibitions that purport to
sum up ... the hundred-plus-year life span of modern art are on every museum's
agenda these days ... but it will be hard to find one whose focus is as clear
as this one, or whose premise holds up as well." (Click here for the MoMA site.)

            

               Updates
            

            Robert
Hughes' much-touted PBS series on American art finally airs, generating a
conservative backlash. Hughes-hater Hilton Kramer, writing in the New York
Observer , snipes that "American Visions simply--and very simply at
times--ratifies the establishment vision of what counts in recent American
art," and the Wall Street Journal 's Ann Berman and the Weekly
Standard 's David Gelernter also get in their digs. ... The
Actual, Saul Bellow's novella, receives more compliments. The New
Republic 's James Wood admires its "own nervous perfection," and Alfred
Kazin, writing in the New York Review of Books , rates it a notch below
Bellow's great works. ... In the New York Times Book Review , Miss
Manners, Judith Martin, is peeved by Sylvia Jukes Morris' discourteous
treatment of Claire Boothe Luce. Reading the book, she says, "is like
being on confidential terms with someone who hates her boss. ... [Morris] will
hardly allow her new subject the smallest uncontaminated virtue."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            May
28:

            
               Movie -- The Lost
World ;

            
               Movie -- Addicted to
Love ;

            
               Movie -- Brassed
Off ;

            
               Television -- Murder
One (ABC);

            
               Theater -- King
David ;

            
               Music -- Flaming
Pie , by Paul McCartney;

            
               Book -- Che Guevara:
A Revolutionary Life , by Jon Lee Anderson;

            
               Book -- Rage for
Fame: The Ascent of Clare Boothe Luce , by Sylvia Jukes Morris;

            

               Art --New Chinese Galleries (Metropolitan Museum of Art).

            May
21:

            
               Book -- Underboss:
Sammy the Bull Gravano's Story of Life in the Mafia , by Peter Maas;

            
               Book -- The Actual: A
Novella , by Saul Bellow;

            

               Television -- Roseanne (ABC);

            
               Television -- David
Blaine: Street Magic (ABC);

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Night Falls
on Manhattan ;

            
               Movie -- Love!
Valour! Compassion! ;

            

               Theater -- The Wizard of Oz .

            May
14:

            
               Architecture --New
Amsterdam Theater;

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Father's
Day ;

            
               Movie -- The Fifth
Element ;

            
               Movie -- The
Designated Mourner ;

            
               Television -- The
Odyssey (NBC);

            
               Book -- The Courage
to Stand Alone: Letters From Prison and Other Writings , by Wei Jingsheng,
translated and edited by Kristina M. Torgeson;

            
               Book -- Time Bind:
When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work , by Arlie Russell
Hochschild;

            

               Theater -- Candide ;

            

               Museum --Newseum.

            May
7:

            
               Book -- Mason &
Dixon , by Thomas Pynchon;

            

               Book/Television -- American Visions: The Epic History of Art in
America , by Robert Hughes, and American Visions (PBS);

            
               Book -- Echo
House , by Ward Just;

            
               Book -- Reading in
the Dark , by Seamus Deane;

            
               Architecture --Franklin
Delano Roosevelt Memorial;

            
               Television -- The
Last Don (CBS);

            
               Movie -- Children of
the Revolution ;

            

               Movie -- Breakdown .

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
