
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Personal History
               , by Katharine Graham (Knopf). Nobody has
anything negative to say about the Washington Post owner's
autobiography. The reviews differ only in emphasis. Some argue that the "iron
lady" spins an inspirational feminist tale--"the story of a pioneer," says the
New York Times ' Christopher Lehmann-Haupt. In the Washington
Post , Jill Ker Conway says the book throws more light on the "psychology of
women, and the profound changes brought by the women's movement, than a dozen
tomes filled with psychological jargon." Others are drawn to the gossipy
details (did Graham really sleep with Adlai Stevenson the night before he
died?) and her candor (on such subjects as her husband's suicide). Time's Richard Zoglin says Graham chronicles her life with
"more honest self-analysis than probably any other media mogul ever." (Random House touts the book at its site.)

            

               
                  What It Means to Be a Libertarian: A Personal Interpretation
               , by
Charles Murray (Broadway Books). Has Charles Murray persuasively reconciled the
two conflicting traditions in American conservatism--faith in the free market
and faith in tradition? In the Washington Post , Charles Krauthammer says
"yes." Subsequent reviewers disagree. "[N]o editor has asked Murray to address
the tricky questions that are customarily lobbed at the high school junior who
reads his first Ayn Rand novel," says James Ledbetter in the Village
Voice . "Libertarianism of Murray's variety is a philosophy for winners, for
the same reason that 'Born Free' is a song about lions, not the animals they
prey on," says Louis Menand in the New York Review of 
               Books , also
savaging Murray's facts and his logic. Even the conservative Weekly
Standard is skeptical: "The sheer magnitude of the problems that government
now fumbles with may militate against" Murray's vision of private efforts
filling the void. (Slate was unimpressed as well. See Jacob
Weisberg's review. Read excerpts of Murray's book at his publisher's site.)

            
               
                  Do
the Windows Open?
               , by Julie Hecht (Random House). Yet another
self-obsessed, neurotic narrator ("Diane Keaton playing a health-food fiend
addicted to Xanax"--Michiko Kakutani, the New York Times ) makes her
debut in a collection of short stories. But the paranoid rantings of an East
Hampton photographer are said to transcend shtick. "She's like a naturalist at
a tide pool, but instead of examining shrimp and sand crabs, she tracks loss,
entropy and the ravages of aging," says Laurie Stone in the Village
Voice . In the New York Times Book Review , Elizabeth Frank says that
Hecht writes some of the "freshest and loveliest colloquial speech to grace
American fiction in a long time."

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Gridlock'd
                (Polygram Filmed Entertainment/Gramercy Pictures). The
last movie starring slain rapper Tupac Shakur ( Juice , Poetic
Justice ) is deemed an authentic portrayal of junkie life. The twist: The
villain is the welfare system. (Addicts Shakur and Tim Roth want to kick their
habit but are stymied by unhelpful social-service workers.) Reviewers also
seize the opportunity to imbue Shakur's meager oeuvre with an aura of
James Dean-ish tragedy. Gridlock'd , in particular, bespeaks unfulfilled
potential. Then there is the "perplexing chasm [that] separated the two Tupac
Shakurs": the gangsta rapper (bad Tupac) and empathetic actor (good Tupac)
(Richard Corliss, Time). The wistful conclusion: "[P]erhaps films would have
allowed him to evade the gangsta rap typecasting forced on him by the music
industry" (Richard Harrington, the Washington Post). (Click here for the official Gridlock'd site.)

            

               
                  Waiting for Guffman
                (Castle Rock/Sony Pictures Classics). A
mockumentary--same genre, same producers, and some of the same writers as
This Is Spinal Tap (1984), though on a different topic: the American
musical and amateur theatrics. Reviews praise Guffman 's spoofs of show
tunes and its digs at Midwestern life, but rate it a notch below the cult
classic. "The subject may not be as universal as loud music played badly," says
the USA Today's Susan Wloszczyna. (Guffman.com has stills and video.)

            

               Art
            

            

               "Willem de Kooning: The Late Paintings, the 1980s" (Museum of Modern
Art, New York). Is the abstract expressionist's late work a last hurrah, in the
tradition of Matisse's paper cutouts? Is it senile doodling? Or is it a cynical
scheme perpetrated by his ex-wife and assistants to force an
Alzheimer's-afflicted artist to turn out schlock for cash? Critics are
titillated by the biographical mysteries surrounding de Kooning's 1980s
paintings, but maintain a genteel focus on the paintings themselves.
Conclusion: The paintings are shockingly genteel, too. New 
               York 's
Mark Stevens perceives transcendental old-age art about old age itself: "[H]e
seems to empty out his art, like the man who wants to give everything away
before he dies." The 
               New Yorker 's Calvin Tomkins finds such
serenity incongruous with the rest of de Kooning's career: "What's missing is
the melodrama of vulgarity. The messy, vicious slathers of pigment, the
turbulence and turmoil ... [are the] essential elements of de Kooning's
greatness." (MoMA's site plugs the show.)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  Men
Are From Mars, Women Are From Venus
                (Gershwin Theater, New York).
"About as entertaining as having blood drawn," says Peter Marks in a vicious
New York Times pan of John Gray's Broadway show (half monologue, half
audience participation) based on his best-selling advice book about gender
roles and personal growth. Critics dismiss it as tedious psychobabble. But,
says Variety 's Greg Evans, "[j]udging by his fans in attendance (mostly
young couples and groups of women nudging one another and mouthing, 'That is so
true')," Gray's Elmer Gantry routine "seems to work."

            

               Event
            

            
               "On
Cultural Power: The Wilson-Brustein Discussion ," moderated by Anna
Deavere Smith (Town Hall, New York). Critics hyped the face-off between New
Republic theater critic Robert Brustein and black playwright August Wilson
over Afrocentric theater as "the intellectual version of extreme fighting"
(Frank Rich, the New York Times ). But the debate was judged to be a
flop--lots of combative bravado and little payoff. "Two humorless and often
petty egomaniacs intransigently reiterated their familiar positions"
(Rich).

            

               Updates
            

            
               New
York 's David Denby joins in the general celebration of the film Kolya
and its accompanying Czechophilia: "The movie speaks quietly, in the
chamber-music tones of ... [a] Dvorak quartet." ... The Weekly
Standard 's John Podhoretz blasts Everyone
Says I Love You: "Why would Woody Allen willingly make a movie that
resembles nothing so much as Springtime for Hitler , the deliberately bad
show at the center of Mel Brooks's classic comedy The 
               Producers ?"
... 
               New York 's Stevens turns up the volume on the Tiepolo hype: Tiepolo "paints as a stylish swordsman might kill,
with a flashing wrist; he gives us flourishes, a kind of
whistling-through-the-air bravura, as if to say, 'Of course! It is easy,
nothing. I was born a genius.' " (See also Christopher Benfey's review in
Slate of the Tiepolo
exhibits.)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            Jan.
29:

            
               Art --"Giambattista
Tiepolo, 1696-1770";

            
               Event --Halftime at
Super Bowl XXXI;

            

               Movie -- Kolya ;

            
               Book -- Island of
the Colorblind , by Oliver Sacks;

            
               Theater -- The
Steward of Christendom ;

            
               Movie -- Fierce
Creatures ;

            

               Book -- Le Divorce , by Diane Johnson.

            Jan.
22:

            
               Book -- Behind the
Oval Office: Winning the Presidency in the Nineties , by Dick Morris;

            
               Movie -- The Whole
Wide World ;

            
               Event --The
Inauguration of William Jefferson Clinton;

            
               Book -- One World,
Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global Capitalism , by William B.
Greider;

            
               CD -- Idomeneo ,
by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, performed by Placido Domingo and the Metropolitan
Opera Orchestra and Chorus, conducted by James Levine;

            
               Movie -- Albino
Alligator ;

            

               Television -- The Naked Truth .

            Jan.
15:

            
               Movie -- La
Cérémonie ;

            
               Book -- The Prospect
Before Her: A History of Women in Western Europe, 1500-1800 , by Olwen
Hufton;

            
               Television -- King
of the Hill ;

            

               Architecture --Tokyo International Forum.

            Jan.
8:

            
               Movie -- Beavis and
Butt-Head Do America ;

            
               Book -- Slouching to
Gomorrah: Modern Liberalism and American Decline , by Robert Bork;

            

               Television -- Politically Incorrect With Bill Maher ;

            

               Movie -- Mother ;

            
               Movie -- Some
Mother's Son ;

            
               Book -- Christian
Dior: The Man Who Made the World Look New , by Marie-France Pochna,
translated by Joanna Savill;

            

               Book -- Yves Saint Laurent: A Biography , by Alice Rawsthorn.

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
