
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , April 25
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, April 25)
            

            The
cover editorial claims that the conflict in Israel no
longer poses a threat to the world because it has become a localized crisis. In
time, peace will come and Israel will emerge with its borders intact.
Complication: To keep its borders stable, Israel will have to stop treating its
one million Israeli Arabs like an "unwanted presence." ... A paternalistic editorial calls America's Latinos "a
minority worth cultivating." The piece praises Latinos for being the
"uncomplaining greasers of the wheels of the American economy," and doing "the
jobs that others refuse to do." Unlike African-Americans, Latinos have no
racial ax to grind and so can act as the "builders of bridges" between blacks
and whites. ... A story exposes the undercover shilling of many Hollywood
stars. Guaranteed that the clips will never air outside Japan, several major
stars have filmed ads for Japanese TV: Leonardo DiCaprio for a credit card,
Sylvester Stallone for ham sausage, Jodie Foster for coffee, and Harrison Ford
for beer. The stars earn up to $4 million for a 15 second spot.

            
               
                  New
Republic , May 11
            

            
               (posted
Friday, April 24)
            

            The cover
story on the California gubernatorial race mourns the decline of that state's
politics. Independently wealthy candidates win office with no political
background or platform. Career politicians, with solid ideas, can't raise
enough money to keep up. Since California voters use ballot initiatives for
serious policy changes, they don't mind electing do-nothing plutocrats.
... A story says the White House is terrified of Dick Morris, because he
knows a lot of Clinton dirt that he hasn't yet dished. His recent assignments
with conservative Rupert Murdoch (commentating on the Fox News cable channel,
writing for the New York Post ) suggest he's turned on Clinton.
... An article deplores the glut of tell-all books by prospective
presidential candidates (Newt Gingrich, George Pataki, John Ashcroft). The
books, which ignore public policy, are shameless attempts by candidates to
humanize themselves for voters. ... Yehuda Amichai contributes a pair of
poems and a personal essay about Israel's 50 th anniversary.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , April 26
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, April 23)
            

            In the
cover story, a scientist seeks the gene that causes an abnormal number of cleft
lips and palates in the natives of a Philippine island. Researchers working in
remote areas face ethical unease: Locals, valued for their genetic isolation,
often don't understand what the research is for and rarely benefit from it.
(Some islanders thought children's cleft lips resulted from their parents
eating chicken anuses.) ... The magazine profiles Rep. John Kasich,
chairman of the House Budget Committee and a long-shot candidate for the
Republican presidential nomination in 2000. The Ohioan lacks "gravitas" but is
passionate, good with people, highly religious, and an outsider--all positives
in the election game.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , April 27
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, April 21)
            

            Two covers on money.
Newsweek claims we're all "married to the market": Americans invest more
than ever before (42 percent of households' financial assets are in the stock
market), and a crash would so cripple the economy that even noninvestors would
suffer. Two accompanying articles argue that the boom will continue (because
unemployment and inflation remain low) or will not (because price-to-earnings
ratios are too high). Time 's bank-merger cover story assesses the future of money: It will be 1) digital
and 2) concentrated in superbanks that handle investments and banking.
Conspiracy theorists beware: MasterCard is investing in a chip that can store
electronic cash, your medical history, and "keys" to your home and office.

            

               Newsweek claims 2 p.m. to 8 p.m. has become "crime time" for American
teen-agers. Working parents leave teens unsupervised during afternoons (thanks
to budget cuts in after-school programs), leading to greater drug use and
delinquency. ... 
               Time , meanwhile, claims that 2 p.m. to 8 p.m. has become God time for
American teen-agers. Kids are reintroducing prayer to public schools.
After-school prayer clubs skirt church-state separation laws and are popping up
"in as many as 1 out of every 4 public schools in the country." Religious teens
wear wristbands marked "W.W.J.D." ("What Would Jesus Do?").

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , April 27
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, April 21)
            

            The
cover story is skeptical about charter schools. The schools can
succeed when dedicated teachers push innovative curricula, but in many charter
schools profits are more important than education. At some Arizona charter
schools, kids attend only four hours a day and learn from computers instead of
from teachers. ... A story argues that suburban sprawl penalizes urban residents.
Low-density areas don't pay enough taxes to subsidize the roads, schools, and
sewers they require. City centers end up paying the difference. This lowers
downtown property values and spurs middle-class flight. ... A story says 60 percent of U.S. $100 bills reside in foreign
countries. American currency circulating abroad functions as "an interest-free
loan to the U.S. government" and demonstrates extreme worldwide confidence in
the U.S. economy.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , April 27 and May 4
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, April 21)
            

            A
"special Europe issue" should be called a special western Europe issue,
given that it notices only the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Spain,
and Denmark. Highlights: The magazine excerpts the wrenching diary of Victor
Klemperer, a Jew who managed to survive World War II in Dresden, Germany. (He
was married to an Aryan woman.) He loses friends, job, possessions, dignity:
"The sadistic machine simply rolls over us." ... A profile of Spanish
King Juan Carlos applauds him for transforming a backward fascist dictatorship
into a thriving, tolerant democracy. The king saved Spain by surrendering his
own power to the people: Now even socialists want to preserve the monarchy.
... A piece says peace in Northern Ireland depends on new definitions of
old words: "terrorist," "United Kingdom," "culture" and, most of all, "nation."
The peace agreement is premised on the notion that the Irish can live happily
without the feeling that they belong to "a well-defined nation." ... A
writer visits the Danish town of Billund, the headquarters of the "greatest toy
in the world," Lego. The Lego-obsessed town is "three parts charming to ... one
part creepy." Lego is not just plastic bricks anymore: It also sells backpacks,
shoes, umbrellas, etc.--anything a kid needs.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , April 27
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, April 21)
            

            The cover
story argues that we should build more highways. Public transportation has
failed (it's neither convenient nor cost efficient), and Americans love their
cars. Our roads are congested not because we lack alternative transportation,
but because we lack superhighways and connecting roads. (See

                  Slate
               's dialogue "The War on Cars.")

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
