
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Con
Air
                (Touchstone Pictures). This action flick, about a rogues' gallery
of prisoners who hijack a jet, is deemed summer-blockbuster overkill: too many
ridiculous plot twists, too many explosions, too much ripping off of its
predecessors. It is "so monumentally idiotic, frenzied and cheesy--the special
effects look like Tonka toys writ large--that it re-sets the bar for the
genre," says the Wall Street Journal 's Joe Morgenstern. Reviewers split
on the star, Nicolas Cage. He either "emerges intact from the rubble" (Anthony
Lane, The New Yorker ) or proves "he can be as much of an overmuscled
jackass as Sylvester Stallone" (David
Edelstein, Slate). (Click here for the
Con Air site.)

            

               
                  Ulee's Gold
                (Orion Pictures). Peter Fonda's comeback--as a stoic
beekeeper facing down his convict son's thuggish friends--is called his first
worthy performance since Easy Rider (1969). "[A]fter all this time, a
role that suits his rocklike demeanor perfectly and makes virtues of his
expressive limitations" (Terrence Rafferty, The New Yorker ). Slow-paced
and minimalist, the film is hailed as an anti-blockbuster: It "achieves a rare,
and rarely earned, emotional depth ... ennobling and enriching without being
sticky or sanctimonious" (Todd McCarthy, Variety ). (See Edelstein's
review
and Orion's promotional site.)

            
               
                  The
Pillow Book
                (Cinepix Film Properties). The latest from avant-garde
British director Peter Greenaway ( The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her
Lover ) elicits a familiar critique: It's judged a visual knockout but
pretentious as hell. Most critics say the movie, about a Japanese woman's
peculiar fetish, has lots of gorgeous naked bodies but little plot or character
development. A "cold, contemptuous, and interminable Oedipal saga," says the
Village Voice 's J. Hoberman, "just a big, static snooze." The New
York Times ' Janet Maslin, on the other hand, says the "audaciously
beautiful imagery, captivating symmetries and brilliantly facile tricks" redeem
the film.

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Wu-Tang Forever
               , Wu-Tang Clan (RCA/Loud). Critics predict that
the Staten Island rap group's 27-track double CD--released along with Wu-Wear,
a clothing line--will mark a breakthrough for hip-hop, as both hype and art.
The Wu-Tang Clan has entered the "stagnant hip-hop scene like a slap in the
face, parading its strikingly original gutter funk like a ghetto peacock" (Matt
Diehl, Entertainment Weekly ). Critics admire the group's eclectic
influences--including funk, flamenco, and psychedelic--and its lyrics, "as
dense, obsessed, prolific and full of popular and arcane references as a
Pynchon novel" (Neil Strauss, the New York Times ). (Clips are available
here.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Without a Doubt
               , by Marcia Clark, with Teresa Carpenter (Viking).
Readers don't seem to mind that the O.J. prosecutor's angry memoir--a New
York Times No. 1 best seller--adds little to the vast body of literature
about the trial. But critics do. "As her title suggests, self-reflection and an
appreciation of ambiguity are not Marcia Clark's strong points," Ellen Willis
writes in the New York Times Book Review . The dead prose style, adds
Entertainment Weekly 's Dana Kennedy, "reads as if Clark had dictated it
from her car phone." To the dismay of still others, Clark neither confirms nor
denies the rumor that she and fellow prosecutor Christopher Darden slept
together.

            

               
                  Firewall: The Iran-Contra Conspiracy and Cover-Up
               , by Lawrence E.
Walsh (W.W. Norton). Too much minutiae, not enough revelations is the consensus
criticism of the Iran-Contra Special Prosecutor's chronicle of his seven-year
investigation. Wanting still to win the case, he rehashes arcane and forgotten
episodes from the Reagan-era scandal seemingly for his own benefit. "The leaden
account ... feels like it goes on for seven years" (Jacob Weisberg,
Slate). Only The Nation 's Doug Ireland finds merit in Walsh's brief
against the Reagan administration, calling the attorney "a genuine American
hero."

            

               
                  Promiscuities: The Secret Struggle for Womanhood
               , by Naomi Wolf
(Random House). The Third Wave feminist's third book--part memoir, part
sociology, part political tract--gets praised for its lyrically rendered
anecdotes and slammed for shoddy thinking. The part about her sexual
coming-of-age in San Francisco fares reasonably well. "[S]he melts together the
personal and political so gently we're barely aware of the difference," says
Newsweek 's Laura Shapiro. But Wolf's politics are roundly ridiculed,
especially her idea that girls should retreat to the wilderness with older
women to perform ceremonial sex rites. "[S]he tries in vain to pass off tired
observations as radical aperçus, subjective musings as general truths, sappy
suggestions as useful ideas," writes the New York Times ' Michiko
Kakutani.

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  Gross Indecency: The Three Trials of Oscar Wilde
                (Minetta Lane
Theatre, New York City). Applause for this off-off Broadway play (written by
Moisés Kaufman, an unknown gay Venezuelan dramatist), which finally hits the
big time. Rescued from obscurity three months ago by a rave from the New
York Times ' Ben Brantley, Gross Indecency , about the Irish
playwright's famous sodomy trials, started an open-ended New York run last
week. The play recounts Wilde's downfall, says USA Today 's David Patrick
Stearns, "with the inevitability and much of the monumentality of a Greek
tragedy." New York 's John Simon, the lone sniper, says the play deserved
to languish in obscurity because of its "annoying cuteness."

            

               Updates
            

            In one of
the most scathing reviews of Norman
Mailer's Jesus book to date, The Nation 's Mary Gordon asks: "How can
someone who has published so much, some of it admirable, have written such a
bad book? A book whose badness leaves the reader first with a sense of
reluctance (must I really go on?), then anger (how can he let himself get away
with this?), then embarrassment (it is unseemly to cast my eyes on such a
spectacle)." ... Praise continues to escalate for Philip
Roth's American Pastoral . In the Washington Post Book World ,
Donna Rifkind calls it "possibly the finest work of his career."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            June
4:

            
               Movie -- Trial and
Error ;

            
               Music -- Blood on the
Dance Floor--HIStory in the Mix , Michael Jackson;

            
               Television -- Bill
Clinton: Rock & Roll President (VH1);

            
               Television -- Port
Charles (ABC);

            
               Book -- Race, Crime,
and the Law , by Randall Kennedy;

            
               Book -- Virginia
Woolf , by Hermione Lee;

            
               Book -- Kowloon
Tong , by Paul Theroux;

            
               Event -- The Tony
Awards;

            

               Art --"Objects of Desire: The Modern Still Life" (Museum of Modern
Art).

            May
28:

            
               Movie -- The Lost
World ;

            
               Movie -- Addicted to
Love ;

            
               Movie -- Brassed
Off ;

            
               Television -- Murder
One (ABC);

            
               Theater -- King
David ;

            
               Music -- Flaming
Pie , by Paul McCartney;

            
               Book -- Che Guevara:
A Revolutionary Life , by Jon Lee Anderson;

            
               Book -- Rage for
Fame: The Ascent of Clare Boothe Luce , by Sylvia Jukes Morris;

            

               Art --New Chinese Galleries (Metropolitan Museum of Art).

            May
21:

            
               Book -- Underboss:
Sammy the Bull Gravano's Story of Life in the Mafia , by Peter Maas;

            
               Book -- The Actual: A
Novella , by Saul Bellow;

            

               Television -- Roseanne (ABC);

            
               Television -- David
Blaine: Street Magic (ABC);

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Night Falls
on Manhattan ;

            
               Movie -- Love!
Valour! Compassion! ;

            

               Theater -- The Wizard of Oz .

            May
14:

            
               Architecture --New
Amsterdam Theater;

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Father's
Day ;

            
               Movie -- The Fifth
Element ;

            
               Movie -- The
Designated Mourner ;

            
               Television -- The
Odyssey (NBC);

            
               Book -- The Courage
to Stand Alone: Letters From Prison and Other Writings , by Wei Jingsheng,
translated and edited by Kristina M. Torgeson;

            
               Book -- Time Bind:
When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work , by Arlie Russell
Hochschild;

            

               Theater -- Candide ;

            

               Museum --Newseum.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
