
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Gospel According to the Son
               , by Norman Mailer (Random House). Norman
Mailer's latest act of literary chutzpah--an autobiography of Jesus--fails
spectacularly. The New York Times ' Michiko Kakutani calls it a "silly,
self-important and at times inadvertently comical book." Criticisms: The
language is stilted and predictable, with Mailer's only additions to the Christ
story being the lust Jesus feels in his heart and the hard time he has with
celebrity. Only Frank Kermode defends Mailer; in an erudite reading of the book
in the New York Review of Books, he attributes to Mailer the subtlety of
a theologian--whose "powerful mind," however, "works in a specialized way, not
by theological argument but by telling or retelling a story."

            

               
                  American Pastoral
               , by Philip Roth (Houghton Mifflin). The best of
the three novels published this spring by postwar Jewish-American novelists
(Bellow, Roth, and Mailer). Some say it is Roth's best ever. "Never before has
Roth written fiction with such clear conviction. Never before has Roth
assembled so many fully formed characters or shuttled so authoritatively
through time" (R.Z. Sheppard, Time ). Narrated by Roth's fictional alter
ego Nathan Zuckerman, it is the story of an assimilated Jew whose life is
shattered in the '60s by his daughter's Weathermen Underground-style rebellion.
He has "created a resonant parable of American innocence and disillusion"
(Kakutani). In the New York Times Book Review , however, Michael Wood
calls the book a "little slow," lacking the manic energy of the other Zuckerman
novels. (Roth's publisher plugs his book.)

            

               
                  W.B. Yeats: A Life. 1: The Apprentice Mage, 1865-1914
               , by R.F.
Foster (Oxford University Press). Coming after a long line of mediocre
biographies of the Irish poet, the first volume of a two-part biography by
Oxford historian Roy Foster is greeted warmly. It "integrates Irish history
impressively into the complex fabric of the great poet's life" says the
Washington Post 's Karl Beckson. Yeats "would be relieved to know ...
that the biographer is himself a fine writer, bearing with grace his knowledge
of Irish history, and writing with wit, authority and, when appropriate,
considerable eloquence," says Thomas Flanagan in the New York Times Book
Review . (See James Wood's enthusiastic review in Slate.)

            

               
                  Purple America
               , by Rick Moody (Little, Brown, and Co.). As with
Moody's last two novels ( Garden State , Ice Storm ), reviewers
can't decide whether the young novelist is a hip Updike or a Pynchon wannabe.
(This novel deals with a decaying suburban Connecticut nuclear family and a
decaying suburban Connecticut nuclear power plant.) The New York Times Book
Review 's Janet Burroway calls him "a chronicler of the middle class for the
millennium." Time 's Sheppard says that the novel's "characters are
emotionally intricate, and its tensions adroitly controlled." Others think he
overwrites. "This is a novel that doesn't seem written, but declaimed, in a
WASP Jesse Jackson style, from a Darien pulpit" (Dwight Garner, the Village
Voice ).

            

               Television
            

            
               
                  In
the Gloaming
                (HBO, click here for
a schedule). Who would criticize quadriplegic actor Christopher Reeve's
directorial debut? Almost nobody. Reviewers concede the made-for-TV tawdriness
of this AIDS movie starring Robert Sean Leonard, Glenn Close, Bridget Fonda,
and Whoopi Goldberg: pat characters and a tear-jerker plot. But the screenplay
is said to redeem the melodrama. It is "artful and literate" says the
Washington Post 's Tom Shales. Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker
says it "is superior to any domestic drama Hollywood has released in theaters
in at least a decade." Newsweek 's Rick Marin is the only critic to brave
a negative judgment: "That [Reeve] can direct at all is impressive. Too bad the
movie isn't." (A trailer for the show is available on HBO's site.)

            

               Opera
            

            
               
                  The
Ring of the Nibelung
               , by Richard Wagner (Metropolitan Opera Company,
New York City). High praise for an all-star rendition of Wagner's four-opera
cycle (the third installment was performed last week). Kudos mostly for
conductor James Levine's "thrilling reading of Wagner's emotion-magnifying
score" (Allan Kozinn, the New York Times ). Also lauded are the singers,
an ensemble of the world's greatest that includes tenor Placido Domingo,
soprano Deborah Voigt, and bass James Morris. "This was Golden Age stuff--a
reminder that not all greatness lies in the past, that not all the best
performances are contained on crackly old recordings adorned with sepia
photographs," says the Weekly Standard 's Jay Nordlinger.

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Murder at 1600
                (Warner Brothers). Another White House murder
mystery and a chance to bash the genre. Gripes: 1) It' a product of classic
Hollywood opportunism, cashing in on widepread cynicism about presidential
ethics. 2) This particular instance of it stinks. "A whole Lincoln bedroom full
of clichés," says Newsday 's John Anderson. Not even star Wesley Snipes'
considerable charisma can compensate for the ridiculous plot. "Serviceable at
passing the time, if nothing else is available," says the Los Angeles
Time s' Kenneth Turan. (For stills, clips, and the like, see the Murder at 1600 site.)

            

               
                  Kissed
                (Orion). Critics mostly applaud this movie about a female
necrophiliac who works in a funeral home. "Delicacy and lyricism ... underscore
the mystical rather than gruesome aspects of ... a consuming addiction," says
the New York Times ' Stephen Holden. But Michael Sragow, writing in the
New Times Los Angeles , calls Kissed "ridiculously earnest. I kept
hoping that John Cleese would appear out of nowhere, and say, in the high
dudgeon of his Dead Parrot routine, 'They're dead! They're deceased!' " (See
the Kissed site.)

            

               Updates:
            

            
Conservatives weigh in: In the National Review , Jonathan Foreman bashes
novelist Patrick Chamoiseau's highly praised Texaco, calling it "ponderous, self-indulgent, and overwhelmingly
mediocre." Westerners only like it, he says, because they are obsessed with
"getting into the minds of 'primitive' ... people."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            April
16:

            
               Art --"Picasso: The
Early Years, 1892-1906" (National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.);

            

               Movie -- Anaconda ;

            
               Movie -- Grosse
Pointe Blank ;

            
               Theater -- An
American Daughter ;

            
               Book -- Naked , by
David Sedaris;

            
               Book -- The Blue
Flower , by Penelope Fitzgerald;

            
               Book -- Gut
Symmetries , by Jeanette Winterson;

            

               Book -- Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917 , by T.S.
Eliot, edited by Christopher Ricks.

            April
9:

            
               Theater -- A Doll's
House ;

            
               Movie -- The
Saint ;

            
               Movie -- Paradise
Road ;

            
               Movie -- Inventing
the Abbotts ;

            
               Movie -- That Old
Feeling ;

            
               Book --Allen Ginsberg
(1926-1997);

            
               Book -- After the
Madness: A Judge's Own Prison Memoir , by Sol Wachtler;

            

               Book -- The Big Picture , by Douglas Kennedy.

            April
2:

            
               Book -- Texaco ,
by Patrick Chamoiseau, translated by Rose-Myriam Réjouis and Val Vinokurov;

            
               Book -- John Wayne's
America: The Politics of Celebrity , by Garry Wills;

            
               Book -- The Divorce
Culture , by Barbara Dafoe Whitehead;

            
               Book -- When the Sons
of Heaven Meet the Daughters of the Earth , by Fernanda Eberstadt;

            
               Movie -- The Devil's
Own ;

            
               Movie -- Chasing
Amy ;

            

               Theater -- The Young Man From Atlanta .

            March
26:

            
               Event -- The
69 th Academy Awards ;

            
               Art --"1997 Biennial
Exhibition" (Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City);

            
               Art --Willem de Kooning
(1904-1997);

            
               Movie -- Liar
Liar ;

            

               Movie -- Crash ;

            

               Movie -- Selena ;

            
               Movie -- The
Godfather ;

            
               Book -- The Coming
Conflict with China , by Ross H. Munro and Richard Bernstein;

            

               Book -- Radical Son: A Journey Through Our Times , by David
Horowitz.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
