
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Private Parts
                (Paramount Pictures). Shock jock Howard Stern
successfully transforms himself into a likable American Everyman. A New
Yorker profile compares him to Lenny Bruce. The Wall Street
Journal 's Joe Morgenstern says the film, though packaged as "psychosexist
autobiography," is actually "romantic fiction." The New York Times '
Janet Maslin credits director Betty Thomas ( The Brady Bunch Movie ) with
making Stern "into the biggest, dorkiest Brady imaginable." Slate's David
Edelstein calls it "the shrewdest piece of spin doctoring since Triumph
of the Will ." (The Private Parts site includes assorted Howard Stern games, stills,
and clips.)

            

               
                  Jungle 2 Jungle
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Considering the drubbing
given the original--a 1994 French comedy titled Little Indian, Big
City --reception of the Disney remake seems almost positive. Reviewers call
Tim Allen ( Home Improvement) affable. The new screenplay also adds
"farcical plot and sight gags to provide hilarity" to the story of the
relationship between a commodity trader and the 13-year-old son he finds in the
Amazon, according to the Los Angeles Times . Dissenters call the plot
ridiculous and the gags tiresome. (Disney plugs the movie at its site.)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  A
Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum
                (St. James Theatre, New
York City). Whoopi Goldberg replaces Nathan Lane in Stephen Sondheim's musical
comedy, and critics like her just fine. "She's a time-traveling Manhattan
Yankee in Plautus's forum, using her distinctive street smarts to find her way,
both as a character and as a performer" (Ben Brantley, the New York
Times ). Goldberg's self-mocking approach is said to redeem the production
from an otherwise overwrought book.

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Kiss: A Memoir
               , by Kathryn Harrison (Random House). Reviewers dismiss
this memoir about a novelist's incestuous affair with her father as a product
of talk-show culture. "Who controls the narrative? Well, Oprah" (Mim Udovitch,
New York ). The main gripes: that The Kiss represents an act of
self-plagiarism, since Harrison's first novel recounts the same story; that her
prose is by turns flat and overheated, "chockablock with romance-novel clichés"
(Jonathan Yardley, the Washington Post); and that her need to confess is
self-indulgent. "The Kiss is about a woman who can't get over herself,"
says the Wall Street Journal 's Cynthia Crossen.

            

               
                  Giovanni's Gift
               , by Bradford Morrow (Viking). New York
recently featured this literary murder mystery as a case study in
"breakthrough" marketing--its publisher, Viking, hoped to position it as a
middlebrow hit, like Annie Proulx's The Shipping News . Reviewers aren't
cooperating. "If Robert James Waller had taken an Oxford degree or Danielle
Steel had read classics at the Sorbonne, this is the sort of book they might
write," says Walter Kirn in the New York Times 
               Book Review .
(Click here to read an excerpt from the book.)

            

               Art
            

            "Exiles
and Émigrés: The Flight of European Artists from Hitler" (The Los Angeles
County Museum of Art, through May 11). This exhibit, bankrolled by Steven
Spielberg and Sharon Stone, is judged to be of greater historical than artistic
merit. It illustrates the influence of the émigrés on postwar American art and
exposes American reluctance to rescue the artists from Nazi persecution.
Despite the inclusion of canvases by Salvador Dali, Max Beckmann, Marc Chagall,
Fernand Léger, and Piet Mondrian, the art is said to be unexceptional, since
only Beckmann and Mondrian did their best work in exile.

            

               Television
            

            
               
                  The
Practice
                (ABC, Tuesdays at 9 p.m. EST). The Practice is deemed
the ER of law. The Washington Post 's Tom Shales says the show,
about an unglamorous firm whose lawyers take on lowlifes as clients and work in
shabby offices, skillfully interweaves several plots into a single episode.
Critics predict stardom for Dylan McDermott, who plays the firm's chief
partner. (ABC's site offers you clips, and the show's official
site lets you tour the firm.)

            

               Update
            

            Defying
the critical consensus, The 
               New Yorker 's Anthony Lane pans
Donnie Brasco: Director Mike Newell "doesn't see anything funny
in wise guys; I have an awful feeling he may even think of them as slightly
wise."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            March
5:

            
               Movie -- Donnie
Brasco ;

            
               Movie -- Smilla's
Sense of Snow ;

            
               Music --David Helfgott
World Tour;

            
               Television -- Crisis
Center ;

            

               Television -- Feds ;

            

               Television -- Arsenio ;

            
               Television -- Just
Shoot Me ;

            
               Book -- Crazy
Rhythms: Richard Nixon and All That Jazz , by Leonard Garment;

            
               Books --First Novel
Roundup;

            

               Theater -- The Last Night of Ballyhoo .

            Feb.
26:

            
               Movie -- The Empire
Strikes Back: Special Edition ;

            
               Movie -- Lost
Highway ;

            

               Movie -- Rosewood ;

            

               Television -- Schindler's List ;

            
               Television -- Miss
Evers' Boys ;

            
               Book -- Monster:
Living Off the Big Screen , by John Gregory Dunne;

            
               Book -- American
Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson , by Joseph J. Ellis;

            
               Book -- Whittaker
Chambers: A Biography , by Sam Tanenhaus;

            

               Theater -- Stanley .

            Feb.
19:

            
               Television -- Thomas
Jefferson ;

            

               Television -- Emma ;

            
               Movie
               --Absolute
Power ;

            
               Movie -- Blood and
Wine ;

            
               Book -- Gladstone: A
Biography , by Roy Jenkins;

            
               Book -- Asylum ,
by Patrick McGrath;

            
               Book -- Hungry
Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine , by Jasper Becker;

            

               Art --"Henry Darger: The Unreality of Being."

            Feb.
12:

            
               CD -- Pat Boone in a
Metal Mood: No More Mr. Nice Guy , by Pat Boone;

            
               Movie -- Dante's
Peak ;

            
               Movie -- When We
Were Kings ;

            
               Movie -- Prisoner of
the Mountains ;

            
               Book -- What Falls
Away: A Memoir , by Mia Farrow;

            
               Book -- Before the
Dawn: An Autobiography , by Gerry Adams;

            
               Book -- A Supposedly
Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again: Essays and Arguments , by David Foster
Wallace;

            

               Television -- The Chris Rock Show .

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
