
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Batman & Robin
                (Warner Bros.). Critics dismiss the fourth
installment in the Batman series as nonsensical kitsch, a "wild, campy
costume party" (Janet Maslin, the New York Times ). Director Joel
Schumacher ( A Time to Kill ), a former window dresser, leans heavily on
high-concept get-ups (villainess Uma Thurman sports a suit made from 450 Santa
Claus wigs) in the apparent hope of deflecting attention from a script that
"has the eerie feeling of having no beginning, no middle and no end" (Kenneth
Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). Still, his overwrought attempts to make
the film fun--fast editing, crashingly loud sound effects--end up making it "a
punishing ordeal" (Alex Ross, Slate). (See the Batman & Robin site.)

            

               
                  Face/Off
                (Paramount Pictures). Hong Kong director John Woo's
action flick stands out as the best, by far, in a bad summer crop. Critics
ignore the absurd premise--a cop (John Travolta) and a villain (Nicolas Cage)
each undergoing plastic surgery to look like the other one--and take unabashed
delight in the movie's "grandly operatic pulp" (David Ansen, Newsweek ).
Reviews credit Woo with giving violence "balletic grace" (Todd McCarthy,
Variety ) as well as "moral gravity" (Richard Corliss, Time ). Cage
and Travolta are deemed "two of the most daring, physically intuitive, soulful
performers on screen" (Ansen). (Click here for the Face/Off site.)

            
               
                  La
Promesse
                (New Yorker Films). Veteran Belgian documentarians Luc and
Jean-Pierre Dardenne win acclaim for their film about a 15-year-old boy's
pledge to a dying Ghanaian immigrant to look after his family. A "minimalist
marvel," says the Wall Street Journal 's Joe Morgenstern. Reviews dwell
on the directors' effective hand-held camera and their subtle depiction of the
ordeals of immigrant life. The New Republic 's Stanley Kauffmann says the
Dardenne brothers can join Ken Loach and Mike Leigh in "the front rank of
contemporary directors with social concerns."

            

               Musical
            

            

               
                  Ragtime
                (Schubert Theatre, Los Angeles). The musical adaptation
of E.L. Doctorow's 1975 novel about turn-of-the-century America is crowned as
an instant classic. Terrence McNally and Lynn Ahrens' show, says Time 's
Richard Zoglin, "combines big social themes, imaginative staging and
emotionally involving storytelling in a way that has all but vanished from the
American musical." Controversy surrounds the show's producer, movie-theater
mogul Garth Drabinsky, "the current mahatma of musical theatre" (John Lahr,
The New Yorker ): Will he restore glory to the American musical as he
bankrolls other blockbusters, or will his productions simply serve as a vehicle
for his own ego?

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Puttermesser Papers
               , by Cynthia Ozick (Knopf). Though eclipsed somewhat
by Philip Roth's and Saul Bellow's new novels, Cynthia Ozick's latest gets
glowing reviews just the same. The story of the travails of a brainy single
Jewish female in New York is lauded as a "wry modern fable" (Merle Rubin, the
Wall Street Journal ) that shows off Ozick's flair for Isaac Bashevis
Singer-style magical realism. Praise also for Ozick's relentless skepticism
about modern urban life, which is said to be reminiscent of Bellow, "a vision
that is stark and unsparing but ... so intelligent ... it remains endearing,
edifying, a spark of light in the gloom" (Richard Bernstein, the New York
Times ). (See David Remnick's review in Slate and click here for an
excerpt.)

            
               
                  How
Proust Can Change Your Life: Not a Novel
               , by Alain de Botton (Pantheon
Books). Critics applaud this semisatirical reinterpretation of Proust's
3,000-page novel Remembrance of Things Past as a nine-step self-help
book. (One chapter title: "How to Suffer Successfully.") The book, they say, is
a witty sendup of therapeutic literature, and it also serves as a "seriously
legitimate guide for the perplexed" (Benito Rakower, the Washington
Post ). Critics also recommend it as a sort of highbrow Cliff's
Notes : "You don't need to have read Proust in order to read this book; in
fact, once you've read de Botton you don't need to read it at all" (Richard
Klein, Voice Literary Supplement ).

            

               
                  Bright Angel Time
               , by Martha McPhee (Random House). This
roman-à-clef by writer John McPhee's daughter portrays him as ridiculously
irresponsible. Still, critics say the daughter has inherited the father's "gift
for fine, lapidary prose [and] carefully controlled language" (Michiko
Kakutani, the New York Times ). The book wins praise largely because of
its keen rendering of the self-indulgent '70s. "What might have been a
one-trauma-after-another chronicle of loss and divorce," says Walter Kirn in
the New York Times Book Review , "becomes instead a hard and shining
artifact of personal and social upheaval." Reviewers also approve of the
eccentric characters, especially the 8-year-old LSD-dropping narrator.

            

               Updates
            

            The New
Republic 's Robert Brustein says the Tony-winning adaptation of A Doll's
House "is driven by fashionable agendas ... [a] resolutely ahistorical
reinterpretation ... largely designed to illustrate how a powerful woman can
shatter glass ceilings." ... Also in the New Republic , Robert
Boyers offers some unwonted negative words for Philip Roth's American
Pastoral, saying the book caricatures 1960s radicalism. "It does not tell
us what we need to know about America, what a novel can tell us about the
complex attitudes and allegiances of a time and a place."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            June
18:

            

               Movie -- Hercules ;

            
               Movie -- Speed
2 ;

            
               Movie -- My Best
Friend's Wedding ;

            

               Architecture --Shakespeare's Globe Theatre;

            
               Book -- News of a
Kidnapping , by Gabriel García Márquez, translated from the Spanish by Edith
Grossman;

            
               Book -- The Diving
Bell and the Butterfly , by Jean-Dominique Bauby, translated from the French
by Jeremy Leggatt;

            
               Book -- The God of
Small Things , by Arundhati Roy;

            
               Book -- The Perfect
Storm , by Sebastian Junger;

            

               Art --"Venice Biennale."

            June
11:

            
               Movie -- Con
Air ;

            
               Movie -- Ulee's
Gold ;

            
               Movie -- The Pillow
Book ;

            
               Music -- Wu-Tang
Forever , Wu-Tang Clan;

            
               Book -- Without a
Doubt , by Marcia Clark, with Teresa Carpenter;

            
               Book -- Firewall:
The Iran-Contra Conspiracy and Cover-Up , by Lawrence E. Walsh;

            

               Book -- Promiscuities: The Secret Struggle for Womanhood , by Naomi
Wolf;

            

               Theater -- Gross Indecency: The Three Trials of Oscar Wilde .

            June
4:

            
               Movie -- Trial and
Error ;

            
               Music -- Blood on
the Dance Floor--HIStory in the Mix , Michael Jackson;

            
               Television -- Bill
Clinton: Rock & Roll President (VH1);

            
               Television -- Port
Charles (ABC);

            
               Book -- Race, Crime,
and the Law , by Randall Kennedy;

            
               Book -- Virginia
Woolf , by Hermione Lee;

            
               Book -- Kowloon
Tong , by Paul Theroux;

            
               Event --The Tony
Awards;

            

               Art --"Objects of Desire: The Modern Still Life" (Museum of Modern
Art).

            May
28:

            
               Movie -- The Lost
World ;

            
               Movie -- Addicted to
Love ;

            
               Movie -- Brassed
Off ;

            
               Television -- Murder
One (ABC);

            
               Theater -- King
David ;

            
               Music -- Flaming
Pie , by Paul McCartney;

            
               Book -- Che Guevara:
A Revolutionary Life , by Jon Lee Anderson;

            
               Book -- Rage for
Fame: The Ascent of Clare Boothe Luce , by Sylvia Jukes Morris;

            
               Art --New Chinese
Galleries (Metropolitan Museum of Art).

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
