
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Conspiracy Theory
                (Warner Bros.). Most critics chide the Richard
Donner ( Lethal Weapon ) film as irredeemably far-fetched: A paranoid New
York cabbie (Mel Gibson) and a lawyer (Julia Roberts) are chased by government
assassins when one of the cabbie's fantastic theories turns out to be true.
"[W]e don't believe a word of this," says Time 's Richard Schickel. The
New York Times ' Janet Maslin is dubious about the casting: "The man who
talks to himself and mails long, delusional screeds to strangers is not usually
the dreamboat type." A few reviewers discern "tongue-in-cheek" humor in the use
of sex symbol Gibson as a "poster boy for schizophrenia," and declare the film
smarter than "other high-ticket summer fare" (Jack Mathews, Newsday ).
(Click here for
the Conspiracy Theory site.)

            

               
                  Love Serenade
                (Miramax). A warm reception for rookie Australian
director Shirley Barrett's "clever, deadpan comedy" (Maslin) about two sisters
vying for the affection of a thrice-divorced radio DJ who moves to their
outback town. "A wickedly funny examination of obsessive romantic behavior,"
says the Los Angeles Times ' Kenneth Turan. Praise goes also to Barrett's
gentle satire of the culturally backward outback (the radio station doesn't
even have a CD player). Her idiosyncratic script and direction earn her
comparisons to acclaimed antipodean auteurs Jane Campion and Gillian Armstrong.
(Video clips and stills are available here.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Vibe
                
               and 
               
                  The Keenen Ivory Wayans Show
                (check
local listings for channels and times). Critics scoff at two new late-night
talk shows, hosted by black stand-up comics, as poor replicas of the early '90s
hit The 
               Arsenio Hall Show . Vibe , produced by Quincy Jones,
and Keenen , made by the creator of the comedy series In Living
Color , are pronounced "indistinguishable" (James Collins, Time ) and
"hard to stay awake through" (Howard Rosenberg, the Los Angles Times ).
The main gripes are that the programs stick to a "banal" (Caryn James, the
New York Times ) talk show formula and have even less bite than David
Letterman's or Jay Leno's network show.

            

               Event/Television
            

            
               Garth
Brooks in Central Park/ Garth Brooks Live
                (Aug. 8, New York City;
broadcast live on HBO). Bemused critics scratch their heads at the huge turnout
(estimated as high as 1.1 million) for the country music megastar's
live-broadcast concert. "So what ends up being the cultural event of the summer
in the culture capital of the nation?" asks the New York Times ' Michele
Mitchell. Some see the concert as evidence of marketing acumen and a
self-aggrandizing streak in the '90s' best-selling musician. Brooks' "neatly
calibrated spectacle" (Jon Pareles, also in the New York Times ), which
included lots of smoke, lights, and cameos (by Billy Joel and Don McLean), was,
Time says, "originally conceived as a mega-infomercial for his new CD."
(HBO plugs its broadcast.)

            

               Art
            

            

               "Sculpture of Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory"
(National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.). The first American show of
classical Cambodian art in 50 years is said to "carry the force of a
revelation" (Holland Cutter, the New York Times ). Time 's Robert
Hughes calls the pieces, which mostly depict Buddha and other deities and date
to the 6 th century, "some of the greatest stone carving and bronze
work in human history." Critics expect extra attention for the show because of
the recent political turmoil in Cambodia. An editorial in the New
Republic urges holding on to the art until democracy is restored in
Cambodia. (See the National
Gallery site. For a backgrounder on the Cambodian conflict, see Slate's
"Gist.")

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Simenon: A Biography
               , by Pierre Assouline, translated by Jon
Rothschild (Knopf). The biography of the legendary Belgian-French king of pulp
fiction (1903-1989), who wrote more than 400 novels and bedded even more women
(he estimated 10,000), is deemed masterful, "absorbing," and "definitive"
(Deirdre Bair, the New York Times Book Review ). Simenon wins
praise for its defense of Simenon's oeuvre , often dismissed as hackery,
and for its candid treatment of his misogyny and anti-Semitism. "Unlike
altogether too many biographers, [Assouline] is capable of distinguishing
between the singer and the song," says New York 's Luc Sante.

            

               
                  Dispatches From the Freud Wars: Psychoanalysis and Its Passions
               ,
by John Forrester (Harvard University Press). A Cambridge don's assessment of
recent indictments of psychoanalysis--including its alleged sexism,
pseudoscience, and ineffectiveness--is deemed "dispassionate" (Sarah Boxer, the
New York Times Book Review ) by some, wishy-washy by others. Freudians
claim Forrester brings the thinker's hyperbolic critics down to earth, while
anti-Freudians say he pulls his punches. The book "strands the reader in the
musty groves of academe and mutes the passions of the subtitle," says Jungian
analyst Claire Douglas in the Washington Post Book World . (Harvard University Press plugs the book.)

            

               Updates
            

            The New
Republic 's Charles Lane says that News of a
Kidnapping merely extends Gabriel García Márquez's record of "dishonest"
journalism. "[T]he magical realist journalist is himself close to the people
and the events that he is writing about, but does not feel the need to disclose
this fully to his readers." ... 
               New York 's David Denby adds to
the ruckus over In the Company of Men : It "is a repellent experience--a
schematic, coldly cynical work that pretends to expose coldness and cynicism."
... In the Wall Street Journal , Roger Kimball attacks the
recently deceased William S. Burroughs and Allen
Ginsberg for their "pretentious, proselytizing pornography ... the Beats
really do mark an important moment in American culture, not as one of its
achievements, but as a grievous example of its degeneration."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Aug.
6:

            
               Movie -- Career
Girls ;

            
               Movie -- In the
Company of Men ;

            

               Movie -- Spawn ;

            
               Book -- Our Guys:
The Glen Ridge Rape and the Secret Life of the Perfect Suburb , by Bernard
Lefkowitz;

            
               Book -- Faith or
Fear: How Jews Can Survive in a Christian America , by Elliott Abrams;

            
               Death --William S.
Burroughs;

            

               Opera -- Palestrina .

            July
30:

            
               Movie -- Air Force
One ;

            
               Movie -- Mrs.
Brown ;

            
               Movie -- Star
Maps ;

            

               Architecture --National Airport;

            
               Book --
                  Martha
Stewart, Just Desserts: The Unauthorized Biography
               , by Jerry
Oppenheimer;

            

               Book -- A Book of Memories , by Peter Nadas, translated by Ivan
Sanders with Imre Goldstein.

            July
16:

            

               Movie -- Contact ;

            
               Movie -- Shall We
Dance? ;

            
               Book--
               Lawyerland:
What Lawyers Talk About When They Talk About the Law , by Lawrence
Joseph;

            
               Book -- Straight
Man , by Richard Russo;

            

               Television -- Roar (Fox);

            

               Theater -- Amy's View .

            July
9:

            
               Movie -- Men in
Black ;

            
               Book -- Women With
Men , by Richard Ford;

            
               Book -- American
Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence , by Pauline Maier;

            
               Book -- Man Without
a Face: The Autobiography of Communism's Greatest Spymaster , by Markus Wolf
with Anne McElvoy;

            
               Art --"Keith Haring"
(Whitney Museum of American Art);

            
               Television -- Oz
(HBO);

            

               Music --Lilith Fair.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
