
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Volcano
                (20 th Century Fox). The backlash against
natural-disaster movies shifts into high gear. Despite Volcano 's
superior special effects, critics deem it inferior to the last volcano movie,
Dante's Peak . Problems: 1) The plot, or the lack thereof. "Without
special effects as the main attraction, there would be no movie here at all,"
writes the New York Times ' Janet Maslin. 2) Overacting by stars Tommy
Lee Jones and Anne Heche, in lieu of actual roles to play. 3) A volcano that is
both implausible and boring. "Volcano is a movie without a villain or a
mystery. The volcano has no quirks of personality, because it has no
personality. Defeating it is a breeze, because it is dumb, mechanical, and
predictable" (David Plotz, Slate. Also see the official Volcano page.)

            
               
                  Romy and Michele's
High School Reunion
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Classic chick flick or a
bad Bill & Ted knockoff? The New York Times ' Maslin says that
Mira Sorvino ( Mighty Aphrodite ) and Lisa Kudrow ( Friends ), in
their roles as bimbettes avenging the wrongs of high school, "elevat[e]
bubble-headedness to new levels of comic ingenuity." The Washington
Post 's Desson Howe calls the film a "sublime comedy" about "bitchiness
[and] oneupwomanship." But Variety 's Todd McCarthy says the movie "looks
like a peroxided Clueless wannabe straggling along to the party two
years after it's over." (Click here for
clips.)

            

               Pop
            

            
               
                  Share My World
               ,
by Mary J. Blige (MCA). A makeover for "the queen of hip-hop soul": from
gangsta girl to pop diva crooning Natalie Cole covers. "Mary J. Blige has been
to charm school," says Newsweek 's Allison Samuels. It works. "Blige
deserves a place among pop's premiere female vocalists," writes Christopher
John Farley in Time . (You can hear clips from Blige's latest album at
MCA's
site.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Locked in the Cabinet
               , by Robert Reich (Knopf). Whatever their
ideological stripe, critics agree that the former labor secretary's
self-deprecating style (he makes a lot of jokes about being short) masks a
massive ego (he thinks he has all the answers). The Weekly Standard 's
Andrew Ferguson says, "Reich leaves the 'nuts and bolts' of politics a
supremely unhappy man, convinced as strongly as ever of his superiority to its
processes, its practitioners, and to the man who gave him the coolest job he'll
ever have." However, reviewers do praise Reich's lucid prose, pointed
observations, and sense of humor: "There is a Thurberesque side to him" (Evan
Thomas, the New York Times Book Review ). (See Herbert
Stein's review in Slate. Random House plugs the book here.)

            

               
                  Anything Your Little Heart Desires: An American Family Story
               , by
Patricia Bosworth (Simon & Schuster). Not all memoirs are evil.
Critical approbation for this one about Bosworth's father, Bartley Crum, a
corporate lawyer who represented William Randolph Hearst and the "Hollywood 10"
and committed suicide during the McCarthy era. Bosworth, the biographer of
Diane Arbus and Montgomery Clift, "provides a vivid sense of upper-middle-class
life in the early Cold War years, when prominent citizens suddenly turned their
backs on colleagues such as Crum and called them Communist dupes," writes Kathy
Deacon in the Village Voice . In the New York Times Book Review ,
Richard Lingeman says Bosworth "tells her elegiac story in a tone that is
admirably restrained, in prose that conveys strong feeling by
understatement."

            
               
                  Hystories: Hysterical
Epidemics and Modern Media
               , by Elaine Showalter (Columbia University
Press). The feminist literary critic's claim that the Gulf War and
chronic-fatigue syndromes are merely psychological maladies meets with
predictably high levels of vitriol. In the New York Times Book Review ,
social-psychologist Carol Tavris takes Showalter to task for using literary
Freudianism to explain real problems: "Sometimes a headache is a 'language of
distress' and sometimes it's a tumor." Also, Tavris says recent revelations
that Gulf War troops may indeed have been exposed to chemical weapons belie
Showalter's case. In the New Republic , the anti-Freudian Frederick Crews
describes Showalter's theory of hysteria as itself an "attempt to whip up a
little hysteria." (Columbia University Press plugs the book.)

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  Titanic
                (Lunt-Fontanne Theatre, New York City). Surprisingly, the
$10 million spectacular isn't Broadway's all-time biggest flop. But "that is
probably the most exciting thing that can be said about it," says the New
York Times ' Ben Brantley. Critics complain that the musical fails to
deliver the extravagant sets and staging they've come to expect from theatrical
blockbusters. By sidestepping obvious clichés (rushing crowds, crashing waves)
in an effort "to make a sensitive and tasteful show about a trashy subject,"
says Newsday 's Linda Winer, the production achieves only "banality."

            
               
                  The Little
Foxes
                (Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center, New York City).
Apparently, not even the sure-fire plot machinations of Lillian Hellman and
beguiling wiles of actress Stockard Channing can rescue this Lincoln Center
production from its pretensions. The play "is so wildly miscast and so
haplessly misconceived that it is hard to figure out what its creators exactly
had in mind," says the New York Times ' Brantley. (His best guess: a
Freudian essay on lovelessness and neurosis.) The Washington Post 's
Lloyd Rose calls the production "a preachy bore."

            

               Dance
            

            "In Honor of the Divine Lou
Harrison," the Mark Morris Dance Group (Brooklyn Academy of Music, New York
City). The bad boy of modern dance takes on Lou Harrison, the eclectic
classical composer. "As you watch the stage, your brain seems to get bigger,
your life more interesting," says the Wall Street Journal 's Joan
Acocella. The main attraction: a live orchestra (Yo-Yo Ma played opening
night). Also, Morris' much-praised penchant for dancers with unusually shaped
bodies. "It is unique among the major companies of its kind in looking utterly
human, like a cross-section of real people who just happen to move vividly or
be capable of generating a potent atmosphere" (Tobi Tobias, New
York ).

            

               Update
            

            More Mailer
bashing: In the Washington Post , Steven Moore says that Norman Mailer's
retelling of Jesus' life reads "like a simplified novelization [of the gospels]
for grade-school children." In the New Republic , James Wood says, "Each
new book by him is worse than the last; he has become a bibliographer's
definition of nostalgia. He remembers that one must be daring as an artist, but
has forgotten to what end."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            April
23:

            
               Book -- The Gospel
According to the Son, by Norman Mailer ;

            
               Book -- American
Pastoral , by Philip Roth;

            
               Book -- W.B. Yeats:
A Life. 1: The Apprentice Mage, 1865-1914 , by R.F. Foster;

            
               Book -- Purple
America , by Rick Moody;

            
               Television -- In the
Gloaming ;

            
               Opera -- The Ring of
the Nibelung ;

            
               Movie -- Murder at
1600 ;

            

               Movie -- Kissed .

            April
16:

            
               Art --"Picasso: The
Early Years, 1892-1906" (National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.);

            

               Movie -- Anaconda ;

            
               Movie -- Grosse
Pointe Blank ;

            
               Theater -- An
American Daughter ;

            
               Book -- Naked ,
by David Sedaris;

            
               Book -- The Blue
Flower , by Penelope Fitzgerald;

            
               Book -- Gut
Symmetries , by Jeanette Winterson;

            

               Book -- Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917 , by T.S.
Eliot, edited by Christopher Ricks.

            April
9:

            
               Theater -- A Doll's
House ;

            
               Movie -- The
Saint ;

            
               Movie -- Paradise
Road ;

            
               Movie -- Inventing
the Abbotts ;

            
               Movie -- That Old
Feeling ;

            
               Book --Allen Ginsberg
(1926-1997);

            
               Book -- After the
Madness: A Judge's Own Prison Memoir , by Sol Wachtler;

            

               Book -- The Big Picture , by Douglas Kennedy.

            April
2:

            
               Book -- Texaco ,
by Patrick Chamoiseau, translated by Rose-Myriam Réjouis and Val Vinokurov;

            
               Book -- John Wayne's
America: The Politics of Celebrity , by Garry Wills;

            
               Book -- The Divorce
Culture , by Barbara Dafoe Whitehead;

            
               Book -- When the
Sons of Heaven Meet the Daughters of the Earth , by Fernanda Eberstadt;

            
               Movie -- The Devil's
Own ;

            
               Movie -- Chasing
Amy ;

            
               Theater -- The Young
Man From Atlanta .

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
