
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Texaco
               , by Patrick Chamoiseau, translated by Rose-Myriam Réjouis
and Val Vinokurov (Pantheon). Chamoiseau's 1992 novel, newly translated from
the French, wins him instant canonization and comparisons to Gabriel García
Márquez, V.S. Naipaul, Salman Rushdie, and Michel de Montaigne. This 150-year
history of a black Martinique family garnered France's prestigious Prix
Goncourt. It earns praise for having restored grittiness to the whimsical
tradition of magical realism. And its Creole-inflected language is described as
"prose saturated in a kind of bemused gorgeousness" (Richard Bernstein, the
New York Times ). The New Yorker 's John Updike dissents, calling
Chamoiseau too self-conscious, "a Céline who has read Lévi-Strauss and Derrida.
... His narrative ... flows sluggishly, molasses flecked with bits of sugar
cane."

            

               
                  John Wayne's America: The Politics of Celebrity
               , by Garry Wills
(Simon & Schuster). A universal pan for the hyper-prolific cultural
critic's latest book. Wills' analysis of Wayne as a cultural icon is deemed
pretentious, long-winded, and jargon-filled. In the New York Review of
Books , Michael Wood says Wills resorted to "a bundle of rather weary
paradoxes: the lost but unforgettable frontier, the wilderness which is
society's favorite dream." (Excerpts of the book are available here.)

            
               
                  The
Divorce Culture
               , by Barbara Dafoe Whitehead (Knopf). Harsh words from
across the ideological spectrum for Whitehead's attack on divorce and the
permissive culture that tolerates it. The New York Times Book Review
says her scholarship rates no higher than the "the popular 'expert opinion' and
self-help books she rightly criticizes." The New Republic 's Margaret
Talbot says Whitehead and other "divorcephobes" ignore America's history of
liberal divorce laws, the economics of women in the workplace, and common
sense: "Parents who make each other's lives a snarling misery probably won't
make their children's lives a bower of happiness." Even the conservative
Weekly Standard faults Whitehead for shoddy scholarship and pop
psychology. (For more debate on divorce, see the "Dialogue" between
Katha Pollitt and David Blankenhorn in Slate.)

            

               
                  When the Sons of Heaven Meet the Daughters of the Earth
               , by
Fernanda Eberstadt (Knopf). Eberstadt's sendup of the New York art world of the
1980s is pronounced a success. In the New York Times , Roxana Robinson
says the novel--about an Upper West Side patroness and a New Hampshire painter
hailed as the "white Basquiat"--has fun with "philosophical questions": "Where
is the useful intersection between art and commerce? How corrosive is fame?
What is Outsider Art, anyway?" The Washington Times ' Brooke Allen likes
the book, but complains that Eberstadt's tone becomes "overly messianic": It
sometimes reads like a "pitch against the National Endowment for the Arts."

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The
Devil's Own
                (Columbia Pictures). Production problems and bad advance
press boded ill for the latest thriller from Alan J. Pakula ( All the
President's Men ). Multiple writers tried their hand at the script, which
star Brad Pitt publicly attacked. But the consensus is that the film emerges
solid--if uninspired--with grace notes of moral complexity. The friendship
between an honest New York cop (Harrison Ford) and an Irish Republican Army
terrorist (Pitt) eschews the "black-and-white formulas" typical of suspense
films, says Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly ). The New
Yorker 's Terrence Rafferty, on the other hand, finds the premise "an
astonishingly banal male-bonding motif." (Click here for The Devil's Own home page.)

            

               
                  Chasing Amy
                (Miramax). Kevin Smith's low-budget romantic
comedy--the third in a series that began with Clerks (1994)--wins favor
for introducing a twist into the familiar boy-meets-girl plot--here, boy meets
lesbian. "As obstacles in the course of true love go, that's fairly major,"
says Rafferty. The film is a "devastating critique of the hetero male ego,"
says David Ansen of Newsweek . The direction, however, is dismissed by
Rafferty as "amateurish." (Miramax
serves up stills and clips.)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  The
Young Man From Atlanta
                (Longacre Theatre, New York). Mixed reviews for
the Broadway debut of Horton Foote's Pulitzer Prize-winning play. Critics
applaud performances by Rip Torn ( The Larry Sanders Show ) and Shirley
Knight as a middle-aged Houston couple mourning their son's death: "They get
all the small regional footnotes of gesture and inflection just right. But
these actors also convey the sense of an internal furnace of pain and anxiety
that gives fevered glow to such minutiae" (Ben Brantley, the New York
Times ). However, the play itself is found wanting. Says New York 's
John Simon, "There's good down-home, Southern-fried atmosphere ... but where
the hell is the play?"

            

               Updates:
            

            In the
New Republic , Tony Judt calls Sidney Blumenthal's claim in The New
Yorker that Whittaker Chambers attacked Alger Hiss because of spurned
gay love "a smear, 1990s style. Blumenthal's contemptible insinuations are a
reminder that there is nearly always something provincial and self-serving
about the response of American intellectuals to Whittaker Chambers."...
In the New York Review of Books , Tatyana Tolstaya praises David Remnick,
author of Resurrection, a book about post-Communist Russia, as "a satirist
of Gogolian persuasion; he combines the grotesque with the lyrical."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            March
26:

            
               Event -- The 69th
Academy Awards ;

            
               Art --"1997 Biennial
Exhibition" (Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City);

            
               Art --Willem de
Kooning (1904-1997);

            
               Movie -- Liar
Liar ;

            

               Movie -- Crash ;

            

               Movie -- Selena ;

            
               Movie -- The
Godfather ;

            
               Book -- The Coming
Conflict with China , by Ross H. Munro and Richard Bernstein;

            

               Book -- Radical Son: A Journey Through Our Times , by David
Horowitz.

            March
19:

            
               Movie -- Return of
the Jedi: Special Edition ;

            
               Movie -- City of
Industry ;

            
               Opera -- Jackie
O ;

            
               Theater -- Antony
and Cleopatra ;

            
               Book -- Arkansas:
Three Novellas , by David Leavitt;

            
               Book -- Deadly
Feasts: Tracking the Secrets of a Terrifying New Plague , by Richard
Rhodes;

            

               Book -- Resurrection: The Struggle for a New Russia , by David
Remnick;

            

               Book -- The Three-Arched Bridge , by Ismail Kadare, translated by
John Hodgson.

            March
12:

            
               Movie -- Private
Parts ;

            
               Movie -- Jungle 2
Jungle ;

            
               Theater -- A Funny
Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum ;

            
               Book -- The Kiss: A
Memoir , by Kathryn Harrison;

            
               Book -- Giovanni's
Gift , by Bradford Morrow;

            
               Art --"Exiles and
Émigrés: The Flight of European Artists from Hitler";

            

               Television -- The Practice .

            March
5:

            
               Movie -- Donnie
Brasco ;

            
               Movie -- Smilla's
Sense of Snow ;

            
               Music --David Helfgott
World Tour;

            
               Television -- Crisis
Center ;

            

               Television -- Feds ;

            

               Television -- Arsenio ;

            
               Television -- Just
Shoot Me ;

            
               Book -- Crazy
Rhythms: Richard Nixon and All That Jazz , by Leonard Garment;

            
               Books --First Novel
Roundup;

            

               Theater -- The Last Night of Ballyhoo .

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
