
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Dec. 6
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Dec. 6)
            

            The cover
editorial argues that "road pricing" will solve the world's traffic problems by
making drivers pay for their privilege. Charging varying amounts for driving at
peak and off-peak times will cut down on congestion and pollution. Revenues
could fund public transportation. A profile salutes pathological downsizer
"Chainsaw" Al Dunlap for having the guts to fire workers in order to turn
companies around. The profile also asserts that Dunlap's slash-and-burn
technique would be ineffective for all but the sickest firms. (For

                  Slate
               's take on Dunlap, see "The Chainsaw
Capitalist.") A few weeks ago there was a media flurry about a computer
that composed classical music. In this week's Economist , a computer that
can improvise jazz. Its programmer enters parameters of style and tempo. The
computer's getting better: Many experts can no longer distinguish it from a
live musician.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Dec. 22
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Dec. 5)
            

            Following
Newsweek 's lead, TNR puts Amistad , Steven Spielberg's new
film about a slave revolt, on the cover. Among four related stories: a rave
review for the film and an appreciation of John Quincy Adams, a major
Amistad character and "one of the only genuine intellectuals ever to
occupy the White House." An article says the Russian military is too weak to
invade other countries (good news), but also too weak to prevent its soldiers
from selling arms to terrorists (bad news). Also, a report from the Rev. Moon's
mass-marriage ceremony: Most of the newlyweds will go back to their own
hometowns after the wedding. They may or may not see their spouses in the
future.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Dec. 7
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Dec. 4)
            

            Yet
another "special issue"--the fourth in three months. The subject of the 20-odd
stories: American religion. A story follows a Muslim teen-ager living in
suburban Virginia. Her classmates ridiculed her head scarf, so she took it off.
Her mom doesn't like her punk nose ring, but she leaves it in. An article
describes a new medical study about prayer: When devout "healers" prayed for
the health of arthritic patients--without the patients' knowledge--the
patients' health improved. Doctors are dubious. A Unitarian recounts her
epiphany: A voice in the woods told her to become a minister. Also, kudos for
the Alabama Freethought Association, a league of atheists in the heart of the
Bible Belt. They meet on Sundays and lampoon Christians: "Right about now,"
says one, "the folks in town are sitting in church, waving a book that makes no
sense and that most of them haven't even read."

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , Dec. 8
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Dec. 2)
            

            The mags discover the same
trend: the exodus to exurbia. Time 's cover story on small towns follows several couples who
gave up fast-track lives to settle down in villages. Why the migration?
Telecommuting and the great job market make mobility easier than ever. A
shorter Newsweek story labels these dropouts "Young Unhappy
Professionals" (unhappy, that is, till they drop out).

            
               Newsweek 's cover
package, pegged to the release of Steven Spielberg's film Amistad ,
assesses the legacy of slavery. Among the conclusions: A national apology for
slavery would be hollow and facile, but America should erect a slavery memorial
on the Mall. Newsweek interviews John Hope Franklin, chairman of the
presidential advisory board on race. (He's against an apology, and for
affirmative action. See "The Sound of One Hand Talking" for 
                  Slate
               's take on
Franklin and the panel.) An accompanying review raves about Amistad
(though the magazine inexplicably calls it "controversial").

            

               Time breaks the news that Bill Ford Jr. will become chairman of
Ford in 1999. Ford, who has been running the family-owned Detroit Lions for the
past two years, will be the first Ford to head the automaker in a decade.
Time also reports on the making of Titanic . The film cost
$200 million, and its producers are terrified. Director James Cameron
contributes a short defense of his movie, but an accompanying review pans it:
great special effects, hackneyed story.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Dec. 8
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Dec. 2)
            

            
               U.S.
News kicks off the Christmas shopping season with a cover
story on junk mail. Lots of insider info about how junk mailers reel you
in: real stamps, pseudo-official envelopes, and "P.S." messages. Some high-end
retailers make more money by selling their mailing lists than by selling their
products. (Requisite statistic: On average, each American receives 553 pieces
of junk mail a year.) A story praises the Trinity Foundation, a Christian community in
Texas that investigates fraud by televangelists and publishes a Christian
satire magazine called the Door . The annual
guide to personal finance advises investors to stop worrying about
inflation: It's gone.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Dec. 8
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Dec. 2)
            

            An
article chronicles Rupert Murdoch's quest to buy the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Murdoch, who has decided that sports will be his international TV anchor, is
trying to monopolize broadcast rights for California sports teams. But Atlanta
Braves owner and Murdoch rival Ted Turner may try to block approval of
Murdoch's $311-million Dodgers bid. A profile of the vice president takes the
usual Gore psychoanalysis a step further. It agrees that Gore's outer
robotic-ness masks a warm jocularity, but argues that the warm jocularity
itself masks Gore's fundamental emotional coolness. Gore admits that his "no
controlling legal authority" press conference was a mistake. A "Comment" by
Robert Reich argues that Republicans and Democrats have switched places.
Republicans used to be the party of "noble aspirations" and Democrats used to
be the party of "just causes." Now Democrats tout bland aspirations (like
racial healing) while Republicans fervently champion causes like tax reform and
school vouchers.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , Dec. 8
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Dec. 2)
            

            A cover
story makes the case for national education reform. Decentralization, the usual
conservative solution, isn't helping schools. National policies could increase
the number of charter schools, cripple local education bureaucracies, and limit
the power of evil teachers unions. A piece calls Clinton's race commission the
"Disgrace Commission." It's a group of affirmative-action supporters appointed
to rubber-stamp Clinton policies, the article says. The most interesting
section of the magazine is the letters page, where gay-rights advocates
exchange fire with William Bennett over Bennett's recent piece attacking
them.

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
