
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Jan. 31
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Jan. 31)
            

            Clinton
should resign if there is even a "shred of truth" in the Lewinsky story, argues
a forceful cover editorial. Regardless of whether he committed any criminal
act, Clinton should quit if he had sex with Lewinsky and lied to America about
it: "It would confirm a clear pattern of Clintonite behavior, one of reckless
risk-taking followed by deceit. ... That is unworthy of a president."
... A profile of Dan Quayle hints that he could be Jimmy Carter to
Clinton's Nixon. If he sustains his righteous, conservative image, he'll fare
well in the 2000 presidential race. Problem: He's still a dull speaker and
mediocre thinker. ... An article claims that once-secular Iraq is
embracing Islam. Saddam Hussein is building the world's largest mosque in order
to improve his reputation in the Islamic world. His subjects are returning to
Islam because it's their only relief from poverty, hunger, and
unemployment.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Feb. 16
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Jan. 30)
            

            Seven
stories on Lewinsky. One predicts that Democrats will try to dump Clinton
quickly if the allegations turn out to be true: They don't want him dragging
the party down to defeat in 1998 or 2000 as Nixon did the Republicans in 1974.
Republicans will be happy to let Clinton cook slowly. The "TRB" column says the
essential difference between Watergate and Clinterngate is that while Clinton
may be personally slimy, his entire presidency is not founded on corruption and
deception. A piece condemns Hillary Clinton for standing by her man. A
supposedly ardent feminist, she has smeared the reputations of Clinton's female
accusers in order to protect her political power. ... The editorial
endorses a "just war" against Iraq but worries that Clinton is too tarnished to
lead it.

            

               
                  Esquire , February 1998
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Jan. 29)
            

            The cover
story: a look at O.J.'s life, post-trial. Simpson plays golf six days a week,
chats amiably with gawking tourists outside his house, and thinks he'll be a
star again. The writer's conclusion: O.J. himself no longer knows if he's
guilty. The piece is the source of the startling, much-repeated O.J. quote:
"Let's say I committed this crime. Even if I did do this, it would have to have
been because I loved her very much, right?" ... A story reports from a
dwarf convention that is the main courting ground for little people. Dwarf guys
complain that some dwarf women won't date anyone under 4 feet tall. Fact:
Dwarfs socially stratify each other based on extent of
deformity--achondroplastic dwarfs (more proportional, with nondeformed faces)
rule the roost. ... 
               Esquire profiles a Utah man with four wives
and 31 children. He's not in it for the sex (which is solely for procreation),
he owes on four mortgages, he's wanted by the law for bigamy (quadragamy?), and
he must remember eight birthdays and two wedding anniversaries in a single
month. Why does he do it? It's his duty to God. The Mormon Church, which has
outlawed polygamy, excommunicated him.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Feb. 1
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Jan. 29)
            

            Hong
Kongers are increasingly restless about Chinese rule. As the economic crisis
rattles the former colony, its residents want a larger voice in running it. The
worry: Hong Kong could become like its Chinese sister city Shenzhen, which is
capitalist but wild, lawless, and cruel to workers. ... A piece
describes the burgeoning market for Cuban girls: Beautiful young girls throw
themselves at tourists in hopes of becoming kept mistresses. A few American men
have actually moved to Cuba to get married. ... The cover story lionizes
Chuck Close, who manages to paint astonishing Pointillist portraits despite
near-total paralysis. His work is described as "Friendly Art," a backlash
against modern art's harshness. Conclusion: He deserves the $400,000 he gets
for each painting because he's such a good guy.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , Feb. 2
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Jan. 27)
            

            
               Time has the better
cover shot: Lewinsky, wearing a dashing DKNY beret, standing next to the
president. But Newsweek 's coverage trumps Time 's. It publishes an
exhaustive account of the story to date. Its package includes a long, exclusive
excerpt from the Tripp tapes and an essay by George Stephanopoulos. The
once-loyal Clintonite distances himself from the president: "Right now, I don't
know whether to be sad, angry, or both. But if the Lewinsky charges are valid,
I know this: I'm livid." Newsweek also explains its decision to hold
Michael Isikoff's story last week. Primary reason: The tape Newsweek
heard did not confirm or disprove the obstruction-of-justice allegation.

            
               Time counters with an
evolutionary psychologist's take on Clinton's zipper problem and a defense of Matt Drudge, who first leaked the story. (Full
disclosure: 
                  Slate
                editor Michael Kinsley wrote the Drudge
defense.) Time 's main article emphasizes Hillary's role in the White House
reaction: While Bill crashed on a couch, she went into overdrive.

            In both
magazines: an examination of Kenneth Starr's legal case, a map of the White
House diagraming what (allegedly) happened where, a profile of Lewinsky, a profile of Vernon Jordan, and an armchair analysis of Clinton's
apparent sex compulsion.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Feb. 2
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Jan. 27)
            

            
               U.S.
News finishes a distant third: Its Monica coverage lacks diagrams, legal
analysis, and juicy tidbits. The cover image--the president superimposed on a
shadowy photo of Lewinsky--is wan. An essay says Washington is blowing the scandal out of proportion,
and an article wonders how Hillary endures her husband's infidelity.
(The theory: "Even if Clinton is unfaithful, his wife considers those who would
use that to ruin his political career as the really bad guys. Not her Bill.")
... An article claims that Medicare fraud artists, including
Russian crooks, bilk the government of billions of dollars per year. Phony
clinics and labs file false bills, and the system is so big that no one
notices. ... A survey on mutual funds warns that Fidelity, once a powerhouse, is
now merely average. The survey also advises investors to consider moving money
from stocks to bonds.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Feb. 2
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Jan. 27)
            

            In Monica
news: 1) A profile of Tripp ally/book agent Lucianne Goldberg describes her as
adventurous, aggressive, and rather amoral--a "seasoned Bond girl." Why did
Goldberg get involved? "Because it's fucking fascinating. I love dish!" She
denies a rumor that she had an affair with Lyndon Johnson. 2) A piece claims
that the president is the real victim of the scandal. He may lose his job,
reputation, and wife; the star-gazing Lewinsky, by contrast, found fame and
power. 3) In the "we never thought we'd read that in The 
               New
Yorker " category, a story wonders whether Clinton will be remembered as the
" 'pussy President.' " ... A long piece about fat condemns virtually all
popular diets (especially the high protein, low carb ones). Weight depends more
on genes and a chemical called leptin than on food intake. Good news for the
obese: Scientists believe they are close to understanding and controlling
leptin. ... Also, the magazine prints eight of Ted Hughes'
much-discussed new poems about Sylvia Plath.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , Feb. 2
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Jan. 27)
            

            The
general theme of Monica coverage: Clinton's presidency is over. The editorial
argues that Clinton has forfeited the second chance America gave him in 1992.
He's now proved himself "pathological," "unbalanced," and "compulsive." He has
a "character of infinite deception and self-deception." A piece urges
Republicans to use this time of Clinton paralysis to push through their agenda,
especially a ban on partial-birth abortions and a tax cut. An article says the
Lewinsky case will scare "many potential John Deans" into coming forward and
revealing more Clintonian crimes. ... The Standard warns that
Saddam Hussein is going to win the current standoff with the United States:
Even if we launch airstrikes, he will preserve his chemical weapons and his
hold on power. The only satisfactory option: A ground invasion that
deposes/kills him.

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
