
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The
Empire Strikes Back: Special Edition
                (Lucasfilm Ltd., 20 th
Century Fox). The second film in the Star Wars trilogy takes in $24
million its opening weekend and receives rave reviews. "Empire Strikes
Back is the best of three Star Wars films," declares the Chicago
Sun-Times ' Roger Ebert. "It managed to prefigure the power-mad 80's," says
the New York Times ' Janet Maslin, comparing Darth Vader to
merger-and-acquisitions-mad corporate titans. Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia
are said to have matured into actual characters (as opposed to cartoon ones),
and the sage Yoda makes his first appearance, "emerg[ing] from murky nature to
become the spiritual center of the whole Star 
               Wars game," says
the San Francisco Chronicle 's Peter Stack. (Slate's Louis
Menand explains Star Wars ' appeal. You can also visit the official
Star Wars site. )

            

               
                  Lost Highway
                (October Films). Critics denounce David Lynch's
latest picture as a soulless knockoff of other Lynch movies ( Blue
Velvet , Wild at 
               Heart , Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me ).
"We've visited this planet before," says Time's Richard Corliss. Among the elements of Lynch's
self-plagiarism: an eerie soundtrack, creepy characters ( femmes fatales ,
scary thugs, ghoulish freak), and lots of tawdry sex. Also, a shaggy-dog plot
that defies the laws of time and space. "The cries of 'Cheat!' that attended
the later episodes of Twin Peaks are likely to be heard again," says
Slate's David Edelstein. On the other hand, the film is said to look
great--"magnificent in the painterly way Mr. Lynch pioneered," says the Wall
Street Journal 's Joe Morgenstern. (Lost Highway's official site serves up bizarre
promos.)

            

               
                  Rosewood
                (Warner Brothers). Based on a hitherto little-known 1923
incident in which a white mob pillaged a black Florida town, Rosewood is
deemed important as history but insignificant as art. Director John Singleton
( Boyz N the Hood ) is accused of sentimentalizing his subject and
resorting to action-film banalities--"a sorry assortment of dramatic and visual
clichés that were retired from service, or should have been, decades ago," says
the Wall Street Journal 's Morgenstern. (Rosewood's
home page has video clips and the like.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Schindler's List
                (NBC, Feb. 23). NBC earns kudos for its
"sensitive" presentation of Steven Spielberg's 1993 Holocaust epic, which it
showed without ads, under the sponsorship of Ford. But the praise is tempered
by the observation that the film came in a package deal with Jurassic
Park and was broadcast in the middle of February sweeps. Critics note two
other ironies: 1) Schindler's List is the most graphic program ever
shown on network television. 2) Ford has its own unacknowledged history of
anti-Semitism. (Henry Ford once gave his workers free copies of The
Protocols of the Elders of Zion .)

            
               
                  Miss
Evers' Boys
                (HBO; click here for times). David Feldshuh's Pulitzer Prize-winning
play about the notorious Tuskegee Experiment has been adapted for television to
general acclaim. Alfre Woodard displays "sinewy intelligence and grace" (John
Leonard, New York ) and "unfailing dignity" (John O'Connor, the New
York 
               Times ) in the role of a black nurse who recruits black men for
a government research project about syphilis. (The men go untreated, and 28
die.) Laurence Fishburne "underplays [one of the patients] to smoldering
effect" (Leonard). (HBO plugs the movie at its site.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Monster: Living Off the Big Screen
               , by John Gregory Dunne (Random
House). The inside story of how Dunne and wife Joan Didion turned the Jessica
Savitch saga into the 1996 Disney picture Up Close and Personal makes
the cover of the March 2 New York Times Book Review , although
screenwriter Larry Gelbart summarizes, rather than evaluates, the book:
"Monster offers a crash course in getting a script through the hazards
of the present-day studio system." In the Los Angeles Times ,
producer/writer Michael Crichton applauds Dunne's breezy, professional tone:
"Shock and petty moralizing are the mark of an outsider." The New York
Review of Books complains that Dunne is too breezy: "This is what
makes him so readable, but it doesn't give him a voice for brooding."

            

               
                  American Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson
               , by Joseph J.
Ellis (Knopf). Historian Ellis earns praise for his contribution to Jefferson
scholarship. Ellis' twist: He's a moderate who neither censures the author of
the Declaration of Independence for his conflicted views on race nor dismisses
his political beliefs as insincere. "Jeffersonism is not Clintonism," says
historian Sean Wilentz in the New Republic . The Chicago Tribune ,
however, concludes that American Sphinx makes manifest so many
inconsistencies in Jefferson's thought that it may unwittingly be "the most
critical biography of Jefferson published in this century." (For more on the
Jefferson debate, see David Greenberg's "High Concept.")

            

               
                  Whittaker Chambers: A Biography
               , by Sam Tanenhaus (Random House).
Tanenhaus elevates Chambers to the pantheon of great American postwar
intellectuals and declares Alger Hiss a Soviet spy, and no critics object. Even
The Nation , famously defensive on the question of Hiss, calls the
biography "an honest and indispensable book that goes a long way toward
restoring to Chambers an elementary human plausibility" (gosh, thanks).
Tanenhaus accuses Chambers of having inadvertently instigated McCarthyism, and
"shows us Chambers' paranoia, his introversion, his sententiousness" (Stephen
Koch, the Wall Street Journal ). (Also, see Slate's mildly
critical review by Ann Douglas.)

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  Stanley
                (Circle in the Square, New York City). Two weeks ago, art
historian Simon Schama predicted in The 
               New Yorker that Pam Gems'
play about midcentury British painter Stanley Spencer, his wife, and his lover
would be received--unfairly, claimed Schama--as "yet another formulaic
contribution to the flourishing genre of painter-as-prick." Critics have proven
him right. The play is "Spencer's life reduced to Two Weddings and a
Funeral , a quaint and titillating Bloomsbury parallelogram," says the
Wall Street Journal 's Donald Lyons. All praise is reserved for the
production itself: "The staging is infinitely inventive," says New
York 's John Simon. Actor Anthony Sher, as Stanley, is "astonishing, as
though he were plugged into a power source the rest of the world had yet to
discover," says the New York Times ' Ben Brantley.

            

               Update
            

            The
New Republic 's Jed Perl trashes the late paintings of Willem de
Kooning. The Museum of Modern Art exhibition "is something new--the first
show dedicated to Alzheimer's chic."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            Feb.
19:

            
               Television -- Thomas
Jefferson ;

            

               Television -- Emma ;

            
               Movie
               --Absolute
Power ;

            
               Movie -- Blood and
Wine ;

            
               Book -- Gladstone: A
Biography , by Roy Jenkins;

            
               Book -- Asylum ,
by Patrick McGrath;

            
               Book -- Hungry
Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine , by Jasper Becker;

            

               Art --"Henry Darger: The Unreality of Being."

            Feb.
12:

            
               CD -- Pat Boone in a
Metal Mood: No More Mr. Nice Guy , by Pat Boone;

            
               Movie -- Dante's
Peak ;

            
               Movie -- When We Were
Kings ;

            
               Movie -- Prisoner of
the Mountains ;

            
               Book -- What Falls
Away: A Memoir , by Mia Farrow;

            
               Book -- Before the
Dawn: An Autobiography , by Gerry Adams;

            
               Book -- A Supposedly
Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again: Essays and Arguments , by David Foster
Wallace;

            

               Television -- The Chris Rock Show .

            Feb.
5:

            
               Book -- Personal
History , by Katharine Graham;

            
               Book -- What It Means
to Be a Libertarian: A Personal Interpretation , by Charles Murray;

            
               Book -- Do the
Windows Open? , by Julie Hecht;

            

               Movie -- Gridlock'd ;

            
               Movie -- Waiting for
Guffman ;

            
               Art --"Willem de
Kooning: The Late Paintings, the 1980s";

            
               Theater -- Men Are
From Mars, Women Are From Venus ;

            

               Event --"On Cultural Power: The Wilson-Brustein Discussion."

            Jan.
29:

            
               Art --"Giambattista
Tiepolo, 1696-1770";

            
               Event --Halftime at
Super Bowl XXXI;

            

               Movie -- Kolya ;

            
               Book -- Island of the
Colorblind , by Oliver Sacks;

            
               Theater -- The
Steward of Christendom ;

            
               Movie -- Fierce
Creatures ;

            

               Book -- Le Divorce , by Diane Johnson.

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
