
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  U-Turn
                (Sony Pictures). Most critics attack Oliver Stone's latest
movie, saying it exhibits his usual self-indulgence. Deemed particularly
offensive are the skewed camera angles and choppy editing--"the Big Fat
Over-Produced and Over-Directed Oliver Stone treatment" (Stephen Hunter, the
Washington Post ). The plot--which has Sean Penn stranded in a bizarre
desert town and caught between a real-estate mogul (Nick Nolte) and his
stepdaughter/wife (Jennifer Lopez), each of whom asks him to murder the
other--is called "a primer in hard-boiled clichés" (Mike Clark, USA
Today ). Exempted from the general drubbing is Billy Bob Thornton's funny
turn as an unhygienic redneck mechanic. (See the official site.)

            

               
                  Washington Square
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Applause for Europa,
Europa director Agnieszka Holland's feminist adaptation of Henry James'
novel, starring Albert Finney as an overbearing father and Jennifer Jason Leigh
as his stubborn daughter. Washington Square is said to compare favorably
with last winter's revisionist Portrait of a Lady , since it "respects
James' complexities and bitter ironies" (David Ansen, Newsweek ). Critics
also praise its "brusque, energetic pace" (Janet Maslin, the New York
Times ) and Leigh's "heartbreakingly good" performance ( People ). The
New Republic 's Stanley Kauffmann dissents, calling the film "ill at
ease, uncomfortable, straining for effect." (Download a trailer here.)

            

               
                  Soul Food
                (20 th Century Fox). Like Waiting to
Exhale , this film about the black bourgeoisie rakes in unexpectedly huge
receipts--$30.4 million in two weeks. Some critics praise the film for
featuring a hard-working family instead of Hollywood's usual black "pimps and
junkies" (Roger Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ). Others say it just
replaces a negative stereotype with a schmaltzy one: "[I]t pushes emotional
buttons with all the subtlety of a poke in the baby-back ribs" (Richard
Corliss, Time ). (Photos and the like are available here.)

            

               Architecture
            

            

               Guggenheim Museum (Bilbao, Spain). Critics anoint Los Angeles architect
Frank Gehry's sprawling, postmodern titanium-and-stone edifice "one of the
greatest buildings of the twentieth century" (Calvin Tomkins, The New
Yorker ). (Click here for a photo.) Gehry wins praise for his idiosyncratic,
"cartoonish" style--the New York Times ' Herbert Muschamp calls his
innovations reminiscent of Frank Lloyd Wright. Some critics worry that the
magnificent building will overshadow the art it houses, which will be mostly
borrowed from the museum's New York branch.

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  Toward the End of Time
               , by John Updike (Knopf). The novelist's
47 th book is pronounced a "rare misfire" (Jeff Giles,
Newsweek ). Set in 2020 after a nuclear war, it is lambasted as
consisting mainly of an old man's "bombast" (Richard Eder, the Los Angeles
Times ) about death, sex, and excrement. "How could such a gifted writer
produce such a lousy book?" (Michiko Kakutani, the New York Times ). One
admirer is Margaret Atwood, writing in the New York Times Book Review :
Updike "manages an amazing range of emotions with his usual grace and
dexterity." (Another is Slate's Paul Berman. Click here for his
review and here for an excerpt from the book.)

            

               Death
            

            
               Roy
Lichtenstein (1923-1997). Upon his death, the pop artist ascends from the
controversial to the canonical. Having endlessly debated the staying power of
his '60s comic-strip sendups, most critics now conclude his art will last.
"With good humor and icy elegance ... Lichtenstein was able to construct an art
that approached real monumentality," says Time 's Robert Hughes. Critics
also say Lichtenstein succeeded as both technical painter and social
commentator, and that he was ahead of his time: "[H]e was a saboteur, offering
1990s irony in the 1960s" (Michael Kimmelman, the New York Times ).

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Oct.
1:

            
               Movie -- The
Edge ;

            
               Movie -- The
Peacemaker ;

            
               Book -- Big Trouble:
A Murder in a Small Western Town Sets Off a Struggle for the Soul of
America , by J. Anthony Lukas;

            

               Book -- Timequake , by Kurt Vonnegut;

            
               Music -- Time Out of
Mind , by Bob Dylan, and Bridges to Babylon , by the Rolling
Stones;

            

               Television -- ER : "Ambush" (NBC);

            

               Art --"Sensations: Young British Artists From the Saatchi Collection"
(Royal Academy of Art, London).

            Sept.
24:

            
               Book -- The
Royals , by Kitty Kelley;

            

               Book -- Underworld , by Don DeLillo;

            
               Book -- Great
Apes , by Will Self;

            
               Art --"Robert
Rauschenberg: A Retrospective" (Guggenheim Museums and Ace Gallery, New
York);

            
               Movie -- A Thousand
Acres ;

            
               Movie -- The Ice
Storm ;

            

               Television -- Veronica's Closet (NBC).

            Sept.
17:

            
               Movie -- L.A.
Confidential ;

            
               Movie -- In &
Out ;

            

               Television -- Nothing Sacred (ABC);

            

               Television -- Brooklyn South (CBS);

            

               Television -- Michael Hayes (CBS);

            
               Music -- Candle in
the Wind 1997 , by Elton John;

            

               Museum --Museum of Jewish Heritage: A Living Memorial to the
Holocaust.

            Sept.
10:

            
               Television -- Sister
Wendy's Story of Painting (PBS);

            
               Television -- Ally
McBeal (Fox);

            
               Movie -- She's So
Lovely ;

            

               Movie -- Sunday ;

            
               Book -- The Farewell
Symphony , by Edmund White;

            

               Book -- America in Black and White: One Nation, Indivisible , by
Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
