
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  G.I. Jane
                (Hollywood Pictures). After panning Demi Moore's
performances in The Scarlet Letter and Striptease as stolid and
humorless, most critics say that this movie revives her career. Cast as an
indomitable woman who endures hellish training with an all-male Navy squadron,
Moore "becomes perversely spectacular" (Janet Maslin, the New York
Times ) and transcends the movie's "banal premises and predictable
conclusion" (Richard Schickel, Time ). But some critics find the
fascination of director Ridley Scott ( Alien , Thelma & Louise )
with Moore's suffering hopelessly sadistic. And others say she is as humorless
as ever. (See Sarah Kerr's review in Slate and the G.I. Jane site.)

            

               
                  Mimic
                (Dimension Films). Reviewers are divided over whether this
unusually dark horror film--starring Mira Sorvino as a scientist who hatches
killer cockroaches--represents B-movie brilliance or garden-variety trash. Some
praise director Guillermo Del Toro for manipulating Gothic conventions and
sprinkling the film with Catholic imagery and allusions to classic films. He
manages, says the Los Angeles Times ' Kenneth Turan, to "bring a sense of
style to the genre's oldest tricks." Others say that his efforts to shock
outweigh his attempts to build suspense. "[N]othing more than a standard-issue
big-bug item," says Variety 's Todd McCarthy. (Click here for the
Mimic site.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Already Dead: A California Gothic
               , by Denis Johnson
(HarperCollins). Praise, for the most part, for Denis Johnson's crime novel
about a Nietzsche-quoting vagabond who agrees to help a New Age marijuana
farmer kill his wife. It's "a sort of Stephen King novel for highbrows" (David
Gates, the New York Times Book Review ) that combines "existential
bleakness" (David Ulin, Newsday ) and "breezy silliness" (Bill Kent, the
Washington Post Book World ). The New York Times ' Michiko Kakutani
dissents, calling Already Dead "simultaneously pretentious, sentimental,
bubble-headed and gratuitously violent."

            
               
                  The
One Best Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Efficiency
               , by
Robert Kanigel (Viking). This biography of the original apostle of "scientific
management" and industrial efficiency is dismissed as fairly conventional, but
it does spark a debate over Taylor's legacy. Left-leaning critics such as
historian Jackson Lears, writing in the New Republic , say that the
widespread adoption of Taylor's theories amounted to "a horror story" in which
cold-blooded management stripped workers of their last shreds of autonomy.
Conservatives call Taylor's vision benign. "It certainly came in handy when
Hitler was rampant," writes George Will in the New York Times Book
Review .

            

               Music
            

            
               
                  The
Dance
               , by Fleetwood Mac (Reprise). The '70s supergroup reunites for a
concert album, ending 10 years of feuding. Critics' doubts about whether the
middle-aged rockers have any staying power are overcome; they praise Fleetwood
Mac's new songs, their '70s sound notwithstanding. "For these expert purveyors
of Me-Generation romantic angst, the thrill is clearly not gone," says the
Los Angeles Times ' Elysa Gardner. Critics comb the new songs for details
about the group's squabbles: Fleetwood Mac airs "every piece of dirty laundry
they had" (Jim Farber, Entertainment Weekly ). (Audio and video clips are
available here.)

             

            

               Television
            

            
               
                  Good
News
                (UPN; Mondays, 9 p.m. EDT/PDT). Critics say UPN's new series about
a novice African-American preacher may be the network's first half-decent show.
It "has heart and charm and not just the usual gag reflex," says the
Washington Post 's Tom Shales. The rest of the new UPN lineup--debuting a
month before other networks' fall programs--consists mostly of sitcoms that are
generally condemned for mindlessness and tastelessness. Especially reviled is
Hitz , starring trash-talking comedian Andrew Dice Clay, which suffers
from too many penis jokes and a "gratingly loud laugh track" (Caryn James, the
New York Times ). (UPN plugs
its shows.)

            

               Update
            

            Plaudits
follow pans for the revival of the musical On the
Town. Time 's Richard Corliss says, "It's like a vivid old New
Yorker cartoon, animated by Tex Avery. ... It works terrifically," and the
New York Observer 's John Heilpern says it "has us ... falling in love
with the city all over again."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Aug.
20:

            
               Movie -- Cop
Land ;

            
               Movie -- The Full
Monty ;

            
               Music -- Be Here
Now , Oasis;

            

               Theater -- 1776 ;

            
               Theater -- On the
Town ;

            
               Television -- George
Wallace (TNT);

            
               Books -- A Fan's
Notes , by Frederick Exley, and Misfit: The Strange Life of Frederick
Exley , by Jonathan Yardley;

            
               Book -- Apaches ,
by Lorenzo Carcaterra.

            Aug.
13:

            
               Movie -- Conspiracy
Theory ;

            
               Movie -- Love
Serenade ;

            

               Television -- Vibe and The 
               Keenen 
               Ivory

               Wayans 
               Show ;

            

               Event/Television --Garth Brooks in Central Park/ Garth Brooks Live
(HBO);

            
               Art --"Sculpture of
Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory";

            
               Book -- Simenon: A
Biography , by Pierre Assouline, translated by Jon Rothschild;

            

               Book -- Dispatches From the Freud Wars: Psychoanalysis and Its
Passions , by John Forrester.

            Aug.
6:

            
               Movie -- Career
Girls ;

            
               Movie -- In the
Company of Men ;

            

               Movie -- Spawn ;

            
               Book -- Our Guys: The
Glen Ridge Rape and the Secret Life of the Perfect Suburb , by Bernard
Lefkowitz;

            
               Book -- Faith or
Fear: How Jews Can Survive in a Christian America , by Elliott Abrams;

            
               Death --William S.
Burroughs;

            

               Opera -- Palestrina .

            July
30:

            
               Movie -- Air Force
One ;

            
               Movie -- Mrs.
Brown ;

            
               Movie -- Star
Maps ;

            
               Architecture --National
Airport;

            
               Book -- Martha
Stewart, Just Desserts: The Unauthorized Biography , by Jerry
Oppenheimer;

            

               Book -- A Book of Memories , by Peter Nadas, translated by Ivan
Sanders with Imre Goldstein.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
