
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Contact
                (Warner Bros.). A movie made by Robert Zemeckis
( Forrest Gump ) from a Carl Sagan novel about the search for
extraterrestrial life is declared pretentious. "People magazine's mail
seems penetrating in comparison," says the Washington 
               Post 's Rita
Kempley. Reviewers deem most vapid the heavy-handed exchanges about the meaning
of life between Jodie Foster's obsessed scientist and Matthew McConaughey's New
Agey priest. Foster, as always, is "fiercely intelligent" but her character is
"grindingly sincere" (David Denby, New York ). The New Yorker 's
Anthony Lane: "[She] does not need a long trip into space. She needs to get (1)
a square meal inside her, (2) some rest, and (3) laid." (See Sarah Kerr's
review
in Slate and the Contact site.)

            

               
                  Shall We Dance?
                (Miramax). Critics foresee art-house success for
this film about a buttoned-down Japanese accountant whose midlife crisis drives
him to take dance lessons. Reviews praise the movie's depiction of the
repressed Japanese middle class and its "Fred and Ginger sweetness" (Janet
Maslin, the New York Times ). But some critics complain it's too languid
and drawn out. "Even when the catharsis we yearn for arrives, it's tinged with
restraint," says Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Glieberman. (Kerr reviews the
movie for Slate.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Lawyerland: What Lawyers Talk About When They Talk About the Law
               ,
by Lawrence Joseph (Farrar, Straus & Giroux). St. Johns law professor and
Sunday poet Lawrence Joseph's anthology of conversations with New York
attorneys is deemed humorous but "pointless" (Rob Long, the Weekly
Standard ). Reviewers say Joseph is "good at catching the way people talk"
(Christopher Lehman-Haupt, the New York Times ) and his characters "are
first cousins to David Mamet's or Eric Bogosian's ranters" (Philip Lopate,
Esquire ). But beneath the froth the book offers little insight into the
way lawyers work, Long says; it's really about "what colorful New Yorkers talk
about when they're trying to be colorful."

            

               
                  Straight Man
               , by Richard Russo (Random House). Critics applaud
Russo's sendup of life at a small western Pennsylvania college, in which an
English professor loses his job, becomes unhinged, commandeers a local TV
station, and threatens to murder a goose. According to reviewers, Straight
Man , like Russo's earlier novel Nobody's Fool , comically but
sympathetically plumbs "the American working class in the age of downsizing"
(Dan Cryer, Newsday ). Others just like its humor. The book, raves Tom de
Haven in the New York Times Book Review , has "pitch-perfect dialogue,
persuasive characterization and a rich progression of scenes ... crackling with
an impudent screwball energy reminiscent of Howard Hawks's movies." (Random
House plugs the book here.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Roar
                (Fox; Mondays; 9 p.m. EDT/PDT). Fox's knockoff of the
popular syndicated 5 th -century warrior adventure show Xena is
said to lack the camp irony of the original. The most "shamefully derivative
hour in recent network history," says Roy Richmond in Variety .
"Unintentionally laughable," says the New York Times ' Caryn James. Tom
Carson of the Village Voice suggests the only reason to watch is
"because you're dying to know how the black guy got in the cast." Other critics
predict that Roar , like Xena , will be a cult hit.

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  Amy's View
                (National Theatre, London). British playwright David
Hare, criticized in the past for his "preachy politics," is said to have
finally found "his way beyond polemic" (John Lahr, The New Yorker ).
Hare's new play about a self-centered film critic, his wife, and his
mother-in-law is hailed as a "coup de théâtre " (Matt Wolf,
Variety ), both for its social critique (of the amorality of the news
media) and for its sensitivity "about such personal matters as loss, grief and
stoical survival" (Benedict Nightingale, the London Times ). Hare's
enthusiasts declare it time for canonization.

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            July
9:

            
               Movie -- Men in
Black ;

            
               Book -- Women With
Men , by Richard Ford;

            
               Book -- American
Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence , by Pauline Maier;

            
               Book -- Man Without
a Face: The Autobiography of Communism's Greatest Spymaster , by Markus Wolf
with Anne McElvoy;

            
               Art --"Keith Haring"
(Whitney Museum of American Art);

            
               Television -- Oz
(HBO);

            

               Music --Lilith Fair.

            June
25:

            
               Movie -- Batman
& Robin ;

            

               Movie -- Face/Off ;

            
               Movie -- La
Promesse ;

            

               Musical -- Ragtime ;

            
               Book -- The
Puttermesser Papers , by Cynthia Ozick;

            
               Book -- How Proust
Can Change Your Life: Not a Novel , by Alain de Botton;

            

               Book -- Bright Angel Time , by Martha McPhee.

            June
18:

            

               Movie -- Hercules ;

            
               Movie -- Speed
2 ;

            
               Movie -- My Best
Friend's Wedding ;

            

               Architecture --Shakespeare's Globe Theatre;

            
               Book -- News of a
Kidnapping , by Gabriel García Márquez, translated from the Spanish by Edith
Grossman;

            
               Book -- The Diving
Bell and the Butterfly , by Jean-Dominique Bauby, translated from the French
by Jeremy Leggatt;

            
               Book -- The God of
Small Things , by Arundhati Roy;

            
               Book -- The Perfect
Storm , by Sebastian Junger;

            

               Art --"Venice Biennale."

            June
11:

            
               Movie -- Con
Air ;

            
               Movie -- Ulee's
Gold ;

            
               Movie -- The Pillow
Book ;

            
               Music -- Wu-Tang
Forever , Wu-Tang Clan;

            
               Book -- Without a
Doubt , by Marcia Clark, with Teresa Carpenter;

            
               Book -- Firewall:
The Iran-Contra Conspiracy and Cover-Up , by Lawrence E. Walsh;

            

               Book -- Promiscuities: The Secret Struggle for Womanhood , by Naomi
Wolf;

            

               Theater -- Gross Indecency: The Three Trials of Oscar Wilde .

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
