
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Donnie Brasco
                (TriStar/Sony). Despite a general expression of
weariness with mob movies, Donnie Brasco is deemed a critical success.
Critics give three reasons: 1) A buddy pairing of unusual moral complexity
between an undercover agent (Johnny Depp) and his Mafia mentor (Al Pacino). 2)
Nuanced acting from the usually overwrought Pacino. 3) A star turn by Depp, who
delivers "an intense, quietly flawless performance" (Joe Morgenstern, the
Wall Street Journal ). (The Donnie Brasco site has stills, clips, and a game that enables
virtual infiltration of the mob.)

            

               
                  Smilla's Sense of Snow
                (Fox Searchlight Pictures/20 th
Century Fox). Critics extol the charms of British actress Julia Ormond but pan
Danish director Bille August's adaptation of Peter Hoeg's 1993 best-selling
glaciological whodunit. "What will surprise everyone is the dry iciness, the
burning coldness of Ormond's Smilla," says Time 's Richard Schickel. The
movie itself is said to be a muddle. The 
               New Yorker 's Terrence
Rafferty describes it as "a ghost story that thinks it's a murder mystery,"
complete with Arctic Circle chase scenes at the end. "Soggy Euro-pudding," says
the British Independent .

            

               Music
            

            
               David
Helfgott World Tour . Journalists decry the exploitation of David Helfgott,
the mentally ill former piano prodigy and subject of the biopic Shine ,
as a "freak show" ( Sydney Morning Herald ). They point out that during
the first leg of his tour in Australia, he lost his place in midperformance,
screamed while playing, and wandered into the audience. His David Helfgott
Plays Rachmaninov (RCA/Victor), currently No. 2 on Billboard 's
classical-music charts, is "more listenable than his live recitals," says
Newsweek , but it is "still muddy, noisy and boring."

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Crisis Center
                (NBC, Fridays at 10 p.m. EST). Critics find NBC's
latest dramatic series insufferable. Daily Variety 's Ray Richmond says
the show, which focuses on volunteers in a San Francisco community clinic, "has
the disconcerting effect of a neon sign flashing, 'We're doing television that
makes a difference.' " (In the first episode, underage Asian prostitutes are
clothed, teens are prevented from committing suicide, and a kidnapped baby with
spina bifida is returned to its parents.) The Washington Post's Tom Shales suggests another name for the
series: "A Bunch of Klutzes Who Should Mind Their Own Business." (Click
here to go to NBC's plug for Crisis Center .)

            

               
                  Feds
                (CBS, Wednesdays at 9 p.m. EST). Law & Order
executive producer Dick Wolf's latest law-enforcement drama is anointed the
best among the midseason shows. Despite the familiarity of its premise
(government lawyers hunt down villains and prosecute them), it is said to be
less than formulaic. New York 's John Leonard praises the cast, which
includes Blair Brown ( The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd ) and Regina
Taylor ( I'll Fly Away ). (See the Feds page on the CBS
site.)

            

               
                  Arsenio
                (ABC, Wednesdays at 9:30 p.m. EST). Former late-night
talk-show host Arsenio Hall told Newsweek that he wanted his sitcom
about a cable sportscaster to be a conventional comedy about black urban
professionals. Critics agree that it's a conventional comedy. "The show has all
the flair of an Oxford shirt set off by a rep tie," says Time's Ginia Bellafante.

            

               
                  Just Shoot Me
                (NBC, premieres Tuesday, March 4, at 9:30 p.m. EST;
regular air time Wednesdays at 9:30 p.m. EST). Yet another sitcom about a
single female journalist, this one has a high-profile cast (George Segal;
sex, lies, and 
               videotape 's Laura San Giacomo; and Saturday
Night 
               Live 's David Spade). "If NBC wanted to clone its sitcoms, you
think it could aim higher than Suddenly Susan and The 
               Naked
Truth ," says USA Today 's Matt Roush. (Preview the show on the
Just Shoot Me page.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Crazy 
                  Rhythms: Richard Nixon and All That Jazz
               , by Leonard
Garment (Times Books). Nixon lawyer and defender Leonard Garment emerges as the
anti-Dick Morris--a charming neurotic, free of self-importance and attentive to
emotional nuance. Reviewers focus on Garment's past as a clarinetist, on
Nixon's insecurities, and on the unlikely friendship between the anti-Semite
and the Jew: "Count Metternich, meet Woody Allen" (Thomas DeFrank, the Washington Post).

            

               First-Novel Roundup : Time and the Wall Street Journal award measured
praise to 
                  Lives of the Monster Dogs
               , by Kirsten Bakis (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux), and 
                  Fugitive Pieces
               , by Anne Michaels
(Knopf). Lives of the Monster Dogs tells the story of dogs outfitted
with voice boxes and prosthetic hands who move to New York and become
socialites. "Ms. Bakis, with admirable audacity, has set herself the almost
impossible task of making these dogs 'human' and just misses the mark," says
the Journal . Fugitive Pieces is a poetic telling of the life of a
Holocaust-survivor-turned-poet. "Her prose does not race; it hovers,
insinuating its way in and around timeless mysteries," says Time . Both
novels, however, are said to be excessively self-conscious. Time also
considers 
                  Necessary Madness
               , by 19-year-old Jenn Crowell (G.P.
Putnam's), noteworthy. The book itself, the story of a 30-year-old American
widow in London, is unimpressive. But the author's precociousness has already
led to the sale of the foreign rights and to a major movie deal.

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  The
Last Night of Ballyhoo
                (Helen Hayes Theater, New York). The new play by
Alfred Uhry ( Driving Miss Daisy )--a romantic comedy about self-hating
Jews in Atlanta on the eve of World War II--is said to teeter between the "the
serious-comedy tradition of Neil Simon's autobiographical trilogy" (Linda
Winer, Newsday ) and sitcom schmaltz. "Its form is the theatrical
equivalent of comfort food, something for those who like their nostalgia
repackaged in the guise of something new," says the New York Times ' Ben
Brantley. Variety predicts several Tony Award nominations.

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            Feb.
26:

            
               Movie -- The Empire
Strikes Back: Special Edition ;

            
               Movie -- Lost
Highway ;

            

               Movie -- Rosewood ;

            

               Television -- Schindler's List ;

            
               Television -- Miss
Evers' Boys ;

            
               Book -- Monster:
Living Off the Big Screen , by John Gregory Dunne;

            
               Book--
               American
Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson , by Joseph J. Ellis;

            
               Book -- Whittaker
Chambers: A Biography , by SamTanenhaus;

            

               Theater -- Stanley .

            Feb.
19:

            
               Television -- Thomas
Jefferson ;

            

               Television -- Emma ;

            
               Movie
               --Absolute
Power ;

            
               Movie -- Blood and
Wine ;

            
               Book -- Gladstone: A
Biography , by Roy Jenkins;

            
               Book -- Asylum ,
by Patrick McGrath;

            
               Book -- Hungry
Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine , by Jasper Becker;

            

               Art --"Henry Darger: The Unreality of Being."

            Feb.
12:

            
               CD -- Pat Boone in a
Metal Mood: No More Mr. Nice Guy , by Pat Boone;

            
               Movie -- Dante's
Peak ;

            
               Movie -- When We Were
Kings ;

            
               Movie -- Prisoner of
the Mountains ;

            
               Book -- What Falls
Away: A Memoir , by Mia Farrow;

            
               Book -- Before the
Dawn: An Autobiography , by Gerry Adams;

            
               Book -- A Supposedly
Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again: Essays and Arguments , by David Foster
Wallace;

            

               Television -- The Chris Rock Show .

            Feb.
5:

            
               Book -- Personal
History , by Katharine Graham;

            
               Book -- What It Means
to Be a Libertarian: A Personal Interpretation , by Charles Murray;

            
               Book -- Do the
Windows Open? , by Julie Hecht;

            

               Movie -- Gridlock'd ;

            
               Movie -- Waiting for
Guffman ;

            
               Art --"Willem de
Kooning: The Late Paintings, the 1980s";

            
               Theater -- Men Are
From Mars, Women Are From Venus ;

            

               Event --"On Cultural Power: The Wilson-Brustein Discussion."

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
