
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  L.A. Confidential
                (Warner Bros.). Raves for the adaptation of
James Ellroy's acclaimed policier about the investigation of a mass
murder in the 1950s. "[T]he best film of its type since Chinatown ," says
Todd McCarthy in Variety . Critics praise the all-star cast (which
includes Kevin Spacey and Kim Basinger); the unpredictable plot twists; and the
use of Los Angeles, made to evoke the city of classic film noir, as a backdrop.
The big surprise is the discovery of talent in director Curtis Hanson, who was
roundly drubbed for a previous film, The Hand That Rocks the Cradle .
"Nothing in Hanson's previous work ... suggested that he would come up with a
film like L.A. Confidential " (Anthony Lane, The 
               New
Yorker ). (Click here for stills and clips.)

            
               
                  In
& Out
                (Paramount). A sitcom-ish comedy about an Indiana high school
teacher (Kevin Kline), the mystery of whose sexual orientation becomes the
object of a media hunt. Critics say writer Paul Rudnick ( Jeffrey )
strains to make the humor accessible to Middle America: "Nearly every gag is
pitched and underlined in the most obvious way," says Variety 's
McCarthy. Some say Kline's screwball performance rescues the film: "Kline
triumphs over an incoherent idea" (David Denby, New York ). ( In &
Out is plugged here.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Nothing Sacred
                (ABC; Thursdays, 8 p.m. EDT/PDT). Critics coo
about this new show featuring an inner-city priest who sends a parishioner to
an abortion clinic and considers breaking his own celibacy vows. The subject of
religious ambivalence is called daring, the treatment of it smart and
sophisticated. "I can't imagine how [it] ever got on the prime-time schedule,"
says New York 's John Leonard. Slate's Walter Kirn,
however, dissents, condemning Nothing Sacred as self-righteous "phony
Hollywood iconoclasm." (ABC promotes the show.)

            

               
                  Brooklyn South
                (CBS; Mondays, 10 p.m. EDT/PDT). What's most
original about NYPD Blue producer Steven Bochco's newest cop show,
critics say, is the level of gore. Nine minutes into the first episode, a
sniper blows a chunk of brains out of a detective's head. While this latest
ensemble show about an urban police precinct echoes Bochco's other work (mainly
Hill Street Blues ), it is called "self assured and polished" (Tom
Shales, the Washington Post ). And critics praise its social conscience,
taking especial note of its unsparing depictions of police brutality. (CBS
plugs Brooklyn South .)

            

               
                  Michael Hayes
                (CBS; Tuesdays, 9 p.m. EDT/PDT). One of four new
law-and-crime dramas set in New York, this one--starring NYPD Blue 's
David Caruso--wins praise as "a smartly conceived genre piece" (Caryn James,
the New York Times ). Writer-producer Nicholas Pileggi
( GoodFellas ) gets credit for the show's verisimilitude. Caruso, as a
dour, crusading prosecutor, is called, alternatively, "credible" and "likable"
(Shales, the Washington Post ), and humorless and "as virtuous as John
Calvin" (Leonard, New York ). (See CBS's preview.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Candle in the Wind 1997
               , by Elton John (Rocket/A&M). Overplay
of Elton John's funeral tribute to the late Princess Diana provokes a backlash.
Newsweek 's Karen Schoemer says it's clear that John "hastily reworked"
his 1973 love letter to Marilyn Monroe. The new lyrics (by Bernie Taupin), she
says, are "as facile and pretty as a souvenir thimble"; the apparently hot new
genre of pop elegy, she adds, is tacky. But John also wins praise for refusing
to profit from Di's death. "Even if the song continues to be inescapable, Mr.
John refuses to compound the hype," says the New York Times ' Jon
Pareles.

            

               Museum
            

            
               Museum
of Jewish Heritage: A Living Memorial to the Holocaust (New York City).
Overcoming skepticism about the need for yet another Holocaust memorial,
reviewers express mainly admiration. The museum distinguishes itself, they say,
by focusing on aspects of Jewish culture other than the Holocaust (Jews are
shown as they might have liked to be remembered, rather than as victims). The
critics also praise the museum's somewhat eclectic displays--the shtetl
wedding dresses, the Woody Allen clips. The most poignant part is said to be
video interviews with Holocaust survivors: "A faceless mass resolves eloquently
into a single person" (Michael Kimmelman, the New York Times ). The
building itself--a gray granite hexagon in Battery Park--does not fare half as
well: It "conveys none of the brilliant complexity displayed inside" (Herbert
Muschamp, the New York Times ).

            

               Update
            

            In a
lengthy New Republic review, sociologist Alan Wolfe mostly praises the
Thernstroms' tome on race: Their "tough-minded book serves the
cause of racial justice." Its "great strength is its insistence that some of
our most contentious questions have answers. Its most conspicuous weakness ...
is that it sometimes finds those answers too predictably."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Sept.
10:

            
               Television -- Sister
Wendy's Story of Painting (PBS);

            
               Television -- Ally
McBeal (Fox);

            
               Movie -- She's So
Lovely ;

            

               Movie -- Sunday ;

            
               Book -- The Farewell
Symphony , by Edmund White;

            

               Book -- America in Black and White: One Nation, Indivisible , by
Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom.

            Aug.
27:

            
               Movie -- G.I.
Jane ;

            

               Movie -- Mimic ;

            
               Book -- Already Dead:
A California Gothic , by Denis Johnson;

            
               Book -- The One Best
Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Efficiency , by Robert
Kanigel;

            
               Music -- The
Dance , by Fleetwood Mac;

            

               Television -- Good News (UPN).

            Aug.
20:

            
               Movie -- Cop
Land ;

            
               Movie -- The Full
Monty ;

            
               Music -- Be Here
Now , by Oasis;

            

               Theater -- 1776 ;

            
               Theater -- On the
Town ;

            
               Television -- George
Wallace (TNT);

            
               Books -- A Fan's
Notes , by Frederick Exley, and Misfit: The Strange Life of Frederick
Exley , by Jonathan Yardley;

            

               Book -- Apaches , by Lorenzo Carcaterra.

            Aug.
13:

            
               Movie -- Conspiracy
Theory ;

            
               Movie -- Love
Serenade ;

            

               Television -- Vibe and The 
               Keenen 
               Ivory

               Wayans 
               Show ;

            

               Event/Television --Garth Brooks in Central Park/ Garth Brooks Live
(HBO);

            
               Art --"Sculpture of
Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory";

            
               Book -- Simenon: A
Biography , by Pierre Assouline, translated by Jon Rothschild;

            

               Book -- Dispatches From the Freud Wars: Psychoanalysis and Its
Passions , by John Forrester.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
