
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Return of the Jedi: Special Edition
                (Lucasfilm Ltd./20th Century
Fox). Critical response to Jedi is subdued compared with the frenzy over
the first two films in the restored Star Wars trilogy. Critics deem the
movie less metaphysical and more theme-parkish than its predecessors. Its
faults: the Ewoks, teddy-bearish-looking Rebel allies, are ubiquitous and
annoying; Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher are too old for their parts. "You can
also feel the technological revolution in movies that Star Wars ushered
in beginning to turn on itself," says the New York Times ' Stephen
Holden. (Click here for the re-released trilogy's official Web site.)

            
               
                  City
of Industry
                (Orion Pictures). Director John Irvin's ( Widows'
Peak ) City of Industry is praised for not being a hyperstylized
Tarantinoesque crime movie. Its deadpan attitude and traditional plot--thieves
heist jewelry and then double-cross one another--are said to hark back to
classic film noir. "What's refreshing, and even sort of charming, about this
thriller is that it's so obviously the work of diehards--of talented
traditionalists who are dedicated to taking care of business" (Terrence
Rafferty, The 
               New Yorker ). Also lauded: the cast, which features
Timothy Hutton, Stephen Dorff, and Harvey Keitel; and the movie's refusal to
glamorize the criminal life. (Orion
serves up stills and clips on its site.)

            

               Opera
            

            

               
                  Jackie O
                (Houston Opera Studio). Mixed reviews for a campy
rock-opera about Jackie Onassis' ascent to iconhood. The Washington
Post 's Carl Cunningham says it's a "mindless 100-minute cult fantasy"--a
third of the opera is set at a 1968 New York loft party where the first lady
schmoozes with Maria Callas, Grace Kelly, and Andy Warhol. Newsweek
extols the "poetic" libretto by Wayne Koestenbaum, author of Jackie Under My
Skin: Interpreting An Icon , as well as its "brilliantly eclectic score" and
its general irreverence (Jackie is played by Nicole Heaston, who is short,
stout, and African-American).

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  Antony and Cleopatra
                (Joseph Papp Public Theater, New York). The
New York Times ' Ben Brantley calls this production of the Shakespeare
play, directed by Vanessa Redgrave, "jaw-droppingly bizarre." Redgrave's
portrayal of the queen of the Nile as an aging, cigarillo-smoking ditz,
obsequious to Antony, is judged daffy but charming, except by New

               York 's John Simon, who wishes Redgrave would be "seductively womanly."
Critics are skeptical of anachronistic touches in the production, including
loud sirens, camcorders, and video projections of political speeches.
Newsday 's Linda Winer calls Redgrave's decision to play Antony's suicide
scene as a joke "unforgivable." (The Public Theater
site plugs the play.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Arkansas: Three Novellas
               , by David Leavitt (Houghton Mifflin
Co.). Reviews of Leavitt's collection of novellas focus on the first, The
Term Paper Artist , which caused a scandal when Esquire pulled it at
the last minute. The fiction editor quit, claiming the editor in chief had been
afraid that Leavitt's explicit gay sex scenes would alienate advertisers. The
New York Times ' Michiko Kakutani says that Leavitt's take on sex is
"adolescent" and "does nothing to illuminate its heroes' lives." Others find
the collection uneven. The Term Paper 
               Artist does earn some
praise, though, for its playful reference to another crisis in Leavitt's life:
the British poet Stephen Spender's allegation that Leavitt plagiarized
Spender's memoirs in an earlier novel.

            

               
                  Deadly Feasts: Tracking the Secrets of a Terrifying New Plague
               ,
by Richard Rhodes (Simon & Schuster). A history of mad-cow disease by
veteran science writer Richard Rhodes ( The Making of the Atomic Bomb ).
Critics praise Rhodes' lucid explication of complex virology as well as his
range--the book includes digressions on political and literary themes and a
section on the scandal surrounding a Nobel Prize-winning expert on the disease
who recently pleaded guilty to molesting a little boy. The book is said to
degenerate into a jeremiad when Rhodes anoints mad-cow disease "the new Black
Death."

            

               
                  Resurrection: The Struggle for a New Russia
               , by David Remnick
(Random House). New Yorker writer Remnick's sequel to his Pulitzer
Prize-winning Lenin's Tomb is a "compelling postscript" (Walter Laqueur,
Los Angeles Times ). Reviewers focus on Remnick's access to political
insiders, especially his extended interviews with Mikhail Gorbachev, Vladimir
Zhirinovsky, and Gennady Zyuganov. Critics also welcome his ambivalence on
Russia's future: Unlike most Russia watchers, "Mr. Remnick does not manage his
material so as to prove that Russia is bound to succeed, or doomed to fail"
(the Economist ).

            
               
                  The
Three-Arched Bridge
               , by Ismail Kadare, translated by John Hodgson
(Arcade). High praise for a newly translated 1981 novel by Albanian author
Kadare, about a medieval village at the dawn of capitalism. "Translated ...
into prose of crystalline clarity and grace, it is ... a slim, dark tale that
bears some kinship to J.M. Coetzee's Waiting for the Barbarians "
(Patrick McGrath, New York Times Book Review ). High praise also for
Kadare, a perennial nominee for the Nobel Prize. The New York Times says
his defection to the West in 1990 helped topple Albania's Communist regime.
However, the Weekly Standard attacks the author, calling him an
apologist for dictator Enver Hoxha. (Albania.com provides a biography of Kadare and a list of his
published works.)

            

               Updates:
            

            More
attacks on Kathryn Harrison and her adult-incest memoir, The
Kiss. In the Weekly Standard , Mary Eberstadt implies Harrison is
making it all up. "Mrs. Harrison has written a failed--that is to say, an
unconvincing--memoir. ... For all we know, she did all these things and more.
Any speculations to the contrary would be indecent." In the New
Republic , James Wolcott speculates that Harrison wrote The Kiss to
invite "humiliation upon her [own] children ... as misery was invited on her."
... 
               New York 's David Denby refuses to board the Howard
Stern train, condemning the shock jock for his megalomania, his "fifties
idea of sexual humor," and his crimes against "dignity" and "high-mindedness."
... The backlash against the backlash against David
Helfgott has begun. An editorial in the Wall Street Journal argues,
"Mr. Helfgott babbles and probably makes more mistakes per evening than the
famously unentertaining Alfred Brendel has made in a lifetime. So what. Here's
someone whose fierce love of music is making thousands of others listen to
classical music."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            March
12:

            
               Movie -- Private
Parts ;

            
               Movie -- Jungle 2
Jungle ;

            
               Theater -- A Funny
Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum ;

            
               Book -- The Kiss: A
Memoir , by Kathryn Harrison;

            
               Book -- Giovanni's
Gift , by Bradford Morrow;

            
               Art --"Exiles and
Émigrés: The Flight of European Artists from Hitler";

            

               Television -- The Practice .

            March
5:

            
               Movie -- Donnie
Brasco ;

            
               Movie -- Smilla's
Sense of Snow ;

            
               Music --David Helfgott
World Tour;

            
               Television -- Crisis
Center ;

            

               Television -- Feds ;

            

               Television -- Arsenio ;

            
               Television -- Just
Shoot Me ;

            
               Book -- Crazy
Rhythms: Richard Nixon and All That Jazz , by Leonard Garment;

            
               Books --First Novel
Roundup;

            

               Theater -- The Last Night of Ballyhoo .

            Feb.
26:

            
               Movie -- The Empire
Strikes Back: Special Edition ;

            
               Movie -- Lost
Highway ;

            

               Movie -- Rosewood ;

            

               Television -- Schindler's List ;

            
               Television -- Miss
Evers' Boys ;

            
               Book -- Monster:
Living Off the Big Screen , by John Gregory Dunne;

            
               Book -- American
Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson , by Joseph J. Ellis;

            
               Book -- Whittaker
Chambers: A Biography , by Sam Tanenhaus;

            

               Theater -- Stanley .

            Feb.
19:

            
               Television -- Thomas
Jefferson ;

            

               Television -- Emma ;

            
               Movie
               --Absolute
Power ;

            
               Movie -- Blood and
Wine ;

            
               Book -- Gladstone: A
Biography , by Roy Jenkins;

            
               Book -- Asylum ,
by Patrick McGrath;

            
               Book -- Hungry
Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine , by Jasper Becker;

            

               Art --"Henry Darger: The Unreality of Being."

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
