
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The
Edge
                (20 th Century Fox). Most critics say David Mamet's
trademark dialogue helps overcome the banal premise of his screenplay: A
billionaire (Anthony Hopkins) and a fashion photographer (Alec Baldwin) who
hate each other are stranded in the wilderness with a mean bear. The bear's
performance is deemed a "milestone in ursine acting" (Kenneth Turan, the Los
Angeles Times ). The beauties of nature are also said to come to the film's
assistance. Some complain about the swaggering Mametian machismo: He "has done
little more than tone up a Men's Journal fantasy" (David Denby, New
York ). (Click here for the official site.)

            
               
                  The
Peacemaker
                (DreamWorks SKG). Disappointed reviewers rate the
Spielberg-Katzenberg-Geffen studio's debut just "a notch better than the
average predictable action thriller" (Jay Carr, the Boston Globe ). Stars
George Clooney and Nicole Kidman are said to be perfectly likable but utterly
humorless, and the nuclear-terrorism story line is called suspenseful but
trite. "DreamWorks had a chance to do something different, instead they played
it safe" (Anthony Lane, The New Yorker ). (Clips are available here.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Big
Trouble: A Murder in a Small Western Town Sets Off a Struggle for the Soul of
America
               , by J. Anthony Lukas (Simon & Schuster). Acclaim for the
former Times reporter's historical epic, completed just before his
suicide in June. Reviewers praise the way Lukas made use of a historical
incident--the assassination of an Idaho governor in 1905, allegedly by radical
unionists--to examine the violent side of class warfare. Lukas' eclectic cast
of characters (Clarence Darrow, E.H. Harriman, Teddy Roosevelt) rivals that of
"some unwritten E.L. Doctorow novel" (David Remnick, The New Yorker ).
"This book is to 'true crime' stories what War and Peace is to most war
novels" (Garry Wills, the New York Review of Books ). The major
complaint: too many digressions, inflating the book to 800-plus pages. (See
Sean Wilentz's review in Slate.)

            

               
                  Timequake
               , by Kurt Vonnegut (Putnam). Muted objections to what
the Slaughterhouse Five author has called his "last" work. Critics call
the book--fragments from an uncompleted sci-fi novel about a 2001 "timequake"
that forces people to relive the 1990s--"random" (Malcolm Bradbury, the London
Times ) and "misbegotten" (L.S. Klapp, Entertainment Weekly ). But
Vonnegut's very effort evokes a note of elegy. "[S]ince it comes from Vonnegut,
America's favorite grumpy old man, you've got to love him" (Thomas Disch, the
Washington Post ).

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Time Out of Mind
               , by Bob Dylan (Columbia), and 
                  Bridges to
Babylon
               , by the Rolling Stones (Virgin). The simultaneous release of
albums from '60s rock stars occasions studies in contrast. Dylan's bluesy album
wins accolades for introspective lyrics about mortality and is judged his best
work in decades, "attesting to the creative renaissance of an artist still bent
on defying expectations and spurning trends" (Edna Gundersen, USA
Today ). The Rolling Stones' new songs are called "uninspired retreads"
(Richard Cromelin, the Los Angeles Times ), and their much-hyped world
tour--which uses giant nude inflatable dolls as set pieces--is pronounced
"tasteless" (the Independent ). (See the Stones' tour site.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  ER : "Ambush" (NBC; Sept. 25). Some critics describe the top-rated
drama's live broadcast as a welcome throwback to 1950s television. "A walk on a
high wire ... thrilling to see it all come off so well," says the Washington
Post 's Tom Shales. But many also say the conceit of the episode--that a
film crew is documenting life in an emergency room--was a cheap ploy to cover
up gaffes. The New York Times ' Caryn James says it undermined the whole
episode, making "Ambush" "something the show has never been before and isn't
likely to be again: terminally dull."

            

               Art
            

            

               "Sensations: Young British Artists From the Saatchi Collection" (Royal
Academy of Art, London). Outrage greets the stodgy museum's exhibition of
brash, hipster "Britpack" artists. London papers express outrage that the
academy stamped its approval on works like Marcus Harvey's painting of a
spread-legged naked woman and his portrait of a notorious child murderer, done
in a mosaic of simulated children's handprints. "The Royal Academy of Porn,"
sneers the Daily Mail . American critics dismiss the controversy as old
hat. The Britpack "represent the new orthodoxy," says the Wall Street
Journal 's Paul Levy.

            

               Updates
            

            In the
Weekly Standard , Dinesh D'Souza rejects the Thernstroms' take on race as baselessly optimistic. "If there is a
case for feeling good about the prospects of African Americans, the case is not
effectively made here." ... Bucking the consensus on The Ice
Storm, the New Republic 's Stanley Kauffmann excoriates director Ang
Lee: "[E]verything in his directing, absolutely everything, is banal."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Sept.
24:

            
               Book -- The
Royals , by Kitty Kelley;

            

               Book -- Underworld , by Don DeLillo;

            
               Book -- Great
Apes , by Will Self;

            
               Art --"Robert
Rauschenberg: A Retrospective" (Guggenheim Museums and Ace Gallery, New
York);

            
               Movie -- A Thousand
Acres ;

            
               Movie -- The Ice
Storm ;

            

               Television -- Veronica's Closet (NBC).

            Sept.
17:

            
               Movie -- L.A.
Confidential ;

            
               Movie -- In &
Out ;

            

               Television -- Nothing Sacred (ABC);

            

               Television -- Brooklyn South (CBS);

            

               Television -- Michael Hayes (CBS);

            
               Music -- Candle in
the Wind 1997 , by Elton John;

            

               Museum --Museum of Jewish Heritage: A Living Memorial to the
Holocaust.

            Sept.
10:

            
               Television -- Sister
Wendy's Story of Painting (PBS);

            
               Television -- Ally
McBeal (Fox);

            
               Movie -- She's So
Lovely ;

            

               Movie -- Sunday ;

            
               Book -- The Farewell
Symphony , by Edmund White;

            

               Book -- America in Black and White: One Nation, Indivisible , by
Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom.

            Aug.
27:

            
               Movie -- G.I.
Jane ;

            

               Movie -- Mimic ;

            
               Book -- Already
Dead: A California Gothic , by Denis Johnson;

            
               Book -- The One Best
Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Efficiency , by Robert
Kanigel;

            
               Music -- The
Dance , by Fleetwood Mac;

            

               Television -- Good News (UPN).

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
