
   
   
      
         
            

            

               CD
            

            
               
                  Pat
Boone in a Metal Mood: No More Mr. Nice Guy
               , by Pat Boone (Hip-O
Records). The born-again Christian crooner ("Elvis without the pelvis")
reinvents himself as a heavy-metal rocker, recording covers of songs from Judas
Priest, AC/DC, and Metallica. Reviewers are skeptical. "What's Boone up to?
Same as always, shoplifting other folk's style and music," says
Newsday 's Les Payne--only this time, "this professional Christian" is
borrowing from "the same [musicians he] denounced a few years back as the sons
and warlocks of Satan." The Chicago Tribune 's Michael Killian calls him
"a traitor to his epoch, the Benedict Arnold of Bucks and Button-Down." (Listen
to Pat Boone in his metal mood on No More
Mr. Nice Guy's official page.)

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Dante's Peak
                (Universal Pictures). Volcano chic, Part One (Part
Two, Volcano , opens in April). Dante's Peak gives movie critics
an occasion to reaffirm a movie-critic's article of faith: the efficacy of
generic formulas and special effects, trite though they may be. "Disaster
movies are our millennial No plays, totally stylized, totally predictable, but
comforting in their familiarity" (Richard Schickel, Time). "The movie ... has a visual energy all its own--a
blizzard of boulders, the village blanketed with mauve ash, a bridge cracking
apart and dumping its cargo of cars into a river" (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall
Street Journal ). "The stupid thing gets the job done" (David Denby, New
York ). Critics interpret the sudden outcropping of natural-disaster movies
as nostalgia for the '70s and films such as The Poseidon Adventure and
Jaws , "some of whose plot elements have been recycled here," says Denby.
Pierce Brosnan wins praise for adding a personality to his picture-perfect
features. (Stills, clips, and the like are available on the Dante's Peak site.)

            
               
                  When
We Were Kings
                (Gramercy Pictures). High praise for director Leon Gast's
debut documentary about the "Rumble in the Jungle," the 1974 Muhammad Ali vs.
George Foreman championship bout fought in Zaire. High praise for Ali, too:
"[H]is charisma makes the film" (Richard Corliss, Time ). The film's
highlights: on-screen commentary from ringside spectators Norman Mailer and
George Plimpton, music by James Brown and B.B. King, and displays of eloquence
from Ali ("Only last week I murdered a rock, Injured a stone, Hospitalized a
brick. I'm so mean I make medicine sick.") "So now we know," writes
The 
               New Yorker 's Anthony Lane. "Among his many other
accomplishments, Muhammad Ali invented rap." (Clips of Ali preparing for the
"Rumble in the Jungle" and a Mailer bio are available on the When
We Were Kings page.)

            

               
                  Prisoner of the Mountains
                (Orion Classics). Veteran Soviet-era
director Sergei Bodrov transposes a Tolstoy short story about Russian soldiers
held by Muslim foes to present-day Chechnya. Reviews praise the film's mordant
humor and cinematography (mostly rugged mountain vistas). The Wall Street
Journal 's Morgenstern says it is "unexpectedly affecting, a tragicomedy
about ordinary guys who might have been GIs caught up in Vietnam, or Bill
Maudlin's Willie and Joe in World War II." The New Republic 's Stanley
Kauffmann says, "Bodrov's entire film is, to put it musically, like a set of
appealing variations on an old, simpler theme."

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  What Falls Away: A Memoir
               , by Mia Farrow (Nan A.
Talese/Doubleday). Woody Allen's rehabilitation suffers a setback.
Ex-girlfriend Farrow levels some familiar charges (Allen put his face in the
lap of their 8-year-old daughter, Dylan, and kept pornographic Polaroids of
Soon Yi) but adds instances of pettier meanness (he lashed out at Farrow when
she invited him to her son's sixth-grade graduation). Most critics find Farrow
credible. In Newsweek , novelist Jacquelyn Mitchard says the elegance of
Farrow's prose exonerates her of the charge that she is crazy. Time 's
Martha Duffy compares the memoir to Katharine Graham's. Like Graham, Farrow
"questions her own passivity in dealing with men and blames herself." But
People's Carol Sarler argues that writing the book
constitutes child abuse, in a way: "[T]here are forms of abuse other than the
violent or the sexual. And one of them is hanging your children's privacy out
to dry when you have a book to sell." (See Doubleday's plug for the book.)

            

               
                  Before the Dawn: An Autobiography
               , by Gerry Adams (William Morrow
and Co.). No bloody details stain this memoir by the leader of Sinn Fein (the
Irish Republican Army's political wing). Reviewers view Adams' decision to
remain opaque as a political necessity. Admitting to an active part in IRA
violence would have landed him in jail. But since Adams opted instead to write
a diatribe against the British occupation of Northern Ireland, critics dismiss
the book as a facile rant. Writing in the Weekly Standard , Stuart Reid,
an editor of the Daily Telegraph , a conservative British paper, says
that Adams' political reinterpretation of his past "is so transparent as to
make you turn away in watery-eyed embarrassment."

            
               
                  A
Supposedly Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again: Essays and Arguments
               , by
David Foster Wallace (Little, Brown and Co.). Essays on pop culture,
literature, tennis, and Middle America from the author of the epic and epically
hyped Infinite Jest (1996). Reviewers note that the essays, like the
book, are long (97 pages about a cruise-ship voyage, 54 on the Illinois State
Fair) and playful ("He trounces words; he pivots on commas; he drops in and out
of styles like a vaudevillian who lets the audience watch him change costumes
right there on stage," says the Los Angeles Times ' Susan Salter
Reynolds). The question: Is Wallace a postmodern ironist, sarcastic to the
point of annoyance? Or is there seriousness underneath the mordancy? In
Newsday , James Wood optimistically proposes the latter: "One feels
behind the postmodernism an old realist modernist grinding away, eager to
notate reality (though in funky ways)." (Click here for more on
the book.)

            

               Television
            

            
               
                  The
Chris Rock Show
                (HBO, Friday nights at 12:30 EST and PST; 11:30 CST).
Critics say the new late-night talk show by young black comedian Chris Rock
( Saturday Night Live , voice of Li'l Penny in Nike ads) succeeds because
of its risky racial humor. (He says his show "will be close-captioned for the
ebonically impaired.") "Rock goes beyond Eddie [Murphy], beyond liberal guilt.
He makes equally scathing fun of white people and black people," says
Newsweek 's Rick Marin. Other reviews compare him to Lenny Bruce and
Richard Pryor. He "is probably the funniest and smartest comedian working
today," says the New York Times ' Caryn James. (HBO plugs The Chris
Rock Show.)

            

               Updates
            

            In the
New Republic , Nicholas Lemann reads Dick
Morris' book, Behind the Oval Office: Winning the Presidency in the
Nineties , as the tragic tale of a triangle of unrequited love. The players
are Clinton (the object of desire), Morris (the mistress), and the Democratic
Party (the wronged wife): "She doesn't understand her man, she can't fulfill
his deepest desire (to get re-elected), she will inevitably drag him down. And
yet she functions as his official consort. Morris, by contrast, when he wishes
to be alone with his loved one, must come in through the back door (the East
Wing), alone, at night, passionately but illicitly."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            Feb.
5:

            
               Book -- Personal
History , by Katharine Graham;

            
               Book -- What It Means
to Be a Libertarian: A Personal Interpretation , by Charles Murray;

            
               Book -- Do the
Windows Open? , by Julie Hecht;

            

               Movie -- Gridlock'd ;

            
               Movie -- Waiting for
Guffman ;

            
               Art --"Willem de
Kooning: The Late Paintings, the 1980s";

            
               Theater -- Men Are
From Mars, Women Are From Venus ;

            

               Event --"On Cultural Power: The Wilson-Brustein Discussion."

            Jan.
29:

            
               Art --"Giambattista
Tiepolo, 1696-1770";

            
               Event --Halftime at
Super Bowl XXXI;

            

               Movie -- Kolya ;

            
               Book -- Island of the
Colorblind , by Oliver Sacks;

            
               Theater -- The
Steward of Christendom ;

            
               Movie -- Fierce
Creatures ;

            

               Book -- Le Divorce , by Diane Johnson.

            Jan.
22:

            
               Book -- Behind the
Oval Office: Winning the Presidency in the Nineties , by Dick Morris;

            
               Movie -- The Whole
Wide World ;

            
               Event --The
Inauguration of William Jefferson Clinton;

            
               Book -- One World,
Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global Capitalism , by William B.
Greider;

            
               CD -- Idomeneo ,
by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, performed by Placido Domingo and the Metropolitan
Opera Orchestra and Chorus, conducted by James Levine;

            
               Movie -- Albino
Alligator ;

            

               Television -- The Naked Truth .

            Jan.
15:

            
               Movie -- La
Cérémonie ;

            
               Book -- The Prospect
Before Her: A History of Women in Western Europe, 1500-1800 , by Olwen
Hufton;

            
               Television -- King of
the Hill ;

            

               Architecture --Tokyo International Forum.

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
