
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Men in Black
               
(Columbia Pictures). Barry ( Get Shorty ) Sonnenfeld's shamelessly silly
comedy about government agents who police extraterrestrials is hailed as the
most offbeat and enjoyable blockbuster of the summer. "[S]uccessful absurdist
fiction," says New York 's David Denby. Like other blockbusters, it may
suffer from a "perilously thin" plot (Anthony Lane, The New Yorker ), but
that's "the least important thing" about the movie ( Newsweek ). Instead,
reviewers revel in its deadpan humor, stylish costumes, and comic performances,
particularly that of Tommy Lee Jones--"registering levels of cool that would
cause most actors to snap in half" (Lane). (Stills and clips are available
here.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Women With Men
               , by Richard Ford (Knopf). Having celebrated his
1995 novel Independence Day (which won a Pulitzer), critics are now
wondering whether Ford can write about anything other than the subject of that
book--that is, self-centered men. Two of the three stories in this volume
concern the midlife crises of womanizers and all three are deemed mediocre
knockoffs of Ford's earlier work, littered with characters "not complex enough
to hold one's interest" (Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, the New York Times ).
Some, however, appreciate Ford's continued explorations of "contemporary
manhood and its discontents" (Dan Cryer, Newsday ) and his "sinewy"
prose, reminiscent of Twain and Hemingway (Michael Gorra, the New York Times
Book Review ). "Nobody now writing looks ... more like an American classic,"
says Gorra. (An excerpt is available at the Knopf site.)

            

               
                  American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence
               , by
Pauline Maier (Knopf). The latest salvo in the Thomas Jefferson debate claims
the Declaration of Independence wasn't his individual handiwork but the product
of a committee, based on scores of similar documents around the American
colonies. Most critics find Maier's argument well supported and persuasive. "An
outstanding work of research and analysis, written with grace and wit," says
Slate's John
Patrick Diggins. But Richard Alan Ryerson, in the New York Times Book
Review , faults Maier for giving short shrift to the document's
philosophical underpinnings. "American Scripture comes close to creating
a world without ideas." (Click here for an excerpt from the book.)

            
               
                  Man
Without a Face: The Autobiography of Communism's Greatest Spymaster
               , by
Markus Wolf with Anne McElvoy (Times Books). The memoirs of East Germany's
Spymaster, legendary for helping bring down West German Prime Minister Willy
Brandt's government. Critics are skeptical about his claim to have known
nothing about the East German secret police's brutalities and to have been just
a good Jew fighting fascism. "The dishonesty with which Wolf presents this case
is almost childish" (Ian Buruma, the New Republic ). But a few consider
"the Dapper Don of the Stasi" credible. In The New Yorker , Robert Harris
concurs that Wolf ultimately did little to abet the Communist regime and calls
his memoir "a testament to the essential uselessness of almost all
espionage."

            

               Art
            

            
               "Keith
Haring" (Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City). The late subway
graffitist turned '80s art superstar gets his first major retrospective, to
grudgingly admiring reviews. Most critics fault Haring's work as repetitive and
simple. But they can't help liking his much-merchandised and highly accessible
cartoonlike stick figures. "Only the terminally embittered can fail to love
Keith Haring," writes Peter Schjeldahl in the Village Voice . "Haring's
enterprise was bigger than art and, in its fashion, better." Haring, adds the
New York Times ' Holland Cotter, brought "entertainment and edification
together as later art has rarely been able to." (See the Whitney's site.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Oz
                (HBO; click here for schedule). The cable network's first dramatic series gets
high marks for its realistic and "gritty" (the critics' favorite term)
depiction of life in a maximum-security prison. Critics credit the independence
of cable with allowing what broadcast networks won't: four-letter words,
grotesque violence, abundant male nudity. New York 's John Leonard calls
Oz "an ecology and anthropology of terror, not for the faint of heart or
the queasy of stomach ... it's not by accident that one con speaks of 'the
penis, not the penal, system.' "

            

               Music
            

            
               Lilith
Fair . A touring show of female musicians--including Sarah McLachlan, Sheryl
Crow, and the Indigo Girls--is said to herald the end of male dominance of
rock. Most reviewers simply cheerlead. "Its value as a sign of women's
achievements and solidarity is already undeniable," says the New York
Times ' Jon Pareles. Others are less enthusiastic. "It's almost possible to
ignore the exclusion of male artists and think of Lilith as a savvy packaging
of the hottest ... acts," says Entertainment Weekly . Newsweek
predicts it could turn out to have "the touchy-feely feminist vibe of a
grown-up slumber party ... the roster of performers reads like a who's who of
political correctness."

            

               Updates
            

            
               The New
Yorker 's Adam Gopnik says the "Venice
Biennale" is overpopulated by "[a]ging Pop artists, years removed from
their best work (Jim Dine, Claes Oldenburg), [who] sit alongside ...
neo-expressionists, some of whom (Julian Schnabel, Francesco Clemente) never
had best work to be years removed from." ... 
               The New Yorker 's
Terrence Rafferty breaks with the consensus to pan Face/Off, calling it too serious. "Woo's wildly inappropriate
gravity has the effect of dulling his natural showmanship." ... 
               New
York 's David Denby raves about Hercules: "[p]retty much a hash, an amalgam of Ovid and everything
else ... But who cares? Hercules, after all, is not a tragic hero like Oedipus
or Prometheus."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            June
25:

            
               Movie -- Batman
& Robin ;

            

               Movie -- Face/Off ;

            
               Movie -- La
Promesse ;

            

               Musical -- Ragtime ;

            
               Book -- The
Puttermesser Papers , by Cynthia Ozick;

            
               Book -- How Proust
Can Change Your Life: Not a Novel , by Alain de Botton;

            

               Book -- Bright Angel Time , by Martha McPhee.

            June
18:

            

               Movie -- Hercules ;

            
               Movie -- Speed
2 ;

            
               Movie -- My Best
Friend's Wedding ;

            

               Architecture --Shakespeare's Globe Theatre;

            
               Book -- News of a
Kidnapping , by Gabriel García Márquez, translated from the Spanish by Edith
Grossman;

            
               Book -- The Diving
Bell and the Butterfly , by Jean-Dominique Bauby, translated from the French
by Jeremy Leggatt;

            
               Book -- The God of
Small Things , by Arundhati Roy;

            
               Book -- The Perfect
Storm , by Sebastian Junger;

            

               Art --"Venice Biennale."

            June
11:

            
               Movie -- Con
Air ;

            
               Movie -- Ulee's
Gold ;

            
               Movie -- The Pillow
Book ;

            
               Music -- Wu-Tang
Forever , Wu-Tang Clan;

            
               Book -- Without a
Doubt , by Marcia Clark, with Teresa Carpenter;

            
               Book -- Firewall:
The Iran-Contra Conspiracy and Cover-Up , by Lawrence E. Walsh;

            

               Book -- Promiscuities: The Secret Struggle for Womanhood , by Naomi
Wolf;

            

               Theater -- Gross Indecency: The Three Trials of Oscar Wilde .

            June
4:

            
               Movie -- Trial and
Error ;

            
               Music -- Blood on
the Dance Floor--HIStory in the Mix , Michael Jackson;

            
               Television -- Bill
Clinton: Rock & Roll President (VH1);

            
               Television -- Port
Charles (ABC);

            
               Book -- Race, Crime,
and the Law , by Randall Kennedy;

            
               Book -- Virginia
Woolf , by Hermione Lee;

            
               Book -- Kowloon
Tong , by Paul Theroux;

            
               Event --The Tony
Awards;

            

               Art --"Objects of Desire: The Modern Still Life" (Museum of Modern
Art).

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
