
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Sept. 12
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Sept. 12, 1998)
            

            The
cover editorial welcomes the impeachment or resignation of
President Clinton. He has lied to both friends and enemies, and the American
presidency is powerless without moral authority. "This newspaper has no wish
for him to stay. And it is hard to see why America should, either." ...
The Economist applies its anti-protectionism stance to cultural protectionism. International fears of American
cultural hegemony are overblown. No country should attempt to keep out American
music or movies, since no matter how successful American culture is, homegrown
products will always be more popular with locals.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Sept. 28
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Sept. 12, 1998)
            

            A cover
piece offers a Freudian take on Flytrap. Clinton is the primal father, who has
claimed sexual access to all women. According to Freud's "myth of the origin of
civilization," the primal father must be destroyed for society to survive
(though Clinton might then be reborn as the repentant son). Also: Newspapers
are society's ego, and editorial pages are the superego. ... A Russian
journalist warns that her country's economic collapse may destroy its free
press. Banks, which own or control much of the media, are too broke to support
newspapers and TV stations. Already the national media are ignoring the looming
war in the Russian republic of Dagestan because they can't afford to cover
it.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Sept. 13
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Sept. 10, 1998)
            

            The
second cover profile of the week for Texas governor and likely presidential
candidate George W. Bush (see the Weekly Standard , below). Bush partied
hard in his youth, but getting married and giving up alcohol focused him. He's
toned down his social conservatism, and his hugely likable personality makes
him a great campaigner. (He's not much of a policy wonk, however.) Critics say
his greatest asset is his name, but Bush seems to have emerged from his
father's shadow. ... Another profile of Germany's Gerhard Schröder (see
U.S. News and The New Yorker , below). Schröder's similarity to
Bill Clinton is remarkable: both were raised by poor, single mothers; were
governors of "small, politically marginal" states; and eschew right and left
politics in favor of a new center. One difference: Schröder hates emotional
displays, claiming he "can't abide pathos." ... A story argues that
Nike's "swoosh" logo has become too familiar. To many, the swoosh symbolizes
exploited foreign labor, and hip young people now choose Adidas as an
alternative to Nike's hegemony. Nike is pinning its comeback on its one
incontrovertible success: Michael Jordan's endorsement.

            

               
                  Time and U.S. News & World Report , Sept. 14
            

            
               (posted
Wednesday, Sept. 9, 1998)
            

            Both cover packages are
basically bullish on the stock market. Time tells investors not to panic about the bad world news: "One
of the worst things [investors] could do is let rising volatility and
uncertainty drive them out of stock investments." Time 's guide to the
economic troubles of 10 major countries prescribes tax cuts, spending cuts,
open markets, and privatization for everyone. ... 
               U.S. News ,
though generally optimistic about the economy, does offer bear
market advice, just in case. What to do when the bear growls? Buy
utilities, bottom feed on mutual funds that invested in the Southeast Asian
markets and got slammed, try real estate investment funds, and seek stability
in U.S. bonds.

            Also in
U.S. News , an article claims that German Chancellor Helmut Kohl may well lose
this month's election. Kohl's inability to create jobs in the former East
Germany and his overtaxing of the former West Germany have killed his
popularity. (See also The New Yorker item, below.) ... A story says robot insects will soon be deployed by the military.
The 3 inch long, daddy-longlegs-shaped robots use efficient motors to crawl
into enemy territory and spy, or perhaps release lethal toxins. Soon to come:
flying robot insects.

            

               
                  Newsweek , Sept. 14
            

            
               (posted
Wednesday, Sept. 9, 1998)
            

            

               Newsweek 's cover celebrates home run hitters Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa
as "Awesome!" An essay by career home run champ Hank Aaron is oddly cool toward
Sosa and McGwire, while a piece by official baseball blowhard George Will
declares this "the greatest baseball season since ... young Abner Doubleday
wandered into Farmer Phinney's pasture." ... 
               Newsweek describes a
simple remedy for cellulite: Doctors now treat skin with a special massage
machine that kneads away that "cottage cheese" look without surgery.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Sept. 14
            

            
               (posted
Wednesday, Sept. 9, 1998)
            

            A piece
profiles Gerhard Schröder, the favorite to replace Helmut Kohl as Germany's
chancellor. Schröder holds few defined positions (his risk-averse strategy is
dubbed "Clintonblair" by Germans). His main strength: At 54, and with no ties
to the nation's dark past, Schröder would be the first chancellor to look
forward instead of back--vital in the less serious, less arrogant cultural
climate of modern Germany. ... A story argues that it's nearly
impossible to sue Hollywood for stealing your ideas. Even faced with extensive
evidence of direct rip-offs (one man shows direct links between his play and
Paramount's The Truman Show ), courts are reluctant to award damages.
Hollywood's excuse is that most supposed similarities are "scenes à
faire "--the concept that if you have a plot about, say, a felon hiding as a
nun, certain scenes and dialogue (God works in mysterious ways jokes, for
example) inevitably follow. Translation: Hollywood doesn't care about
originality, so why would it bother to steal from you?

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , Sept. 14
            

            
               (posted
Wednesday, Sept. 9, 1998)
            

            The cover
story welcomes the presidential candidacy of Texas Gov. George W. Bush (who has
not announced his candidacy ... yet). Bush is more charming than his ex-prez
dad and more conservative. His central theme: limiting government. While a
social conservative, Bush is immigrant-friendly (he opposed Proposition 187)
and keeps quiet about his pro-life position.

            More Flytrap
...

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
