
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Thomas Jefferson
                (PBS, Feb. 18 and 19, 9 p.m. EST). Unlike Ken
Burns' other epic documentaries ( Civil War was nine hours long and
Baseball , 18), his biography of the third president is a brief three
hours. In every other respect, however, critics find it numbingly familiar.
"The usual skillful Burns package of period music ... lush photography ...
almost prurient avidity for the grainy feel of sacred relics ... and
delighted-to-be-here voice-overs" (John Leonard, New York ). "At times
you may feel you've tuned into a commercial for Colonial interiors or an online
flower show" (Walter Goodman, the New York Times ). Burns earns muted
praise for his evenhanded if inconclusive portrait of Jefferson, particularly
for his treatment of the Sally Hemings question and Jefferson's
contradiction-riddled approach toward slavery. (For more on the scholarly
debate surrounding the current Jefferson craze, see David Greenberg's "High Concept." Also
see the PBS page
touting Thomas Jefferson .)

            

               
                  Emma
                (A&E, Feb. 21, 9 p.m. EST). Critics exempt the latest
Jane Austen adaptation from the general backlash against Jane Austen
adaptations. Kate Beckinsale's Emma is judged superior to Gwyneth Paltrow's in
the movie released last year. "The Beckinsale version is darker and less
accessible," says the New York Times ' Sarah Lyall.

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Absolute Power
                (Castle Rock Entertainment). Despite a screenplay
by William Goldman and performances from acting heavyweights Gene Hackman and
Judy Davis, reviews of Clint Eastwood's latest directorial effort are mixed, at
best. A plot in which Eastwood, as a cat burglar, spies Hackman, as the U.S.
president, murdering his mistress is deemed cartoonish and incredible.
"Frankly, Mars Attacks! had a better handle on the White House," says
the Washington Post's Rita Kempley. Eastwood's character
"would have to be telepathic to keep popping up, as he does, whenever the plot
needs him," says the Wall Street Journal 's Joe Morgenstern. On the other
hand, Eastwood's performance is said to have saved the movie from itself.
Eastwood makes "the most of his vibrant geezerhood," says Morgenstern. "This
time he even pokes fun at it." (Castle Rock has stills and clips.)

            

               
                  Blood and Wine
                (20 th Century Fox Films). Director Bob
Rafelson's follow-up to his 1970 classic, Five Easy Pieces , bombs.
"Doggedly sincere," says New York 's David Denby. Bad-tempered and "bad
for you," says The New 
               Yorker 's Anthony Lane. Rafelson's take on
a Miami family's lust, rage, and greed--"the usual trio of forties- noir
emotions"--is "too straight, almost TV movieish" (Denby). "The characters keep
laying into each other, as if to slam home the message--for what it's
worth--that everybody hurts sometime" (Lane).

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Gladstone: A Biography
               , by Roy Jenkins (Random House). Across the
Atlantic, Lord Roy Jenkins' biography of the Victorian prime minister was
universally applauded. The Economist called it "quite simply, a
masterpiece of the biographer's art." American critics have been less fulsome.
"A very decent try at an immensely difficult subject," writes Norman Stone in
the New York Times Book Review . Common complaints: Jenkins, a retired
British politician, projects onto Gladstone such pet concerns as European
unity. He also writes confusing prose. "It is something of a lazy book. (As in
'if I had more time, I would write a shorter letter')," says the Los Angeles
Times ' Richard Eder. The New Yorker 's Adam Gopnik is the lone
American enthusiast: "Part of the fun, of course, lies in the hair-raising
displays of Victorian energy. Gladstone, in the midst of his political career,
produced a three-volume study of Homer, two long books on Church and State, and
a new translation of Horace's Odes ."

            

               
                  Asylum
               , by Patrick McGrath (Random House). "We don't usually
associate Gothic novels with elegance and discretion, but these are the
defining features of Patrick McGrath's work," writes Michael Wood in the New
York Times Book Review . Asylum is credited with achieving new levels
of restraint. The story of a psychiatrist's wife who falls in love with a
murderous patient, it culminates in "a departure into madness that is perfectly
pictured but beyond analysis," says Wood. McGrath earns extra plaudits for
suppressing his usual fondness for the fantastic: Asylum "is closer to
Hardy than Poe," says Phil Baker in the London Times . (See the Random
House site for excerpts from Asylum .)

            

               
                  Hungry Ghosts: Mao's Secret Famine
               , by Jasper Becker (Free
Press). Becker, Beijing bureau chief for the South China Morning Post ,
describes in gory detail how Mao Tse-tung's industrialization program, the
Great Leap Forward of 1958, created a devastating famine--30 million dead, more
than the combined tolls of Hitler and Stalin. Becker succeeds in establishing
the famine "as one of the worst atrocities of all time" (Richard Bernstein, the
New York Times ). He does this despite the Chinese government's continued
effort to cover up the incident, and by way of "interviews with survivors
[that] provide us with a chilling view of the famine as it was experienced by
ordinary villagers" (Paul Pickowicz, the Wall Street Journal ).

            

               Art
            

            
               "Henry
Darger: The Unreality of Being" (The Museum of American Folk Art). These
bizarre (some say grotesque) watercolors by the reclusive (some say mad)
Chicago janitor Henry Darger (1892-1973) receive unanimous acclaim. The appeal
lies partly in the weirdness of his obsessions (scantily clad little girls with
penises), "so pungently suggestive of an imagined world," says New
York 's Mark Stevens. There is also "his power of formal arrangement and his
sense of color" (Robert Hughes, Time). Critics disagree, however, on Darger himself--was
he a psychopath or an undiscovered genius? "He is not better than a trained or
'insider' artist," writes Stevens, "but he taps sources of power now lost to
sophisticated art." (See Slate's review by Larissa MacFarquhar.)

            

               Updates
            

            In the
New York Times Book Review , Kathryn Harrison, the author of a
forthcoming memoir about incest with her father, accuses Mia
Farrow of cashing in with a memoir "that will satisfy a Peeping Fan
readership."... Reviewing When We
Were Kings, New York 's Denby says, "For younger viewers, there will
be two revelations--not only the mercurial Ali but Norman Mailer at his most
sympathetic and brilliant."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            Feb.
12

            
               CD -- Pat Boone in a
Metal Mood: No More Mr. Nice Guy , by Pat Boone;

            
               Movie -- Dante's
Peak ;

            
               Movie -- When We Were
Kings ;

            
               Movie -- Prisoner of
the Mountains ;

            
               Book -- What Falls
Away: A Memoir , by Mia Farrow;

            
               Book -- Before the
Dawn: An Autobiography , by Gerry Adams;

            
               Book -- A Supposedly
Fun Thing I'll Never Do Again: Essays and Arguments , by David Foster
Wallace;

            

               Television -- The Chris Rock Show .

            Feb.
5:

            
               Book -- Personal
History , by Katharine Graham;

            
               Book -- What It Means
to Be a Libertarian: A Personal Interpretation , by Charles Murray;

            
               Book -- Do the
Windows Open? , by Julie Hecht;

            

               Movie -- Gridlock'd ;

            
               Movie -- Waiting for
Guffman ;

            
               Art --"Willem de
Kooning: The Late Paintings, the 1980s";

            
               Theater -- Men Are
From Mars, Women Are From Venus ;

            

               Event --"On Cultural Power: The Wilson-Brustein Discussion."

            Jan.
29:

            
               Art --"Giambattista
Tiepolo, 1696-1770";

            
               Event --Halftime at
Super Bowl XXXI;

            

               Movie -- Kolya ;

            
               Book -- Island of the
Colorblind , by Oliver Sacks;

            
               Theater -- The
Steward of Christendom ;

            
               Movie -- Fierce
Creatures ;

            

               Book -- Le Divorce , by Diane Johnson.

            Jan.
22:

            
               Book -- Behind the
Oval Office: Winning the Presidency in the Nineties , by Dick Morris;

            
               Movie -- The Whole
Wide World ;

            
               Event --The
Inauguration of William Jefferson Clinton;

            
               Book -- One World,
Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global Capitalism , by William B.
Greider;

            
               CD -- Idomeneo ,
by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, performed by Placido Domingo and the Metropolitan
Opera Orchestra and Chorus, conducted by James Levine;

            
               Movie -- Albino
Alligator ;

            

               Television -- The Naked Truth .

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
