
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Books

            

            

               
                  Underboss: Sammy the Bull Gravano's Story of Life in the Mafia
               ,
by Peter Maas (HarperCollins). Critical and commercial success for the
biography of Gravano, "the most famous snitch in Mob history," who brought down
John "the Teflon Don" Gotti, offed 18 people, and ordered his own
brother-in-law's execution. Drawing on extensive interviews with the Bull, it
is a "brilliantly constructed and grimly fascinating ... morality play on the
subject of loyalty" (Donald Westlake, the New York Times Book Review ).
Though it retreads tired observations about Mafia life, Underboss still
enriches the "portrait of a subculture some of us can't get enough of" (Bruce
Handy, Time ). (HarperCollins plugs the book.)

            
               
                  The
Actual: A Novella
               , by Saul Bellow (Viking). The 81-year-old author's
latest is admired as a "mature work": same old Bellovian subject (Jewish man
brooding over a woman), but a more subdued, elegiac tone. Almost everyone
lavishes praise on the book, not minding the absurdities they find in the plot
(such as the emergence of a 92-year-old trillionaire who befriends the brooding
man). "The Actual is not a young man's piece of fiction. ... It is
instead something far more rare: the work of a great master still locked in
unequal combat with Eros and Time," says Louis Begley in the New York Times
Book Review . "Bellow writes now with as much authority and energy as he did
nearly half a century ago" (Jonathan Yardley, the Washington Post ).

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Roseanne
                (May 20, ABC, 8 p.m. EDT/PDT). Roseanne's finale after
nine seasons leaves reviewers unimpressed, but it occasions encomiums for the
show's working-class grit. "The most groundbreaking kitchen-sink sitcom since
All in the Family ," declares Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly .
Most agree, however, that the show declined in its last years, especially after
Roseanne's character won the lottery and the family forsook its proletarian
roots--while the actress herself mutated from caustic social critic into pop
icon. "A rich Roseanne Conner," says the New York Times ' Caryn James,
"was as bizarre as the conspicuous physical makeover that no one in the Conner
family ever mentioned." (See David Plotz's "Assessment" of
Roseanne in Slate and ABC's page for the
show. Also in Slate: Larry Doyle's "Dispatches" on sweeps month.)

            

               
                  David Blaine: Street Magic
                (ABC, May 19, 8 p.m. EDT/PDT). Blaine,
a 23-year-old hipster magician with a goatee and no fancy equipment, is
proclaimed a performer for the people, an anti-David Copperfield. "Instead of
ornate props and gorgeous showgirls, he shares his act lovingly with ordinary
men and women in the street," writes John O'Connor in the New York
Times . But many find an average performer behind the populist hype. "Corny
card tricks and coin feints and levitation stunts [updated] with post-grunge
chic," declares Time 's David Handelman, adding that "Blaine's best magic
trick may be his own career." (ABC's site asks: "Is he
an Entertainer, a Con man, the Devil, or a Guru?")

            

               Event
            

            
               Cannes
International Film Festival (France). Complaints about Cannes' overwrought
glitz subside during the festival's second week. It "reasserted its claim to
seriousness," says the New York Times ' Janet Maslin. Credit is given to
the two winners of the Palme d'Or: Iran's The Taste of Cherries , about
suicide; and Japan's The Eel , about a man who murdered his wife. Still,
some whining lingers. "The quintessential Cannes fortnight, indeed, would
involve no films at all--just invitations to parties that never happen and
rumors of films that will never be made," says The New Yorker 's Anthony
Lane. (See the "Summary Judgment" entry for Cannes' first week.)

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Night Falls on Manhattan
                (Paramount Pictures). Critics mostly
dismiss Serpico director Sidney Lumet's 41 st film as
hackwork. Rehashing his favorite subject of New York City police corruption,
Lumet slaps together, they say, an implausible plot (a year after law school,
an ex-cop becomes a crusading district attorney), formulaic characters (bad-ass
drug dealer, idealistic liberal defense lawyer), and preachy moralizing. ("The
predictable lesson--justice isn't cut and dry--clogs the film's gears," says
the Washington Post 's Eric Brace.) Among Lumet's defenders are the
Los Angles Times ' Kevin Thomas, who says the director makes the unlikely
plot twists believable "the old-fashioned way: through interaction with a
screen full of strongly drawn, fully dimensioned, psychologically valid
characters."

            

               
                  Love! Valour! Compassion!
                (Fine Line Features). Terrence
McNally's Tony-winning play from 1994 about eight gay men who vacation together
doesn't translate well to film, critics say. They regard the adaptation, which
stars Seinfeld shlub Jason Alexander, as a "stodgy affair" (Elliott
Stein, the Village Voice ). And the hypercampy characters feel like
relics of an era when gay men were routinely lampooned--"more The

               Boys in the Band than a gay Big Chill ," says Lisa Schwarzbaum of
Entertainment Weekly . The New York Times ' Stephen Holden, in
dissent, extols the film's "richly nuanced" performances and its "intense mood
of Chekhovian sadness." (A trailer is available here.)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  The
Wizard of Oz
                (Madison Square Garden). Outraged cries of "what were they
thinking?" greet this stage adaptation (starring Roseanne as the Wicked Witch
of the West) of the classic 1939 movie. A "charmless, surprisingly chintzy
affair" (Greg Evans, Variety ), the play features a script eviscerated of
interesting characters. The sets--a Munchkinland that consists of wooden
cutouts of milk-bottle vases, for example--would be "unimpressive even for a
cost-cutting resident theater." "If it only had a brain," wishes Peter Marks of
the New York Times .

            

               Updates
            

            Thomas
Pynchon's Mason & Dixon amasses more raves, notably from Louis
Menand in the New York Review of Books and T. Coraghessan Boyle in the
New York Times Book 
               Review . Writes Boyle, "Mason &
Dixon is a groundbreaking book, a book of heart and fire and genius, and
there is nothing quite like it in our literature, except maybe V. and
Gravity's Rainbow ."... The New Republic 's Jed Perl attacks
The New Yorker 's Adam Gopnik and the New York Times ' Michael
Kimmelman for their elitist attacks on Picasso's popularity. "If they are frequently just plain hostile
to Picasso, it could be because they are annoyed at the thought that the public
doesn't really need a commentator's help."

            Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns

            May
14:

            
               Architecture --New
Amsterdam Theater;

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Father's
Day ;

            
               Movie -- The Fifth
Element ;

            
               Movie -- The
Designated Mourner ;

            
               Television -- The
Odyssey ;

            
               Book -- The Courage
to Stand Alone: Letters From Prison and Other Writings , by Wei Jingsheng,
translated and edited by Kristina M. Torgeson;

            
               Book -- Time Bind:
When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work , by Arlie Russell
Hochschild;

            

               Theater -- Candide ;

            

               Museum --Newseum.

            May
7:

            
               Book -- Mason &
Dixon , by Thomas Pynchon;

            

               Book/Television -- American Visions: The Epic History of Art in
America , by Robert Hughes, and American Visions (PBS);

            
               Book -- Echo
House , by Ward Just;

            
               Book -- Reading in
the Dark , by Seamus Deane;

            

               Architecture --Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial;

            
               Television -- The
Last Don (CBS);

            
               Movie -- Children of
the Revolution ;

            

               Movie -- Breakdown .

            April
30:

            

               Movie -- Volcano ;

            
               Movie -- Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion ;

            
               Pop -- Share My
World , by Mary J. Blige;

            
               Book -- Locked in
the Cabinet , by Robert Reich;

            
               Book -- Anything
Your Little Heart Desires: An American Family Story , by Patricia
Bosworth;

            
               Book -- Hystories:
Hysterical Epidemics and Modern Media , by Elaine Showalter;

            

               Theater -- Titanic ;

            
               Theater -- The
Little Foxes ;

            

               Dance --"In Honor of the Divine Lou Harrison," the Mark Morris Dance
Group.

            April
23:

            
               Book -- The Gospel
According to the Son, by Norman Mailer ;

            
               Book -- American
Pastoral , by Philip Roth;

            
               Book -- W.B. Yeats:
A Life. 1: The Apprentice Mage, 1865-1914 , by R.F. Foster;

            
               Book -- Purple
America , by Rick Moody;

            
               Television -- In the
Gloaming ;

            
               Opera -- The Ring of
the Nibelung ;

            
               Movie -- Murder at
1600 ;

            

               Movie -- Kissed .

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
