
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Royals
               , by Kitty Kelley (Warner Books). The celebrity biographer's
Windsor-bashing book cashes in on the hoopla surrounding Diana's death.
Indignant critics accuse Kelley of purveying unsubstantiated rumors, "the sorts
of secrets only supermarket tabloids covet" (Michiko Kakutani, the New York
Times ). Others yawn at Kelley's gossip, including speculation that, as a
newlywed, Queen Elizabeth was sex-crazed. "[T]hose who hoped that the book
would be like a royal mistress--flirty, flighty, zesty, yeasty--will be
disappointed" (Julian Barnes, The New Yorker ). Unwittingly, some say,
Kelley's dirt actually humanizes the starchy Windsors.

            

               
                  Underworld
               , by Don DeLillo (Scribner). DeLillo's epic of Cold War
America--which juxtaposes Russia's atomic bomb with Bobby Thompson's Shot Heard
Round the World, a Lenny Bruce concert, and a lost Sergei Eisenstein film--is
pronounced a "masterwork" (Tom LeClair, the Atlantic Monthly ). DeLillo
wins praise for his witty prose and inventive historical fiction, which
includes such postwar celebrities as Frank Sinatra and J. Edgar Hoover.
"There's pleasure on every page of this pitch-perfect evocation of a sour,
anxious half century" (Malcolm Jones Jr., Newsweek ). Slate's Walter Kirn is
virtually alone in finding the book indulgent and vapid. (Click here for an
excerpt from Underworld .)

            

               
                  Great Apes
               , by Will Self (Grove/Atlantic). Reviews of the latest
farce from the British satirist both wince and smirk at its unrelenting
scatological humor and unflattering sendups of authors Robert Hughes and Oliver
Sacks. The book's conceit--an artist awakens in a world of monkeys that mirrors
modern "Swinging London"--is alternately judged a "slender idea for satire"
(Kakutani) and a hilarious metaphor for "the modern urban savanna" (Gary Krist,
the New York Times Book Review ). (Click here for Sarah
Kerr's review in Slate and here for an excerpt from the book.)

            

               Art
            

            
               "Robert
Rauschenberg: A Retrospective" (Guggenheim Museums and Ace Gallery, New
York). Spanning 400 works and filling three venues, the exhibition of the
collage artist's oeuvre --possibly "the largest retrospective of a living
artist ever" (Michael Kimmelman, the New York Times )--draws respectful,
if qualified, reviews. Critics excuse failed experiments (such as paintings on
aluminum) and recent assembly-line productions (the execution of his ideas by a
dozen assistants) because of the importance of the artist's conceptual
innovations. Many grumble that the curators weren't more discriminating. New
York 's Mark Stevens imagines a young Rauschenberg mocking the exhibition's
"pumped-up size." (The Guggenheim plugs the show.)

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  A
Thousand Acres
                (Touchstone Pictures). Jane Smiley's Pulitzer
Prize-winning novel, which relocates King Lear on an Iowa farm, has been
adapted into "an ungainly, undigested assembly of 'women's issues' " (Roger
Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ). Critics call its screenplay
soap-operatic: The Lear figure (Jason Robards) molests his daughters (Jessica
Lange, Michelle Pfeiffer, and Jennifer Jason Leigh), who babble in lengthy
pop-psych disquisitions. Blame also goes to director Jocelyn Moorhouse ( How
to Make an American Quilt ), who quit the film midproduction. Lange and
Pfeiffer win compliments for strong performances, "emotionally in sync" (Mike
Clark, USA Today ). (Stills and clips are available here.)

            
               
                  The
Ice Storm
                (Fox Searchlight Pictures). Ang Lee's drama about suburban
sexual promiscuities is lauded as an authentic depiction of 1970s emotional
drift. Lee "captures ... this garish and confused moment in history, with
surgical precision" (David Ansen, Newsweek ). Performances by Kevin
Kline, Joan Allen, and Sigourney Weaver are said to be so solid that they
compensate for the unlikability of their characters. Lee wins praise for his
"gently ironic touch" in adapting a novel by Rick Moody, and for being "less
interested in assigning blame for all the misery than in simply documenting it"
(Daphne Merkin, The New Yorker ). (The movie is plugged here. And
check out this week's Slate "Diary" by
The Ice Storm screenwriter, James Schamus.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Veronica's Closet
                (NBC; Thursdays, 9:30 p.m.). Finally, a sitcom
aired between Seinfeld and ER that is said to live up to the
demands of its time slot. Praise goes to Kirstie Alley, who plays an aging
ex-model now in the lingerie business: "Less frenetic than Lucy, more mature
than Mary" (Richard Corliss, Time ). The Washington Post 's Tom
Shales dissents, calling Alley unwatchably neurotic and "in a virtually
perpetual feverish tizzy." (NBC promotes the show here.)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Sept.
17:

            
               Movie -- L.A.
Confidential ;

            
               Movie -- In &
Out ;

            

               Television -- Nothing Sacred (ABC);

            

               Television -- Brooklyn South (CBS);

            

               Television -- Michael Hayes (CBS);

            
               Music -- Candle in
the Wind 1997 , by Elton John;

            

               Museum --Museum of Jewish Heritage: A Living Memorial to the
Holocaust.

            Sept.
10:

            
               Television -- Sister
Wendy's Story of Painting (PBS);

            
               Television -- Ally
McBeal (Fox);

            
               Movie -- She's So
Lovely ;

            

               Movie -- Sunday ;

            
               Book -- The Farewell
Symphony , by Edmund White;

            

               Book -- America in Black and White: One Nation, Indivisible , by
Stephan and Abigail Thernstrom.

            Aug.
27:

            
               Movie -- G.I.
Jane ;

            

               Movie -- Mimic ;

            
               Book -- Already
Dead: A California Gothic , by Denis Johnson;

            
               Book -- The One Best
Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Efficiency , by Robert
Kanigel;

            
               Music -- The
Dance , by Fleetwood Mac;

            

               Television -- Good News (UPN).

            Aug.
20:

            
               Movie -- Cop
Land ;

            
               Movie -- The Full
Monty ;

            
               Music -- Be Here
Now , by Oasis;

            

               Theater -- 1776 ;

            
               Theater -- On the
Town ;

            
               Television -- George
Wallace (TNT);

            
               Books -- A Fan's
Notes , by Frederick Exley, and Misfit: The Strange Life of Frederick
Exley , by Jonathan Yardley;

            

               Book -- Apaches , by Lorenzo Carcaterra.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
