
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Event
            

            
               
                  The
69 th Academy Awards
               . The $100 million production budget and
performances by Madonna and Celine Dion apparently were not enough to make this
year's Oscar night memorable. Even a "semi-spontaneous tribute to Muhammad Ali
couldn't rescue the festivities," says Brian Lowry of the Los Angeles
Times . Redeeming features included the return of master of ceremonies Billy
Crystal and his "repeated relief from the pretentiousness of presenters" (Tom
Shales, the Washington Post ); Jessica Yu's crack that her evening's
outfit cost more than her Oscar-winning documentary; and David Helfgott's
performance of Rimsky-Korsakov's Flight of the 
               Bumblebee . (See
"The Week/The Spin"
for more on the results.)

            

               Art
            

            
               "1997
Biennial Exhibition" (Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City).
Usually the most controversial group show in the United States, this year's
much hyped selection of the best American art of the last two years is deemed
smart but overly polite. New York 's Mark Stevens says "this biennial is
rife with safe curatorial decisions and art that has already been widely
certified." The New York Times ' Michael Kimmelman says the exhibit
reflects nothing less than the state of contemporary art: derivative and
self-conscious. (Click here for the Whitney's site.)

            
               Willem
de Kooning (1904-1997). Obituaries of the painter pronounce his death the
end of an era: "[T]he almost terminally Warholized American art world loses ...
a link with its last heroic--indeed, its last sincere--grand style" (Peter
Plagens, Newsweek ). Critics also seize the opportunity to weigh in again
on de Kooning's late work, currently on exhibit at the Museum of Modern Art.
"These are among the saddest things ever made by a once-major artist," says
Time 's Robert Hughes. (See Slate's review of de Kooning's late work.)

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Liar Liar
                (Universal Pictures). The latest comedy by smirkmeister
Jim Carrey ( Ace Ventura: Pet Detective ), currently the No. 1 film at the
box office, is deemed his most conventional movie yet. Carrey, playing a sleazy
lawyer forced to tell the truth for a day, "removes the rubber nose and plays a
realistic human being" (Rita Kempley, the Washington Post ). But the film
still relies on Carrey's "kamikaze elan" to overcome its meager premise ("[a]
one joke movie"--Susan Wloszczyna, USA Today ). And The New
Yorker 's Anthony Lane says director Tom Shadyac ( The Nutty
Professor ) blunders in choosing, midfilm, "to calm down the proceedings,
[so that] our poor hero is reduced to saying therapeutic things like ...'You
know, this truth stuff is pretty cool.' " (The Liar Liar page is good for some lawyer bashing, and serves
up stills and clips.)

            

               
                  Crash
                (Fine Line Features). Despite the ruckus surrounding David
Cronenberg's adaptation of J.G. Ballard's novel Crash --the movie was
banned in England and won a special prize at Cannes for "originality, daring,
and audacity"--it fails to shock. Time 's Richard Corliss calls the
quasipornographic narrative of car-crash survivors who go on to have a lot of
sex while driving "sexual without being sexy." The New Yorker 's Lane
calls it boring and pretentious: "The characters in Crash are so
unsmiling--so driven, in every sense--that they make you ashamed of ever having
enjoyed yourself." Cronenberg and Ballard should not even get credit for coming
up with a novel idea, says New York 's David Denby: "The men and women
who make TV commercials have sensed the connection between automobiles and
eroticism for decades." (See Luc Sante's
review of the film in Slate. Crash's Web site deserves its NC-17 rating.)

            

               
                  Selena
                (Warner Bros.). Lukewarm reviews for El Norte
director Gregory Nava's reverential biopic about the slain Tejano singer. Some
praise Nava for giving the film the same crossover appeal as Selena herself.
Others damn it as formulaic. "Boilerplate," says the Los Angeles Times '
Kenneth Turan, pointing out that the flashbacks are cheesy, the characters
stock, and the themes, such as the subplot about unrequited love, tired. (See
Warner
Bros.' site for the film. Also check out Sarah Kerr's
review and Jared Hohlt's "Life and Art" column in Slate.)

            
               
                  The
Godfather
                (Paramount). Once again, critics declare Francis Ford
Coppola's masterwork (re-released on its 25 th anniversary) the
quintessential American epic. "Every scene is weighted, emotionally
significant, resplendent with the thick texture of feeling and history," writes
New York 's Denby. The New York Times , however, pursues the
revisionist line. Cultural critic Edward Rothstein attacks the film's central
metaphor--the Mafia family as metaphor for the American family--as untenable.
And Molly Haskell says the film "demeans and demotes women outrageously."
(Paramount plugs the re-release on its site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Coming Conflict with China
               , by Ross H. Munro and Richard Bernstein
(Knopf). Critics agree with the premise of this get-tough-on-China polemic but
think the authors, two former Beijing bureau chiefs, go overboard with the Cold
War rhetoric. In the New Republic , Robert Kagan says the authors' mild
policy prescriptions won't solve the problems they shrilly decry. If anything,
their book only makes things worse, says Orville Schell in the New York
Times : Bernstein and Munro "have unrepentantly plunged harpoons into the
tenderest interstices of the Chinese-American relationship."

            

               
                  Radical Son: A Journey Through Our Times
               , by David Horowitz (Free
Press). The memoir of this former ally of the Black Panthers turned scourge of
the New Left draws cheers and jeers from predictable quarters. The Weekly
Standard 's John Podhoretz compares Horowitz's conversion to conservatism to
Whittaker Chambers' magisterial tale of apostasy, Witness . Leftists
dismiss the book as score-settling and name-calling. Nicholas von Hoffman in
the Los Angeles Times says Horowitz wastes "much too much space ...
calling his former radical collaborators cowards and poltroons."

            

               Updates :

            After a
barrage of vicious pans, two critics defend The
Kiss, Kathryn Harrison's incest memoir. In the New York Times Book
Review , Susan Cheever says "the book brilliantly, heartbreakingly" lays out
Harrison's helplessness. Also see Luc Sante's "Hey, Wait a Minute" in
Slate. The New York Times ' Frank Rich attributes the Harrison hype to
the Hollywoodization of publishing. He quotes an editor who says, "We all know
that if Kathryn Harrison"--who is highly photogenic--"were a dumpy-looking lady
with Coke-bottle glasses, none of this would have happened." ... The
Washington Post 's John Schwartz deems "irresponsible" Richard Rhodes'
"apocalyptic" predictions in Deadly
Feasts that mad-cow disease could kill 200,000 people in Britain by
2015.

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns:
            

            March
19:

            
               Movie -- Return of
the Jedi: Special Edition ;

            
               Movie -- City of
Industry ;

            
               Opera -- Jackie
O ;

            
               Theater -- Antony and
Cleopatra ;

            
               Book -- Arkansas:
Three Novellas , by David Leavitt;

            
               Book -- Deadly
Feasts: Tracking the Secrets of a Terrifying New Plague , by Richard
Rhodes;

            
               Book -- Resurrection:
The Struggle for a New Russia , by David Remnick;

            

               Book -- The Three-Arched Bridge , by Ismail Kadare, translated by
John Hodgson.

            March
12:

            
               Movie -- Private
Parts ;

            
               Movie -- Jungle 2
Jungle ;

            
               Theater -- A Funny
Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum ;

            
               Book -- The Kiss: A
Memoir , by Kathryn Harrison;

            
               Book -- Giovanni's
Gift , by Bradford Morrow;

            
               Art --"Exiles and
Émigrés: The Flight of European Artists from Hitler";

            

               Television -- The Practice .

            March
5:

            
               Movie -- Donnie
Brasco ;

            
               Movie -- Smilla's
Sense of Snow ;

            
               Music --David Helfgott
World Tour;

            
               Television -- Crisis
Center ;

            

               Television -- Feds ;

            

               Television -- Arsenio ;

            
               Television -- Just
Shoot Me ;

            
               Book -- Crazy
Rhythms: Richard Nixon and All That Jazz , by Leonard Garment;

            
               Books --First Novel
Roundup;

            

               Theater -- The Last Night of Ballyhoo .

            Feb.
26:

            
               Movie -- The Empire
Strikes Back: Special Edition ;

            
               Movie -- Lost
Highway ;

            

               Movie -- Rosewood ;

            

               Television -- Schindler's List ;

            
               Television -- Miss
Evers' Boys ;

            
               Book -- Monster:
Living Off the Big Screen , by John Gregory Dunne;

            
               Book -- American
Sphinx: The Character of Thomas Jefferson , by Joseph J. Ellis;

            
               Book -- Whittaker
Chambers: A Biography , by Sam Tanenhaus;

            

               Theater -- Stanley .

            
               --Compiled by Franklin
Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
