
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Sister Wendy's Story of Painting
                (PBS; Sundays, 9 p.m. EDT/PDT).
Critics swoon over the eccentric 67-year-old Carmelite nun's survey of Western
painting. "Nothing this good in the genre has come out of England since Kenneth
Clark's Civilisation a quarter-century ago," says the Los Angeles
Times ' William Wilson. The self-taught Sister is said to be charmingly
enthusiastic, and to "awaken an appreciation for a sweeping spectrum of art ...
for the average schmo" (Megan Rosenfeld, the Washington Post ). Reviewers
predict the ratings for her series will surpass critic Robert Hughes' similar
show last spring. (PBS plugs the program.)

            

               
                  Ally McBeal
                (Fox; Mondays, 9 p.m. EDT/PDT). Ambivalent reviews
for a drama about an insecure twentysomething female lawyer. Critics say it
"respects the audience's intelligence" with well-drawn characters and a
"healthy cynicism" about lawyering (Caryn James, the New York Times ).
But it also uses unfunny gimmicks, particularly a running gag of dramatizing,
on-screen, the protagonist's fantasies. (See Fox's site for the
show.)

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  She's So Lovely
                (Miramax Films). A movie by the son, Nick
Cassavetes, from a screenplay by the father, John Cassavetes, who died in 1989.
The film is deemed a gesture more of sentiment than of artistry. Critics
discern little logic in the story, in which two men (John Travolta and Sean
Penn) duel over an alcoholic woman (Robin Wright Penn). The characters' motives
are also damned as obscure. "[Y]ou might wonder whether 15 or 20 pages of
[script] ... hadn't fallen out," says the Los Angeles Times ' Jack
Mathews. But a handful of critics admire Penn's and Travolta's "big, headstrong
performances," and proclaim the film "a huge-hearted emotional fairy tale"
(Janet Maslin, the New York Times ). (Click here for David
Edelstein's review in Slate, and here for the
official site.)

            

               
                  Sunday
                (Cineplex Film Properties). Another Sundance Grand Jury
Prize winner--this one by rookie director and part-time sommelier Jonathan
Nossiter--generates critical excitement. Nossiter's script about an affair
between a homeless man (David Suchet) and a woman (Lisa Harrow) who mistakes
him for a British filmmaker is called "elegant" (Daphne Merkin, The New
Yorker ), and Suchet is said to give "a virtuoso turn" (John Anderson, the
Los Angeles Times ). Dissenting, the New York Times ' Stephen
Holden calls the film a formulaic, "overly schematic exercise in cinematic
hide-and-seek."

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Farewell Symphony
               , by Edmund White (Knopf). As with the earlier
installments of White's semiautobiographical trilogy ( A Boy's Own Story
and The Beautiful Room Is Empty ), critics dwell on the graphic gay sex
scenes and on the writer's promiscuity (he estimates having had 2,000
partners). It "might have been more honestly called Hilly Buttocks I Have
Known ," says James Wolcott in the Wall Street Journal . Those who
don't dismiss it as salacious gossip laud its revelations about gay New York
writers, especially the poet James Merrill, and its depiction of the ravages of
AIDS. "[A] powerful critique of the lifestyle [he] once eulogized," says Bruce
Bawer in the Washington Post Book World .

            

               
                  America in Black and White: One Nation, Indivisible
               , by Stephan
and Abigail Thernstrom (Simon & Schuster). A mammoth new tract on race by a
Harvard professor and his wife, a Manhattan Institute pundit. Foes of
affirmative action extol the book--part history, part policy analysis--as a
devastating blow to race-based programs. "[T]he most far-ranging,
information-rich analysis of our seismic racial shifts since Gunnar Myrdal's
An American Dilemma of 1944," says Jim Sleeper in the Wall Street
Journal . In the New York Times Book Review , however, Nicholas Lemann
says, "To assume the Myrdal mantle means speaking in a calm, clear, generous
voice, but America in Black and White does this only intermittently. ...
[The book is] pugnacious and angry to the point of occasional bitterness and
sarcasm."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Aug.
27:

            
               Movie -- G.I.
Jane ;

            

               Movie -- Mimic ;

            
               Book -- Already Dead:
A California Gothic , by Denis Johnson;

            
               Book -- The One Best
Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Efficiency , by Robert
Kanigel;

            
               Music -- The
Dance , by Fleetwood Mac;

            

               Television -- Good News (UPN).

            Aug.
20:

            
               Movie -- Cop
Land ;

            
               Movie -- The Full
Monty ;

            
               Music -- Be Here
Now , by Oasis;

            

               Theater -- 1776 ;

            
               Theater -- On the
Town ;

            
               Television -- George
Wallace (TNT);

            
               Books -- A Fan's
Notes , by Frederick Exley, and Misfit: The Strange Life of Frederick
Exley , by Jonathan Yardley;

            

               Book -- Apaches , by Lorenzo Carcaterra.

            Aug.
13:

            
               Movie -- Conspiracy
Theory ;

            
               Movie -- Love
Serenade ;

            

               Television -- Vibe and The 
               Keenen 
               Ivory

               Wayans 
               Show ;

            

               Event/Television --Garth Brooks in Central Park/ Garth Brooks Live
(HBO);

            
               Art --"Sculpture of
Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory";

            
               Book -- Simenon: A
Biography , by Pierre Assouline, translated by Jon Rothschild;

            

               Book -- Dispatches From the Freud Wars: Psychoanalysis and Its
Passions , by John Forrester.

            Aug.
6:

            
               Movie -- Career
Girls ;

            
               Movie -- In the
Company of Men ;

            

               Movie -- Spawn ;

            
               Book -- Our Guys: The
Glen Ridge Rape and the Secret Life of the Perfect Suburb , by Bernard
Lefkowitz;

            
               Book -- Faith or
Fear: How Jews Can Survive in a Christian America , by Elliott Abrams;

            
               Death --William S.
Burroughs;

            

               Opera -- Palestrina .

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
