
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Career Girls
                (October Films). Director Mike Leigh's latest film
about working-class Brits "trapped in the hopelessness of modern life" (Richard
Schickel, Time ) is rated a notch below his acclaimed Naked and
Secrets & Lies . The premise--ex-college roommates spend a weekend
together for the first time in six years--is overly "modest" (Todd McCarthy,
Variety ): "[N]othing much happens, dramatically speaking," says
Schickel. But The New Yorker 's Terrence Rafferty says the film contains
"enough small truths and enough off-hand comic business to keep you reasonably
happy for an hour and a half." New York 's David Denby says it proves
Leigh "digs deeper into people than any other director now working in movies."
(See the Career Girls site.)

            
               
                  In
the Company of Men
                (Sony Pictures Classics). Polarized reactions to
Neil LaBute's low-budget debut about two businessmen who scheme to seduce and
dump a deaf woman. Some discern a feminist slant to the film's "ballsy
depiction of man's inhumanity to woman, and man" (Lisa Schwarzbaum,
Entertainment Weekly ). The New York Times ' Janet Maslin praises
its "critical detachment" and "coolly stylized exaggeration," which make it
"impossible to mistake In the Company of 
               Men for simple bigotry."
Others perceive rank cynicism. Newsday 's Jack Mathews says LaBute "has
avoided the gray shades of life for in-your-face sensationalism. He's made a
horror movie designed to shock, and nothing else." (Stills and clips are
available here.)

            

               
                  Spawn
                (New Line Cinema). Based on a cult-hit comic book about a
CIA agent who returns from the dead to destroy the human race as part of a
Faustian bargain, this live-action film crosses over to mass-market success
with both teens and kids--the next Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles .
Spawn action figures have been selling out of stores, and the film
grossed $20 million its opening weekend. Newsweek praises it as "the
summer's most spectacular concoction of visual effects and color." Most
critics, however, echo the New York Times ' Stephen Holden's verdict: "an
incoherent blitz of noise, chintzy special effects and bargain-basement
allegory." (Click here for Spawn 's site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Our
Guys: The Glen Ridge Rape and the Secret Life of the Perfect Suburb
               , by
Bernard Lefkowitz (University of California Press). A journalism professor's
account of the 1989 incident in which eight high-school jocks raped a mentally
retarded girl. "Important," says the New York Times Book Review .
"[B]rilliantly rendered," says the Weekly Standard . Praise goes to
Lefkowitz's "painstaking" reporting. Shock is expressed at the
upper-middle-class New Jersey community's blasé reaction to rape (boys boasted
about it in their yearbook). But reviewers fault Lefkowitz for "sweeping
platitudes and clichés that trivialize" (Sally Jenkins, the Washington
Post ) when he links the rape to Glen Ridge's obsession with sports.

            

               
                  Faith or Fear: How Jews Can Survive in a Christian America
               , by
Elliott Abrams (Free Press). The ex-Reagan administration official's tract
against Jewish assimilation stokes an old debate most recently fueled by Alan
Dershowitz's The Vanishing American Jew . Political conservatives endorse
Abrams' calls for a return to Orthodoxy and an alliance with evangelical
Christians. "Elliott Abrams is a severe, insightful critic of the assumptions
that have brought the American Jewish community to its current predicament,"
says Mark Miller in the Weekly Standard . Liberals rebuke Abrams for his
alarmism about intermarriage. In a New York Times op-ed piece, J.J.
Goldberg says he relies on discredited studies in order to exaggerate the
"crisis."

            

               Death
            

            
               William S. Burroughs
(1914-1997). Obituaries of the author of Naked Lunch highlight his
importance as a countercultural role model, calling him "the non-conformist's
non-conformist" (the Boston Globe ) who "inspired a who's who of pop
culture" ( USA Today ). They dwell on the artists (Beats, punk rockers)
who embraced Burroughs as a guru, and retell bizarre anecdotes from his life
(he shot his wife accidentally, slept with little boys, and hawked his
typewriter to buy heroin). Yet none of the obits argues for his literary
greatness, or that his writing should be read by future generations except for
reasons of historical curiosity.

            

               Opera
            

            

               
                  Palestrina
               , by Hans Pfitzner, performed by the Royal Opera
(Metropolitan Opera House, New York). Controversy embroils the first American
performance of German composer Hans Pfitzner's 1917 opera. Some critics argue
Pfitzner has been unfairly ignored because of his friendship with Hitler, and
urge revision. The New Yorker 's Alex Ross calls Palestrina --about
the 16 th -century Italian church-music composer--"a spectacle that is
magnificent on the surface and haunting at the core." Others, though, bash
Pfitzner's work as a pale imitation of Wagner, "massively bloated [and]
endlessly meandering," and say its American performance would have been
"[b]etter never, perhaps, than late" (Martin Bernheimer, the Los Angeles
Times ).

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            July
30:

            
               Movie -- Air Force
One ;

            
               Movie -- Mrs.
Brown ;

            
               Movie -- Star
Maps ;

            

               Architecture --National Airport;

            
               Book --
                  Martha
Stewart, Just Desserts: The Unauthorized Biography
               , by Jerry
Oppenheimer;

            

               Book -- A Book of Memories , by Peter Nadas, translated by Ivan
Sanders with Imre Goldstein.

            July
16:

            

               Movie -- Contact ;

            
               Movie -- Shall We
Dance? ;

            
               Book--
               Lawyerland:
What Lawyers Talk About When They Talk About the Law , by Lawrence
Joseph;

            
               Book -- Straight
Man , by Richard Russo;

            

               Television -- Roar (Fox);

            

               Theater -- Amy's View .

            July
9:

            
               Movie -- Men in
Black ;

            
               Book -- Women With
Men , by Richard Ford;

            
               Book -- American
Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence , by Pauline Maier;

            
               Book -- Man Without
a Face: The Autobiography of Communism's Greatest Spymaster , by Markus Wolf
with Anne McElvoy;

            
               Art --"Keith Haring"
(Whitney Museum of American Art);

            
               Television -- Oz
(HBO);

            

               Music --Lilith Fair.

            June
25:

            
               Movie -- Batman
& Robin ;

            

               Movie -- Face/Off ;

            
               Movie -- La
Promesse ;

            

               Musical -- Ragtime ;

            
               Book -- The
Puttermesser Papers , by Cynthia Ozick;

            
               Book -- How Proust
Can Change Your Life: Not a Novel , by Alain de Botton;

            
               Book -- Bright Angel
Time , by Martha McPhee.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
