
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Air Force One
               
(Columbia Pictures). Most critics find little resemblance between German
director Wolfgang Petersen's "hokey" action flick and his near-classic Das
Boot . Harrison Ford's turn as a U.S. president who goes mano a mano
with Russian hijackers aboard his official plane is deemed a "14-year-old boy's
fantasy of being president" (David Denby, New York ). Reflecting a
general weariness with the summer's Hollywood fare, The New Yorker 's
Terrence Rafferty writes, "Let's hope they don't get any sillier than this."
But Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman praises Petersen's ability to
"seduce you into greater and greater flights of preposterousness." (Click
here for Air Force One 's patriotic site, and
here
for Sarah Kerr's review of the movie in Slate.)

            
               
                  Mrs. Brown
               
(Miramax). This Masterpiece Theatre-funded docudrama about Queen Victoria's
unusually close "friendship" with her Scottish manservant is said to reflect
both the virtues and flaws of the PBS TV series: strong performances from
actors little known in the United States (Antony Sher, Judi Dench, and Billy
Connolly), but also a cloying pretentiousness and "decorousness" (Janet Maslin,
New York Times ). The movie "often feels pat and resolutely performed for
the camera, scene by scene," says the Wall Street Journal 's Joe
Morgenstern. (Video and stills are available here.)

            
               
                  Star Maps
                (Fox
Searchlight). Lukewarm reviews for director Miguel Arteta's debut film, about a
teen-age Latino prostitute who aspires to make it in Hollywood, and his father,
who pimps for him. Most critics agree the film is heavy on melodrama, and the
father's character is implausibly overbearing. "[T]he metaphor ... of a father
selling his son's body is too outré to have much resonance" (Rafferty, The
New Yorker ). Arteta, however, receives praise for his "realistic" style and
"flair for caustic storytelling" (Maslin, New York Times ). "Star
Maps signals the arrival of a potentially major new talent," says
Newsday 's Jack Mathews. (For Slate's take, see Kerr's review.)

            

               Architecture
            

            
               National Airport
(Washington, D.C.). High marks for the new $450 million wing of Washington's
"downtown" airport. Critics cite the "spacious" and "user-friendly" design by
the noted New Haven architect Cesar Pelli. The new terminal is said to imitate
Washington's Neo-Classical style, with rows of glass domes and corridors of
columns. The Washington Post 's Benjamin Forgey says the building bucks
recent trends in airport design that have "struggled to keep up with the
increasing popularity of air travel" by casting aside "such amenities as beauty
... comfort and convenience." Objecting to the enthusiasm is the New York
Times ' Herbert Muschamp, who criticizes the presence of a Disney store and
TGI Friday's restaurant in the "new Washington Mall," and sarcastically
wonders, "why shouldn't an airport strive to be Macy's?"

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Martha Stewart, Just
Desserts: The Unauthorized Biography
               , by Jerry Oppenheimer (William
Morrow & Co.). The backlash against domestic goddess Martha Stewart reaches
it zenith with a new biography, currently No. 10 on the New York Times '
Best Sellers list, which claims that Stewart is even more of a bitch than
previously believed. (One example: she allegedly plagiarizes recipes.)
Reviewers don't quarrel much with the biography's slant, though they almost all
deride it as "mean-spirited." Maslin, however, instigates the backlash against
the backlash, calling Stewart an "easy target," undeserving of such outraged
fulminations: "Now it can be told: little Martha Stewart ate Gulden's mustard
on white bread as an after-school snack."

            
               
                  A Book of
Memories
               , by Peter Nadas, translated by Ivan Sanders with Imre
Goldstein (Farrar, Straus & Giroux). Newly translated into English,
Hungarian writer Peter Nadas' 706-page novel, written in 1986, is virtually
enshrined into the canon by American critics. Reviews of this tale of a
bisexual Hungarian writer in 1970s East Berlin use such terms as "Proustian"
(Eva Hoffman, New York Times Book Review ) and "masterpiece" (Stanislaw
Baranczak, the New Republic ). Praise goes to the novel's lyrical prose,
innovative (some say "difficult") structure--which includes a novel within the
novel--and its arresting depiction of life behind the Iron Curtain. Baranczak's
lavish review calls it "the book that you have been awaiting since you read
Remembrance of Things Past , The Magic Mountain or The Man
Without Qualities ."

            

               Updates
            

            In the New York Review of
Books , Nobel laureate Derek Walcott writes an effusion over his fellow
Caribbean writer Patrick Chamoiseau's Texaco. "What Ulysses did for Ireland it also did for
literature in English, and Texaco , also a masterpiece, does the same for
another island, Martinique, and for (here one swallows) literature in French."
... Panning Mason & Dixon, the New Republic 's James Wood
declares Thomas Pynchon's penchant for allegory tiresome and his alleged
cleverness to be overwrought and heavy-handed. "[T]oo much, even in this benign
book, seems willed, unfree, a hysteria that he forces onto his scenes because
without it they would not really exist."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            July
16:

            

               Movie -- Contact ;

            
               Movie -- Shall We
Dance? ;

            
               Book--
               Lawyerland:
What Lawyers Talk About When They Talk About the Law , by Lawrence
Joseph;

            
               Book -- Straight
Man , by Richard Russo;

            

               Television -- Roar ;

            

               Theater -- Amy's View .

            July
9:

            
               Movie -- Men in
Black ;

            
               Book -- Women With
Men , by Richard Ford;

            
               Book -- American
Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence , by Pauline Maier;

            
               Book -- Man Without
a Face: The Autobiography of Communism's Greatest Spymaster , by Markus Wolf
with Anne McElvoy;

            
               Art --"Keith Haring"
(Whitney Museum of American Art);

            
               Television -- Oz
(HBO);

            

               Music --Lilith Fair.

            June
25:

            
               Movie -- Batman
& Robin ;

            

               Movie -- Face/Off ;

            
               Movie -- La
Promesse ;

            

               Musical -- Ragtime ;

            
               Book -- The
Puttermesser Papers , by Cynthia Ozick;

            
               Book -- How Proust
Can Change Your Life: Not a Novel , by Alain de Botton;

            

               Book -- Bright Angel Time , by Martha McPhee.

            June
18:

            

               Movie -- Hercules ;

            
               Movie -- Speed
2 ;

            
               Movie -- My Best
Friend's Wedding ;

            

               Architecture --Shakespeare's Globe Theatre;

            
               Book -- News of a
Kidnapping , by Gabriel García Márquez, translated from the Spanish by Edith
Grossman;

            
               Book -- The Diving
Bell and the Butterfly , by Jean-Dominique Bauby, translated from the French
by Jeremy Leggatt;

            
               Book -- The God of
Small Things , by Arundhati Roy;

            
               Book -- The Perfect
Storm , by Sebastian Junger;

            

               Art --"Venice Biennale."

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
