
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Hercules
                (Disney). The studio's newest feature-length cartoon
outstrips even The Lion King (1994) in sheer promotional hype: a Fifth
Avenue parade, fireworks over the Hudson, as well as the usual McDonald's and
cereal-box tie-ins. "This time," however, says the New York Times ' Janet
Maslin, "the film is worth the fuss." Critics praise it for bucking Disney's
musical-comedy formula: It's full of self-conscious humor (jokes about a glut
of Hercules merchandise) and employs gospel music instead of the usual treacly
pop tunes. And by making Hercules a sports star and another character a
Hollywood agent, the movie proves that "Walt's art form is still sassy and
snazzy" (Richard Corliss, Time ). (Disney serves up tie-ins galore on its
site.)

            

               
                  Speed 2: Cruise Control
                (20 th Century Fox). The sequel
to the 1994 smash hit--this time set on a runaway luxury liner instead of a
runaway bus--is ridiculed as an inferior knockoff. "What a reeking bag of
nothingness!" says the Washington Post 's Stephen Hunter. Among its
faults: inane characters, incoherent plot, lack of suspense, and self-knowing
allusions to the original. The film contains, says Newsday 's Jack
Mathews in a typical pan, "not one single exhilarating scene or enticing
idea."

            
               
                  My
Best Friend's Wedding
                (Sony Pictures). Julia Roberts is back--albeit to
mixed reviews--as a malicious schemer intent on thwarting her ex-lover's
engagement. Several critics praise Roberts for achieving new heights of
meanness. Newsweek 's David Ansen, for one, says she raises interesting
questions for a Hollywood romantic comedy--"Should we be rooting for her?"--and
puts "new fizz in an old form." The New Yorker 's Terrence Rafferty
differs, denouncing the film's "killjoy moralism": It "isn't at all the sort of
spectacle that audiences for romantic comedies expect, or deserve." (Stills,
clips, etc., are available at the movie's site.)

            

               Architecture
            

            

               Shakespeare's Globe Theatre (London). Plaudits for the reconstruction of
the fabled Elizabethan theater, which was demolished in 1644. The new building,
on the Thames' south bank and 50 yards from the original, is praised for its
authenticity: harsh wooden benches, vendors selling wine during soliloquies,
costumes made using 17 th -century methods. The cramped 1,000-seat
theater makes it seem as if actors "are talking to you, asking you questions,
involving you in their fears. ... Isn't that what theatre is all about?"
(Benedict Nightingale, the London Times ). However, some critics dismiss
the project as a corny, nostalgia-heavy tourist trap, "an Elizabethan theme
park" (Roy Hattersley, the Guardian ). (Click here for the Globe's site.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  News of a Kidnapping
               , by Gabriel García Márquez, translated from
the Spanish by Edith Grossman (Knopf). The Nobel Prize-winning novelist's foray
into journalism--an account of his fellow Colombian, the late coke kingpin
Pablo Escobar--puzzles critics. García Márquez earns praise for his reporting,
which demonstrates, says Robert Stone in the New York Times Book Review ,
"a quick eye for the illuminating detail and a capacity for assembling fact."
But others lament the absence of the novelist's trademarks--the magical
realism, the stylish prose, the irony. And the Los Angeles Times '
Michael Massing says the book, which is uncritical of the often brutal Escobar,
lacks a "moral center ... he seems clearly taken with the man."

            
               
                  The
Diving Bell and the Butterfly
               , by Jean-Dominique Bauby, translated from
the French by Jeremy Leggatt (Knopf). Critics find this memoir by the late
editor of French Elle extremely poignant--but mainly because of its
method of composition. Bauby, who was almost completely paralyzed by a stroke,
dictated the book letter by letter, blinking his left eyelid as someone read
through the alphabet over and over. "[A] book as moving as Job's" (Thomas
Mallon, the New York Times Book Review ). "[B]eguilingly poetic" (Albert
Mobilio, the Village Voice ). As they invariably do with art by and/or
about invalids, critics grandiloquently pronounce the book a "testament to the
human spirit" (Malcolm Jones Jr., Newsweek ). (Click here for excerpts.)

            
               
                  The
God of Small Things
               , by Arundhati Roy (Random House). No less than John
Updike (in The New Yorker 's fiction issue) proclaims the
screenwriter-architect's first novel "a Tiger Woodsian début." Other reviews
echo the enthusiasm, comparing her tale of an aristocratic Indian family in
decline to the work of Rushdie, Faulkner, and Dickens. Roy's inventive
narrative style (multiple flashbacks, rotating narrators) and "the exuberant,
almost acrobatic nature of the writing itself" (Alice Truax, the New York
Times Book Review ) are singled out as breathtaking. Dissenting is the
Los Angeles Times ' Richard Eder, who says Roy "inflates story into epic,
the modest magic of perception into an occasional clumsy piece of magic
realism."

            
               
                  The
Perfect Storm
               , by Sebastian Junger (W.W. Norton & Co.). Raves for
this chronicle of the 1991 "storm of the century" that swallowed up a boatload
of New England fishermen. Just published and already a best seller, The
Perfect Storm is said to be "thrilling--a boat ride into and (for us) out
of a watery hell" (Anthony Bailey, the New York Times Book Review ).
Reviews cite the book's eclecticism: It combines a lucid explanation of the
storm's complex meteorology, gritty descriptions of sailor bars and, most
compellingly, a reconstruction of the ship's final minutes. "Junger is grimly
precise about the mechanics of drowning," says Time 's John Skow. (Norton
plugs the book here.)

            

               Art
            

            
               "Venice
Biennale" (Venice, Italy). Despite a lineup of big-name talent--including
Roy Lichtenstein, Jeff Koons, and Claus Oldenberg--the world's most prestigious
contemporary art exhibition fails to excite. The show "lacks insight and
inspiration," says the New York Times ' Roberta Smith. Others complain
that the superstars are over the hill, and are trotting out mediocre work. One
bright spot: Robert Colescott, the first African-American artist at Venice,
whose paintings, which transform images from Van Gogh and Picasso into sendups
of racial stereotypes, are said to add "some spice" to an otherwise "sleepy
biennal" (Holland Cotter, the New York Times ).

            

               Update
            

            More
derision for Promiscuities, Naomi Wolf's tract about female sexuality.
In the New York Observer , Francine Prose says Wolf's "methodology makes
Shere Hite look like Louis Pasteur," and in her New York Times column,
Maureen Dowd observes that the book reveals "that women like men and that they
like to be touched. Well, duh." See also Sarah Kerr's review this week
in Slate.

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            June
11:

            
               Movie -- Con
Air ;

            
               Movie -- Ulee's
Gold ;

            
               Movie -- The Pillow
Book ;

            
               Music -- Wu-Tang
Forever , Wu-Tang Clan;

            
               Book -- Without a
Doubt , by Marcia Clark, with Teresa Carpenter;

            
               Book -- Firewall: The
Iran-Contra Conspiracy and Cover-Up , by Lawrence E. Walsh;

            

               Book -- Promiscuities: The Secret Struggle for Womanhood , by Naomi
Wolf;

            

               Theater -- Gross Indecency: The Three Trials of Oscar Wilde .

            June
4:

            
               Movie -- Trial and
Error ;

            
               Music -- Blood on the
Dance Floor--HIStory in the Mix , Michael Jackson;

            
               Television -- Bill
Clinton: Rock & Roll President (VH1);

            
               Television -- Port
Charles (ABC);

            
               Book -- Race, Crime,
and the Law , by Randall Kennedy;

            
               Book -- Virginia
Woolf , by Hermione Lee;

            
               Book -- Kowloon
Tong , by Paul Theroux;

            
               Event --The Tony
Awards;

            

               Art --"Objects of Desire: The Modern Still Life" (Museum of Modern
Art).

            May
28:

            
               Movie -- The Lost
World ;

            
               Movie -- Addicted to
Love ;

            
               Movie -- Brassed
Off ;

            
               Television -- Murder
One (ABC);

            
               Theater -- King
David ;

            
               Music -- Flaming
Pie , by Paul McCartney;

            
               Book -- Che Guevara:
A Revolutionary Life , by Jon Lee Anderson;

            
               Book -- Rage for
Fame: The Ascent of Clare Boothe Luce , by Sylvia Jukes Morris;

            

               Art --New Chinese Galleries (Metropolitan Museum of Art).

            May
21:

            
               Book -- Underboss:
Sammy the Bull Gravano's Story of Life in the Mafia , by Peter Maas;

            
               Book -- The Actual: A
Novella , by Saul Bellow;

            

               Television -- Roseanne (ABC);

            
               Television -- David
Blaine: Street Magic (ABC);

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Night Falls
on Manhattan ;

            
               Movie -- Love!
Valour! Compassion! ;

            

               Theater -- The Wizard of Oz .

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
