
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The
Lost World
                (Universal Pictures). As invariably occurs upon the release
of a new Spielberg blockbuster, critics complain about the lack of plot and the
unconvincing characters; audiences shell out a record-setting amount of money
on opening weekend (in this case, $92.7 million). "Essentially a digital
version of your basic, primeval BOO! flick," says Jack Kroll in
Newsweek . Yet even the skeptics love the dinosaurs. "The Lost
World is the very essence of a thrill ride, shamelessly designed, ... [but]
there's some passion in the action, a lilt to the chases, a fluid lyricism in
the way the beasts move across hapless humans who cross their paths" (Joe
Morgenstern, the Wall Street Journal ). (See David
Edelstein's review in Slate and The Lost World site.)

            

               
                  Addicted to Love
                (Warner Bros.). The critical consensus on this
romantic comedy: more sadism than laughs. Director Griffin Dunne and actors Meg
Ryan and Matthew Broderick meant to turn the darker sides of voyeurism and
revenge into lighthearted fare; critics say they failed. "It gives us the
impression that we're supposed to take drastic, irrational revenge as a larky
laff riot," says the Los Angeles Times ' Kevin Thomas. Pans also for the
normally sunny Ryan, miscast here as a leather-clad bitch bent on punishing her
ex: "The same way a Care Bear is a teeth-baring grizzly" (Susan Wloszczyna,
USA Today ). (The Addicted to Love site has a plot summary as well as stills
and clips.)

            

               
                  Brassed Off
                (Miramax). Mixed reviews for a British "working class
comedy" about Yorkshire coal miners downsized by Thatcherism, and about their
brass band. The movie's simple-minded Tory-baiting "wears its bleeding heart
conspicuously on its sleeve," says Stephen Holden in the New York Times .
"You might feel like one of Thatcher's miners--manipulated, misled and
maneuvered into an emotional corner," says John Anderson in the Los Angeles
Times . The New Yorker 's Anthony Lane, however, praises the movie's
feel for the British working class, "forced to sustain their flagging souls by
quickness of wit." (Click here for Brassed Off 's site.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Murder One
                (ABC; May 25, 26, and 29; 9 p.m. EDT/PDT). Producer
Steven Bochco's legal drama, a critical darling but a popular flop, enjoys a
three-part last hurrah before ABC delivers the kibosh. Critics say they are
grateful for these final installments, which concern a vigilante who blows away
17 paroled convicts. "As improbable yet as irresistible as any beach book you
may be hoarding" ( USA Today ). Encomiums for the show compare it to
Law & Order and NYPD Blue , which "have made the '90s a golden
era of TV crime dramas" (Howard Rosenberg, the Los Angeles Times ).

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  King David
                (New Amsterdam Theater). Disney stages its first
production in its refurbished 42 nd Street theater. So far, the
theater has got the better marks. The New York Times ' Ben Brantley calls
Disney's musical version of the biblical story, with a score by Alan Menken
( The Little Mermaid ) and lyrics by Tim Rice ( Evita ), "a Goliath
of a yawn." Linda Winer of Newsday deems the score forgettable, "an
ambitious and derivative example of the
it's-so-loud-and-humorless-it-must-be-art style." New York 's John Simon
suggests that King David "may well be the worst musical ever perpetrated. ...
It's a new genre, a horrortorio." (See the "Summary
Judgment" entry for the New Amsterdam.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Flaming Pie
               , by Paul McCartney (Capitol). McCartney's album
occasions re-evaluations of the most mainstream Beatle--turns out he's not the
empty tunesmith he seemed in the '70s and '80s. "He is the keeper of the
Beatles' flame," says the New York Times ' Bob Spitz, "and has handled
megastardom with level-headedness and acumen." The new album, which is rife
with unabashed Fab Four nostalgia, draws warm praise. "The old bloke sounds
more inspired and, well, less goofy than he has in years" (Elysa Gardner, the
Los Angeles Times ). However, a few critics call the songs more Wings
than Beatles: "He has done some sucky stuff in his long and partially
illustrious career, but it has to be said that, overall, McCartney has never
sounded less necessary" (Andy Gill, the Independent ). (See the Flaming Pie site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  Che
Guevara: A Revolutionary Life
               , by Jon Lee Anderson (Grove Press). The
first major biography of the Cuban guerrilla--along with several forthcoming
movies and his appearance on watch faces and album covers--is said to mark a
reprise of Che Chic, with Che as a pop icon, devoid of political import. The
biography itself, which uses unpublished diaries and untapped Cuban government
archives, is praised for having done a "masterly job in evoking Che's complex
character, in separating the man from the myth" (Peter Canby, the New York
Times Book Review ). The Weekly Standard 's Stephen Schwartz calls it
tainted for having received "official support" from the Castro regime and for
abetting a Che revival.

            

               
                  Rage for Fame: The Ascent of Clare Boothe Luce
               , by Sylvia Jukes
Morris (Random House). A very friendly reception for the first volume of a
biography of one of the best-connected
journalist-playwright-congresswoman-ambassadors in history, the wife of
Time founder Henry Luce. "Morris has written a model biography of a
woman who, if born a man, could easily have been a President," says Luce's
friend Gore Vidal in The New Yorker . Reviews dwell on the book's dishy
detail, derived from Luce's diaries. Time deems the book "definitive"
but too harsh: "Morris struggles for fairness but portrays Luce as a
calculating, self-indulgent user whose fixed eye on the main chance rendered
her oblivious to the concerns of others." (See Margaret
Talbot's review in Slate. An excerpt is also
available.)

            

               Art
            

            
               New
Chinese Galleries (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York). Critics rave
about the Met's renovation of its Chinese art galleries, which have, as a
result, doubled their space. The Met has finally given a "great art tradition
... the epic-scale New York home it deserves" (Holland Cotter, the New York
Times ). Enthusiasts praise the addition of 11 major works, including
Riverbank , one of the world's earliest landscape paintings, known as the
"Mona Lisa of Chinese art." The museum's collection, which ranges from the Tang
Dynasty to the present, can now be called "the most comprehensive view of
Chinese painting to be found outside China" (Mark Stevens, New York ).
(Click here for the
Met's site.)

            

               Update
            

            The
Weekly Standard 's Lisa Schiffren lambastes playwright Wendy
Wasserstein: She "is credited with being the bard of her generation's
women. One wonders whether she is conscious of the fact that, taken as a whole,
her oeuvre can be read as a superb indictment of the feminist way of life. ...
Wendy Wasserstein's uncommon women are uncommonly unhappy, their lives a
mockery of all."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            May
21:

            
               Book -- Underboss:
Sammy the Bull Gravano's Story of Life in the Mafia , by Peter Maas;

            
               Book -- The Actual: A
Novella , by Saul Bellow;

            

               Television -- Roseanne (ABC);

            
               Television -- David
Blaine: Street Magic (ABC);

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Night Falls
on Manhattan ;

            
               Movie -- Love!
Valour! Compassion! ;

            

               Theater -- The Wizard of Oz .

            May
14:

            
               Architecture --New
Amsterdam Theater;

            
               Event --Cannes
International Film Festival;

            
               Movie -- Father's
Day ;

            
               Movie -- The Fifth
Element ;

            
               Movie -- The
Designated Mourner ;

            
               Television -- The
Odyssey (NBC);

            
               Book -- The Courage
to Stand Alone: Letters From Prison and Other Writings , by Wei Jingsheng,
translated and edited by Kristina M. Torgeson;

            
               Book -- Time Bind:
When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work , by Arlie Russell
Hochschild;

            

               Theater -- Candide ;

            

               Museum --Newseum.

            May
7:

            
               Book -- Mason &
Dixon , by Thomas Pynchon;

            

               Book/Television -- American Visions: The Epic History of Art in
America , by Robert Hughes, and American Visions (PBS);

            
               Book -- Echo
House , by Ward Just;

            
               Book -- Reading in
the Dark , by Seamus Deane;

            
               Architecture --Franklin
Delano Roosevelt Memorial;

            
               Television -- The
Last Don (CBS);

            
               Movie -- Children of
the Revolution ;

            

               Movie -- Breakdown .

            April
30:

            

               Movie -- Volcano ;

            
               Movie -- Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion ;

            
               Pop -- Share My
World , by Mary J. Blige;

            
               Book -- Locked in the
Cabinet , by Robert Reich;

            
               Book -- Anything Your
Little Heart Desires: An American Family Story , by Patricia Bosworth;

            
               Book -- Hystories:
Hysterical Epidemics and Modern Media , by Elaine Showalter;

            

               Theater -- Titanic ;

            
               Theater -- The Little
Foxes ;

            
               Dance --"In Honor of
the Divine Lou Harrison," the Mark Morris Dance Group.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
