
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Architecture
            

            
               New
Amsterdam Theater (New York City). For months, critics have derided
Disney's plans to clean up Times Square as mere Disneyfication. But they are
more sanguine when it comes to the restoration of the 1903 New Amsterdam
Theater. It is now "one of the grandest and most mind-bendingly ornate theaters
in America, an eclectic melange of Art Nouveau and other turn-of-the-century
ornamentation and a triumph of the restorer's art," says Time 's Bruce
Handy. Not all skepticism has been banished, however. "This street has the
potential to become one of the most culturally important in urban America. ...
Or it could simply be a bright but chuckleheaded exercise in consumerism"
(Herbert Muschamp, the New York Times ). (To learn more about the New
Amsterdam, click here.)

            

               Event
            

            
               Cannes
International Film Festival (France). Predictably, the film festival's
50 th anniversary is an overhyped bash; and predictably, critics
kvetch. "[T]he supposed guests of honor--the films--are in danger of being
relegated to a secondary role as the free-wheeling fest becomes the real star
of the show," says Variety 's Michael Williams. Complaints: 1) There are
too many American stars; 2) Sylvester Stallone continues to try to win
acceptance as a serious actor; 3) the movies stink. Only two have received
acclaim: Welcome to Sarajevo , starring Woody Harrelson and Marisa Tomei
as journalists who save Bosnian orphans; and Ang Lee's adaptation of Rick
Moody's The Ice Storm . Flops include The Brave , Johnny Depp's
directorial debut. (See Cannes' surprisingly subdued official site for more on
the festivities.)

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Father's Day
                (Warner Brothers). Despite performances by certified
funny people Robin Williams and Billy Crystal (each plays a man convinced he is
the real father of Nastassja Kinski's son), most critics say, this remake of
the 1983 French comedy Les Compères is unfunny. Williams and Crystal "do
the old married couple shtick so well they should open a joint bank account"
(John Anderson, Newsday ). But the script is heavier on sentimental
musing on parenthood than it is on humor. "[T]hese two great comics are poorly
served by the picture's ... domestic respectability. Family values are fine, in
their place, but this is the wrong place" (Terrence Rafferty, The New
Yorker ). The New York Times ' Janet Maslin, however, dissents:
"[T]here are some slow patches and formulaic touches, but that's a fair trade
for the fun of watching Mr. Williams and Mr. Crystal make an irresistible comic
team." (See the Father's Day site.)

            
               
                  The
Fifth Element
                (Columbia Pictures). The high-kitsch sci-fi blockbuster,
set in 23 rd century New York and directed by French schlockmeister
Luc Besson ( La Femme Nikita ), augurs not only the end of the world but,
critics predict, the end of culture. "[T]he annihilation of everything Cannes
has stood for" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly ). "A spectacular
triumph of style over substance," says the Washington Post 's Rita
Kempley. Kudos go to its cartoonish set and the elaborate costumes by Jean-Paul
Gaultier. The plot, in which Bruce Willis and scantily clad model Milla
Jovovich save the planet, is ridiculed as even more implausible than usual.
"How can filmmakers devote a year, even two years of their lives to such
overwrought, crumbling nonsense?" (David Denby, New York ). (See David
Edelstein's similarly negative review. Visit The Fifth Element site.)

            
               
                  The
Designated Mourner
                (First Look Pictures). Raves for this adaptation of
a play by actor/writer Wallace Shawn ( My Dinner With Andre ), which
features three intellectuals holding forth on the decay of high culture ("like
a surreal extended edition of The Charlie Rose Show ," writes Stephen
Holden in the New York Times ). The script "flows along seamlessly ...
[and] has a measured elegance," says Holden. Praise also goes to comedian Mike
Nichols' film-acting debut: His "timing is flawless, his speech peppered with
strange pauses through which we grasp the full weight of his irony, derision,
and sheer incredulity at the peculiarity of the human phenomena that surround
him" (Leslie Camhi, the Village Voice ). (Slate's Sarah Kerr
argues that the movie is merely pretentious.)

            

               Television
            

            
               
                  The
Odyssey
                (NBC, May 18 and 19; 9 p.m. EDT/PDT). Critics trash Homer's
epic-turned-sweeps-month-stunt. With a $43 million budget, it is, minute for
minute, the most expensive TV show ever, and also features a shocking amount of
sex--as Odysseus, Armand Assante sleeps with Penelope (Greta Scacchi), Circe
(Bernadette Peters), and Calypso (Vanessa Williams). Time 's Ginia
Bellafante says the show "seesaws--often uncomfortably--between earnestness and
camp." This Odysseus "seems to be on a very long journey to find his missing
Prozac." (Watch previews and join The Odyssey chat on NBC's site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The
Courage to Stand Alone: Letters From Prison and Other Writings
               , by Wei
Jingsheng, translated and edited by Kristina M. Torgeson (Viking). Writings by
the imprisoned Chinese political activist are granted a place "among the
classics of the 20 th century literature of dissent, alongside the
writings of figures like Vaclav Havel, Vladmir Bukovsky and Adam Michnik"
(Richard Bernstein, the New York Times ). The collection mainly consists
of letters, written from prison to Chinese leaders, pleading the case for
democracy. "[D]espite the impossible circumstances under which they were
written, they are an extraordinary and moving record of a courageous,
compassionate and obstinate mind dedicated to democratic principles and the
amelioration of the Chinese people's harsh fate" (Judith Shapiro, the New
York Times Book Review ).

            
               
                  The
Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work
               , by Arlie
Russell Hochschild (Metropolitan Books/Henry Holt & Co.). Mostly positive
reviews for the Berkeley sociologist's latest work, in which she argues that
parents put in ever longer hours at work not because they must but because they
prefer it to home. In the New York Times Book Review , Nicholas Lemann
praises the book: "Ms. Hochschild writes in a calm, understanding tone that
tends to disguise how truly subversive and depressing her message is." Slate's
Ann
Hulbert says Hochschild overstates her case: "The truth is that home hasn't
suddenly become work. It has always been work--endless work."

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  Candide
                (Gershwin Theatre, New York City). Another extravagant
musical, more unkind reviews. For the third time in 25 years, director Harold
Prince revives the 1956 Leonard Bernstein-Lillian Hellman-Richard Wilbur
version of Voltaire's novel. The problem with this production: Prince sets
Candide in a traveling carnival and includes elaborate stunts like
artificial flying falcons, thereby substituting "spectacle ... for satire ...
without an iota of anarchy or inspiration," says The New Yorker 's John
Lahr. The New York Times ' Ben Brantley says that "Candide is
truly one of the best of all possible musicals, but only if you close your
eyes."

            

               Museum
            

            

               Newseum (Arlington, Va.). Gannett's effort at self-aggrandizing
philanthropy is dismissed as self-aggrandizing propaganda. Located across the
street from USA Today 's headquarters, the Newseum's collection consists
partly of artifacts from great moments in journalism (e.g., Edward R. Murrow's
microphone) and partly of high-tech interactive games meant to depict the
workings of a newspaper (the Daily Miracle ). "You get more feeling for
the newspaper business from Daily Planet panels in an old
Superman comic" (Henry Allen, the Washington Post ). Time 's
Andrew Ferguson says the museum "is a $50 million testament to the terrifying
insecurity that lurks at the heart of American journalism." (See the Newseum site.)

            

               Updates
            

            In The
New Yorker , Louis Menand praises Philip Roth's American
Pastoral. It is about "the same irony and the same agony" as Portnoy's
Complaint --the excesses of the 1960s--but American Pastoral is
"darker, difficult, more mature."... The Weekly Standard 's Pia
Catton argues that the FDR
monument "misrepresents and diminishes the man" because it lacks the
grandeur of the Jefferson, Lincoln, and Washington monuments. It "is as
accessible and gentle as your grandmother's garden."

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            May
7:

            
               Book -- Mason &
Dixon , by Thomas Pynchon;

            

               Book/Television -- American Visions: The Epic History of Art in
America , by Robert Hughes, and American Visions (PBS);

            
               Book -- Echo
House , by Ward Just;

            
               Book -- Reading in
the Dark , by Seamus Deane;

            

               Architecture --Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial;

            
               Television -- The
Last Don (CBS);

            
               Movie -- Children of
the Revolution ;

            

               Movie -- Breakdown .

            April
30:

            

               Movie -- Volcano ;

            
               Movie -- Romy and
Michele's High School Reunion ;

            
               Pop -- Share My
World , by Mary J. Blige;

            
               Book -- Locked in
the Cabinet , by Robert Reich;

            
               Book -- Anything
Your Little Heart Desires: An American Family Story , by Patricia
Bosworth;

            
               Book -- Hystories:
Hysterical Epidemics and Modern Media , by Elaine Showalter;

            

               Theater -- Titanic ;

            
               Theater -- The
Little Foxes ;

            

               Dance --"In Honor of the Divine Lou Harrison," the Mark Morris Dance
Group.

            April
23:

            
               Book -- The Gospel
According to the Son, by Norman Mailer ;

            
               Book -- American
Pastoral , by Philip Roth;

            
               Book -- W.B. Yeats:
A Life. 1: The Apprentice Mage, 1865-1914 , by R.F. Foster;

            
               Book -- Purple
America , by Rick Moody;

            
               Television -- In the
Gloaming ;

            
               Opera -- The Ring of
the Nibelung ;

            
               Movie -- Murder at
1600 ;

            

               Movie -- Kissed .

            April
16:

            
               Art --"Picasso: The
Early Years, 1892-1906" (National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.);

            

               Movie -- Anaconda ;

            
               Movie -- Grosse
Pointe Blank ;

            
               Theater -- An
American Daughter ;

            
               Book -- Naked ,
by David Sedaris;

            
               Book -- The Blue
Flower , by Penelope Fitzgerald;

            
               Book -- Gut
Symmetries , by Jeanette Winterson;

            

               Book -- Inventions of the March Hare: Poems 1909-1917 , by T.S.
Eliot, edited by Christopher Ricks.

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
