
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Cop
Land
                (Miramax). Forty extra pounds notwithstanding, Sylvester Stallone
fails to ascend to the ranks of his co-stars, the great character actors Robert
De Niro, Harvey Keitel, and Ray Liotta. He "comes alive ... only [in the]
climax, when he finally gets to pick up a gun," says Entertainment
Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman. The New York Times ' Janet Maslin defies
the critical consensus and extols the new Sly: "Watching Mr. Stallone quietly
hold his ground with Robert De Niro, ... it is not immediately apparent who was
lauded as his generation's greatest brooding film star." (Miramax plugs the
movie here.)

            
               
                  The
Full Monty
                (Fox Searchlight Pictures). This "bittersweet" British
"working-class comedy" (Kevin Thomas, the Los Angeles Times ) about
out-of-work, out-of-shape steelworkers turned male strippers earns praise for
its politics and humor. Critics find the film's conceit--"that joblessness is a
humiliation well beyond nakedness"--to be "witty" and "trenchant" (the New
York Times ' Maslin). The film also wins points from politically sympathetic
reviewers who bemoan "how few American films have dealt even as remotely as
well with ... downsizing, ... a heinous redistribution of wealth, [and] the
exaltation of capital" (John Anderson, Newsday ). (Click here for the
full Monty .)

            

               Music
            

            
               
                  Be
Here Now
               , Oasis (Epic). Long compared to the Beatles, the British bad
boys of pop "unabashedly lay claim to the pantheon of rock greats" (Elysa
Gardner, the Los Angeles Times ). Other critics disagree. "The sheer
vitality and pure inner joy contained within the music disguises how dated it
really is," says the Daily Telegraph 's Neil McCormick. Others dismiss
the Beatles comparison as hype. "[N]ot a particularly smart or involving album.
... If we want to hear the Beatles, we can listen to their Anthology
records," says Time 's Christopher John Farley. (Link to the dozens of Oasis pages.)

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  1776
                (Roundabout Theatre, New York City). Most critics agree that
the revived 1969 hit musical about the making of the Declaration of
Independence has endured the decades. "A surprisingly (if oddly) skilled
seducer," says the New York Times ' Ben Brantley. "[I]ts laurels weren't
just nods to jingoistic values in a time of social upheaval." Praise goes to
its book, written by a high-school history teacher: It invests the Continental
Congress' debate with a "thrill [that] is ... moral and intellectual" (Donald
Lyons, the Wall Street Journal ). Others take the occasion to recall,
resentfully, how the "reactionary" show beat out Hair for a Tony;
Newsday 's Linda Winer declares it "Broadway's equivalent of an extremely
competent after-school special."

            
               
                  On
the Town
                (Delacorte Theatre, New York City). Another extravagant
musical revival, it is said not to do justice to Leonard Bernstein's 1944
original about sailors on 24-hour leave in New York (which later became a Frank
Sinatra-Gene Kelly movie). "A strained affair that ... leav[es] the heart
unengaged" (Frank Scheck, the Hollywood Reporter ). The litany of
problems starts with basics like the acting and dancing: Its cast of unknowns
"is jarringly unbalanced," and "as a dance show, it has two left feet"
(Brantley).

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  George Wallace
                (TNT; Aug. 24 and 26; 8 p.m. EDT/PDT). Critics
complain that John Frankenheimer's miniseries about the Alabama governor and
presidential candidate plays fast and loose with history. (Most problematic: A
fictitious manservant, supposed to be a sort of African-American Everyman,
contemplates assassinating Wallace.) In the Weekly Standard , Wallace
biographer Stephan Lesher says the film reduces the governor's appeal to simple
racism--a contention "every bit as anti-intellectual and demagogic as Wallace's
own ... bigotry." But Time 's Joel Stein says that Gary Sinise's
"nuanced" portrayal of Wallace redeems the series. (See the official site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  A
Fan's Notes
               , by Frederick Exley (Modern Library), and 
                  Misfit: The
Strange Life of Frederick Exley
               , by Jonathan Yardley (Random House).
Critics seize upon the re-issue of 1968's A Fan's Notes and upon this
biography of its eccentric, dipsomaniac author to sing his praises. Christopher
Caldwell in the Weekly Standard declares A Fan's Notes , Exley's
only hit, a "masterpiece." The reviews of Yardley's book are less positive. A
Washington Post book critic and Exley's literary executor, Yardley is
said to use scant evidence--such as numerous late-night phone calls from Exley
from 1975 to 1992--to draw conclusions about Exley's self-absorption and
ambiguous sexuality. "Still, Yardley's book has value as a study of just how
small and brief and enigmatic certain writers' lives can be once you've
subtracted their work from the equation." (Slate's Walter
Kirn).

            

               
                  Apaches
               , by Lorenzo Carcaterra (Ballantine Books). Like his
previous book, Sleepers , which was adapted into a Robert De Niro movie,
Carcaterra's latest novel is both an instant best seller and a critical flop.
Apaches , about ex-cops battling a gang of drug traffickers who smuggle
cocaine in the hollowed-out cadavers of kidnapped babies, is condemned for its
"gruesome banality, ... assembly line formulas and ... plain tastelessness"
(Richard Bernstein, the New York Times ). Newsweek 's Jeff Giles
says Carcaterra is "one of the most intriguing writers around, with or without
his books. Preferably without." (See the elaborate Apaches
site.)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Aug.
13:

            
               Movie -- Conspiracy
Theory ;

            
               Movie -- Love
Serenade ;

            

               Television -- Vibe and The 
               Keenen 
               Ivory

               Wayans 
               Show ;

            

               Event/Television --Garth Brooks in Central Park/ Garth Brooks
Live ;

            
               Art --"Sculpture of
Angkor and Ancient Cambodia: Millennium of Glory";

            
               Book -- Simenon: A
Biography , by Pierre Assouline, translated by Jon Rothschild;

            

               Book -- Dispatches From the Freud Wars: Psychoanalysis and Its
Passions , by John Forrester.

            Aug.
6:

            
               Movie -- Career
Girls ;

            
               Movie -- In the
Company of Men ;

            

               Movie -- Spawn ;

            
               Book -- Our Guys: The
Glen Ridge Rape and the Secret Life of the Perfect Suburb , by Bernard
Lefkowitz;

            
               Book -- Faith or
Fear: How Jews Can Survive in a Christian America , by Elliott Abrams;

            
               Death --William S.
Burroughs;

            

               Opera -- Palestrina .

            July
30:

            
               Movie -- Air Force
One ;

            
               Movie -- Mrs.
Brown ;

            
               Movie -- Star
Maps ;

            
               Architecture --National
Airport;

            
               Book -- Martha
Stewart, Just Desserts: The Unauthorized Biography , by Jerry
Oppenheimer;

            

               Book -- A Book of Memories , by Peter Nadas, translated by Ivan
Sanders with Imre Goldstein.

            July
16:

            

               Movie -- Contact ;

            
               Movie -- Shall We
Dance? ;

            
               Book -- Lawyerland:
What Lawyers Talk About When They Talk About the Law , by Lawrence
Joseph;

            
               Book -- Straight
Man , by Richard Russo;

            

               Television -- Roar (Fox);

            
               Theater -- Amy's
View .

            

               --Compiled by Franklin Foer and the editors of Slate .
            

         
      
   
