
   
   
      
         
            Policy Corner: Bush Ed

            The reviews of George W. Bush's proposal for education
reform, unveiled three weeks ago in California, have been largely favorable.
Sober-minded columnists and education reformers have praised the plan, which
hinges on taking federal money away from failing schools and giving it to
parents to use elsewhere. But the analysis has neglected one salient point
about the Bush program: It already exists in Texas. And it's a failure.

            Under Bush's proposal, states would be required to test
their "disadvantaged" students on academic basics every year. If a school's
test scores didn't improve after three consecutive years, the federal
government would take away its contribution that comes under an aid program
known as Title 1. This federal money would then go to parents, who could use it
as a voucher to pay for a private school, tutoring, or another public
school--"for whatever offers hope," as Bush put it. In announcing the plan, he
estimated that the Title1 chit would be worth about $1,500 per student.

            You can find the details of how something similar
actually works in W. country in a Sept. 3 Houston
Chronicle story by Melanie Markley and Kathy Walt. Under a program that
Bush has promoted (but did not initiate), Texas tests all its students and
schools just as he envisions doing nationally. Students have to take the Texas
Assessment of Academic Skills (TAAS). On the basis of that test and a few other
factors, schools are rated in one of four categories: "low-performing,"
"acceptable," "recognized," or "exemplary." Only one school in the entire
state--Goodrich Elementary School, 60 miles outside Houston--has been rated
"low-performing" for three consecutive years. What would happen to Goodrich
under the Bush plan? This school, which has 150 students, gets only $47,000 in
Title 1 funds each year. This means that parents would receive a voucher worth
not $1,500 per student, but $313.33. That doesn't buy a lot of hope, even in
Goodrich, Texas. In fact, there are no private schools in the vicinity, which
means that there wouldn't even be anyone to turn down this sorry-assed excuse
for tuition.

            What about urban districts? It so happens that Houston
has a program that is both more generous and more stringent than Bush's
proposal. It says that students who fail the Texas test and who attend schools
rated "low-performing" by the state for just one year, can receive a credit of
$3,575 to attend private school. It's not exactly a voucher, since the school
district negotiates directly with private schools to place these students. This
year,147 students in the Houston Independent School District qualify to opt out
of failing public schools under this program. How many have taken advantage of
it? Zero.

            The Chronicle story offers
a couple of explanations for this. For one thing, the Houston school district
didn't identify which students qualified for the program until August, by which
time it was too late to enroll elsewhere for this year. But the bigger problem
is that even $3,575 isn't enough to pay tuition at a private school in Houston.
Four or five private schools did contact the school district to express
interest in the program, but all considered a payment of $3,600 too low.
Tuition at run-of-the-mill private schools in Houston runs more like $5,500 for
the school year. At elite academies, it can be as much as $12,000 per year.
Since the Chronicle story was published, one
private school has agreed to accept 25 students. It's a mostly African-American
religious school, which intends to create a separate secular facility for the
public-school transfer students.

            If private schools in Houston won't accept a $3,600
voucher, it's pretty clear that a $1,500 voucher won't produce any real choice
for parents. And if there's no choice, there's no competitive pressure on
failing public schools, which is the chief justification for the program. To
find out whether vouchers can actually improve education, Bush would have to
offer an additional incentive worth several times the federal government's
Title 1 spending (currently around $8 billion). But even the compassionate one
isn't prepared to run afoul of conservative dogma to the extent of proposing
spending tens of billions of additional federal dollars on education.

            The Texas story points to another fatal flaw in Bush's
proposal. How is it that only one school in the whole state of Texas has been
rated "low-performing" for three consecutive years? Bush might have you believe
that it's because he has done so much to improve education in Texas. In fact,
it's because the state standards are riddled with loopholes. Schools can exempt
students judged to have learning disabilities, or who have limited English
skills, from taking the state test. Schools do this--and the state permits
it--to avoid punishment and embarrassment. It's the bureaucratic equivalent of
social promotion. How likely is it that states would set up stringent systems
of evaluation and accountability for the sake of having their federal education
funding taken away? Not very. Bush is proposing that federal education dollars
come with strings attached. But the people receiving the dollars get to pull
the strings.

            There's a way around this problem: set federal
education standards. Reading at a fourth-grade level should mean the same thing
in Goodrich, Texas, that it does in Bismarck, N.D. With a single standard, you
could measure any school against any other school and truly assess their
progress or failure against a common baseline. Checker Finn and Diane Ravich,
two of Bush's education advisers, have championed this idea in the past. Yet
Bush's plan steers entirely clear of national standards in favor of state ones.
The implicit reason is, once again, that anything the federal government does
runs afoul of the conservative dogma, which says that education is an
exclusively local responsibility.

            More money and strict federal standards would make
Bush's plan plausible and interesting. Until his work improves, he deserves a
D.

         
      
   
