
   
   
      
         
            Appeasement in Our Time

            The New York Times leads with George W. Bush
asking Pat Buchanan to stay with the GOP. Though disturbed by Pat's views on
World War II, Bush, positioning himself as the clear Republican front-runner,
claims he needs a unified party to win. The Washington Post leads with
a federal appeals court's rejection of late-term abortion bans passed in
Arkansas, Iowa, and Nebraska. Judges dismissed all three bans because they
could unconstitutionally restrict first- and second-trimester abortions (the
story is stuffed by the NYT ). The Los Angeles
Times goes local, describing a battery of reforms to California's ailing
child support program.

            According to the NYT ,
Bush's desire to keep Pat in the party, expressed in an Associated Press
interview, puts him at odds with Republicans such as John McCain and William
Kristol, who feel that Buchanan would do the GOP a favor by leaving. The
NYT also notes that on Wednesday, in an address to
Texas Jewish groups, Bush announced that he wouldn't fuel the debate by
entering it. The WP explicates Buchanan's theory: 
the same "liberal interventionism" that spurred Hitler's aggression now
threatens to drive Russia "straight into the arms of a Chinese Communist."

            The NYT and the
WP agree that the abortion bans were deemed
unconstitutional because their wording could also prohibit procedures used in
first- and second-trimester abortions. The ruling will likely endanger the ban
passed last week in Missouri, as well as a similarly worded bill pending in
Congress. The papers disagree about how many states have passed such bans
( WP , 30; NYT , 28), and
how many of these bans have been temporarily or permanently blocked by appeals
courts ( WP , 18; NYT ,
19). Further appeals are guaranteed: "U.S. Supreme Court, here we come," one
activist told the WP .

            All California seems to agree that the state's child
support programs needed today's legislative fix, but the LAT waits until after the jump to describe what's wrong, and how
the reforms will fix it. Previously, cases were handled by California's
district attorneys, with little statewide supervision. This fragmented system
proved ineffective: In L.A., only one of 10 cases filed led to collection,
thousands of men were wrongly billed, and attempts to create a statewide child
support computer system failed, resulting in large federal fines. The new laws
transfer the attorneys' duties to new county offices, which will be overseen by
a new statewide Department of Child Support.

            An NYT front-pager reports
that, in the face of violent protests, Indonesia's president delayed signing a
law concerning the military's emergency powers. The bill was rushed through the
parliament Thursday and engendered protest from students who feared that the
law could lead to a military coup. Officials claim that the act would actually
decrease military power. Three protesters and a police officer were killed
during the protests.  The WP stuffs the story, but
mentions early on that one of the protesters was apparently killed by a sniper
using live ammunition, though the government claims only rubber bullets were
used. The NYT says why this is important: A similar
discrepancy in May 1998 helped fuel protests that toppled the Suharto
regime.

            The WP front tells of Bob
Dole's growing fund-raising role in his wife's campaign. Dole is targeting his
past supporters, many of them generous Bush donors, claiming that no matter who
wins, Libby's campaign is good for the GOP. One source claims that Dole
actually combed through Bush's list of donors for contact names (a violation of
FEC regulations). Some sources suggest that Dole's redoubled efforts are
"penance" for disparaging comments he had made about the campaign.

            The LAT fronts a scrutiny
of online chat room stings. Though the growing number of stings are leading to
a lot of arrests, they may draw attention away from what is overwhelmingly an
offline problem. Child advocacy experts say that offenders make first contact
with their victims online in only a tiny fraction of the cases they handle. And
in such cases, contact is usually initiated in mainstream chat areas. The more
hard-core rooms, it seems, are now frequented largely by undercover agents.

            
               
                  Liberté , égalité ,
T&A: Marianne, France's buxom equivalent of Uncle Sam, is best known as
the topless revolutionary in Delacroix's Liberty Leading the People .
But in the past two centuries, she has appeared in many guises, modeled after
many different women. A front page NYT story
reports that controversy has erupted over who will be the model for Marianne
2000. The finalists are a model, a singer, a journalist, a game show
host/windsurfer, and a model/actress, but protesters want a Marianne who
represents the achievements of French women beyond the runway. Today's Papers
thinks they've already got her: past Marianne models include Bridgitte Bardot
and Catherine Deneuve, whose supple republican fervor and firm, curvaceous
civic virtues are an inspiration to patriots everywhere.

         
      
   
