
   
   
      
         
            The Anti-Elitist Elite
            

            Dear Nat,

            Maybe I was too prickly about Lemann's treatment of the
California Civil Rights Initiative, but let me explain why. CCRI, and
opposition to affirmative action generally, is popular with middle-class
Americans. Meanwhile, CCRI was extremely unpopular with the educated elites.
One of the things the educated elites did during the CCRI fight was to use the
full power of their influence in the media and the culture to oppose,
discredit, and in many cases smear the supporters. That's one of the reasons
most of the normal big-money people in the Republican party wouldn't go near
it.

            In the end, the educated-elite assault was not enough
to drive public support of CCRI below 50 percent. That shows that the influence
of the educated elite is not dominant in American society (if it were,
campaign-finance reform would have passed long ago).

            But Lemann is writing a book lamenting the fact that
America has this new elite, selected at an early age by SAT scores and other
academic factors. He says this system of selecting people so young is unfair to
most Americans. Good point. But if that is your argument, then in the major
public-policy dispute you cover in the book, you had better bend over backwards
to give voice to the majority of high-school grads who supported CCRI. Instead,
the story is told--for the most part--through a bunch of Ivy League lawyers and
highly educated political activists. To simplify Lemann's supple narrative a
bit: He decries the existence of the educated elite, but when push comes to
shove he seems more a creature of that elite than an opponent or a detached
cultural observer.

            But I don't want to say that Lemann is an old fashioned
elitist. That is to fundamentally misunderstand the nature of the educated
elite, of which Lemann seems to be a paragon. The reality is much more
paradoxical. This is an elite raised to oppose elites. This is an elite with an
egalitarian sensibility. That's why it supports affirmative action--out of
concern for the less fortunate. That's why its members write books like this
one. When members of the elite oppose the middle class and sometimes trample
all over them, they are usually doing it in the name of egalitarianism. The
elites are more egalitarian than the masses.

            One of the things that shines through Lemann's writing
is his concern for people less fortunate than himself. He is never
self-righteous or showy about this. Instead, his penchant for exhaustive
research seems to flow from a genuine social commitment. I've never met the
man, but I admire him through his writings. From what I know about him, he
seems to have had all the educational advantages. And here he is arguing
against the privileges of his class, but without any radical-chic bravura--and
most members of the educated elite will agree with him.

            That's why this elite, for all its flaws, is
fundamentally different than and better than the Protestant Establishment that
it replaced. That's why I'm not convinced by Lemann's concluding section in
which he says we should change the way we select our elites. The ethos he
describes in his heroes undercuts his case. If we are going to have an
elite--and we are--we should have one made up of people as egalitarian as
Lemann. The current university system seems to inculcate such values. I
mentioned yesterday that I just finished a book about the manners and morals of
this educated class. When I wrote the proposal, I said that my last chapter
would be about the revolt against this class, for some of the same reasons that
Lemann hints at (without sufficiently detailing) in his book: They are selected
too early; they live in a culture that is detached from the rest of the
culture; the income gap between them and the rest of the culture is widening.
But as I traveled around doing my research, I couldn't find any evidence of
this class revolt. There didn't seem to be any mass movement to upend people
like us who went to or work at selective colleges. Indeed, the rest of America
seems to want to learn how to drink espressos like we do. The only people who
seemed genuinely upset about the educated elite were members of the educated
elite themselves.

            This sensibility oozes from the pores of Molly Munger,
one of the liberal lawyers Lemann describes fighting CCRI. This sensibility
plays out over many spheres. This is an elite that dresses casually so it won't
appear elite (visit Microsoft). This is an elite that practices conscientious
consumption instead of conspicuous consumption. This is an elite in which
six-figure-income intellectuals like Robert Reich churn out books on widening
wealth disparities. This is not too say they are hypocrites. It is to say they
go to extraordinary lengths to mitigate their social advantages, at least
compared to the old Protestant Establishment.

            Indeed, I have a half-baked theory that America
tolerates left-wing universities because they serve as finishing schools for
the new ruling class. They give the coming elite an egalitarian sensibility, so
when they rise to the top, they won't give off offensive vapors that might
arouse class resentments in the middle and lower class. In this way Marxist
professors actually serve to solidify the current class structure.

            But that wacky theory aside, the point for Lemann's
book is this: He brilliantly shows how the Protestant Establishment gave way to
the educated elite. He tells for the first time how the selective mechanism for
the educated class--the SAT--came to occupy its current dominant role. He
underlines the problems with this arrangement. He makes a truncated plea for
reform. But he never shows the great harms perpetrated by this system. He
doesn't show how the new elites have been corrupted by their status, or of the
misery of How the Other Half Lives. On the contrary, he shows how educated
elites like himself and Molly Munger are fighting against the Marie Antoinette
syndrome. I don't agree with Lemann on a lot of issues, but I'm glad the
central flaw of this elite is excessive egalitarianism. That's the least bad
flaw for an elite to have.

            You mentioned yesterday that today you were going to
take on his concluding section. I'm looking forward to that.

            David

         
      
   
