
   
   
      
         
            Steve Ballmer's Bunk
            

            Steve Ballmer spoke, and the stock market trembled. Too
bad it didn't yawn.

            Ballmer is president of Microsoft (which,
incidentally--well, I hope just incidentally, since I sure do like my job--owns

                  Slate
               ), and last
Thursday, in a post-speech question-and-answer period, he told the Society of
American Business Editors and Writers that the stock market's valuation of
"technology stocks," including Microsoft, was "absurd." Ballmer's comments
almost singlehandedly drove the tech-heavy Nasdaq--"tech-heavy" is an adjective
permanently attached to "Nasdaq"--to its worst performance in five months and
sent Microsoft's shares (which, full disclosure, I own) down 5 percent.

            As just about everyone has remarked, Ballmer's comments
were nothing new. Microsoft's CFO, Greg Maffei, told analysts this summer that
the company's stock valuation was "ludicrous," and Ballmer told those same
analysts that investors' expectations for Microsoft's future growth were
"outlandish." Microsoft execs in general are well-known for downplaying the
company's future prospects. Bill Gates himself supposedly told his father to
sell his Microsoft stock soon after the company went public and saw its shares
soar to what then must have seemed like stratospheric levels. (Sensibly, Gates'
dad declined the advice.)

            Ballmer also has a clear incentive to talk down
Microsoft's stock price, at least in the short term. A higher stock price makes
it more difficult to lure employees with stock options, and, more important,
makes existing options more expensive. And keeping investor expectations
moderate is a good way of making sure you meet those expectations.

            But even if Ballmer's comments had been completely
unexpected and completely unrelated to any of Microsoft's broader corporate
goals, they should not have moved the market, because Steve Ballmer knows less
about the appropriate valuation of technology stocks than the market does.

            The value of a company depends essentially on two
things: the free cash flow (cash above and beyond expenses, including its cost
of capital, and reinvestment) that the company generates and the length of time
the company is able to continue generating free cash flow. In valuing companies
like Microsoft, Cisco (which I also own shares of), Intel, and Dell so highly,
then the market is saying two things: These companies are generating
extraordinary amounts of free cash flow (which they are), and they will be able
to continue generating that kind of cash for a considerable length of time.

            Now, the first point is not really arguable. By any
meaningful measure of economic performance, the dominant U.S. technology
companies today are among the most successful and profitable in the history of
the world. (I say that for effect, but I'm not exaggerating.) The second point,
which has to do with the sustainability of this domination, is presumably the
one Ballmer finds so objectionable. With technology changing as rapidly as it
seems to be, Ballmer is arguing, no company can really be sure of staying on
top for a long time.

            Now, I think Ballmer is wrong about these valuations,
which is to say wrong about the future. (That's why I own shares in some of
these companies.) Now, the fact that I think Ballmer is wrong is basically
irrelevant (except, perhaps, to my future here). The fact that the market
thinks Ballmer is wrong is, however, very important.

            Our natural inclination, after all, is to imagine that
someone in Steve Ballmer's position must know a lot more than everybody else
about something like the valuation of technology stocks. But to succumb to that
inclination is to reject the most important lesson taught by the triumph of
capitalism, which is that markets process information, judge the future, and
allocate capital far more efficiently and successfully than any individual, no
matter how well-positioned, possibly can. We don't trust central planners
anymore because we know they can never know as much as or react as quickly as
markets can. And we shouldn't dump our Microsoft stock because Steve Ballmer
says it's too expensive for the very same reason.

         
      
   
