
   
   
      
         
            Strangers in Town
            

            Dear Ester:

            I understand your appreciation for urban life. I, too, love cities--as a
resident, tourist, professional visitor, etc. It generally is one of the
conditions of my visiting a city to lecture or consult that I stay at a
"downtown" hotel rather than one on a highway someplace. The inspiration for
much of my work has been Jane Jacob's wonderful book The Death and Life of
Great American Cities .

            I take your point about making the city a place for "tourists" at the
expense of residents and neighborhoods. Certainly in the subway, although I was
concerned about tourists using the subway, my primary concern was the fact that
travel on the subway had become intolerable for people who had to use it:
students, service workers, and so on. The rich were using limos and cabs.
Students, workers, and urban residents in the broadest sense, deserved better
than they were getting.

            On the city level, while I am primarily concerned about the residents of
neighborhoods and communities, I am also concerned about "strangers": that is,
persons who come into neighborhoods to shop, provide services, "people watch,"
and all the other things that lovers and users of public spaces do. As Jacobs
has pointed out, for neighborhoods to thrive, strangers must both feel
comfortable entering neighborhoods and behave in ways that don't threaten the
neighborhood. "Isolated" neighborhoods such as the Robert Taylor Homes in
Chicago, become dangerous places--not only for visitors but for residents as
well.

            But, of course, this takes us into murky areas. Clearly both residents and
"strangers" can take offense too easily. Moreover, despite the popular view
that neighborhoods are cozy and warm, they also have enormous capacity for
pettiness and hostility. And, it also can be true that one person's "disorder"
is another person's uniqueness. Nonetheless, I have found this resolvable if
one is attentive to the law, the constitution, and issues of freedom and
responsibility.

            The issues you raise about possibilities of abuse, however, are appropriate.
In my own work, I have seen the misinterpretation of "broken windows" for their
own purposes by both the far left and the far right. Part of the trouble is
that now everybody "understands" the ideas in broken windows. And for many, it
is "zero tolerance" of any forms of disorderly behavior--a phrase that I hate
and have never used except to distance myself from it. It is both unrealistic
and smacking of zealotry. The far left likes to substitute it for broken
windows because it proves that I am a fascist conducting a war on "homeless"
and the poor; the far right loves the term "zero tolerance" as a replacement
for broken windows because it justifies police "ass kicking."

            Well, I have gone on a bit. Since my wife is now traveling, I will have
another cup of coffee and get set for the day.

            Be well,
George Kelling

         
      
   
