
   
   
      
         
            Two Cheers for the SAT
            

            Dear David,

            I do look forward to your book, some of which, or at
least some of the research reports for, I have been reading in the
Weekly Standard and elsewhere. It is a strange
situation we have with our current elite, as you point out. In some other
countries where there is affirmative action, it is a majority that imposes
affirmative action for itself, for example, the Malays in Malaysia. Here we
have it for a small minority (the key beneficiary is the black population, 12
percent of the total) and university presidents, almost all major foundation
heads, etc.--defend this system vigorously even though it reduces, perhaps only
minimally, its own advantages. You point out quite correctly that at the very
top levels the resentment is very muted and hardly visible (see the huge
majorities of students in elite colleges who say diversity is a good thing and
we should have more, in the Bowen and Bok book, The
Shape of the River ). It's the people educated at Yale, in Lemann's account,
who are the most vigorous defenders of affirmative action in California. There
is not only Molly Munger but also Bill Lann Lee, now the assistant attorney
general in charge of civil rights. The resentment seems to be somewhat greater
at the University of Texas and the University of Michigan, which are certainly
elite within their states but fall short of the very top national elite level.
And as you point out, it is the middle classes, and I would add, the upper
working class, that seem most resentful, even though the children of the latter
will go neither to the Ivy Leagues nor the flagship state universities. At the
places their children will go to, racial preference doesn't play much of a
role. Clearly self-interest is not playing the decisive role in the struggle
over affirmative action. I would suggest it is ideology that makes for the
division, and yes, the ideology of the elite is equality, and that of the
middle classes is opportunity. There are some oddities here, not the least of
which is that the struggle over affirmative action is waged most vigorously
over admissions to colleges and universities, and one hears less and less about
important cases in the area of employment. But it is there, I would think, that
those who voted against CCRI would feel the bite of affirmative action more,
because of its commonness in employment for policemen, firemen, and much other
public employment, and its prominence in the hiring and promotion policies of
big corporations.

            In view of the fact that the present system for
selecting elites selects one that is critical of the system, concerned about
inequality and greater opportunity, one wonders why Lemann is complaining. He
writes that the most unfair system of distributing opportunity would be one "in
which all roles were handed down explicitly by inheritance." But then, "the
second most unfair system ... could well be one that allowed for competition
but insisted that it take place as early in life as possible and with school as
the arena." His discomfort with the SAT is that it's an intelligence test that
primarily selects people who are good at test-taking and school. His real
problem is to define a less unfair system.

            As a matter of fact, he is unfair in describing the
present system. It is not totally dependant on the tests. There are the
athletes and the alumni children and the occasional student who is very good at
something even though his test scores are not at the top. And, of course, there
is affirmative action in most selective institutions, and that may be as many
as 20 percent of all colleges and universities, for blacks and Hispanics and
American Indians. So it is a meritocratic system considerably modified.

            So what is the problem? Unfairness because of early
selection? Actually, if we made the selection even earlier, the differences
between the majority and minority students would probably be smaller. And by
international standards, we don't make the selection so early. In England there
used to be (maybe there still is) an 11-plus exam that makes the selection at a
very early age; on the continent, too, students are divided between secondary
schools that lead to university and those that do not at an earlier age than 17
or 18. Secondly, there are opportunities here to get into the system later.
There are community colleges, from which you can transfer all the way to the
elite campuses of the state university. Few do, but there is the
opportunity.

            Is the problem that the arena is school? Here Lemann
has a stronger point, but no society has been able to figure out a better
arena, even though school is not the best place to learn how to become an
entrepreneur or a politician, run a business or a country, become an artist,
etc. How the school system became the great selector, even though it selects
people on the basis of talents that are not directly related to many important
social roles, is a mystery to me. But it's happened everywhere, in the most
diverse cultures. I recall that even in ancient China, administrators of the
empire were selected on the basis of competence in the ancient classics. The
only justification for the present system is that intelligence is useful in any
task, and that the only fair and systematic way we have of determining
intelligence is by way of a uniform test, poor as that may be. Lemann's task is
to define the alternative.

            At the end of his account of Molly Munger's fight
against the CCRI, and her deflation when after all her efforts it succeeds,
Lemann tells us that she has left civil-rights work and has started a new
organization devoted to improving education for the poor. Lemann, while he is
only reporting this, seems to approve. So maybe the only problem, or the main
problem, is not the test, not selection on the basis of verbal and mathematical
competence--which is all the test does--but trying harder to get those who
ordinarily do poorly on such tests to do better. But that opens another can of
worms, and Lemann's stab at the enormously difficult problem of improving
education at the lower levels is not too encouraging: "We should adopt the goal
of sending most people all the way through college ... To get more people
through college, we shall have to establish greater national authority over
education. High schools should ... [teach] a nationally agreed upon
curriculum." One wonders if he has been following the efforts to create
national standards. Of course, this is only a somewhat tacked-on addendum to
what is on the whole a good book, but it does confront us with the question:
What is the alternative to the present system?

            This has not been much of a debate, I realize. We seem
to agree that whatever its flaws in logic and in practice, we can't think of a
clearly better system. I have the impression, if we had a talk with Lemann, he
might agree, and we wouldn't disagree with him when he insisted that the main
thing to do is to improve education. But we would probably disagree over the
specifics as to how one does it.

            Nat Glazer

         
      
   
