
   
   
      
         
            Promises, Promises

            The New York Times leads
with the news that Republicans in Congress are likely to dip into the Social
Security surplus--despite repeated promises to the contrary--as they finalize
budget bills this week. The top story at the Washington Post is a highly critical
post-mortem on the U.N.'s East Timor diplomacy, while the Los Angeles Times reports abusive discipline meted out by
guards at the California Youth Authority.

            The Social Security surplus for fiscal 2000, which
begins Friday, has soared to nearly $150 billion. That's proved too large a
pile of cash for Republican members of Congress to resist, even though party
leaders vowed to any reporter who'd listen last week that Social Security was
absolutely, thoroughly sacrosanct. The GOP-led Congress, already having
earmarked all the country's general fund surpluses for the next two fiscal
years, will likely take anywhere from $8 billion to $30 billion from Social
Security coffers. The NYT says Democratic leaders,
on a constant lookout for mud to sling during next fall's races, are observing
the Republican flip-flop "in a state of barely restrained glee."

            The WP suggests that U.N.
efforts to keep last month's East Timor independence vote from turning violent
may have been doomed from the start. In what it calls a "case study" of the
problems that plague U.N. intervention, the paper gives a blow-by-blow account
of how Indonesia wriggled out of Western demands that it agree in advance to
shackle pro-Jarkata militias on East Timor and guarantee the safety of foreign
election observers. With the U.S. preoccupied by Kosovo as the negotiations
began in April, Indonesia requested that Portugal, its former colonial ruler,
sit across the bargaining table. In the end, according to a diplomat quoted by
the Post , Indonesian negotiators "took Portugal to the cleaners." Even
before the ink was dry on the May 5 election agreement, many at the U.N. were
privately predicting exactly the kind of violence and chaos that followed the
Aug. 30 pro-independence landslide.

            Disciplinary excesses are commonplace at the California
Youth Authority, according a report prepared for Gov. Gray Davis and obtained
by the LAT . Guard abuses included cavalierly
injecting disorderly inmates with anti-psychotic drugs and isolating prisoners
from rival gangs together in small rooms. In the latter cases, known inside the
prison as the "Friday night fights," guards would sometimes put a member of the
Crips in a holding cell with a hated Blood, lock the door, and stand back to
watch. The staged confrontations ostensibly were used to test inmates' ability
to avoid fights and thus their readiness to enter the general prison
population, but the report says they often escalated into predictably bloody
violence.

            A NYT front-pager explores
how the Justice Department's criminal investigation of the tobacco industry
unraveled. Last Wednesday, Attorney General Janet Reno announced a large-scale
civil lawsuit against cigarette makers. But the government's ambitious criminal
case wound up leading to only one charge: a misdemeanor count against a small
California biotech firm that has admitted developing a high-nicotine tobacco
seed for Brown & Williamson. Because Justice faces a lower burden of proof
in civil court, the paper says, it decided to make the bulk of its anti-tobacco
case there.

            The LAT's top non-local
story is on the architectural wreckage that litters Taiwan in the wake of
Tuesday's massive earthquake. The paper reports that construction shortcuts
were common in older high-rises, including cases where building crews used
vegetable oil cans instead of bricks. Surprisingly, the Taiwan government has
lowered the estimated death toll from the quake since Friday, to just over
2,000, apparently because some victims were counted twice.

            Under a three-column photograph on its front page, the
NYT reports that the federal government is
considering the highly controversial step of dismantling four huge dams on
Washington's Snake River. The dams, which went up in the 1930s and provide
about 4 percent of the Pacific Northwest's electricity, have killed off nearly
all the river's varieties of salmon. But even environmentalists concede it's
far from clear if taking the dams out of service would revive the fish
population.

            The WP reports that as
George W. Bush assembles his campaign team, he is freezing out most of the
Washington GOP brain trust and hiring a steady stream of Texans instead. The
paper says some of Bush's reluctance to hire Beltway types stems from a
longstanding distrust of the East Coast establishment, which goes back to his
student days at Andover and Yale.

            The NYT fronts a story on
winemakers in the Champagne region, who are telling Americans not to
worry--there'll be plenty of authentic French bubbly to go around come Y2K eve.
After breathless references in its opening paragraphs to Champagne rationing
and skyrocketing demand, the story goes on to report rather quietly that 1999
sales are expected to rise just 15 percent from last year. Today's Papers, who
is pretty sure the world will survive, likes his front-page stories with a
little more fizz.

         
      
   
