
   
   
      
         
            Skip West Wing; Watch Roswell

            The network premiere of the evening is NBC's The West Wing (9 p.m.),
but Culturebox suggests that, come October 6th, you spin your dial to the WB's
Roswell (9 p.m.) instead. Here's proof that hybridization can succeed.
Generically, Roswell is the spawn of The 
               X-Files and
Dawson's Creek , but the first episode, at least, has more charm than
both. It's the story of two teen-agers, of course--it's on the WB! She's a
normal girl who fears she looks like a freak (she doesn't); he's an alien boy
who looks like the kind of shy dreamboat a girl could get a crush on (he is).
Girl, who has waitress job, takes hit from passing bullet in coffee-shop
altercation; boy, who has special powers, heals her with his unearthly touch.
This prompts the revelation of his ancestry--he descended to earth as an
incubating fetus in Roswell's notorious 1947 alien spaceship crash--the
suspicions of a grim-faced local sheriff, and, of course, a star-crossed
romance.

            According to Entertainment 
               Weekly , Roswell's creators
(an X-Files director and a My So-Called Life writer) originally
offered it to Fox, which demanded changes and planned to launch it mid-season.
They then took it to the WB, which put it in the best slot of the week,
immediately after Dawson's Creek . Once again, the WB has demonstrated
its superior programming abilites. Roswell's Liz (Siri Appleby) and Max
(Jason Behr) are fine-tuned combinations of poise, awkwardness, and eloquence.
The hunger on the alien Max's face when he looks at the forbidden Liz is as raw
yet sublimated as James Dean's displaced homoeroticism. When Liz processes the
facts of Max's non-humanity, the scene lasts a minute or two, an eternity in TV
time, in order to register her sequence of expressions: incredulity, hilarity,
disgust at the cheesiness of the whole idea, terror, longing.

            But what makes the show endearing is the tone: matter-of-fact in the manner
of Buffy (you feel alien? You are alien), yet with a lighter
touch. Roswell's writers  have clearly studied their teen romantic
comedy history, and understand that an adequate representation of the teen
condition requires the presence of well-meaning but oppressive adults and
friends who try and try but just don't get it, but also an absence of
condescension. Ignore the naysayers who will complain, as they do about
Dawson's Creek and Felicity , that teens don't talk like
that--that they lack such advanced powers of introspection. Teens never talked
the way Romeo and Juliet do, or agonized as deeply, and who takes their creator
to task for that?

         
      
   
