
   
   
      
         
            Free Speech and Broken Windows
            

            Dear George,

            It is early in the a.m., and since I woke up thinking
about your letter, it seemed like a good time to reply. I don't really love the
morning, despite the fact that my kids have to be on the school bus (now my
13-year-old takes the city bus) by 7:10. While this may seem unusual to anyone
living in the suburbs, I feel both blessed and liberated not being the family
chauffeur. City living, as many working women are beginning to understand,
provides much more flexibility and precious time than the suburban commuter
life. While we will never have enough space for all our books (or even our
clothes!) or a backyard with a swing set, our apartment is a happy clutter
where no child will be forgotten in the bowels of a finished basement, and
Riverside Park has plenty of grass and ball fields. OK. I can hear you saying,
"Where is she going with all of this. Wasn't Sukkoth enough of a digression
yesterday?" But it's all connected, as some famous philosopher once said, or
maybe that was my mother.

            I have spent a lot of time thinking and writing about
the quality of urban life for families and not just for the tourists most
mayors think are the key to urban regeneration. Not only have I read your
Broken Windows article and value it's important
impact on criminal justice policy, but its thesis goes to the heart of how we
make urban areas communities again, places where we can work and live. Before
we go more deeply into your crime-prevention theories and your work in the New
York City subways during the 1980s, I think its important to consider the
relationship between free speech and crime control. I have been struck with how
political conservatives have used the issue of crime to justify autocratic, if
not authoritarian, policies. Street crime is not usually rampant in
non-democratic regimes, whether it's the Communist Soviet Union or
authoritarian Taiwan. Public order, however, has been a challenge for
democracies. To what extent are we willing to suspend individual rights for the
safety of the community? Do we have to tolerate police misconduct? Do we bar
political demonstrations from the steps of city hall? Do we take away
government contracts from groups such as Housing Works for protesting current
New York City AIDS policy? All of these have been policies of Mayor Giuliani.
While all these questions do not have an obvious relationship to public safety,
for the mayor of New York they are all part of keeping public order. By
extension, the mayor has the right to close down an art exhibit if it offends
his sense of public decency. Where does free speech end and public order begin?
For Mayor Giuliani, its obvious: It all begins and ends with his own personal
preferences and there's no need to worry about the democratic process.

            I know it's still early, but what do you think?

            Warmest regards,
Ester

         
      
   
