
   
   
      
         
            Giuliani Comes Out as a Cultural Conservative!

            
               Click 
here for Chatterbox's take on Giuliani's art criticism.
            

            "Sensation"--the show at the Brooklyn Museum of Art that Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani is trying to quash by threatening to withdraw city funding from the
institution--is not the first exhibition of so-called "sick stuff" to be shown
by a publicly funded New York cultural institution during his seven-year
tenure. In October of 1997, the gallery P.S. 1--which receives, according to
one curator's estimate, more than 50 percent of its budget from the
city--installed continuous showings of an hourlong film of a simulated
homosexual orgy by underground filmmaker Jack Smith. The mayor didn't utter a
word. Nor did he comment on the Whitney Museum's 1997 Biennial, which included
Paul McCarthy's videos of a half-naked man dressed as Rudolph the Red-Nosed
Reindeer frolicking with nude female "elves" as they defecated, stirred the
excrement up with chocolate, and ate it.

            But now Giuliani's attacking this "Sensation" exhibit, which includes: a self-portrait made of its creator's
frozen blood; vivisections of dead livestock preserved in formaldehyde; and a
painting of a Virgin Mary decorated with elephant droppings. The
mayor is threatening to cut city funding for the museum--that's about a third
of the BMA's annual budget--if it opens the exhibit. It's a move that's
obviously designed to bolster his Senate candidacy: The British artists are his
Murphy Brown and Sister Souljah. (Luckily for him, being mayor of New York
supplies him with richer material than a mere upscale single mom or a cussing
rap star.) Giuliani is signaling to upstate New Yorkers and to the national
Republican Party that although he's the mayor of Sin City, he can't abide
sinners himself.

            Culturebox can't help but think that the mayor and the "Sensation" artists
deserve one another, since they share a common goal of drawing as much
attention to themselves as possible. The "Sensation" folks, though, are doing
the better job. Brilliantly orchestrated by the British adman Charles Saatchi
to increase the value of his extensive holdings of the artists' work, the show
has already drawn flattering notices in The 
               New Yorker , New
York Times , and other publications. And that was before the mayor's
condemnatory fit. Now, if the show doesn't go on, it will be martyred; if it
does, it will draw even bigger crowds and more press than originally
anticipated. Giuliani will have given the show's name more credence than it
ever had on its own.

            The mayor, on the other hand, is coming off as a coward and a traitor. He's
too chicken to pick on a more established cultural institution such as MoMA,
which now owns P.S. 1. Forcing the show to be canceled at the last minute will
arouse the ire of culture lovers, the wrath of the First Amendment brigade, and
the sympathies of anyone who's ever tried to organize ... well,
anything . (Giuliani did win Chatterbox's approval, though; click

here to read why.)

            But the worst part is that Giuliani is screwing his own city. New York needs
avant-garde art just as it needs fashion designers, Wall Street firms, and
Broadway shows. Our museums and galleries put us at the center of the art
world, and bring us untold riches from art-related businesses and tourists who
come to patronize the city's cultural institutions. The art industry is also
responsible for resuscitating--some would say gentrifying--some of New York's
most desolate neighborhoods, including SoHo, TriBeCa, the meatpacking district,
and the DUMBO section of Brooklyn.

            It's no surprise that Giuliani is coming out as a cultural conservative. But
selling out his own city to do so is pretty sick stuff indeed.

         
      
   
