
   
   
      
         
            The Al Gore-Bill Bradley Green-Off, Part II

            As Chatterbox noted previously (see "The Al Gore-Bill Bradley Green-Off, Part I"), Bill
Bradley's lifetime legislative score from the League of
Conservation Voters is a full 20 percentage
points ahead of Al Earth in the
Balance Gore's. Cutting the vice president every conceivable
break--restricting the comparison to the years (1985-1992) when both men were
in the Senate, and knocking out the years 1987,
1988, and 1992, when Gore's runs for president and vice president may have
caused him to miss key environmental votes-- narrowed the Gore-Bradley gap to eight
percentage points . But it didn't

               eliminate that gap. Bradley still ended up with the
better LCV score. How could that be?

            Chatterbox decided to attack this question by examining
causes for both the 20-point gap (based on the raw LCV lifetime scores) and the
eight-point gap (based on Chatterbox's elaborate massaging of the LCV lifetime
scores). That way, Chatterbox figured, he'd have answers for both
Bradley partisans (who are likely to view any
alteration of the raw LCV scores with suspicion) and Gore partisans (who are likely to view comparison of the raw LCV
scores as simplistic and unfair). Supporters of Republican presidential
candidates are presumably gleeful that this contest is being scored at all and
don't much care how big the gap is.

            
               
                  Analysis of the 20-point gap:
               
            

            Not even Chatterbox has the patience to comb through
every environmental vote in the House and Senate between 1977 and 1992.
(Chatterbox leaves that to certified practitioners of social science.) Instead,
Chatterbox zeroed in on the two years when Gore cast considerably more votes
considered "anti-environment" by the LCV than he did in other years. These were
1978, when Gore cast "anti-environment" votes 12 times and received an LCV
rating of 56 percent (his third-worst score ever);
and 1980, when Gore cast "anti-environment" votes 15 times and received an LCV
rating of 35 percent (his worst score ever).*

            What were these 27 "anti-environment" votes?
Four of them Chatterbox would characterize (by way
of explaining, not necessarily condoning) as "Tennessee votes," i.e., votes in
which powerful Tennessee interests were at odds with national environmental
groups:

            

               On July 17, 1978, the House voted on phasing out
federal funding for Tennessee's Clinch River Breeder
Reactor, one of the more notorious boondoggles of the period. Gore voted
against the de-funding measure, which lost, 157-238.

               On October 5, 1978, the House voted on whether to
override President Carter's veto of a water projects appropriation bill, which
included funding for the Tennessee-Tombigbee
Waterway (another famous boondoggle of that era). Gore voted in favor of
the veto override, which failed, 223-190 (falling short of the necessary
two-thirds majority).

               On October 14, 1978, the House voted on whether to
exempt Tennessee's Tellico Dam, which was believed
to represent a threat to the snail darter population, from the Endangered
Species Act. Gore voted for the exemption, which was adopted, 231-157.

               On June 25, 1980, the House voted on whether to cut
funding for the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway . Gore
voted against the cut, which was rejected 196-216.

            

            
               Twelve additional
"anti-environment" votes Chatterbox would call "Tennessee penumbra votes,"
i.e., votes in which powerful Tennessee interests might be harmed
indirectly by a pro-environment vote. These include
eight votes in favor of dams and other water projects outside Tennessee ; probably Gore felt
he needed to support other House members' water projects if they were going to
support his in Tennessee. The other four "Tennessee
penumbra votes" benefited the nuclear power
industry and the Bonneville Power
Administration --two out-of-state constituencies whose influence no doubt
could be felt in Tennessee, home of the Clinch River Breeder Reactor and the
Tennessee Valley Authority.

            That leaves eleven
anti-environment" votes whose connection to powerful Tennessee interests are
unclear. These include several "energy crisis" votes (it is by now largely
forgotten that environmental groups were often opposed to federal efforts to
ease the energy crisis). Gore voted in favor of a solar
satellite program that the environmental movement opposed (according to the
LCV, because it was "costly and grandiose"); Gore voted against the National Energy Act of
1978 , which the LCV favored because it included a lot of conservation
measures, but which some environmentalists opposed, because it also
decontrolled natural gas prices; and Gore voted to create the Synthetic Fuels Corp. , an ill-considered and short-lived
alternative fuel venture opposed by environmentalists because it involved
strip-mining. Environmentalists were also opposed to the MX missile's underground basing mode, which Gore supported in a
couple of votes during this period; eventually he would shift his support to an
expensive but strategically elegant alternative called the "Midgetman"
missile.

            
               
                  Analysis of the eight-point gap:
               
            

            Chatterbox, again, was too lazy to examine all the
environmental votes that occurred between 1985 and 1992, the period when Gore
and Bradley served together in the Senate--even after omitting all votes in
1987-8 and 1992. Instead, Chatterbox looked at the three years when Gore cast
his greatest number of "anti-environment" votes in the Senate. These were 1985
and 1986, when Gore cast four "anti-environment" votes, earning a combined LCV
score of 67 (Gore's third-worst Senate score); and
1991, when Gore cast another four "anti-environment" votes, earning an LCV
score of 73 (Gore's fourth-worst Senate score).
**

            These eight "anti-environment" Senate votes were: a
vote against de-funding the Synfuels Corp.; a vote in favor of constructing a
highway along the boundary of a wilderness park in Hawaii; a vote against
creating a new victim's compensation program under the Superfund program; a
vote to cut funding for the Environmental Protection Agency; two highway bill
votes; a vote against banning new billboard construction along federally
subsidized highways; and a vote against a moratorium on issuing federal patents
for hard-rock mining on public lands out west. Of these, only the Synfuels
Corp. vote and the mining vote were clearly dreadful. The votes against
extending Superfund spending and effecting a wholesale ban on billboards was
clearly good. The EPA funding cut was probably bad, but Chatterbox would have
to know more about the circumstances.

            *Gore's second - worst score, 50 percent,
occurred in 1987 and 1988, but it was an aberration; during those two years
Gore actually cast only one "anti-environment" vote. He ended up with 50
percent because he was absent for four out of ten LCV-scored votes.

            **Gore's two

               worst 
               Senate scores
were in 1987-8 and 1992. The 1987-8 score of 50 percent is explained in the
previous footnote. The 1992 score, 58 percent, is entirely attributable to five
absences; Gore didn't cast a single "anti-environment" vote that year, but
there were only 12 LCV-scored votes.

         
      
   
