
   
   
      
         
            Defending Rudy

            Rudolph Giuliani has managed to make himself a
laughingstock to the cognoscenti by threatening to de-fund the Brooklyn Museum
of Art if it doesn't cancel an art show that includes (according to today's
New York
Times ) "a portrait of the Virgin Mary stained with a clump of elephant
dung." The Times news story more or less
congratulates Brooklyn Museum director Arnold Lehman for failing to be
"intimidated by Mr. Giuliani's expression of outrage" (imagine how differently
the story would read if it said Lehman failed to be "moved by Mr. Giuliani's
expression of outrage"). (Click here for a 
                  Slate
                colleague's outrage.)
But why should taxpayers have to pay for a portrait of the Virgin Mary covered
by elephant shit? Isn't it a little silly that the same sort of people who
bitch about school prayer and public-school vouchers spent on religious
education are ready to lay down their lives to protect the government's right
to subsidize art that desecrates religious figures in the most sophomoric way
imaginable? Whatever happened to the separation between church and state?

            Chatterbox doesn't think people should have to pay,
through their taxes, for art that is likely to offend them deeply. The
Times would understand this principle better if the
cause of offense were, for example, a government-funded silk screen that said
ALL NIGGERS MUST DIE or KIKES INVENTED THE HOLOCAUST. One can imagine ironic or
otherwise complex readings of these statements that might attempt to cleanse
them of their offensive meaning, just as the Times
attempts to cleanse the Virgin Mary canvas of its
offensive meaning by quoting the artist, Chris Ofili, saying it all has
something to do with his childhood confusion about the virgin birth. But
Chatterbox wouldn't buy it, and neither would the Times .

            Chatterbox, an atheist, holds no brief for the Virgin
Mary. And he isn't against avant-garde art per se. He actually thought Andres
Serrano's "Piss Christ," another act of scatological desecration, was pretty to
look at (though he thought the idea it conveyed a bit childish). But Chatterbox
doesn't think artworks that a significant number of people are likely to find
blatantly offensive should be state-funded. Let private benefactors pay for
them, if the market won't support them (which it almost certainly won't).

         
      
   
