
   
   
      
         
            Double Dutch Drubbings

            The Taiwan earthquake leads with three columns at the
New York Times and is fronted by the
Washington Post , the Los Angeles Times , and USA
Today (which puts it below the fold). (The Wall Street Journal puts the earthquake atop its
"Worldwide" box.) The Post leads with news first
hinted at in President Clinton's State of the Union message: According
to anonymous sources, the federal government will file a massive civil
racketeering lawsuit against the tobacco industry to reclaim billions of
dollars of health payments for tobacco-related illnesses. This story is the top
non-local lead at the LAT , which adds that the
suit would be the largest ever brought by the Justice Department.
USAT leads with a Senate Y2K report, to be
released today, stating that New Year computer glitches "will cause more
inconvenience than tragedy" (the report is also fronted by the
WP ). Most foul-ups will be isolated, the report
says, with the education, oil, construction, agriculture, food processing, and
health care industries being the most vulnerable. A panel of experts assembled
by USAT predicts Y2K will not be more disruptive
than Hurricane Floyd, which dislocated millions and killed several dozen.

            The Taiwan quake--which measured 7.6 on the Richter
scale (7.7 says the NYT )--has killed over 1,700,
with 2,700 still trapped and over 4,000 injured. There have been more than
6,000 aftershocks, including one that registered 6.8. Despite the enormous
casualties and continued neighborhood blackouts, much of the city was up and
running the day after the quake, including major highways and the airport. The
Journal notes that the quake may cause a spike in
the price of computer chips--one of Taiwan's main exports--though a similar
report in the LAT is more optimistic. The
Post and NYT both
front an astounding photograph of a Taiwanese apartment building perilously
perched over the street like a giant Tower of Pisa.

            With four articles, the LAT coverage is the most thorough. One story helpfully notes that
the 7.6 quake was actually twice as powerful as the 7.4 quake which killed
16,000 in Turkey last month. (To learn how the Richter scale works, click
here; to learn what damage will typically result from
a given Richter reading, click here.) The LAT also says
that the spate of recent earthquakes has nothing to do with geology (they
happen with the same frequency as they always have) and everything to do with
demographics and geography (more people live near fault lines).

            Democratic presidential hopeful Bill Bradley attacks
the administration's Russia policy on the Journal's editorial page. Bradley argues that Clinton has
personalized the relationship with Russian President Boris Yeltsin, set
too-high expectations for democratization, slacked off on nuclear security, and
failed to properly monitor economic aid. Meanwhile, the Post reports that Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers defended
Clinton's Russia policy on Capitol Hill. "At every step, we have been
clear-headed in endeavoring to strike a careful balance between ... what is
best economically and is also politically realistic," he said.

            The NYT fronts the
revelation that the FBI "unequivocally opposed" the president's recent release
of Puerto Rican criminals. In a draft letter (released at a congressional
hearing yesterday) to House Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry Hyde, R-Ill.,
FBI Director Louis Freeh wrote that the clemency would "return committed,
experienced, sophisticated and hardened terrorists to the clandestine movement"
for Puerto Rican independence. In another letter released at the hearing,
President Clinton provided his first detailed defense of the clemency.
Interestingly, the Post's story, run on Page A2,
is the inverse of the Times ': It highlights
Clinton's defense, and leaves until the 15th paragraph Freeh's opposition. (The
story was reefered by USAT .)

            The LAT fronts the news
that seat belts on school buses do not save lives, and may actually do harm. A
computer re-creation of several bus crashes by the National Transportation
Safety Board concluded that school-bus seats are too flat and slippery for the
belts to do any good. In some cases, the belts simply exacerbated whiplash. The
NTSB recommended that the seats be redesigned, and Gov. Gray Davis, D-Calif.,
promised to re-examine a school bus seat-belt law passed by the California
legislature earlier this month.

            The NYT and
USAT reefer the closing arguments of the
Microsoft trial, which concluded after a lengthy recess. No new evidence was
presented. (To read 
                  Slate's
dispatch from the trial's last day, click here.) 

            The Post gets its hands
on an advance copy of Edmund Morris' controversial new biography of Ronald
Reagan, Dutch , as well as the transcript of a forthcoming Morris
interview with American Enterprise magazine. The
paper does not pronounce a verdict on the book (appropriate, since presumably
it has had the book for less than 24 hours), but it does note Morris' general
bewilderment with his subject. Among other things, Morris alleges that in 1938
Reagan flirted with joining the Communist Party; Morris fails, however, to
reach a conclusion about Reagan's involvement in Iran-Contra. His provocative
use of fictional narrator personas grew out of an "epiphany" that, "after
several years of deep research I was, in an almost occult sense, there when
Reagan was younger."

            The Post's Michael Kelly
gives one of his inimitable drubbings to would-be GOP apostate Patrick
Buchanan. "Recently in this space, I wrote unflatteringly of the entertainer
Patrick J. Buchanan, suggesting that his material was old and that he was
perhaps overly preoccupied with the subject of Jews and money," Kelly writes.
"Buchanan [now] threatens to bolt the Republican Party. Republicans, hold the
door open for that man, grease the skids and give him a helpful boot down the
steep, swift road to sure and deserved oblivion." (To read 
                  Slate's take on Buchanan, click here.)

         
      
   
