
   
   
      
         
            Mars Attacks!

            
               USA Today leads with President
Clinton's long-expected veto of a $792 billion Republican-sponsored tax cut
bill, which is the off-lead at the Washington Post
but is carried inside elsewhere--Page 22 at the Los Angeles Times . The New York
Times lead is the House's passage of a bill that would, if it became
law, make it "difficult, it not impossible" to bring large class-action suits
against companies such as cigarette or gun manufacturers. The bill draws scant
attention elsewhere--the WP runs an AP item about
it on Page 9. The LAT goes with Jakarta student
street riots over a just-passed bill that has raised fears of a coup because it
bestows new emergency powers on the Indonesian military. The riots are carried
inside at the WP and NYT . The Post lead is what it sees as a
quiet but major shift in Clinton administration Yugoslavia policy: dropping
opposition to Kosovo's independence from Yugoslavia. The story credits the
change to unnamed senior U.S. officials, while quoting national security
adviser Sandy Berger and State's James Rubin as denying it. Other evidence
cited: The U.S. has not resisted the adoption inside Kosovo of the German mark
as the legal currency and has been supportive of a plan to allow KLA fighters
to form a new protective corps for the region.

            The NYT lead explains that
the House bill would require most class action claims to be transferred
to federal courts, where the rules about who gets to participate in the class
and how such cases may proceed are more stringent. The bill, says the paper,
enjoys philosophical and/or lobbying support from some of the nation's biggest
businesses and business groups. Opponents include the trial lawyers'
association and Ralph Nader, William Rehnquist, and 15 state attorneys general.
The WP calls the bill's Senate prospects uncertain,
whereas according to the Times a similar bill there
enjoys bipartisan support.

            The LAT is the only one of
the papers to front Microsoft President Steve Ballmer's comments yesterday that
U.S. tech stocks are absurdly overpriced, which prompted large sell-offs at
Nasdaq and the NYSE. The LAT quotes a stock
analyst's observation that Ballmer's timing was bizarre, coming the same day
that Microsoft announced plans to sell shares of its Expedia site as a way to
participate in the Internet stock trend. The story also observes another
non-self-aggrandizing angle: Ballmer's own Microsoft stock holdings went down
$1.17 billion off his remarks. (By the way, would it have been illegal for
Ballmer to have sold tech stocks short before making his comments?)

            The LAT and
NYT front NASA's realization Thursday that the
Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft has
probably burned up in Mars' atmosphere after flying too close to the planet.
Both stories go high with the gizmo's price: $125 million.

            The WP fronts and
USAT runs on Page 2 word that doctors have for the
first time ever made a menopausal woman fertile again, by implanting her with
pieces of her own ovaries, which had been previously removed and frozen. She
hasn't got pregnant yet but has ovulated and menstruated. The development, the
paper explains, could be a boon to young women with cancer who want to have
children after treatment is concluded. And eventually it would allow healthy
young women to put up a bunch of their youthful eggs until they're ready to
have pregnancies using them later in life.

            The NYT and
WP both go inside with Sen. Daniel Moynihan's
endorsement of Bill Bradley. Moynihan's primary reason for not endorsing Al
Gore: that the VP can't get elected. Both papers quote a Gore spokesman's
reaction: "I think President Bob Kerrey really appreciated his support in
1992."

            The Wall Street
Journal reports that energy commodity prices soared Thursday because of
OPEC's announcement that it will keep oil production low throughout the U.S.
winter. This means, say quoted analysts, that gas and utility bills could keep
going up for some time.

            The papers carry outraged Republican reactions to Pat
Buchanan's recent comments about Hitler, from Sen. John McCain, Elizabeth Dole,
and Steve Forbes' campaign manager. It's noted that George W. Bush, apparently
still working on his position on Buchanan (or on Hitler?), has not addressed
the matter yet.

            The WSJ "Washington Wire"
gives an update on stances taken on the presidential clemency extended to
convicted Puerto Rican terrorists: Al Gore never took a position, but that's
balanced out by Bill Bradley, who last month supported the deal, but now
opposes it. (For a look at another possible Bradley switcheroo, click here.)

         
      
   
