
   
   
      
         
            To NBC: Think Hard Before Getting Hitched
            

            In the wake of Viacom's acquisition of CBS, which,
among other things, paired CBS' television network with Paramount's
television-production studio, the reigning conventional wisdom is that NBC, now
the only network without a studio partner, needs to find one as fast as it can.
(Sony and Universal are oft-mentioned candidates.) But the conventional wisdom
is wrong. NBC needs a studio much less than the studios need it. Even with the
erosion in popularity of broadcast television, NBC remains a real catch. It
doesn't need to rush into the arms of the first suitor who comes along.

            The vogue for vertical integration--in which a network
produces and distributes its own shows--does reflect an important new reality,
which is that since 1995 networks have been able to have a financial interest
in their own programming. (From 1970 to 1995, the FCC forbade that, which is
what made independent producers such as Carsey-Werner and Lorimar billion
dollar companies.) And the studio business can be an immensely profitable one
because of the myriad opportunities for merchandising, licensing, and
syndication. Just look at what Fox did with The
Simpsons and The X-Files . But the studio
business is also, by its very nature, erratic and expensive. For every
Simpsons , there are three Malcolm and Eddies . It might be nice for NBC to be able to produce
and own its own shows (as it already does with Dateline and the Tonight Show ). But
it's not necessary.

            Just look at the numbers. NBC, which is owned by GE,
brings in somewhere between $500 million and $1 billion in net income every
year. If you valued NBC the same way the stock market values CBS or Time
Warner, it would be worth $25 billion. While the company was hurt when it lost
the NFL and had to pay through the nose to keep ER
and Friends , it remains the most profitable
broadcast network, its cable properties are booming, and even its Internet
strategy appears to be taking off.

            Advocates of NBC's allying itself with a studio point
to the $13 million an episode the network had to shell out to keep
ER and the $6 million an episode it paid for the
final season of Seinfeld and say, "Look at the
money it could have saved." But even if NBC had a studio, there's no guarantee
that it would have made ER . Disney, for instance,
has yet to produce a hit for ABC since the companies merged. More important, if
an NBC studio made ER and gave its sister network a
price break, it would be wrecking its own business.

            The great delusion in the way the media write about
vertical integration is the assumption that merging two companies makes it
economically sensible for one to sell its products to the other below the price
that it could charge in the marketplace. But in fact it doesn't. If Paramount
starts charging CBS less for its programs than it could get from ABC, it will
become less valuable. And conversely, if CBS starts taking programs from
Paramount that it would otherwise have rejected, it will become less valuable.
"A bad program is a bad program, and the only thing that happens if you put a
bad program on a network is that your ratings drop," says Dennis McAlpine,
media analyst at Ryan, Beck. "And if you do good programming, you're going to
get picked up. Vertical integration doesn't change that."

            The other pro-merger argument being offered is that if
NBC owned a studio, it would have an easier time bargaining with the studios
owned by other networks, because Warner Bros. would know that if it didn't give
NBC a break on the price of ER , NBC would drive a
hard bargain when it sold shows to the WB Network. This argument is, of course,
crazy. No one takes less money than they can get because they might be rewarded
for their generosity later on.

            In the space of 10 years, the networks have gone in and
out of favor more often than the Who has mounted comeback tours. But through it
all, and even with the continued erosion of viewership, one thing has remained
unchanged: Broadcast television offers unparalleled access to huge numbers of
American viewers. "Fragmentation is a problem, and it will continue to be,"
Barry Diller of USA Networks told me a few months ago. "But the ability to
aggregate 10, 20, 30, and on a good day 40 percent of all living Americans
makes broadcast an enormously powerful medium." When the studios come calling,
NBC should (and it looks right now, with its recent investment in Paxson
Communications, as if it will) remember that.

         
      
   
