
   
   
      
         
            Chechens and Balances

            The Washington Post leads with the intensifying Russian air
assault against Chechnya, now in its fifth day (a story the New York Times
had previously covered more than the other dailies). USA Today
goes with the revelation that last week, Russia's intelligence agency turned
down the U.S. Department of Justice's request for bank statements, other
documents and audiotapes relating to the suspected diversion of nearly $15
million from Russia to U.S. and other banks. Russian officials described the
request, says the paper, as an "unnecessary intrusion." This contrasts with
previous claims by Russian officials of complete cooperation with the bank
probe. The Los Angeles Times leads with the California governor's
signing into law a patient-oriented rewrite of the state's HMO regulations, one
that could serve as a stimulant to similar managed care reform around the
country (Texas, the story points out, already has similar laws). The NYT
fronts the California reforms, but leads instead with local news: The chairman
of that Brooklyn museum that's become the target of Rudy Giuliani's wrath for
exhibiting a dung-stained picture of the Virgin Mary on Monday discussed with
city officials withdrawing the work, only to back out when the officials
revealed the talks to the media. The Times off-leads another New York
story: The city's just-identified mosquito-borne West Nile virus has stricken
nearly twice as many people--37--and over a much wider area than was previously
thought. The virus has now accounted for four deaths. The chief evidence for
the new dimensions of the problem, explains the paper, is that mosquitoes
become carriers of the virus by biting infected birds, and scores of dead birds
are in evidence from Connecticut to Long Island. The WP carries the
story inside, but look for more intense coverage in the days to come, for two
reasons: 1) New York's birds are about to fly south and 2) So many of the
nation's media elites live inside the virus zone.

            The WP lead reports that among the targets of Russian jets are
properties belonging to the Chechen guerrilla commander. The bombing has
created thousands of refugees. The Chechen president, who denies any
affiliation with the guerrillas, has requested a sit-down with Boris Yeltsin,
but for now the Russians aren't having any of it. One of the reasons for
Russian persistence, says the paper, is that the Russian military is trying to
reverse the fumbling image it picked up from the 1994-95 attempt to best the
Chechens. Both this story and the NYT's inside piece point out that the
air-only campaign seems modeled on NATO's war against Yugoslavia.

            Both Times explain that the new California HMO laws mandate plan
coverage of such previously uncovered areas as cancer screening, give
Californians the right to sue their health plans, to obtain second medical
opinions, and to appeal treatment funding decisions to an independent review
board--in short the key features now being debated by Congress in its attempts
to arrive at a patients' bill of rights. One important grain of salt that the
LAT waits until the 32nd paragraph to sprinkle: HMOs still can (and the
implication is, will) prevent patients from suing under the bill by requiring
their agreement to binding arbitration as a condition of treatment.

            A front-page Wall Street Journal feature notes one political upshot of
the managed care imbroglio: It's turned a lot of doctors into Democrats. Solid
numbers are hard to come by but, examples the Journal , the AMA recently
contributed to Ted Kennedy for the first time ever.

            A front-page LAT story reports that the current New England
Journal of Medicine carries a favorable review of two hair-loss products
without disclosing that the paper's author has some financial ties to the
drugs' manufacturers, a situation expressly forbidden by the journal's
guidelines. The author's explanation to the LAT seems Pharisaical at
best: she stopped consulting for the drug companies when she embarked upon the
article, although she expects to resume doing so now that it's been
published.

            Everybody reports inside that Linda Tripp yesterday sued the White House and
the Pentagon, contending that both violated her privacy by unlawfully
disclosing information about her from her personnel file and other government
records. An example Tripp gives in court papers is the unflattering New
Yorker profile that revealed her teen-age grand larceny arrest and also
that Tripp didn't disclose the arrest in her Pentagon security clearance form.
Among the people named in the suit, not as defendants, but as having "engaged
in communications" about Tripp is Hillary Clinton. Tripp claims that as a
result she suffered a loss of income. None of the papers mention a fact about
Tripp that makes this last claim puzzling: During the time frame she's
referring to she remained one of the DOD's highest-paid employees, making
$90-plus K. She even got a raise.

            The LAT front reports that in Missouri, the KKK has gone to court to
try to win the right to participate in the state's Adopt-a-Highway program, and
to become a sponsor on the University of Missouri's radio station's "All Things
Considered" broadcast. The paper points out that the highway program already
includes the Boy Scouts, who exclude girls and gays, and the Knights of
Columbus, who exclude non-Catholics.

            The NYT runs an AP story saying that 1999 has already seen the
largest number of executions in the U.S. since 1954--76 snuffers snuffed. The
story notes though that between 1930 and 1967, the nation averaged more than
100 a year.

            The NYT features a tart op-ed by Gail Collins wondering about the
priorities involved in George W.'s decision to skip the California Republican
Party convention to go watch the Ryder Cup. Not to mention his decision once
there to meet with the team and inspire the players to victory by comparing the
final day's competition to the Alamo.

            
               Gore appeals to the center. In an apparent attempt to lock up the
inarticulate mesomorph vote, Al Gore last night, says the WP , got the
endorsement of Shaquille O'Neal.

         
      
   
