
   
   
      
         
            Oh, No! Not Ben!

            There was endless hype for the premiere of
Felicity's second season--tapes of which had been
withheld from the press--because it was to provide the answer to last season's
Perils of Pauline -like cliffhanger: Would the New
York City college freshman Felicity fly to Berlin with her handsome and
intelligent though overly chatty boyfriend Noel or drive home to California
with the exceedingly handsome but markedly less intelligent Ben, an ex-crush
who had become her best friend's boyfriend?

            As Felicity fans know by now,
she chose Ben. This was disastrous for Felicity personally, of course, but
also, surprisingly, for us. Felicity didn't just alienate Noel and her best
friend and land herself a boyfriend who gives every sign of being a sleazebag
(and whom one hopes she'll slough off within an episode or two). She set
herself back to exactly where she was last year. As a freshman at the beginning
of the show's first season, Felicity rushed to New York to follow Ben, on whom
she had a goofy unrequited crush. (She had been planning to enroll at Stanford
and become a premed student.) She spent the rest of the year getting over it
and growing up, so convincingly that one speculated she might have become too
sophisticated even for the neurotic brainiac Noel.

            All of which brings up a troubling fact that the WB, the
network-wannabe that became a network last year on the basis of its hit teen
shows, will be forced to face more and more in coming years: Adolescents grow
up fast. This gives network executives three choices: 1) They can keep coming
up with new shows but risk losing the audiences from the last ones; 2) They can
find a way to retard characters' development; or 3) They can figure out how to
let characters grow without abandoning of original concept for the show. Many
television series face this quandary, of course; how they respond is one
measure of their merit.

            The sight of Felicity choosing Ben is the sight of the
WB flunking that test. It's as if Marjorie Morningstar had gotten back together
with Noel Airman--your classic if Anglicized Luftmensch --once she had come to her senses. But then, Herman Wouk
didn't write his classic coming-of-age novel on the basis of female teen-age
focus groups. (Culturebox can't help suspecting that Ben, being cuter, tested
better than Noel.) Like Marjorie, Felicity was a sweet romantic heroine,
alternately flaky and smart. Plus she had the best curls on television. The
curls are still there, thank God--they won't be sheared till later in the
season--but everything else on the show now seems like a grim and ugly parody
of itself. Felicity has become hangdog and whiny. Her and Noel's banter has
soured into spite. "I can't believe how horrible it is that we're speaking like
this to each other," she tells him quaveringly, as he punitively regales her
with details of sex he had with another woman during the summer. Felicity is
again paired unhappily with her bitchy punk roommate, only this time the
roommate is less amusing and more scarily invasive. Ben's ex-girlfriend has
moved back in with him and his roommate, which has the effect of turning a
hitherto delightful character into something just short of a stalker.

            And on it goes, in details too creepy to enumerate.
You'd think that all this would just add interest--who needs more artificial
sunniness from television, anyway?--but Felicity ,
alas, is no Ingmar Bergman movie, or even a Quentin Tarantino one, and the
darkness just turns some delightful teen-age fare into an exercise in viewer
masochism. If you're a WB character, it seems, growing up is impossible to
do.

         
      
   
