
   
   
      
         
            Inhaling Bill, Coughing Up Al
            

            Issue 1 is Bill Bradley's increasingly competitive race
with Al Gore. Issue 2 is Pat Buchanan's likely jump to the Reform Party.

            Grilled by Sam, Cokie, and George on ABC's
This Week , Bill Bradley appears relaxed and
confident. He admits to using marijuana but not cocaine, then asks his
interrogators the same question (Donaldson says he has used marijuana, Roberts
says neither drug, and Will--can you guess?--also says neither). Bradley says
he supports limited experiments with vouchers, but in general opposes them. (To
read 
                  Slate's take on Bradley's tightrope walk on vouchers,
click here.) Bradley says Clinton was wrong to grant
clemency to Puerto Rican criminals, and he argues that the apparent success of
Clinton's welfare reform is due largely to the strong economy.

            Most programs flash polls showing Bradley even with
Gore in New Hampshire and New York. Many conservative pundits think Gore is
finished. Skeptics (such as Sam Donaldson and Fox News Sunday's Mara Liasson and Brit Hume)
note that Gore--like Bob Dole in '96 and Walter Mondale in '84--still has the
party establishment behind him and a sizable national lead.

            Appearing on CBS's Face the Nation , Pat Buchanan
says nothing new but sounds more bitter than ever. ("They gave my speaking spot
[at the '96 GOP Convention] to Christine Todd
Whitman ," he mutters.) Most pundits think his jump to the Reform Pary is
certain. Several panelists--including Bill Kristol ( This Week ) , Gloria Borger
( Face the Nation and PBS's Washington Week in Review ), Alan Murray ( Washington Week ), and Jack Germond (NBC's Meet the Press )--think the GOP should show
Buchanan the door.

            Others think there is ample reason for the Republicans
to be "quaking in their wingtips" (PBS's John McLaughlin): He'll steal votes
from George W. Bush. ("That giant sucking sound you hear is the sound of the
Republican Party sucking up to Buchanan," quips McLaughlin's Eleanor Clift.) On Meet the Press , GOP National Chairman Jim Nicholson looks humbled
and frightened. When Tim Russert asks him whether his upcoming meeting with
Buchanan will be at Buchanan's office or his own, he stutters and then refuses
to answer. Some skeptics note that Buchanan's support is tepid to begin with,
and that he may actually draw labor votes from the Democratic nominee (Alan Murray, Fox's Juan Williams, CNN Late Edition's Steve Roberts, and
McLaughlin's Tony Blankley and Michael Barone).
Most shows note that both Gov. Jesse Ventura, I-Minn., and Donald Trump have
threatened to run for the Reform Party nomination to block Buchanan. (Indeed,
Trump attacked Buchanan's isolationism in a fax sent to several shows Sunday
morning.) (To read 
                  Slate's take on Pat's apostasy, click here.)

            
               Predicting (Another) Pat's
Path On This
Week , Bill Kristol predicts that Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y.,
will endorse Bill Bradley this week. It should be noted that Kristol's record
on Moynihan intelligence is not good: In January 1998 Sam Donaldson asked
Kristol what would happen next in the then-exploding Flytrap scandal. Kristol
predicted that Democratic leaders, principally Pat Moynihan, would "go to the
president--and I agree with Sam; it could be in days, not in weeks--and tell
him this is insupportable, you cannot put the country through this." Of course,
Moynihan never did this. However, Bill Bradley did seem to be fishing for his
endorsement on This Week : When asked about
welfare reform, he began, "I agreed with Pat Moynihan on this issue, who I
think knows more about welfare than anybody else in the country." When asked
about Clinton's clemency, he noted that he "agreed with Senator Moynihan."

            
               "Thanks, Louis. Love and
Kisses, Orrin."Senator Orrin Hatch's love
affair with Clinton FBI Director Louis Freeh continues. (See the Sept. 6 Pundit Central.) On Fox , Hatch, R-Utah, informs us that Freeh "is a very honest
guy--and frankly he's the best FBI director I've seen in my whole 23 years in
the Senate. He's an honest, decent man. He gets in trouble with this
administration because he is honest and doesn't play the [political] game."
Earlier in the program, Fox aired a leaked FBI
surveillance video allegedly depicting two Puerto Rican criminals--recently
sprung by Clinton--making a mail bomb.

            
               Last Word From an exchange on Fox :

            
               Tony Snow: "You
mean if somebody found a bunch of KKK members, [and] they had a surveillance
videotape [of the members making bombs, but] they weren't directly linked to
the bombing [in court], that it wouldn't be justified to draw a conclusion from
that?"

            
               Rep. Charles Rangel,
D-N.Y.: "I would say that if you had members of the KKK, that were not
directly tied to the murder--that they did not do the murder--that 90 years [in
jail] would be excessive. You know it, and I know it."

         
      
   
