
   
   
      
         
            Go, Pat, Go

            The notion that the Republican Party should evict Pat
Buchanan--first advanced in this space last week--is gaining momentum.

            On Sunday, Bill Kristol, the editor of the
Weekly Standard, endorsed the idea on
This Week With Sam and Cokie , saying that the GOP
should urge Buchanan to leave. Kristol compared the situation to what happened
in the Democratic Party in 1948, when Harry Truman showed the pro-Stalinist
Henry Wallace the door.

            On Tuesday, John McCain got on the Dump Buchanan
bandwagon. "I don't believe that Pat Buchanan is a part of the Republican Party
when he uses statements and beliefs that we should not have fought against
Hitler's Germany and Tojo's Japan," McCain elaborated. "I believe that we
should always stand on principle and not on polls when we decide whether
someone should remain in our party or not. And I do not believe that that kind
of rhetoric represents Americans, much less Republicans."

            On Wednesday, Mark Sanford, a Republican Congressman
from South Carolina chimed in. "I agree with John McCain," Sanford said.

            On Thursday, Bill Dal Col, Elizabeth Dole and Steve
Forbes' campaign manager, joined in the criticism--though both stopped short of
calling on Buchanan to leave the GOP. Dal Col called Buchanan's statements in
his book questioning whether the United States should have entered World War II
"outrageous." Dole released a statement saying that she was "appalled by Pat
Buchanan's comments."

            Buchanan has responded with his customary fury. Asked by
Katie Couric on the Today Show why he faces
accusations of anti-Semitism, he responded, "Because I speak truth to power and
because Pat Buchanan is probably the only leader in this country who will stand
up to the Israeli lobby." One question: What does the latest round of
criticism--fueled by Buchanan's argument that the United States should have
tried to stay out of the Second World War--have to do with the Israeli
lobby?

            Meanwhile, Buchanan's negotiations to take over the
Reform Party appear to be stalled. In an interview on ABC News Radio released
today, Buchanan says that he has been trying to reach Ross Perot. So far, Perot
has not returned his calls.

         
      
   
