
   
   
      
         
            Who Framed Ronald Reagan?

            The consensus so far on Dutch: A Memoir of Ronald Reagan is that
Edmund Morris, the biographer who inserted a fictionalized version of himself
into his work, is just this side of insane and his publishers just that side of
exploitative and corrupt. This strikes Culturebox as distinctly possible but
shortsighted, literarily speaking. Not wanting to steal thunder from historian
Alan Brinkley and Reagan biographer Dinesh D'Souza, who are scheduled to debate
the book in 
                  Slate
                next week, Culturebox won't defend what Morris
has written--she can't, anyway, having read only the Newsweek
excerpt--but will lay out a few arguments for why he has, in principle, every
right to try to write this way, but can't make it work.

            1. Just because Morris was driven to do what he did by desperation, as he
has admitted in interviews, doesn't mean it lacks legitimate precedent. The
history of literary biography is like a yoyo--one century it careers toward the
facts, the next it swings away from them. It has ever been thus, at least since
the Greek mythologizer Plutarch published his Lives , and continues to be
thus in the debates over footnotes, etc., between academic and journalistic
biographers today. Culturebox thinks the outcry about Morris resembles the
furor over Bloomsbury biographer Lytton Strachey. His masterwork was Eminent
Victorians , a collection of brief revisionist essays about great men and
women of the 19th century that contributed no new facts but rather a
mocking spin on existing ones.  In a time of two-tome biographies, his were
short and to the point, which has a lot to do with his popularity. His more
enduring innovation, though, was, as one historian has put it, "liberating the
biographer from the enslavement of data." Strachey's most controversial liberty
came at the end of a later biography of Queen Victoria, in which he made
himself free to enter her mind as she died:

            

               She herself, as she lay blind and silent, seemed to those who watched her to
be divested of all thinking--to have glided already, unawares, into oblivion.
Yet, perhaps, in the secret chambers of consciousness, she had her thoughts
too. Perhaps her fading mind called up once more the shadows of the past to
float before it, and retraced, for the last time, the vanished visions of that
long history--passing back and back, through the cloud of years, to older and
ever older memories--to the spring woods at Osborne, so full of primroses for
Lord Beaconsfield--to Lord Palmerston's queer clothes and high demeanour, and
Albert's face under the green lamp, and Albert's first stag at Balmoral, and
Albert in his blue and silver uniform, and the Baron coming in through a
doorway, and Lord M. dreaming at Windsor with the rooks cawing in the
elm-trees, and the Archbishop of Canterbury on his knees in the dawn, and the
old King's turkeycock ejaculations, and Uncle Leopold's soft voice at
Claremont, and Lehzen with the globes, and her mother's feathers sweeping down
towards her, and a great old repeater-watch of her father's in its tortoise
shell case, and a yellow rug, and some friendly flounces of sprigged muslin,
and the trees and the grass at Kensington.

            

            2. Interpolations such as Strachey's, above, have become commonplace. No one
complains about the tiny fictionalizations that abound in almost every
biography written today, including Morris' own earlier, award-winning biography
The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt . For instance, Culturebox spotted two
bits of fantasy on the very first page! The scene being set is that of a White
House reception for the public on New Year's Day, 1907:

            

               A shiver of excitement strikes the line of people waiting four-breast
outside Theodore Roosevelt's front gate, and runs in serpentine reflex along
Pennsylvania Avenue as far as Seventeenth Street, before whipping south and
dissipating itself over half a mile a way. The shiver is accompanied by a
murmur: "The President's on his way downstairs."

               There is some shifting of feet, but no eager pushing forward.

            

            Was this based on known fact? Did Morris have documentation for a snake-like
quiver rushing through the crowd, or for its foot-shuffling? Let's face it: He
speculated, and we let him get away with it, because his writing has the ring
of truth. In the Newsweek excerpt of Dutch , there are many
similar tours de force , some imaginatively construed as celebrity
question-and-answer interviews (Morris with Nancy), others set inside some
character's head.

            3. In short, literary biography in our time is more literature than
biography--we believe it if it's well-imagined. Acting on that truth and
playing around with form is anything but a moral shortcoming. Inventing
fictional characters as Morris has done in Dutch , however--clever as it
is--seems doomed to fail as a literary device. Mainly, it's intrusive.
It destroys the illusion of transparency. In theater one would say it calls
attention to the fourth wall, the proscenium framing the play. Even in
Strachey's and the earlier Morris' wildest speculations, they hewed to an
implied contract between reader and biographer that states, We'll go along
with you as long as you make what you say sound like it had some basis, once
upon a time, in verifiable or even plausible fact. The Edmund Morris who is
Reagan's childhood chum is neither a verifiable nor a plausible fact; he's a
hypothetical. He's the Roger Rabbit of biography, a cartoon figure inserted
into Reagan's more straightforwardly filmed movie. He may not be less true than
the  little fabrications and self-inventions in which Reagan specialized; in
fact, given Morris's greater levels of alertness and perspicuity, his
self-inventions are probably more true. The problem is they're like the
anthropological definition of garbage: matter out of place.

         
      
   
