
   
   
      
         
            Crime Control 101
            

            Dear Ester:

            As I noted earlier, I too had hoped to get on e-mail
earlier. Class preparation, however, delayed me.

            As you may know, my center of interest is crime
control, especially police activities to prevent crime through order
maintenance. You mentioned Mayor Giuliani in your note earlier. While the
mayor's position on the merits of certain art has been highly topical and
controversial in New York City (and for those who read the New York Times in other areas of the country), in most of the
sections of the country he is best known for his record on crime control. And
as you may know, one part of his crime-control strategy has been to deal with
minor offenses--a strategy that he has openly acknowledged is derived from an
article I wrote with James Q. Wilson in the Atlantic in 1982. The article was known as "Broken Windows."

            Art criticism and order maintenance might be quite
different issues on one level, but on another they are linked. Both raise
free-speech issues. I know little about free-speech issues as they relate to
art, however, although not a lawyer, I have become quite familiar with the
issues as they relate to certain aspects of disorderly behavior, especially
panhandling in public spaces (begging). (You may or may not know that I was
extensively involved during the late 1980s in restoring order in the New York
City subways and that panhandling was, perhaps, the most divisive issue.)

            In respects, the subway experience (both in dealing
with graffiti and with other forms of disorderly behavior) became the prototype
for New York City's anti-crime efforts, at least in its early stages. Later,
new managerial and tactical innovations seemed to accelerate declines in
crime.

            This issue, crime control and how it is accomplished,
is the basis of Mayor Giuliani's reputation outside of New York City. But, as
you suggest, we are going into an election year and it will be interesting to
see how reputations play themselves out over time.

            I hope that you had a good holiday. I will look forward
to hearing from you and will write more early tomorrow a.m.

            George L. Kelling

         
      
   
