
   
   
      
         
            Does It Pass?
            

            Dear Nat,

            I've been looking forward to this book for a long time, and I find myself
impressed, annoyed, and disappointed. I'm tremendously impressed by the first
chunk of the book, which is a description of the emergence of the SAT-tested
meritocracy. Lemann is emerging as our leading chronicler of hugely important
but under-reported events. And the social transformation he captures here is
momentous. It is nothing less than the death of one elite--the WASP
Establishment--and the rise of another--the meritocratic establishment.

            We all sense that this transformation occurred sometime after World War II.
Lemann won't like me invoking them, but in The Bell Curve , Charles
Murray and Richard Herrnstein include one fact that starkly illustrates the
shift. In 1952, the average verbal SAT score for incoming freshmen at Harvard
was 583. Ninety percent of all applicants whose fathers had gone to Harvard
were admitted. By 1960, the average verbal SAT score was 678. The middle
student in the 1952 class would have been at the bottom of the 1960 class. The
WASP gentlemen had been replaced by brainy strivers.

            What many of us didn't appreciate until Lemann book is that the Protestant
Establishment committed suicide, for the highest of motives. Lemann identifies
two key players, James Bryant Conant, the president of Harvard, and Henry
Chauncey, a Harvard administrator who went on to become the head the
Educational Testing Service. Conant was alarmed by the thought that America
might be developing a hereditary aristocracy. He sought to replace it with a
Platonic class of guardians who would be selected by merit and who would
selflessly serve the public. Henry Chauncey didn't have this sort of grand
social vision, but he was enthralled by the possibility of testing, with the
thought that human beings could be measured and sorted by these fantastic new
scientific evaluations. Like Conant, Chauncey was a member of the Protestant
Establishment, a graduate of Groton and Harvard, a man from Puritan stock.
These unsung men helped push through the changes that are the basis for our
current social setup.

            While telling us about Conant and Chauncey, Lemann keeps reminding us about
the fundamental issues at stake and the central problems inherent in a
meritocracy. The new SAT-based system gave some people more opportunity but
also closed off opportunity for people who couldn't ace the tests. Furthermore,
weren't Conant and Chauncey just undermining one system of social rank and
replacing it with another, and possibly even more rigid, one? I am much
friendlier to the current elite than Lemann is, but he is right to raise all
these issues.

            Having described this fundamental change, the decline of the elite based on
blood and breeding and the rise of the elite based on brains, it seems to me
the next obvious question is: What does this mean for America? What culture and
values get adopted by a meritocratic elite? How do they see themselves? What
does a society led by brainiac strivers look like? I confess I read this book
with some trepidation because I have just completed a book that attempts to
answer just these questions. So it was with some relief tinged with
disappointment that I found Lemann veers off and avoids them.

            The next big chunk of the book is about Clark Kerr and the California
university system and the fight over the California Civil Rights Initiative.
There must be some law somewhere that says when a liberal starts talking about
merit he must immediately move on and talk about race. Obviously, the
affirmative-action debate is an important if well-worn controversy. But it is
not central to the issues Lemann raises in the first third of the book, which
are the problematics of meritocracy. As Lemann admits at the end of the book,
both sides in the affirmative-action debate accept the assumptions of
meritocracy, "that it's good for the country to have a designated,
educationally derived elite." So why does he let this book on meritocracy get
taken over by affirmative action?

            This section on CCRI is a journalistic account about some of the liberal
activists who fought CCRI. The story is told through their eyes, and it is a
biased account. I am a nervous opponent of affirmative action, and through this
whole section I felt my point of view was not being treated fairly. When I read
it again, I got angrier. It is incredibly unfair to Ward Connerly, a leading
opponent who is treated like a hollow front man. It treats other opponents of
affirmative action as oddballs. So one opponent is described living in "an
isolated mountaintop aerie" and spending his days "talking in a low
confidential mumble on the telephone." Another is a "ferociously quiet young
man with a shaved head." What does "ferociously quiet" mean? Would Lemann use
such a menacing phrase to describe a liberal? Lemann is generally not crudely
biased, but liberal readers will find themselves flattered and conservative
readers will find themselves feeling that they are victims of an injustice.

            In the final pages of the book, Lemann gets off race and returns to the core
issues. He asserts that our meritocratic system is unfair, that it is an
affront to our egalitarian ideals. He asserts that our system measures only a
narrow set of skills, and selects people too early in their lives. These are
fair assertions, but he never really makes the case in the center of his book.
This last section is only 8 pages long, and contains none of the sociological
data or journalistic reportage that would flesh out his assertions. He says we
should close the gap between selective colleges and non-selective ones. That
might be fine for English majors, but what about scientists and engineers, who
are rarely discussed in this book. Won't the ramifications be grave if elite
institutions like MIT are disbanded? Not everybody on earth is a lawyer or a
journalist, despite the impression we journalists often give. Lemann doesn't
have time in this final tacked-on section to address such issues.

            
               The Big Test is worth reading for the superb section on Bryant and
Conant. I learned a lot. But I come away thinking Lemann let his narrative
sidetrack him from the issue he cares about most: The huge question of whether
our current meritocratic system is just or unjust, and what we can do about
it?

            I'm looking forward to your reaction to the book.

            Highest regards,
David

         
      
   
