
   
   
      
         
            Weekend Cocktail Chatter
            

            The trade deficit is soaring, the dollar is weakening against the yen, oil
prices are high. Damn, it feels like the 1980s all over again. Except that
inflation is still nonexistent, corporate earnings are high, the Japanese
economy is still barely limping along, and the trade deficit seems to have more
to do with roaring consumer demand and foreign demand for U.S. assets than any
fundamental weakness in the overall economy. Maybe the fact that all this is
going on at once explains this market's complete unwillingness to commit in one
direction or another. Or maybe enough people just haven't read Dow
36,000 yet. On to this week's Cocktail Chat.

            1. "Mindspring and Earthlink agreed to merge, in a deal that would make the
new company the second largest Internet service provider in the world ,
after AOL. Of course, the real question is not whether the two corporate
cultures will mesh. Unfortunately, the new company will be called
Earthlink , robbing us of the chance to have a firm called
Mindearthspringlink, which would have been cool."

            2. "Federal Reserve governor William McDonough reiterated that, as part of
the Fed's attempt to ensure that fears about Y2K won't cause any
liquidity problems, the Fed would be adopting a 'no questions asked'
policy at the window where it lends money to banks. Not even: 'Will you pay
us back?' Is there any chance at all that Russian tycoons are not figuring out
how to take advantage of this?"

            3. "In its first day of trading, Internet stock E.piphany saw its shares
leap more than 150 percent . I'm sure the company is really just terrific,
but could its name be more s.tupid?"

            4. "E.piphany's popularity is due in part to the fact that it's involved
in today's hottest technology sector , namely business-to-business
e-commerce. First we had content, then portals, then e-commerce, then free
e-mail, then business-to-consumer e-commerce again, and now it's
business-to-business that's all the rage . Next, presumably, will be
computer-to-computer commerce, which will have the great virtue of eliminating
humans entirely. Another alternative would be business-to-aliens commerce."

            5. "From the Ripley's Believe It or Not file , this headline from the
Wall Street Journal : 'Once Just Seat-Pocket Promotions, In-Flight
Magazines Find Devotees .' Look, there were actually people who watched
Dear John , too. Incredibly bad taste is just not news."

            6. "Florida's attorney general filed a lawsuit against Rite-Aid, alleging
that the company systematically overcharged uninsured patients for
prescription drugs . When asked about the lawsuit, a spokeswoman for
Rite-Aid said, 'I don't know anything about it.' This is not the ideal
response from a company flack . 'The charges are utterly without merit, and
the lawsuit is baseless' would have been better. 'I don't know anything about
it' sounds more like 'I didn't know anything about it while it was going
on.'"

            7. "New Web site Space.com named former astronaut Sally Ride as
president , ensuring that for the foreseeable future every article about the
site will contain at least one reference to the company's 'rocketing'
fortunes."

         
      
   
