
   
   
      
         
            The Conservative Book Club
            

            Issue 1 is Pat Buchanan's book and his relationship with the GOP. Issue 2 is
Edmund Morris' strange biography of Ronald Reagan. Issue 3 is the Gore-Bradley
race.

            If the chat shows are any indication, the Republican establishment is
turning against Pat Buchanan. Buchanan is called anti-Semitic by two
conservative commentators--William Safire (NBC's Meet the
Press ) and George F. Will (ABC's This Week )--as well as by Buchanan's former Crossfire
co-host, 
                  Slate
                editor Michael Kinsley ( Meet the
Press ). Will calls Buchanan a fascist and compares him to Franco. Other
conservative panelists--such as Paul Gigot ( Meet the Press and PBS's
NewsHour With Jim Lehrer ), William Kristol ( This
Week ), and Tucker Carlson (CNN's Late
Edition ) say Buchanan should leave the GOP and good riddance. On
Fox News Sunday , Buchanan says, "Clearly, we're
leaning toward [bolting the GOP], but I don't want to make an irrevocable
decision." But according to some he already has: "His career as a significant
Republican is over," says Gigot ( Meet the Press ). And Buchanan is "on
the cusp of becoming radioactive politically," says Mark Shields
( NewsHour ). Kristol and Gigot criticize George W. Bush for refusing to
tell Buchanan off. (For 
                  Slate's take on Buchanan's
ostracism from the GOP, see Jacob Weisberg's "
Go, Pat, Go.")

            One conditional defender of Buchanan is Al Hunt (CNN's Captial Gang ), who says that although Buchanan is wrong, he
"makes a considered argument that is not anti-Semitic" in his new book, A
Republic Not An Empire: Reclaiming America's Destiny (buy it here). An unconditional defender is Capital Gang's
Robert Novak, who thinks "it is a brilliant book in many ways. It's not a
presidential candidate's book. ... I would say right now the assault on him by
the media ... makes me a little ill."

            Grilled on Fox by a hostile Brit Hume and Tony Snow, Buchanan calls George
W. Bush's appeal to him to remain in the GOP "gracious" and "smart." (On
Late Edition , Buchanan says that John McCain's criticism of his views
on World War II shows that McCain hasn't read his book.) Snow notes that in his
book, Buchanan argues that America was right not to go to war with the Soviet
Union in the 1930s over Joseph Stalin's quasi-genocidal farm collectivization
program. Snow then asks Buchanan: Does this imply we should not have gone to
war with Germany over the Holocaust? Buchanan replies that the point is moot,
since we were already at war with Germany by the time the Holocaust began.
Buchanan then turns the tables, asking Snow, "Should we have gone to war with
Russia [over farm collectivization] and when?" But Hume cuts in with, "Pat,
Pat, Pat [chuckles],  we're asking the questions here." Buchanan tells
Snow that we should arm Taiwan but not necessarily declare war on China if it
invades the island. "Listen, I will not take my country into war with a nuclear
power," Buchanan says, citing President Eisenhower's decision not to intervene
in the Soviets' 1956 crackdown in Hungary.

            The pundits chew over the Newsweek excerpts of Edmund Morris' controversial biography,
Dutch: A Memoir of Ronald Reagan (buy it here). As the only opinion
maker who has read the entire book, Evan Thomas pronounces Morris' use of a
fictional narrator a noble risk but ultimately a failure. Bill Kristol
( This Week ) and several Reagan aides interviewed on Meet the
Press (Michael Deaver, Edwin Meese, Lyn Nofziger, and Marlin
Fitzwater)--who have not read the whole thing--say Morris' book is a fiction.
Several Reagan confidants say that Morris' bafflement with his subject is
absurd. "Ronald Reagan was an open book who read himself to the country for 20
years," says George F. Will ( This Week ).

            Among the apparent revelations in the Newsweek
excerpt: (1) Reagan came much closer to death after his assassination attempt
than previously disclosed. He insisted on walking into the hospital under his
own power, but then collapsed; he had lost nearly half his blood. After
catching an infection he coughed up blood. (2) The Bushes bitterly resented the
way the Reagans treated them as second-class citizens, rarely inviting them to
the second-floor family quarters. (On Fox, Pat Buchanan--a former Reagan
aide--notes that he too was never invited upstairs but is not bitter; Brit Hume
notes that the Reagans were private people to begin with.)

            Pundits concede that Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan's
endorsement of Bill Bradley gives his campaign another boost, and Gore
spokesman Bill Richardson admits on Meet the Press that "this is going
to be a very contested campaign." Both Meet the Press and This
Week flash a recent Time /CNN poll of New Hampshire primary
voters: Bradley edges Gore 44 percent to 41 percent. (Is this within the margin
of error? Neither show says.) Several pundits note that Bradley may be peaking
early and that Moynihan also endorsed Bob Kerry in 1992 and Ted Kennedy in 1980
(Mara Liasson, Fox ; Margaret Carlson, Capital
Gang ).

            
               A Short History of Washington Week:
Paul Duke reminisces with his panelists and welcomes new host Gwen Ifill. Duke
chronicles the program's history: "It all began in February 1967 in a
ramshackle studio ..." There was the time Nixon tried to de-fund PBS because of
Washington Week's Watergate coverage. There was that unfortunate
episode where the studio lights went out, and the one where the fly kept
landing on a panelist's nose. Several commentators generously warn Ifill (who
does not appear on the program) of one of the perils of being on television
frequently: the "recognition factor." To illustrate, Steven Roberts tells of
all the mail he has received advising him to change his hairdo, and Thomas
Friedman shares the time he was recognized by a stranger on a train to Hong
Kong. Stay tuned to "Pundit Central" to find out how Ifill handles the
privileges and responsibilities of pundit fame.

            
               Last Word:
            

            "We had every right, and we were more than right--right, just, and moral--to
smash both of those evil empires [Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan]."

            --Pat Buchanan ( Late Edition )

            "Here [in 1999] is a defeated, divided, demoralized Weimar Russia sitting
there, and we are pushing it, with our NATO expansion, right into the arms of
China, which bears tremendous resentment toward the West--and the United States
in particular. We are repeating the errors that led to World War II, and for
heaven's sake let's stop it before [we get] World War III."

            --Pat Buchanan ( Fox News Sunday )

         
      
   
