
   
   
      
         
            Chatterdump

            Did Clinton-hating gossipmonger Matt Drudge actually do the president a
favor by forcing the Monica Lewinsky story out into the open before special
prosecutor Kenneth Starr could wire her up and get Clinton to say something
damaging on tape, as Starr apparently planned to do?...

            If Clinton has had affairs with dozens of women, where are all the women he
hit on and didn't have affairs with? Does he score every time? When Chatterbox
hits on women, its success rate is--well, let's not say what the rate is. But
it's less than 100 percent--less than 50 percent, even ...

            Which American is happiest about Clinton's current predicament? Chatterbox
nominates Gary Hart, who must have spent the past five years wondering how
Clinton got away with it ...

            Paranoid's corner: A few weeks after a front-page New York Times
story on the disappearance of lucrative speaking engagements for Washington
pundits, a huge scandal breaks that will surely revive demand for...speeches by
Washington pundits, who can now retail titillating tidbits ("Let me tell you
about the Vernon Jordan I know ...") Mere coincidence? Chatterbox's friend
Walter, who pointed this out, thinks not ...

            In 1994, defending President Clinton against right-wing hit man David Brock,
a liberal pundit wrote: "It would bother me greatly if Clinton was still
messing around after the 60 Minutes interview--let alone after the
election. That would reveal a brutal willingness to deceive the public--way
beyond the normal politicians' cynicism--as well as a frightening lack of
self-control ..." Who was the liberal pundit? Michael Kinsley, now

                  Slate's editor. Prepare to be bothered greatly, buddy ...

            Speaking of paranoia: In retrospect, maybe Hillary Clinton wasn't so crazy
to be concerned about ridding the White House of Bush holdovers when her
husband took office. One of those holdovers, Linda Tripp, made the tapes that
now threaten the Clinton presidency. Bet the Clintons wish they'd gotten rid of
her in 1993, along with the travel-office staff ...

         
      
   
