
   
   
      
         
            No. 142:

            By Randy
Cohen

            

               "Traditions in the West are sometimes hard to break, but we find this to be
particularly egregious," says Rocky Mountain coordinator Andrea Lococo.
            

            
               What
tradition?
            

            by noon ET
Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Thursday's question (No. 141)--"Newersweek ":
            

            
               Accepting his new post
as editor of Newsweek , Mark Whitaker asked his colleagues, "What can we
do to make Newsweek a must-read?" Participants were invited to offer
suggestions.
            

            "More shots of Mark
Whitaker nude in a bubble bath."-- Merrill Markoe
            

            "New subscribers receive
free foot rub from Katherine Graham."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            "Pictorial feature:
'What's Inside Meg Greenfield's ...?' (Handbag, Refrigerator, Pocket, Fist,
etc.)"-- Meg Wolitzer
            

            "Replace George Will's
column with weekly photo of him being punched in the nose."-- Rich
Harrington
            

            "Next week's cover story:
'Medical Miracle for Cute Babies Is a Hot New Trend and Proof of God's
Existence.' "-- Daniel Radosh
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            While
Newsweek shows an admirable eagerness to improve itself, Time may
already have achieved perfection--and not just by stealing 
                  Slate
               
features and denaturing them into wan imitations but by being acutely attuned
to today's demanding pre-teen reader. At Booker T. Washington Middle School 54,
a New York public school, current events assignments are traditionally
researched in the New York Times , tough going for most kids. Recently,
some 11-year-olds were introduced to Time . "It's so easy!" beamed one
sixth-grader who'd struggled with the newspaper's exegesis of the Arab-Israeli
peace accords. Told that there was also something called Time for Kids ,
she replied, "Oh, I know, but nobody reads that. We call it Time for
Idiots ." Kids can be so cruel. So delightfully, perceptively cruel.

            
               Condensed
Quayle: The Art of the Editor Extra
            

            (Below, a
tighter version of the former vice president's op-ed piece in Monday's New
York Times . Many cuts, no additions, no changes in word order.)

            "Kenneth Starr held Antonin
Scalia and a derelict. They might be tempted routinely. Fine. High officials
should be able to buy their way out of misconduct. How trivial. Let them get
off easily without any consequences at all. They are acting in the country's
best interest. Departing from the Constitution pays dividends."

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
