
   
   
      
         
            No. 143:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               Bill
Gates' answer was "I don't know what you mean 'concerned.' " What was the
question?
            

            by noon ET
Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Monday's question (No. 142)--"Customs Inspection":
            

            

               "Traditions in the West are sometimes hard to break, but we find this to be
particularly egregious," says Rocky Mountain coordinator Andrea Lococo.
            

            
               What tradition?
            

            "Splitting an appetizer
with Calista Flockhart."-- Eric Zicklin
            

            "Richard Ford stories in
which nothing happens."-- Chris Kelly
            

            "Making all rookie Rocky
Mountain coordinators prove their dedication by spending a night in a bedroll
with a grizzled old prospector."-- Bill Franzen
            

            "Hunting and killing
homosexuals. Even if they use the meat."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Describing the behavior
of physical objects using a set of rules, instead of acknowledging the actual
witches and elves behind it all."-- Kenton A. Hoover
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            The implacable logic of the
Top 40 format sadly demanded the exclusion of many fine entries premised on
bestiality (surely more generically rural than strictly Western?) and prairie
oysters (so delightfully disgusting, as are many of the odd foods of strange
lands eaten by people with comical names). A more Freudian quiz might wonder
why so many responses involved having sex with, and eating the sexual bits of,
some other species. This quiz does not.

            It does wonder if this
question promotes an unattractive regionalism, as if it were a personal
accomplishment to be born in, say, Paris? But perhaps what makes this
chauvinism necessary is the disproportionate power of the West--too many
senators, too much public money, too many movie locations--and the uses to
which that power is put. Or, as Tom Leherer sang in "The Wild West Is Where I
Want To Be," in the only line I can recall, "Where the scenery is attractive,
and the air is radioactive."

            Thus, in
the moral cartography of "News Quiz," urban trumps rural, and East beats West.
Then does Eastern rural supersede Western urban? Vermont vs. San Francisco?
That's a complicated question I wouldn't want to tackle before I've had a
snack. And some sex. With two different creatures. That's the way we like it
back East.

            
               Wily
Answer
            

            Killing coyotes.

            Hunters from across the West
gathered in Wyoming last weekend for the National Coyote Calling
Contest--"calling" in the sense of luring and then shooting 200 of the 545 that
responded. Andrea Lococo of the Fund for Animals particularly disdains "killing
for kicks, for fun and money, blood sport."

            Speaking for the affirmative,
sheep rancher Dan Thompson, founder of the contest: "About the worst thing to
happen to hunting was Walt Disney. The animated voice doesn't make them human.
The coyote is smart, elusive. I respect him. I don't hunt him because I hate
him."

            Fifty-nine thousand sheep and
lambs fell prey to Wyoming's 100,000 coyotes last year.

            The World
Coyote Calling Contest will be held next weekend in Elko, Nev.

            

               Re-Targeted Extra
            

            1.
"Democracy confers a stamp of legitimacy that reforms must have in order to be
effective."-- Vice President Al Gore
            

            Chides New
York Mayor Giuliani for taking months to ultimately deny parade permits to his
foes while swiftly granting permits to those whose views he endorses.

            2. "We
should just bomb the hell out of him, get it over with."-- Pvt. Michael
Bucci
            

            Thinks
firing isn't good enough for Peter Roth, former Fox head of programming, who
aired low-rated, soul-deadening shows.

            3. "They're
hideous ideologues, pseudo Marxists, pseudo feminists, pseudo historicists and
disciples of Foucault."-- Harold Bloom
            

            Judges the
cast of Friends after watching a single episode, and it was one of the
old ones in syndication.

            4. "He is a
coldblooded fellow who winds up loving absolutely no one."-- Harold
Bloom
            

            Attacks
magician David Copperfield for no apparent reason.

            5. "She's
wholly normative--a miracle of healthiness, good sense, lovability."-- Harold
Bloom
            

            Sucks up
to Claudia Schiffer--after knocking her boyfriend!--in an inept attempt at
seduction.

            6. "I didn't
want it to end."-- Larry King
            

            Praises
News Quiz on today's 
                  Slate
                Table of Contents.

            
               Original
Targets
            

            1. The
Malaysian government, for suppressing dissent

            2. Saddam
Hussein, who will ultimately break his vow

            3. College
Shakespeare teachers who differ with Harold Bloom

            4.
Hamlet

            5.
Rosalind

            6. Meet
Joe Black (All blurbs for News Quiz on the 
                  Slate
                Table of
Contents this week are inexplicable praise for this movie.)

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
