
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The
Siege
                (20 th Century Fox). Critics are sour on this what-if
action thriller about terrorism in New York. They say the film cashes in on the
audience's fear of Islamic fundamentalists, then chastises them for bigotry.
Editorialists and reviewers alike call the movie anti-Arab. Denzel Washington
and Annette Bening (FBI and CIA operatives, respectively) are said to be good
but not great. Bruce Willis (as a psychotic Army general) is so stamped in
moviegoers' minds as the butt-kicking good guy that he leaves the audience
cheering at all the wrong moments. (Visit the
official site.)

            

               
                  Elizabeth
                (Gramercy Pictures). Mixed, but mainly good, reviews
for this lavish costume drama about the first Queen Elizabeth and her troubled
ascendance to the throne. Some love the "darkly sumptuous, hypnotically
complex" plotting (Richard Schickel, Time ); others call the film
"Masterpiece Theater for the MTV generation," riddled with glaring
historical inaccuracies (Rod Dreher, the New York Post ). Two things draw
praise from all: 1) The spectacular art direction; 2) Cate Blanchett's
performance as a feminist Virgin Queen. (David Edelstein reviews the
film in 
                  Slate
               .)

            
               
                  The
Waterboy
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Critics either love it or hate it:
Either the movie "overflows with repellent humor" (Joan Anderman, the Boston
Globe ), or it's "loony, unapologetic fun ... an utter hoot" (Janet Maslin,
the New York Times ). With a voice "like Truman Capote on Seconal" (Dave
Kehr, Daily News ), Adam Sandler regresses from the borderline maturity
of The Wedding Singer back to his trademark sweet, addled, violent
character--this time in a formula sports-loser-turned-sports-hero flick aimed
at the fraternity/junior-high-school crowd. (Click here to
read about the making of this film.)

            

               
                  Velvet Goldmine
                (Miramax Films). This tribute to '70s glam uses a
Citizen Kane -style device to explore the rise and fall of a pair of Iggy
Pop/Ziggy Stardust-ish rock stars. Some critics (such as the New York
Times ' Maslin) nearly fall out of their chairs in awe at the operatic
splendor of the music and pageantry--"blazing with exquisite yet abstract
passions." Others are less impressed by all the stuff-strutting: "[E]veryone in
the movie has the approximate human weight of a hologram" (Peter Rainer, New
York ). (Read Edelstein's review in

                  Slate
               .)

            

               Book
            

            

               
                  Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human
               , by Harold Bloom
(Riverhead Books). Reviewers call Bloom's tome "a cloak-bag of ideas, stuffed
with true wisdom and false bombast" (Jonathan Bate, the Wall Street
Journal ). Bloom's vigor and intelligence in his examination of
Shakespeare's plays make the book a joy to read, despite the fact that he "does
not quite prove his tremendous thesis" (Jodie Morse, Time )--that
Shakespeare single-handedly created the modern idea of individual personality.
Critics call Bloom "a master entertainer" who has applied his formidable skills
to the noble project of a general reader's introduction to Shakespeare (David
Gates and Yahlin Chang, Newsweek ). (Click here to buy the book.)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Bruce Springsteen: Tracks
               , by Bruce Springsteen (Columbia). This
four disc collection of old songs--mainly unpublished material with a few
B-sides--is said to provide valuable insight into Springsteen's progression as
an artist, but the music itself is only so-so. The harsher critics call it
"iffy ballads and lame roadhouse rock" (Jeff Giles, Newsweek ). Despite
the weakness of some of these recycled scraps, Springsteen's "unbridled
earnestness and positive energy" are still impressive (David Browne,
Entertainment Weekly ). (Click here to join an online discussion about Springsteen.)

            

               Opera
            

            
               
                  Le
Nozze di Figaro
               , Metropolitan Opera, New York City. The Met's "handsome
and subtle" production (Alex Ross, The New Yorker ) leaves critics
debating diva Cecilia Bartoli's performance as Susanna. Is she "comically over
the top, attention-grabbing and at times hysterical" (Anthony Tommasini, the
New York Times ), or is she simply a "captivating comic presence"
(Charles Isherwood, Variety )? Not everyone loved the production: New
York 's Peter Davis says, "[T]he characters [are] foggily defined and the
heart of the opera left unexamined." (Here's the
schedule for remaining performances.)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Nov.
4:

            
               Movie -- American
History X ;

            
               Movie -- John
Carpenter's Vampires ;

            
               Movie -- Life Is
Beautiful ;

            
               Movie -- Living Out
Loud ;

            
               Art --"Jackson
Pollock" (Museum of Modern Art, New York City);

            

               Book -- A Man in Full , by Tom Wolfe.

            Oct.
28:

            

               Movie -- Pleasantville ;

            
               Movie -- Apt
Pupil ;

            

               Movie -- Soldier ;

            
               Book -- King of the
World: The Rise of Muhammad Ali , by David Remnick;

            
               Book -- Evening ,
by Susan Minot;

            

               Book -- Bech at Bay: A Quasi-Novel , by John Updike.

            Oct.
21:

            

               Movie -- Beloved ;

            
               Movie -- Bride of
Chucky ;

            
               Movie -- Practical
Magic ;

            
               Theater -- Corpus
Christi , by Terrence McNally (Manhattan Theatre Club);

            
               Music -- Live:
1966 , by Bob Dylan;

            

               Book -- The Poisonwood Bible , by Barbara Kingsolver.

            Oct.
14:

            
               Movie -- Holy
Man ;

            
               Movie -- The
Mighty ;

            

               Movie -- Slam ;

            
               Movie -- A Night at
the Roxbury ;

            
               Dance -- Swan
Lake (Neil Simon Theatre, New York City);

            
               Book -- Work in
Progress , by Michael Eisner with Tony Schwartz;

            

               Book -- Pure Drivel , by Steve Martin.

            
               --Eliza Truitt
            

         
      
   
