
   
   
      
         
            No. 145:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               I give
the headline, you give the story. From Thursday's London Evening
Standard : "Blow to Singer With No Sideways"
            

            by 5 p.m. ET
Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Wednesday's question (No. 144)--"Best Dais of Your Life":
            

            
               A major U.S.
corporation will spend three years and $200 million to install
customer-friendly equipment, including small, mobile, battery-powered podiums.
What are the podiums for?
            

            "Amazon.com will deliver
author readings directly to your home, rendering bookstores yet more obsolete.
Most of the $200 million is being spent not on the podiums themselves but
rather on the small, mobile, battery-powered Frank and Malachy McCourts who
will stand behind them."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Disney World's new
'presidential debates' bumper cars."-- Matthew Singer ( James
Urbaniak had a similar answer referencing poetry at Barnes &
Noble.)

            "Who cares? It's an
Internet company. BUY!"-- Doug Ingram (similarly, Ellen
Scordato )

            "If you're saying they're
not urinals, I'm really embarrassed."-- Steven Miller
            

            "Mice. It's the cutest
darn thing you've ever seen."-- Tim Carvell (similarly, with a Ross Perot
chaser, Carl Spratt and Russ Evansen )

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Small,
mobile, battery-powered--is there anything more modern than that? Is there
anything cuter than that? Is there anything more redolent of vulgar erotic
possibilities? If "News Quiz" were not a quiz but rather a pornographic
Japanese comic book, dense with misogyny and conveniently available in
omnipresent vending machines on the platforms of swift, efficient commuter
railways, those would be the attributes of the sexed-up superhero whose
adventures we chronicled, even if it made many of our fellow passengers really
uncomfortable. But here in America, to be creeped out by unwanted mass transit
eroticism shoved at you from every direction, you must make do with loudmouthed
cell phone sex on the Long Island Railroad. I'm no economist, but I believe
this is the point President Clinton intends to make in Tokyo tomorrow.

            
               On-Time
Answer
            

            As Alfa-Betty Olsen and
Marshall Efron know (click ), United Airlines will be rolling out porta-podia
when there are long lines at check-in counters.

            This space
age table with a radio link to the airline's database is currently being
field-tested in San Francisco and will soon be deployed at LAX, O'Hare, and La
Guardia airports.

            
               Dick
Armey's Metaphor Madness Extra
            

            Read this allegorical passage
by the newly re-elected House majority leader, then answer the questions
below.

            "Think
about the poor bass; put yourself in his place. You go into Denny's and you sit
down and somebody puts your hamburger in front of you, and you pick it up and
take a bite. All of a sudden, somebody grabs you by the mouth, drags you around
the store, drags you outside, pulls the hook out of your mouth, and throws you
back into Denny's. That is what the poor fish goes through."

            1. What does Denny's
symbolize?

            2. What does the fish
symbolize?

            3. Where is "out back"?

            4. What is the hamburger?

            5. What is the hook?

            6. What's the fish doing at
Denny's?

            7. Suppose the fish were
really rich, should it pay the same income tax as a poor fish, maybe like a
shad who works at Denny's?

            8. A champion of family
values, how many children does the fish have from previous marriages?

            9. How does the fish know
when something is wrong?

            10. What
do some other fish think of this fish?

            

               Answers
            

            1. A lake, and also the U.S.
House of Representatives.

            2. An incumbent majority
leader.

            3. A riverbank where it looks
like you won't get re-elected?

            4. I'm a little hazy here.
Opposition to gun control, maybe?

            5. Look, I don't know. Quit
badgering me.

            6. Having lunch, I guess, but
maybe they were all out of worms or something? Do they eat worms?

            7. Yes. Both should pay 17
percent.

            8. Five.

            9. "When the Ten Commandments
can't be placed in courtrooms (even though a relief of Moses adorns the House
chamber), and schoolchildren are harassed by school officials for privately
practicing their faith, something is wrong."

            10. "It
was time to get rid of him," said a fish who did not want to be identified,
"but in the end the moderates just couldn't go with Largent. It was more like
going with the old devil we know."

            
               Funniness
Enhancer
            

            Reread the
passage, only this time pronounce "bass" with a long a, and picture opera great
Samuel Ramey.

            
               Read More
About It
            

            At the speaker's Web site,
http://freedom.house.gov.

            And if you check, you'll
probably find a lot of bass fishing sites.

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
