
   
   
      
         
            No. 146:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               Fill in
the blank. Rolf-Ernst Breuer, chairman of Germany's Deutsche Bank, may acquire
America's Bankers Trust for $9 billion despite declaring, "Our motto is
'__________ first.' "
            

            by noon ET
Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Thursday's question (No. 145)--"Standard Features"--
            

            
               I give
the headline, you give the story. From Thursday's London Evening
Standard : "Blow to Singer With No Sideways."
            

            "Cocaine delivery to rock
stars has become so urgent that couriers are being given terse, even
breathless, instructions to make no detours."-- John Shade
            

            "Seamstress Trudie
Newell-Poit of Wainscotting, disgusted at her sewing machine's poor
cross-stitching, smashed it with a sledgehammer in Piccadilly
Circus."-- Andrew "Page 3 Girl" Solovay ( Jonathan Snow , Martin
Willett , Steve Smith , and Karla Nedel had similarly
stitcherific answers.)

            "A West End hooker who
once had noted novelist Isaac Bashevis Singer as a client offers reminiscences
of her technique."-- Tim Carvell (similarly literary, Dan
Simon )

            "English translations of
Welsh town names."-- Doug Ingram
            

            "Don't they know Karen
Carpenter is dead?"-- Wendy Casey
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Most responses played with
pop star excesses. Listed like that, it's clear that our rock 'n' rollers have
compiled a sadly unimaginative roster of debauchery, largely relying on sex and
drugs--those two tired horses of the dissolution troika. How square. How
disappointing. Even the president, that drab national dad, has been accused of
similarly unsurprising antics. Where's the youthful Byronic madness, the
heedless Lucullan feast of endangered bald eagles slow roasted over flaming da
Vinci drawings? Where's the Caligulan blood frolic? How uninspired is the
surgical selfishness of leaner noses and plumper bosoms. Where is the face
sleekened by cheek bones transplanted from a high-school cheerleader kidnapped
off the streets of Wichita, Kan.?

            I embrace
my middle-aged, middlebrow destiny, regularly dozing off around 9:30 in front
of a Merchant-Ivory movie on public television. Would that our rockers were as
accomplished at embodying their own philosophy. You'd think they'd have some
pride in workmanship.

            
               Opera
Ration Answer
            

            Opera diva Jessye Norman lost
her bid to sue for libel over a "vulgar and undignified" quip about her
size.

            A story in Classic CD
magazine said that when the 53-year-old singer became trapped in swinging doors
on the way to a concert and was advised to turn sideways to release herself,
she replied, "Honey, I ain't got no sideways."

            Miss Norman said the remark,
which she insists she never made, held her up to ridicule, mockery, and
contempt, and conformed to a "degrading racist stereotype of a person of
African-American heritage."

            Lord
Justice Peter Gibson ruled that these words could never convey that defamatory
meaning: "I could have wished Miss Norman had told the hoary old joke contained
in the subject of this libel action as it would have shown that, in addition to
possessing the remarkable vocal and dramatic talents which have made her
world-famous as a distinguished opera singer, she had an engaging sense of
humour. Unhappily, she has taken offence at the false attribution to her of the
six words."

            
               Season's
Greetings Extra
            

            It's not too soon to order
those holiday cards, and there's a colorful, inexpensive, and sinister
assortment available from Jews for the Preservation of Firearms Ownership,
"America's most aggressive defender of firearms ownership."

            The Brasco greeting cards
($11.95 a dozen) feature various pictures of Brasco (TM) the Liberty Bear,
first seen in the coloring book ($5.95) designed by 11-year-old Erik Zelman,
the young son (?) of Aaron Zelman, executive director of JPFO. " 'Inoculate'
your children from the anti-gun lies being taught as education in our schools
and in Mass Media."

            If you think about it, it's
nice that Aaron has taken his son into the family gun nuttery business. If you
don't think about it too hard.

            Among the Brasco greeting
cards:

            "Some Laws Are Bad": Brasco
the firearm ownership preservation bear wears a yellow cowboy suit and carries
a rifle. This could refer to the kosher laws that put pork chops out of bounds,
but I doubt it.

            "Firearms Can Be Fun": Brasco
proudly shows his target to dad. Both have rifles; both wear ear protectors.
They may be gun nuts, but they're still health conscious.

            "Dialing 911 Can Be Useless":
A nervous looking Brasco holds the phone; his bathrobe-wearing dad holds a gun.
Outside the window lurks a bad bear with an eye patch. Apparently the bad bear
didn't show as much concern for eye/ear protection as do Brasco and his
dad.

            "The
Japanese Want Your Guns": A sadistic Japanese prison guard bear deliberately
spills a cup of water just out of reach of a very thirsty Brasco on the floor
of his cell. I don't begin to understand the ideological assumptions behind
this one, but if I had any connection to those Berenstein Bears, I'd be talking
to a lawyer.

            This Milwaukee organization
also does an odd and scary line of Jewish gun nut T-shirts. Order or get more
information at www.jpfo.org.

             

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
