
   
   
      
         
            The Back of Virtues

            During the past year, public
opinion about Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's investigation of President
Clinton has polarized into two schools. The right holds that Starr has
valiantly defended justice and the rule of law against a scoundrel president.
The left dismisses Starr as a duplicitous, right-wing assassin bent on
destroying a president who serves the people. It took Starr months to discredit
the first school. It took him a single day to disprove the second.

            It's
impossible to dismiss Starr's testimony before the House Judiciary Committee as
the performance of a villain. Through hours of hectoring, cheap shots, and
generally ill-mannered behavior from the committee's Democrats, Starr kept his
composure and courtesy. He absorbed the questions seriously, answered them in a
straightforward manner, and offered clear explanations for nearly every aspect
of his conduct that was brought into question. He seemed honest, kind,
thoughtful, and fair--a perfect independent counsel.

            And yet, Starr's investigation has been a moral disaster,
the equivalent of a high-speed chase in which an armada of police cruisers
crumples dozens of cars and injures scores of pedestrians in pursuit of a rowdy
teen-ager. Gazing back at the wreckage, the interesting question is not the
crude choice posed on political chat shows--"Ken Starr: Hero or Villain?"--but
the subtler mystery more often explored in novels: How did such a good person
do such bad things? How does virtue become vice?

            Starr's essential virtues are
his dedication to the truth, his respect for the law, and his solid moral
convictions. When Clinton speaks, he looks like a confidence man trying to
figure out which line to feed you. When Starr speaks, he looks like a man with
nothing to hide. If I were Clinton's lawyer, I'd never let him take a polygraph
test. If I were Starr's lawyer, I'd pay for one. For nearly a year, Starr has
searched doggedly for the truth about the Monica Lewinsky affair, while Clinton
and his henchmen have obstructed him.

            What we've
learned from this search is that Clinton had a shameful affair with an intern
and covered it up--but also that the truth wasn't worth the search. In pursuit
of the truth, Starr's agents wired Linda Tripp to record her young "friend."
They confronted Lewinsky, told her she could go to jail, and suggested she
would be unwise to call her lawyer or her mother. Starr tried to make a
bookstore cough up records of her purchases. He sought to abridge the
attorney-client privilege by commanding Vince Foster's lawyer to divulge what
Foster had told the lawyer before committing suicide. He compelled Secret
Service agents to testify about the president's trysts. Starr's hunt for the
truth trampled privacy, loyalty, and security. At last week's hearing, he
conceded that his agents had investigated whether an unhelpful witness might be
obliged legally to give up her adopted child. "My investigators work very hard
and diligently to find relevant evidence," Starr offered.

            
Starr saw the black-and-white of truth and
falsehood but not the spectrum in between. He accused Clinton of perjury--a
felony--in part for playing silly word games in his grand jury testimony. Never
mind that Clinton had confessed to the essential points: that he had engaged in
an inappropriate relationship with Lewinsky and had tried to hide it from Paula
Jones' lawyers. Convinced there could be only one truth, Starr overlooked
others. He failed to see how what looked to him like a conspiracy to silence a
witness in a sexual harassment case could look to the participants like a
slapdash scheme to hush up an affair. And his report presented sexual truths
that serve no decent purpose.

            Starr's
confidence that he was obeying the law insulated him from examining his
behavior in moral terms. Pressuring Lewinsky to secretly tape-record Clinton,
Vernon Jordan, and Betty Currie was distasteful but legal, so Starr's agents
did it. "This is all traditional prosecutorial activity," Starr asserted at the
hearing. Forcing Secret Service agents to testify about the president's sex
life was indecent and reckless but constitutional, so Starr did it. And leaking
to--or, as Starr put it, "briefing"--reporters about the case on condition of
anonymity was sneaky and unfair, but Starr decided it was OK because it was
legally defensible. When Clinton's lawyer David Kendall challenged the
propriety of these briefings, Starr dismissively replied, "You're asking
[about] press policy as opposed to constitutional issues."

            By all accounts, Starr is a man of firm convictions. But
firm convictions also inhibit doubt, self-criticism, and learning. The moral
confidence that kept Starr admirably untroubled in the face of partisan insults
during his testimony left him equally untroubled by his own genuine errors.
Should he have quit the Whitewater investigation after temporarily accepting a
job at a university funded by a notorious Clinton hater? Gosh, no. So pure was
Starr's heart that he hadn't realized it would look bad. Later, when he sought
approval to investigate the Lewinsky affair, should he have disclosed that his
law firm had been contacted to represent Jones and that he had spoken to Jones'
attorneys several times about constitutional aspects of their case? "It just
did not occur to me," Starr candidly told the committee. Should he have
disclosed months ago that he had found no evidence of wrongdoing by Clinton in
the FBI files matter? Golly, said Starr, he hadn't thought it was necessary to
say so.

            Where
Clinton invokes false subjectivity ("It depends on what the meaning of the word
'is' is"), Starr invokes false objectivity. His favorite cloak is
"professionalism." Confronted with questions about the loaded language of his
report, Starr told the committee it was "a professional product." Unable to
distinguish his ego from his credo, he accused Clinton of obstructing justice
by asserting executive privilege against Starr's investigation. "It's our
professional judgment that the president engaged in abuse of his authority" by
so doing, Starr testified. Given that Starr and his professionals were right,
anyone who saw things differently was wrong. When Lewinsky's lawyer suggested
that Starr's agents had detained his client improperly, Starr issued an equally
one-sided press release portraying the encounter as a joint shopping and dining
excursion. "I felt duty-bound to provide public information that I thought was
appropriate," Starr testified. Likewise, his team often briefed reporters on
background because "we have the duty to engage in a proper public information
function," particularly "to combat misinformation." When Kendall asked why
Starr's team conducted these briefings on background rather than on the record,
Starr explained, "We do not want to in any way be part of [the] story." It
wasn't necessary to disclose that the "information" had come from Starr's
office, since his office was above reproach.

            
Starr's critics think these excesses and
failures make him a bad man. But this inference oversimplifies Starr, just as
he oversimplified the scandal. If conservatives are wrong to preach that the
lesson of the year was the unraveling of a morally bankrupt president, liberals
are equally wrong to preach that the lesson was the unraveling of a morally
bankrupt prosecutor. Starr's failures stemmed not from evil but from errant
good. That lesson won't suit either side's assumptions. But then, that's the
point of lessons.

            There is
another side to this paradox. Just as Starr's virtues turned vicious, Clinton's
vices sometimes turn virtuous. Lacking Starr's faith in absolute truth, Clinton
sees every side of every issue. That's how he absorbed and finessed Israeli and
Palestinian demands in the Middle East peace process. Lacking Starr's
confidence in the law, Clinton sees where the law is too blunt an instrument to
honor and promote good values. That's why his views on abortion and
homosexuality emphasize religious belief and personal responsibility rather
than legislative prohibition. Lacking Starr's moral certitude, Clinton
recognizes his own worst instincts and is capable of transcending them. That's
why he resisted the temptation to bomb Iraq Nov. 14, when the political case
for it was open and shut, but the moral case was dubious. To heed the better
angels of your nature, you must know the devils first.

         
      
   
