
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               No Starr
of the Web
            

            Re the
Oct. 8 "Today's Papers": Kenneth Starr did not put
anything on the Internet. Congress did that. If Shuger believes Congress
did a poor job of redacting the report before it was posted, he should say so.
But Starr is blameless (on this score, at any rate).

            
               --Dick
Reed Washington

            
               Race to
the Finish
            

            In Judith Shulevitz's
response to Michael
Ladenson's letter of Oct. 8, she rightly points out that admission to an elite
university is often based on a set of subjective judgments. She goes on to list
such things as volunteer work, athletic or artistic ability, recommendations,
and so forth.

            But simply
listing a set of criteria is neither a justification for expanding them nor an
argument against striking a few. Including race in that set of criteria and
making it coequal with qualifications such as volunteer work or ability is a
concept that I, and many other people, find disturbing.

            
               --Yon Lew Arvada,
Colo.

            
               My Mouth
as Raw Hamburger
            

            Re
"Paste Test":
I'll have to put the hex on Colgate Total. I bought two large tubes after your
super review. After two days of using the paste, my mouth turned into raw
hamburger. After the return to Colgate Gel--because of its positive
characteristics when used with the Sonicare cordless brush--my mouth was just
about back to normal. After three days of using the gel, my mouth has returned
to its familiar self.

            
               --Joy
Kenworthy Madison, Wis.

            
               Paste for
Greenies
            

            I have always suspected the
majors were trying hard to cover the fact that a generic will do. Two things,
however, that you missed in "Paste Test": Colgate Total makes your tongue numb
(I've tested this with a friend), and Mentadent/pump pastes in general are
hugely wasteful. They waste paste inside their complex mechanisms, and
their packaging couldn't be less eco-friendly.

            I wish
this piece had included the idea that you will be using paste your whole life
and that that means a lot of tubes--and overly built pumps just for the
"aesthetic" value are a bad deal for the environment.

            
               --Benjamin
Keyser San Francisco

            
               Address
your e-mail to the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
