
   
   
      
         
            No. 139:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               Toys,
comic books, nail polish, and jewelry. What's the connection?
            

            by noon ET
Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Monday's question (No. 138)--"Scaly":
            

            
               This winter the U.S.
government is testing a new 1-to-5 rating system in Nebraska and Wyoming.
Rating what?
            

            "Homosexuality.
'Individuals rated 1 through 3 will be issued an identity card protecting them
from violence,' said a spokesman. 'Fours and 5s? Well they're just asking for
it.' "-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Adorableness of plains
states' Jews."-- Jim O'Grady ( Katha Pollitt and Paul Tullis
had similar answers.)

            "Suitability as an
unmarked grave site for Linda Tripp. Whoops! We mean, um, suitability as, um,
landfills."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Number of times per hour
it would be appropriate to refer to Jack London's 'To Build a Fire.' "-- Doug
Ingram
            

            "Fondness for
unicameralism. Nebraska, of course, gets a '5.' "-- Adam Bonin
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Judging by
your responses, here's what we know about Nebraska and Wyoming--bad sex, bad
food, bad teeth, bad weather. No, wait, that's what we knew yesterday about
England, although it's not far off. The big difference seems to be that
everyone in England is gay, and everyone in Nebraska or Wyoming is eager to
beat the stuffing out of them. You would, however, receive an affectionate
reception if you were a domestic animal--sorry again, the term preferred by
animal lovers is "date." Is bestiality, that perpetual urban smirk at rural
life, actually prevalent in Nebraska and Wyoming? Or, to put it another way, in
the sense of asking an entirely different question: Is it really a requirement
of sophistication that a place provides good bookstores, movies, plays,
museums, music, cuisines, and an opportunity for erotic and intellectual
freedom? As it turns out, yes. But be wary of feeling too proud of yourself
simply for not living in Nebraska. The same boast can be made by anyone in
Kansas.

            

               Precipitate Answer
            

            Winter storms.

            According
to CNN Headline News (the brisk alternative for those who find CNN's regular
news too prolix), the rating system is analogous to that used for hurricanes,
with 1 a "minor inconvenience" and 5 "life threatening." The National Weather
Service will evaluate the system in spring.

            
               Life
Under Livingston--Augmented Quotations Extra
            

            (Each final sentence added
by "News Quiz.")

            "It's a different driver
at the same steering wheel with the same gas in the same car. He's a committed
conservative. Any poor folk get in the road, he's gonna run 'em
over."-- Rep . David Obey, D-Wis.
            

            "Livingston is about
running the train on the tracks. Poor folk wander onto those tracks:
Boom!"-- Rep. Mark Souder, R-Ind.
            

            "You will still have a
pro-big business, very much pro-oil industry party, and it is still very much a
Southern party. This place will become much less cannibalistic and much less of
a snake pit. But the snake, though limbless, can drive a car or a train or
maybe a private jet or something right over any damn poor people who get in its
way."-- David Obey
            

            
               Format
Change
            

            As of today, News Quiz
converts to the Top 40 format so popular with the kids. Page 1 will continue to
run five responses, but Page 2 will be capped at 35, thus increasing its comic
density. I'm only grateful that we're not switching over to adult contemporary.
Media consultant bastards.

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
