
   
   
      
         
            Is Monica Good for Israel?

            
               GET
"INTERNATIONAL PAPERS" BY E-MAIL!
            

            
               For Tuesday and
Saturday morning delivery of this column, plus "Today's Papers" (daily),
"Pundit Central" (Monday morning), and "Summary Judgment" (Wednesday morning),
click here. And
if you missed the most recent installments of this column, here they are:
posted Tuesday, Oct. 6, and Friday, Oct.
2.
            

            Writing Thursday in the
Jerusalem Post, Yossi
Ben-Aharon, a former director-general in the Israeli prime minister's office,
proffered the Monica Lewinsky case as an example of why Benjamin
Netanyahu should convene an emergency conference of world Jewish leaders in
Jerusalem to adopt "an urgent plan to save Diaspora Jewry from extinction."
Lewinsky demonstrates the extent to which American Jewry has become
assimilated, he said. The fact that she landed a "much-sought-after job" in the
White House "show[s] the extent to which the American Jewish community [has]
become so well-connected, right up to the highest levels of society and
government."

            
Ben-Aharon wrote that a report by the World Jewish Congress showed "the
American Jewish community is fast disappearing from the Jewish demographic
map." According to the WJC, he wrote, the present number of Jews in the United
States--5.5 million--will be reduced by half in two decades. "The government of
Israel, the Jewish Agency and the organized leadership of world Jewry must wake
up to the urgent need to take action in the face of the impending
disaster."

            With NATO poised for military action over Kosovo,
Yugoslavia, the Russian press took a strongly anti-Western line on the issue.
But the daily Sevodnya also mocked President Boris Yeltsin for devoting
more time to it than to Russia's economic crisis. "Russians waited for a month
and a half for Yeltsin to explain the crisis and how the country should fight
it," the paper said Wednesday. "The president, however, remained in a state of
lethargy." Then, "when he finally woke up," he immediately started making phone
calls to world leaders about Kosovo because this "gave him a chance to feel
himself a leader of a great power." On Russia's pledge to veto any U.N.
resolution authorizing force against Yugoslavia, Sevodnya described
Russia's position as ambiguous "because [it] is both threatening the West and
begging it for money at the same time."

            

               Izvestiya said the use of force against Yugoslavia would revive the Cold
War. Nezavisimaya
Gazeta said there is a possibility Russia will send troops into the Balkans
in extreme circumstances. "Back in February 1994, when NATO threatened to bomb
the Bosnian Serbs, it was the appearance of Russian peacekeepers in the region
that prevented the attack," it explained. It added that, by constantly putting
pressure on only one side in the conflict--the Serbs--the West was encouraging
Albanian terrorism. "The general assumption that Milosevic is bad and Albanians
are good still dominates Western politics," it concluded.

            
In an editorial Thursday, the Times of London decried the
chaos afflicting international diplomacy over Kosovo, "with meetings scheduled
and cancelled within hours, statements issued and promptly retracted, statesmen
announcing their arrival in capitals unprepared to greet them, and leaders
trying to keep telephone track of the Balkan imbroglio while locked into
campaigns and duties thousands of miles away." Attempts to base every decision
on consensus had created a multinational muddle, "while Slobodan Milosevic
laughs a little longer," it concluded.

            On
Russia's own crisis, Komsomolskaya Pravda said Yeltsin was being sheltered from
reality by his Kremlin advisers who sent him reports making his reforms appear
successful and life in Russia happier than it was. But it praised him for
having at least restored free speech to a country that had been deprived of it
for centuries. "No one in Yeltsin's time has ever been persecuted for making
anti-Russian statements," it said.

            Novye Izvestiya ran an interview Wednesday with the
American economist Geoffrey Saks, an adviser to the Russian government in 1994,
whom it quoted as saying that corruption and misappropriation of Western
credits have created a situation in Russia to which no one sees a solution.
Saks said that between $50 billion and $100 billion in Western aid was taken
out of the country and either deposited in Western banks or used to buy
property abroad. Saks added that when he spoke to the White House and the State
Department about this scandal, he was met only with silence, even though, in
private talks, U.S. officials admitted the West had given money to Russia not
for economic but for political purposes.

            In Paris,
Le Monde reported
Thursday on its front page that the mayor has ordered the establishment of a
100 square meter vegetable garden in the old quarter of Le Marais as a memorial
to Princess Diana. It is designed to be "a center of initiation to nature" for
children, the paper said. The proposal angered neighborhood leaders and
provoked some acid comments in British newspapers, which pointed out that Diana
had no interest in gardening and that she couldn't even cook. But the London
Evening Standard hopes the proposal will undermine a deeply
controversial plan supported by the British government for a memorial garden to
her to be created in Kensington Gardens in London.

         
      
   
