
   
   
      
         
            No. 134:

            By Randy
Cohen

            

               Participants are invited to provide a postelection headline that, in a just
universe, would run Wednesday in the media outlet of their choice.
            

            by 5 p.m. ET Monday to
e-mail your answer (newsquiz@slate.com).

            
               Responses
to Thursday's question (No. 133)--"Not Putz":
            

            
               "I didn't
say it. I didn't say it. I was there with a member of my campaign staff. We
took copious notes."
            

            
               Up for re-election, New
York state Attorney General Dennis Vacco incensed a big group of voters with a
remark he denies making. What group; what remark?
            

            "Vacco vehemently denies
telling a convention of People magazine readers, 'That Princess Diana
was a mean drunk and a lousy lay.' "-- Tim Carvell
            

            "The group: the powerful
English teachers' union. The remark: 'From now on, I will refer to other people
who hold my position as "attorney generals." ' "-- David Goldberg
            

            "PETA. 'Who's fucking this
cat?' "-- Tim Rogers
            

            " 'Let us take a brief
moment of silence for the late Ted Hughes,' to the semiannual convention of
Poetesses Who Love Anguished, Theatrical Histrionics (PLATH)."-- Noah
Meyerson
            

            "Native Americans: 'Me
win, me passum heap big law ... bring back St. John's Redmen.' 'I kid ... I
love the Native Americans. I'm indebted to them ... I keep losing at their damn
casinos. But seriously ...' "-- Alex Balk
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Is it
possible to make a joke about an offensive remark without making an offensive
remark? Tricky. Perhaps more than anything else, context counts. Lenny Bruce
built a routine around the idea that repeating the word "nigger" over and over
and over very, very fast could strip it of its cruel power, reducing it to an
impotent sound. But the context was Bruce's entire life. The risk is falling
into the Cops and Firemen in Blackface Defense. When these fellows were caught
on tape (a delightfully Dick Clarkish phrase) on an appallingly racist parade
float, they pleaded satire. Here the context is the history of the New York
Police and Fire departments, organizations traditionally short on anti-racist
parodists, and the commissioners of both bodies gave these guys the boot.
(This, of course, raises First Amendment questions about odious speech, but
that's another question.) So where does that leave "News Quiz"? Just a little
uneasy. But not wallowing in a moral swamp, like those cringing thieves at
Time magazine. And that's a comfort.

             

            
               Señor
Answer
            

            The group: Hispanic New
Yorkers.

            The remark: "You don't stand
outside a bodega and ask the bandito if he would have killed someone if there
was a death penalty."

            The context: replying to a
question about the ineffable deterrent value of the death penalty.

            The denial: Vacco admits to
"bodega," refutes "bandito."

            The source: Rob Goldblum,
managing editor of the newspaper Jewish Week .

            The other admission: Vacco
acknowledged that he was virtually guilty of murdering Buffalo doctor Barnett
Slepian, "just as if I'd pulled the trigger myself."

            Correction: No, he didn't. He
takes no responsibility whatever.

            His
election opponent Eliot Spitzer recalls that when Vacco was a federal
prosecutor he was so egregiously lax in protecting abortion clinics that he was
removed from a case by a Buffalo judge and replaced with a special
prosecutor.

            
               Inductive
Reasoning Extra
            

            These
names were among the first 100 coughed up by an Infoseek.com search. A search
for what?

            John
Glenn

            DeForest
Kelly

            Frances
Farmer

            
Storm-drenched New Zealanders

            Barbara
Jordan

            Adolf
Hitler

            Bill Roley
(according to his daughter Aja)

            Kerri
Strug

            The Jeep

            Helpful
truck drivers

            Columbus

            Residents of
Dumwoody, Ga., who support cancer research

            Craig
Breedlove, auto speed-record holder

            Tom
Selleck

            Linda
Tripp

            Eddie
Rickenbacker

            Marquis de Lafayette

            
               The
Category
            

            American heroes.

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
