
   
   
      
         
            Here's Your Hat, What's Your Worry?

            Hats arouse fully as much
feeling as hairstyles--or they would if enough of them were being worn. For 30
years we have been living in the Bareheaded Age, worrying intensely about our
hair. Many of us don't even remember the time when people would no more go
outdoors without a hat than they would without shoes. The exact character of
your hat mattered a lot then, much as the look of your hair does now. Your hat
confirmed your outfit, putting the final seal on whatever else you wore,
crowning your image and arming your ego for social and professional life--or
just for itself. During the summer in the country, my grandfather would put on
his hat to go down to the end of the driveway and get the letters out of the
mailbox. I would laugh at him, free of the requirement myself; but in his
youth, even kids wore hats whenever they went outdoors.

            Hair rose
up and drove out hats in the 1960s--rose up, spread out, and flowed down in
merciless torrents, sweeping away conventional hats as if they represented all
that was loathsome in civilized life. A few cute hats, most of them faintly
satirical, costumey, and historical, were worn by a few cute people for
momentary effect. But the old hat rule was swiftly abolished. Off came the top
hat at the opera and the elegant homburg or fedora for street wear, along with
the whole range of casual hats and caps for men.

            Swept away, too, were all the charming, infinitely various
feminine hats that once made women feel charming and infinitely various
themselves. Common usage once allowed hat makers to find markets for many
heterogeneous styles, for much discreetly suggestive fantasy in shape and trim.
Absurdity was the obvious risk then, given the vast scope of hat design for
women. Danny Kaye once sang of "The little ones, the big ones, the
sat-on-by-a-pig ones,/ The foolish ones that perch, and the ghoulish ones that
lurch." But a man might still be seduced by an irresistible feminine brim,
curving and dipping to offset a meaningful glance. The desired effect appeared
in the movies on the heads of Greta Garbo and Marlene Dietrich and their
glamorous colleagues, such as Gene Tierney in Laura in her scene at the
Algonquin with Clifton Webb.

            Along with
much else, women's hats are no longer a normal part of the mating game. Women's
hats are out there, but they're all optional, and the range has shrunk. They
come in very few basic shapes (like dresses), and nobody gets any basic
training in hat choice or hat management, since real allure is felt to reside
in hair, not in hats. Real absurdity, too, of course.

            
But winter is coming. The Hair Revolution was
no help in bitter weather, and for a while everybody but Floridians and
Californians simply froze above the neck. Lately healthy, utilitarian hats have
returned in force, along with athletic footgear and down jackets, and there's
even a certain limited stylishness in recent examples. Fur is back, too, as are
delicious pile fabrics, so that luxury can be combined with utility. Meanwhile
thousands of watch caps, ear-flap caps, and wool berets are available from
street vendors to provide instant warmth for passers-by without much regard for
expressive charm. In this day of virtual uniformity, it's curious that whenever
a woman wears any hat at all, somebody is bound to say, "I love your hat!"--as
if out of subliminal nostalgia for the truly great days.

            Nobody
says this to men about their baseball caps, the ubiquity of which has reduced
choices for men just as general hatlessness has diminished the possibilities
for women. What are old-fashioned hat-loving men to do? Classic hats appear
pretentious and dandified. But such men could never wear--can barely
stomach--headgear with the inelegance, the laddishness, the rakishness, the
nerve of a baseball cap, especially one worn backward.

            Nevertheless, let us hope that the Return of the Hat is at
hand, inaugurated by men in their baseball caps, just as the strongest and
longest-lasting fashion changes always have been inspired by men. The hat
itself was a male invention and a male privilege until women got tired of
coifs, veils, and wimples in the Renaissance. Then they daringly adopted hats
to profit from the erotic charge male elements always add to feminine modes.
Many women have done this again in the last decade or so, usually sticking to
masculine sports hat shapes, baseball caps among them, or east European
rabbinical effects to combat the cold blast.

            I bought a fine example of
that kind of winter hat. It surrounds my head in a warm nimbus of fake fur, my
brow, ears, and nape encompassed by golden foxy fleece, my pate upholstered
with plushy leopard pelt, my beardless face mitigating the rabbinical flavor.
I've also acquired a neat hat that makes a black, furry sphere out of my whole
skull, leaving some wisps of my hair to curl up my cheeks and down my forehead,
Russian heroine style. More risky, since I'm not tall, is my cavalier hat in
silvery, streaked brown and black velvet, with a biggish mobile brim for
folding up and down at will, fore and aft or amidships.

            Short, small women have to
remember that they can quickly resemble a mushroom in anything too big or a
child in anything too cute. Medium-sized or large and tall women have no such
problem and tend to look good in any kind of hat. They only have to remember to
let enough of their face show and not to let the hat flatten them on top, so
that their full-sized, shapely head and speaking eyes will support the hat's
dashing impact, and the hat itself won't appear to jam a lid on the body's
expressive means. Advice to all: Study the older royals for the way they manage
good proportions, especially the British Queen Mum, and don't forget to study
your own full-length hatted reflection--front, back, and profile--before
hitting the street. Absurdity forever lurks.

         
      
   
