
   
   
      
         
            No. 144:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               A major
U.S. corporation will spend three years and $200 million to install
customer-friendly equipment, including small, mobile, battery-powered podiums.
What are the podiums for?
            

            by noon ET
Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Tuesday's question (No. 143), "A and Q: Bite the Hand That Fed Michael
Lewis"--
            

            
               Bill Gates' answer was
"I don't know what you mean 'concerned.' " What was the question?
            

            "Are the ActiveX data
objects of a frequency-division multiplexing DDR SDRAM with full duplex VRML
granularity hashing and an MVS IA-64 chip concerned with narrow-band,
random-access Winsock functionality?"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "Do you understand that
some spectators may be concerned by your nudity in the courtroom
today?"-- Noah Meyerson
            

            "Can you give an example
of a sentence that does not contain a preposition?"-- Jennifer Miller
( Tamara Glenny and Doug Ingram had similar answers.)

            "Is it true you said of
James Barksdale and Marc Andreessen, in an inexplicably British locution, 'I
don't ever want to hear that those c**ts earned one sodding shilling off their
bloody browser'?"-- HapppyJack
            

            "He was evading a question
about Universal's troubled Babe: Pig in the City . He's under oath. It's
the '90s. They can ask you anything."-- Chris Kelly
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            There is a
kind of pseudo-rebelliousness when the ant mocks the elephant, particularly
when the ant works for the elephant in some insect-sized capacity. But before
things get overly Aesopian (too late for that, you old fool!) let me tell you a
story about some real people. (Oh no, not another of his tedious stories!) So
you kids stop doing that to the cat and listen closely. For months after
General Electric bought NBC, David Letterman mocked his new bosses as "GE
pinheads," and all the little ants who wrote for Dave felt sassy and bold. (You
said no animals!) A short time later, at the Late Night anniversary
party, Jack Welch, the CEO of GE, and Robert Wright, the president of NBC,
grinned and guffawed and slapped Dave on the back. "We love it when you call us
GE pinheads!" said Welch. "We get such a kick out that!" said Wright. Dave
looked embarrassed, as he so often does, for Welch and Wright had taught him a
lesson: When you mock them on television, you don't threaten them; you humanize
them. What sports! They can take a joke! It's the court jester lesson. And if
you want to know more about it, stop by and talk to me down at the unemployment
office.

            
               Question
Answer
            

            What non-Microsoft browsers
were you concerned about in January of 1996?

            Asked
Monday in court by Justice Department attorney David Boies.

            
               Epithet
Extra--Four Animals, Two Nothings
            

            Match each
metaphor with the object of its scorn.

            1. "mad dog"

            2. "injured lion"

            3. "chicken"

            4. "fox in the henhouse"

            5. "black hole"

            6.
"void"

            A. Richard Butler, head of
U.N. weapons inspection teams, says the headline in some Iraqi newspaper.

            B. Saddam Hussein, says Ali
al-Ali, some Kuwaiti guy.

            C. President Clinton, says
Samir al-Eisa, some other Kuwaiti guy.

            D. Barnes & Noble's
ownership of book distributor Ingram, says Avin Domnitz, head of the American
Booksellers Association.

            E. Livent, the financially
troubled Broadway theater company controlled by Michael Ovitz, says lawyer John
Breglio.

            F. Data
collection on bus accidents, says James Hall, chairman of the National
Transportation Safety Board.

            

               Answers
            

            
               1A, 2B, 3C, 4D, 5E,
6F.
            

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
