
   
   
      
         
            The Courtship of Germany

            
               If you missed the most
recent installments of this column, here they are: posted Friday, Oct.
30, and Tuesday, Oct. 27.
            

            As Gerhard Schröder arrived
in London Monday for his first foreign trip as German chancellor, Britain and
France were vying for the affection of the new leader of Europe's largest and
most powerful nation. Sunday in Germany's Welt am Sonntag, British Prime Minister Tony Blair claimed that
he wasn't "in any way threatening the relationship between Germany and France,"
which has always been the cornerstone of the European Union, but he
nevertheless made proposals that were in direct opposition to France's stated
national interests. Calling for a more dynamic Anglo-German partnership to
tackle Europe's problems, Blair wrote that he and Schröder wanted to discuss
the pace of enlarging Europe eastward, how to reform and restore confidence in
financial institutions, how to combat over-regulation in Europe, develop a
European defense identity, reform the common agricultural policy, and correct
European budget imbalances.

            
Meanwhile, Le Monde of
Paris carried a front-page article by Luc Rosenzweig lamenting Schröder's
apparently excessive Anglo-Saxon leanings. While welcoming the fact that he
paid his first postelection foreign visit (but before he took over as
chancellor) to France, the article noted that Schröder's French wasn't any
better than that of his predecessor, Helmut Kohl. An article titled "The
Difficult Profession of Francophile" said that, in contrast to other countries,
France "starts from the principle that 'francophilia is a natural and normal
thing for other peoples' " It asked, "Are we not the fatherland of the rights
of man? Haven't we in the past raised high the standard of political and social
emancipation for which the whole planet owes us recognition?"

            Rosenzweig went on to point out that France did little to
succor its fans. While France was cutting back on its cultural exports, Germany
under Kohl had created "five chairs of European studies in the most prestigious
universities in the United States. ... The result: eminent American academics
have noted that, across the Atlantic, they 'read' Europe more and more with
German eye-glasses."

            In London,
the Times ran an
editorial Monday noting that Schröder had spoken of "an Anglo-German-French
'triangle'--a key element of which, it goes without saying in Germany, is his
confidence that Mr. Blair will soon come down firmly on the side of British
entry into economic and monetary union." The Times , which is strongly
against European monetary integration, said that "the new German government's
programme is too heavily stamped with the trademarks of traditional
tax-and-spend socialism to bear scrutiny as a modernising agenda. ... Herr
Schroeder may have won over Germany's inherently conservative voters with his
talk of a 'new centre,' but his election swings Europe firmly leftward." It
added, "Far from strengthening the case for British entry into the European
Monetary Union, it strongly reinforces the many good arguments for staying
out."

            
In Israel, the conservative Jerusalem Post expressed the
hope Monday that the decision made at the Wye Plantation talks to establish "a
strategic planning committee" between Israel and the United States might
strengthen the American commitment to protect Israel's security against its
Middle East neighbors with nuclear capabilities. But it said that "if Saddam
Hussein's recent announcement that he is suspending US inspections
entirely--coupled with new evidence that he lied about not arming warheads with
the chemical weapon VX--is not enough to spur US action, it is hard to imagine
that closer consultations with Israel will do so either."

            In
London, the conservative Daily Telegraph called for a tough line against Saddam. Saying in
an editorial Monday that "Saddam means terror, confrontation
and war," that "[h]e is bent on building Iraq into a dominant regional power
with the assistance of weapons of mass destruction," and that the authority of
the United Nations would be "in tatters if he is allowed to terminate Unscom
operations." The paper said that "[g]iving money to the Iraqi resistance is
little more than a symbolic gesture. What is needed is the will to hit Iraq
repeatedly from the air until Saddam backs down." It added, "He must now
believe he can defy the UN with impunity. It is time that he was sharply
disabused."

            After a period since the first anniversary of the death of
Princess Diana, during which the British press more or less honored a public
appeal by her sons, Princes William and Harry, that it respect her memory, it
is now open season against her with the serialization of new books in the
Sunday tabloids. The Mail on Sunday has been running extracts from a
biography of Prince Charles by Penny Junor, claiming that Diana had an affair
with her personal bodyguard early in the marriage and that she issued death
threats against her husband's mistress, Camilla Parker Bowles. The Sunday Mirror, in the
serialization of a book by Diana's "close confidante" Simone Simmons, said this
week that she had mutilated her body with a fork, wanted to run off to South
Africa with a heart surgeon named Hasnat Khan, and voted 250 times against the
monarchy during a televised debate about its future by pressing the redial
button on her mobile phone.

         
      
   
