
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  American History X
                (New Line Cinema). Edward Norton's performance
as a white supremacist who mends his ways has critics predicting an Oscar. The
film itself is panned. Nitpicks: 1) The antihero's conversion is unconvincing.
2) The film begins as an intelligent exploration of the origins of hate and
ends as a hackneyed cautionary tale. 3) "[I]n its visual heart of hearts [the
film] loves the style and swagger of the Nazis" (Stephen Hunter, the
Washington Post ). Playing a fellow prison inmate of Norton's, newcomer
Guy Torry catches the reviewers' eyes. (
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein
says the film "has the soul of a guidance counselor." Read his review here.)

            

               
                  John Carpenter's Vampires
                (Sony Pictures Entertainment). Critics
pan John ( Halloween ) Carpenter's gore-fest about a Vatican-employed
vampire slayer in New Mexico. An interesting mix of genres (vampire and
Western) winds up as a hokey mess: "[T]his gummy mix of fake-Catholic mumbo
jumbo and teeth-in-neck horror goes limp" (Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment
Weekly ). "[T]he unintended campiness of Vampires makes Night of
the Living Dead look like an episode of Nightline " (Michael
O'Sullivan, the Washington Post ). But Gene Siskel praises the film,
calling it "surprisingly entertaining" ( Chicago Tribune ). (Watch the
trailer.)

            

               
                  Life Is Beautiful
                (Miramax Films). A triumph of the human spirit
or an insult to the murdered millions? The critics are evenly split on
writer-director-star Roberto Benigni's comedy set in a concentration camp.
Those in favor say the film is really a fable about parental love, since
Benigni's character's antics are really an effort to shield his son from the
horrors of World War II. Other critics contend "turning even a small corner of
this century's central horror into feel-good popular entertainment is
abhorrent" (Richard Schickel, Time ). (Read Abraham Foxman's New York
Times op-ed piece, "The Holocaust Meets Popular Culture," which
defends the film. Free registration required. Click here for
Edelstein's review in 
                     Slate
                  .)
            

            

               
                  Living Out Loud
                (New Line Cinema). Holly Hunter and Danny DeVito
turn in solid performances as two lonely Manhattanites abandoned by their
spouses, and Queen Latifah sparkles as a wise cabaret singer. The New York
Times ' Janet Maslin says the unlikely pairing of DeVito and Hunter succeeds
because it is not a romance but the story of a friendship. Dourer
critics call the older-woman-starts-over plot a "done-to-death feminist
premise" (Susan Wloszcyna, USA Today ). (Visit the official
site.)

            

               Art
            

            

               "Jackson Pollock" (Museum of Modern Art, New York City). This
retrospective, which includes over 200 of Pollock's paintings as well as a
reproduction of his studio, leaves no doubt as to Pollock's importance to
American art. "[A]n experience as powerful as any in modern art" (Mark Stevens,
New York ). The New York Times ' Michael Kimmelman calls the
paintings "astonishingly beautiful." (Read Jacob Weisberg's
review in 
                  Slate
                or visit the MoMA's Pollock site.)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  A
Man in Full
               , by Tom Wolfe (Farrar, Straus & Giroux). Better than
Bonfire of the Vanities . Eleven years in the making and nominated for
the National Book Award before its official publication date, Wolfe's new novel
is hailed as a masterpiece by some, given mixed reviews by others. This time,
critics say, Wolfe has included a character the reader can like, rather than
the usual cast of unappealing caricatures. Praise is tempered with complaints
that the book is "entertainment, not literature" (John Updike, The New
Yorker ) and that the ending is artificial and "stage-managed" (Michiko
Kakutani, New York Times ). (Read an excerpt from the book here, and
read Jacob Weisberg's review
in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Mutations
               , by Beck (Geffen/DGC). Beck sheds the hip-hop style of
his Grammy-winning album Odelay in favor of a more folk-influenced,
melodic sound. Critics call it "his prettiest record to date" (Nathan Brackett,
Rolling Stone ) but predict that the move will disappoint fans drawn by
the irony-laced style of the last album. (Michael Hirschorn, editor in chief of
Spin , and Gerald Marzorati, editorial director of the New York Times
Magazine , discuss the album this week in 
                  Slate
               's "Music
Club." Also, check out this illustrated, in-depth exploration
of Beck's fashion choices.)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Oct.
28:

            

               Movie -- Pleasantville ;

            
               Movie -- Apt
Pupil ;

            

               Movie -- Soldier ;

            
               Book -- King of the
World: The Rise of Muhammad Ali , by David Remnick;

            
               Book -- Evening ,
by Susan Minot;

            

               Book -- Bech at Bay: A Quasi-Novel , by John Updike.

            Oct.
21:

            

               Movie -- Beloved ;

            
               Movie -- Bride of
Chucky ;

            
               Movie -- Practical
Magic ;

            
               Theater -- Corpus
Christi , by Terrence McNally (Manhattan Theatre Club);

            
               Music -- Live:
1966 , by Bob Dylan;

            

               Book -- The Poisonwood Bible , by Barbara Kingsolver.

            Oct.
14:

            
               Movie -- Holy
Man ;

            
               Movie -- The
Mighty ;

            

               Movie -- Slam ;

            
               Movie -- A Night at
the Roxbury ;

            
               Dance -- Swan
Lake (Neil Simon Theatre, New York City);

            
               Book -- Work in
Progress , by Michael Eisner with Tony Schwartz;

            

               Book -- Pure Drivel , by Steve Martin.

            Oct.
7:

            

               Movie -- Antz ;

            
               Movie -- What Dreams
May Come ;

            

               Movie -- Happiness ;

            
               Book -- I Married a
Communist , by Philip Roth;

            
               Television -- The
Secret Diary of Desmond Pfeiffer ;

            

               Art --"Van Gogh's Van Goghs: Masterpieces From the Van Gogh Museum,
Amsterdam."

            
               --Eliza Truitt
            

         
      
   
