
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Not OK,
Oklahoma
            

            In the Nov. 20 "Give It
Back to the Injuns," an unbalanced and frothing David Plotz refers to
Oklahoma Republicans as "a top to bottom roster of kooks, losers, and
terrors."

            Is this responsible
journalism? Would you permit Democrats to be vilified in similar name-calling?
Does this really elevate civil discourse in a country in which reasonable minds
should be free to disagree? Or is it just brain-dead demagoguery?

            Sometimes

                  Slate
                appears to favor totalitarian intolerance of conservative
thought. Could you provide some basic instruction to your "journalists" on the
left about minimum civility and respect for those with whom they disagree?

            -- Tom Kerwin Vienna,
Va.

            
               Plains
Speaking
            

            Re the extraordinary and
articulate article "Give It Back to the Injuns": If only we Oklahomans were
less genially mediocre, we'd probably be more appreciative of your ability to
slap the faces of so many different groups of Oklahomans all at the same time
and in such a charming way. I'm a male Caucasian, am not inclined to consider
myself a "religious" or even a "Christian" person, and am a 55-year-old
registered Democrat (having switched parties in 1995 after having been a
registered Republican all the years before and mainly because of the present
influence of the so-called religious right in the Republican Party). So, I'm
less genial than some of my Oklahoma kinfolk, even if I share in the mediocrity
you sweepingly attribute to those of us who live within this portion of the
United States.

            You are quick, and apparently
presume you have the status, to give away and to disrespect at the same time.
Now, had you not managed to be so sweepingly offensive to Native Americans,
too, by your disrespectful use of the deprecatory term "Injun" (your momma
should spank your bottom and put a bar of Lifebuoy in your mouth), you might at
least have picked up a few admirers within these borders, given the thesis
implied by the title to your article. Indeed, many Native Americans would
welcome a return of their land, including that small piece of terrain that you
presumably have sufficient mass to be able to occupy. But, as it is, you come
off as just another self-appointed jerk who appears to write articles mainly
for the pleasure of seeing his name and opinions in print, instead of being a
person who uses words to persuade rather than to malign.

            As I said,
I'm sometimes less genial than my fellow Oklahomans, so I trust that you will
not take these remarks as a reflection upon their general temperament.

            -- Doug
Loudenback Oklahoma City

            
               The
Oklahoma Reich
            

            I live in
Tulsa, Okla., and your story "Give It Back to the Injuns" hit the nail right on
the head. You should try being gay and living here. It is kinda like being a
Jew and living in Germany during the 1930s.

            -- Scott
Headrick Tulsa, Okla.

            
               Pregnant
Logic
            

            From the
Nov. 23 "Today's Papers":

            The WP front covers
a lawsuit in which a man is suing a woman for becoming pregnant against his
will--she had, he says, promised to take birth control pills. The woman claims
that she became pregnant accidentally. That factual issue may be settled at
trial, but it seems that there is a larger legal issue well worth addressing.
Since court findings of paternity cost the imputed fathers eighteen years'
worth of support, it seems only fair that women be held accountable for any
promises they make about attempting to remain childless. In the absence of
that, a woman's promise to take charge of birth control and then not doing so
remains the only form of monetary fraud Today's Papers can think of that is not
only not punished, but is in fact regularly rewarded.

            Grrr. I'm sure that by now
hundreds of TP readers have written in to snarl at your reproductive tort
theories. I object to your logic for two reasons: 1) Birth control methods do,
in fact, fail on occasion. Even vasectomies fail. 2) Men who don't want their
sexual partners to become pregnant are responsible for taking steps themselves
to prevent pregnancy. Sex without a condom is not an inalienable right of
men.

            Men who participate in
creating an unwanted pregnancy should do a bit more than whine about how "she
was taking care of it." That tone goes over better for chiding the guy who
forgot to bring the beer to Sunday football.

            As always,
though, great column, despite our difference of opinion in sexual politics.

            -- Emily
Culbertson Philadelphia

            
               Wake Us
Up When It's Over
            

            Quit with
the boring shtick, will ya? One guy is bored with the Starr hearings ("A Starr Is
Boring"), and one gal is bored at the Microsoft trial ("Dispatch"). Is this 
                  Slate
               's new strategy to grab
current and prospective readers? I hope not, because I'm bored with their
boredom. Sure, the hearing and the trial may be a bit slow, but these writers
are covering something important or else they wouldn't be there. And if they
are bored silly covering such events the traditional way, they should get off
their butts and try talking to someone different and exploring something
new.

            -- Patrick R.
McDonald West Hollywood, Calif.

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
