
   
   
      
         
            Cannibalism

            Faster than you can say
"Republican revolution," Newt Gingrich has surrendered his job as speaker of
the House, and House Appropriations Committee Chairman Bob Livingston, R-La.,
has wrapped up the contest to replace him. The media has already reached
consensus on Livingston: He represents "moderation," as opposed to Gingrich's
conservatism, and "management," as opposed to Gingrich's emphasis on ideology.
"Support for Livingston Represents Move Toward Pragmatism," says Monday's
New York Times front page.

            Other
House leadership positions are up for grabs, too, and the candidates for these
jobs have joined Livingston and his enemies in the ideology-pragmatism debate.
Gingrich was "a revolutionary," Livingston argued Sunday on ABC's This
Week ; "I am a manager." But once again, the Republicans and the media are
failing to grasp the message of the 1998 elections. It's not about ideology.
It's not about competence. It's about self-absorption.

            The performance of Livingston and two other leadership
candidates on This Week illustrates how the House coup, far from solving
the GOP's problems, is moving Republicans in the wrong direction. Instead of
confronting the public's material concerns, they're engrossed in blaming each
other and promoting themselves. Speaking for the new "management" school,
Livingston advertised himself as a speaker who would "provide the legislative
machinery" to implement legislation. When asked about his role as
appropriations chairman in this year's sloppily assembled half-trillion dollar
budget bill, he replied that he had said at the time, "This is ugly, but we
have to pass it and get out of here and go get re-elected." When asked about
the GOP's pork-laden $217 billion highway bill, he said opponents of the bill
were right and that he "was opposed in the preliminary" votes but "ended up
voting for the final bill," since "a lot of people are going to have highways
because of that bill and a lot of people are going to have jobs because of that
bill." When asked whether House Republicans had mishandled the Lewinsky
investigation, Livingston answered, "I don't know. I personally was trying to
get my appropriations bills out ... and I wasn't paying that much attention to
what was going on." As for the election results, he blamed conservative voters
who "stayed home from the polls because they're sulking because they didn't get
everything they wanted."

            Rep. J.C.
Watts, R-Okla., who ostensibly represents the party's conservative wing,
followed Livingston on the show. His principal diagnosis of the election was
that his colleagues hadn't heeded his wisdom about appealing to ethnic
minorities. "I feel like I've been beating my head on the wall for the last
four years and saying that we've got to reach out," he lamented. Rather than
address the moral implications of this oversight, Watts went on to explain how
Republicans, by electing him, could capitalize politically on new audiences. "I
haven't just talked about this outreach thing, I've done it," he asserted.
"I've executed the game plan."

            
Finally, speaking for the incumbents, Rep. John
Boehner, R-Ohio, explained why he should be re-elected as chairman of the House
Republican Conference. Boehner agreed that the leadership needed to be changed.
"We have got to manage the House in a much different way," he said. "There were
no clear lines of responsibility in the leadership. No clear lines of
accountability." But when asked about his own responsibility for the party's
failure, he replied, "Most members of the conference really believe that with
Newt's decision to leave, that's enough change--that the problems, in terms of
managing the House, were mostly in the speaker's office." When pressed as to
whether he had made any mistakes, Boehner bravely allowed, "I don't think it is
any secret to anyone that the speaker and I had our share of disagreements over
the last four years about how we operated." When asked about the GOP's failure
to pass budget bills by June 30, as required by law, he replied, "No one has
paid attention to the Budget Act since it was enacted." And summing up his
rationale for re-election, he emphasized "the services that I've provided with
my staff to the members."

            The
conventional media analysis of the GOP leadership struggle is that Watts,
fellow Oklahoma Republican Rep. Steve Largent, and other conservatives are
taking on Livingston, Boehner, and the "pragmatists." And the media's implicit
conclusion is that the pragmatists would turn the GOP toward the mandate for
moderation that was delivered in the elections. But Gingrich's description of
the House coup--"cannibalism"--is more accurate. The candidates for the
Republican leadership are conveying a preoccupation not with solving the
nation's problems but with protecting themselves individually and devouring
each other. And if there's one thing the electorate seems to disdain more than
the violence of the cannibals, it's the narcissism of their palates.

            
               Recent
"Frame Games"
            

            "The C Word": The
1998 election didn't kill conservatism. The postelection analysis did.
(posted Friday, Nov. 6, 1998)
            

            "Election Night
Excuses": William Saletan analyzes 20 classic postelection spins.
(posted Monday, Nov. 2, 1998)
            

         
      
   
