
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Enemy of the State
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Critics like this
paranoid techno-thriller starring Will Smith and Gene Hackman. The plot (Smith
is wrongfully targeted by rogue National Security Agency operatives) stretches
credibility in places, but overall the film is said to be "enormously
entertaining" (Michael O'Sullivan, the Washington Post ). Pluses: It's
full of cool technology and big explosions, and there's so much creepy
surveillance that it feels "like Kafka on steroids" (Peter Rainer, New
York ). (Visit the official site.)

            
               
                  The
Rugrats Movie
                (Paramount Pictures). Mixed reviews on this spinoff of
the animated Nickelodeon series featuring a pack of wisecracking toddlers. Some
complain that the film doesn't do much to entertain parents and observe that
"[i]n this yet-to-be-potty-trained universe, poop looms as large as explosions
in action thrillers" (Susan Wloszczyna, USA Today ). Other critics claim
that the Rugrats kids are "the funniest bunch of crumb-snatchers to come
down the pike since Buckwheat, Alfalfa, and the Our Gang gang"
(O'Sullivan, the Washington Post ). (Find out more about the
Rugrats TV show.)

            

               
                  Waking Ned Devine
                (Fox Searchlight Pictures). This Irish import
warms the cockles of critics' hearts. Featuring the talents of a largely over
70 cast, the film focuses on the residents of a small town as they try to cash
in a neighbor's lottery ticket after his death. Critics' favorite scene: the
aging David Kelly's nude motorcycle ride through the woods to beat the lottery
official to the ticket-holder's house. Sweet and funny without being corny, the
film "belongs to a small genre of crowd-pleasers [such as] The Full
Monty and Brassed Off " (Jami Bernard, Daily News ). (Visit the
official site; 
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein is not
charmed: "I see a future for elderly male actors willing to shed their clothes
for laughs, but I don't see myself in the audience." Read the rest of his
review here.)

            
               
                  A
Bug's Life
                (Walt Disney Pictures). The second computer animated ant
film of the season is said to be head and thorax above its predecessor,
Antz . Aimed at a slightly younger audience, the film bristles with buggy
life and packs in the "gee-whiz moments" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles
Times ). The critics' one gripe is that there's almost too much happening at
once on-screen: It's "so dense with characters and illustrative detail that it
nearly chokes on its own banquet" (Richard Corliss, Time ). (Visit the
Web site of Pixar, this
film's animation studio.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  I
Will Bear Witness: A Diary of the Nazi Years, 1933-1941
               , by Victor
Klemperer (Random House). Critics marvel at this diary of a German Jew who
obsessively detailed both the horrific deterioration of normal life as well as
the kind acts of "good Germans." Critics call it "richer and more profoundly
disturbing than Anne Frank's journals" (Jesse Birnbaum, Time ). Peter Gay
writes in the New York Times Book Review that "even the reader familiar
with Holocaust material must be gripped by these pages" and that the book has a
"concrete, vivid power that is, and I think will remain, unsurpassed." (Read
more about this book in the publisher's online catalog.)

            

               
                  American Beach: A Saga of Race, Wealth, and Memory
               , by Russ Rymer
(HarperCollins). Reviews of this book of three essays on the history and
current state of black townships in Florida are positive, though each is dotted
with a few quibbles. "Rymer has a journalist's gift for telling a story without
violating the mystery at its center" ( The New Yorker ), but he also tends
toward oversimplification of race relations and an overly nostalgic take on the
days of Jim Crow. It is "here close to poetic, there baroque and overwritten,
at once rich with insights and maddeningly reductive" (Tamar Jacoby, the Los
Angeles Times ). (Buy the book online.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Winchell
                (HBO; click here for
showtimes). Although Stanley Tucci turns in a good performance as the godfather
of gossip, Walter Winchell, critics pan everything else in the made-for-TV
film. Complaints: 1) The script leaves out crucial parts of Winchell's story.
2) It's based on a book written by one of Winchell's ghostwriters, who, natch,
makes himself the star of the film. 3) It "doesn't try hard enough to figure
out what made him tick, and tick so loudly" (Tom Shales, the Washington
Post ). (Find out more about the movie here; read Sarah Kerr's review in 
                  Slate
               .)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Nov.
18:

            
               Movie -- Meet Joe
Black ;

            

               Movie -- Celebrity ;

            
               Movie -- I'll Be Home
for Christmas ;

            
               Movie -- I Still Know
What You Did Last Summer ;

            
               Movie -- Dancing at
Lughnasa ;

            
               Book -- Fashionable
Nonsense: Postmodern Intellectuals' Abuse of Science , by Alan Sokal and
Jean Bricmont;

            

               Music -- Spirit , by Jewel.

            Nov.
11:

            
               Movie -- The
Siege ;

            

               Movie -- Elizabeth ;

            
               Movie -- The
Waterboy ;

            
               Movie -- Velvet
Goldmine ;

            
               Book -- Shakespeare:
The Invention of the Human , by Harold Bloom;

            
               Music -- Bruce
Springsteen: Tracks , by Bruce Springsteen;

            

               Opera -- Le Nozze di Figaro , Metropolitan Opera, New York City.

            Nov.
4:

            
               Movie -- American
History X ;

            
               Movie -- John
Carpenter's Vampires ;

            
               Movie -- Life Is
Beautiful ;

            
               Movie -- Living Out
Loud ;

            
               Art --"Jackson Pollock"
(Museum of Modern Art, New York City);

            
               Book -- A Man in
Full , by Tom Wolfe;

            

               Music--
               Mutations , by Beck.

            Oct.
28:

            

               Movie -- Pleasantville ;

            
               Movie -- Apt
Pupil ;

            

               Movie -- Soldier ;

            
               Book -- King of the
World: The Rise of Muhammad Ali , by David Remnick;

            
               Book -- Evening ,
by Susan Minot;

            

               Book -- Bech at Bay: A Quasi-Novel , by John Updike.

            
               --Eliza Truitt
            

         
      
   
