
   
   
      
         
            No. 140:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               According
to Houston psychiatrist Dr. David Krueger, "Part of the reason so many women
take these types of drugs is that men tend to have trouble admitting they have
a problem." What types of drugs?
            

            by noon ET
Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Tuesday's question (No. 139)--"Notions":
            

            
               Toys, comic books, nail
polish, and jewelry. What's the connection?
            

            "Things John Glenn played
with while the other astronauts were doing actual work."--Jon
Hotchkiss
            

            "Items currently preferred
as currency over the Russian ruble."--Alex Balk
            

            "Oh, God. Is there another
'new look' for Superman on the way?"--Andrew Solovay
            

            "Items that members of the
Blair Cabinet have officially been 'urged to discard.' From their offices,
anyway."--Steve Bodow ( David Rakoff and Dan Ricci had
similar answers.)

            "Tie-in merchandise from
The Siege that Ed Zwick gave to kids at the Al Iman School to 'smooth
things over with the Arab-American community.' "--Daniel Radosh
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            It is, of
course, the juxtaposition of childish amusements and adult ornamentation that
makes this list so pleasingly perverse. Similarly, it is the odd juxtaposition
of references that makes "News Quiz" responses so perversely pleasing: (click
for more, and you really should because there's terrific stuff on Page 2) Susan
Sontag and Michael Jackson's ass, glue sniffing and the ruble, IPOs and Adam
Sandler, MacGyver and 1998. It's the kind of high-low juxtaposition--of
reference, of language, of moral importance--that Woody Allen executes so
wonderfully, such as in this excerpt from "The Scrolls": "Whosoever shall not
fall by the sword or by famine shall fall by pestilence, so why bother
shaving?" Now, sadly, his personal life is itself reduced to a comic
juxtaposition. And if you enjoy that sort of thing, here's a little
juxtaposition game you can play when you spot odd pairings of the bald and the
beautiful; it's a betting game called "Date or Daughter?" Enjoy.

            
               Parochial
Answer
            

            As Daniel Radosh and others
knew, students may not bring any of these items to Al Iman School in Queens,
one of 24 Islamic schools in New Jersey, Long Island, and New York City.

            In New York state, 480,000
students--one in five--attend one of 2,400 registered parochial schools, which
are mostly Catholic or Jewish. Nationwide, about one in 10 of the 50 million
schoolchildren attend religious schools, of which more than 200 are
Islamic.

            On Monday, the U.S. Supreme
Court let stand a ruling permitting taxpayer-financed vouchers to send kids to
Milwaukee parochial schools.

            The court
also let stand a ruling giving royalty rights to the Kingsmen for their 1963
hit recording of "Louie, Louie." But don't try singing it in the halls of Al
Iman.

            
               Dream
Team Extra
            

            Match the
60 Minutes II correspondent with the impressive attribute ascribed to
him or her by gushing executive producer Jeff Fager.

            Dan
Rather

            Bob
Simon

            Vicki
Mabrey

            Charlie Rose

            A. "An
amazing hunger for stories."

            B. "A
workhorse like no other."

            C. "A fresh
face."

            D. "Fishlike
gills that let him breathe underwater."

            E. "The
Beatles of the puppet world."

            F. "A
fatuous worldview expressed in banal language."

            G. "Which one is he
again?"

            

               Answers
            

            A. Charlie
Rose

            B. Dan
Rather

            C. Vicki
Mabrey

            D. Aquaman
(not signed by CBS News)

            E. How
Caroll "Big Bird" Spinney describes the late Jim Henson (not signed by CBS
News, but wouldn't you be more inclined to watch if he were?)

            F. Some wise
guy describing Dan Rather (OK, it was me)

            G. Same wise
guy on Bob Simon

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
