
   
   
      
         
            No. 149:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               Fill in
the blank.
            

            
               The pay is bad, the
hours are irregular, and there's that nettlesome FBI background check. Small
wonder Shirley Phillips says, "Being a ___________ makes one feel subhuman and
as low on the totem pole as one can get."
            

            by noon ET Tuesday to
e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Wednesday's question (No. 148)--"Season's Grating":
            

            
               A family photo, the
single word "Noel," a naked babe draped in colored lights sipping
champagne--there are many styles of holiday card, and now's the time to mail
them. You were invited to describe the Christmas card sure to be sent by a
corporation, world leader, or other personage.
            

            "Cover: 'With best wishes
for the holy season from the missionaries to the pre-born.' Inside: 'You've
just been exposed to anthrax!' "-- Katha Pollitt
            

            "Picture: A still from
Beloved . Message: 'For your consider ... I mean, Happy Holidays. Love,
Oprah.' "-- Daniel Radosh
            

            "From the Philip Morris
Co. Outside Santa's workshop, in subzero temperatures, the elves hang out
during their cigarette break."-- Danny Spiegel
            

            "From Lewis Lapham. No
illustration, just text. Its tone somehow both baleful and bemused, wistful yet
wan. It starts with a quote from either Henry Adams or Alexis de Tocqueville,
and I stop reading it about a quarter of the way through."-- Chris
Kelly
            

            "A damp, illegible Easter
card signed by Boris Yeltsin."-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            A slightly
Lenovian question, perhaps--it's easy to picture him holding up the komedy
kards, then rushing out to buy another kollectible kar--but it was redeemed by
some deft responses. I can only plead holiday malaise. Or seasonal affective
disorder. (It gets dark so early when you lie in bed brooding until 2 in the
afternoon.) Oh, wait, I know what it was--overwork. And then that rush, rush to
get away for the holiday weekend, bustling off to catch the high-speed maglev
train that would whisk me swiftly and economically to the countryside, where,
refreshed by the more historically nuanced brooding of my jolly Chekhovian
family, I'd wander the woods and fields, dodging bullets from hunters too
groggy on turkey tryptophans to distinguish between a deer and a Jew. Or maybe
just groggy enough. Boy could I use a drink purchased at a cash bar.

            
               Home for
the Holidays Extra
            

            Some activities from the most
recent "Weekend" guide in the Reading, Pa., Eagle .

            "Grill Fire Company Bingo.
Free! Coffee, doughnuts, candy, hot chocolate, tea, and dappers to New-comers."
(I'm so full after the coffee, doughnuts, candy, hot chocolate, and tea, I
can't eat a single dapper. Assuming it is something you eat.)

            "Hog Butchering. Landis
Valley Museum will present volunteers for the Landis Valley Cookbook Committee,
in traditional dress, demonstrating the various steps to preparing a hog for
consumption. Skills on display will be: scalding, sausage stuffing, lard
rendering, scrapple making, and much more." (Like after a scalding demo, I'd
even think about more.)

            "Virginville Hotel
All-U-Can-Eat Shepherd's Pie, Pork 'n' Sauerkraut." (It's a heck of a bargain,
but after the scalding and the lard rendering, I've pretty much had a full
evening's porkertainment.)

            "The Reading Comedy Outlet at
the Sheraton Berkshire presents 'Giggles & Ribs,' a comedy Dinner Package."
(I like giggles, and I love ribs, and yet ...)

            "2 nd Story Lounge
Exotic Night Club. 2-for-1 private dances. Closed Thanksgiving. Happy
Thanksgiving!" (So you're saying if I want an inexpensive private dance on
Thanksgiving, too bad for me???)

            "The Deer Chaser Native
American-Lakota Dance Troupe will perform Saturday at noon at the Narvon Valley
Bison Farm, in Lancaster County." (No doubt fascinating, but is it two for
one?)

            "Experience the magic of
Christmas at the Appalachian Pet Farm. Cougars. Bear. Monkey and Reptile room
open." (Christmas isn't Christmas without monkeys and reptiles.)

            Not really a weekend
entertainment but a holiday bargain: The Beer Mart on Morgantown Road
announces, "Beer Makes a Great Gift. Gift Certificates and Variety Packs."
(It's like the gift of the drunken, bloated Magi.)

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
