
   
   
      
         
            Sambo Returns

            It only took a few days of
national publicity to force a North Carolina college to cancel a course on the
theme that American slaves were happy on the plantation. But this idea is
popping up elsewhere: not just among the conservative defenders of the Old
South, but even on the left.

            Edward
Ball, a scion of slave owners, won a National Book Award last week for
Slaves in the Family , a sentimental genealogy of his clan. The book
exudes what Arthur Schlesinger Jr. once called "doughface" liberalism. Ball
marvels that he may possess thousands of black "blood kin" who are descended
from his ancestors' captives. He suggests with a can't-we-all-just-get-along
naiveté that they're really all part of the same family. Slavery's barbarism
gets lost in Ball's New Age journey of self-discovery.

            Meanwhile, new DNA evidence strongly indicates that Thomas
Jefferson did indeed father children by his slave Sally Hemings. Because
Hemings was the half-sister of Jefferson's deceased wife, and because their
relationship may have lasted decades, the story has taken on a romantic
coloration. Historian Eric Foner mocks that it is as if "he and Sally were a
kind of Romeo and Juliet, star-crossed lovers doomed by an inflexible
society."

            The
college course was titled "North Carolina in the War for Southern
Independence." (That's the Civil War to y'all.) At Randolph Community College
in Archdale, N.C., members of the Sons of Confederate Veterans have been
teaching, as the Associated Press reported, that "most slaves were happy in
captivity and that many served as loyal Southern soldiers." According to one
instructor, "These people [i.e., the slaves] loved the South. They weren't
looking for some Yankees to come down here and save them."

            
Any historian can tell you that much of the
Sunny Slavery Scenario is nonsense. Few slaves fought for the Confederacy,
though 180,000 former slaves fought for the North . And slaves did want
the Union army to free them. As Leon Litwack recounts in his copiously
researched Been in the Storm So Long , they rejoiced to the skies when
troops arrived to liberate them. They considered it a deliverance of biblical
proportions.

            Still, leave aside the
course, which was canceled last Thursday after protests from the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People. ("We would never
intentionally set up any class that is offensive to anyone in our community ...
and, obviously, this class has done that," the college's president said.) What
was the true character of bondage in the American South? On that
question, historians have never agreed. Opinions have shifted with the
prevailing political and cultural winds, and the issue remains alive.

            For this,
the left is as responsible as the right. Confederate enthusiasts have made free
use of liberal arguments for academic freedom, tolerance, and multiculturalism.
They say they are just exercising their right to teach their version of events.
("Everybody can celebrate their culture, but we can't," groused another course
instructor.) Left-wing scholars have also done the most work to refute the view
of slavery as a crippling experience.

            Alittle historiography is in order. Not so long ago, the
Randolph Community College view of slaves as happy in their bondage--smiling,
singing "Sambos"--was the dominant view, even among experts. (The "experts," of
course, were whites who in general believed themselves innately superior to
blacks.) Led by the Southern-born Ulrich Phillips, whose American Negro
Slavery (1918) was the standard work in the field for decades, leading
academic historians portrayed slavery as a benevolent, paternalistic
institution that benefited blacks by civilizing them. In this view, it was
whites who suffered under the slave system, since before the Civil War, slavery
had become far less profitable than the North's capitalist labor arrangements.
Yet slave owners selflessly bore this burden so their slaves could enjoy
continued care and goodwill.

            It wasn't
until 1956, when Kenneth Stampp published The Peculiar Institution , that
the historical profession--and the textbooks that take their cues from
it--seriously revised the picture of bondage. Besides cataloging the
brutalities of slave owners, Stampp showed that slaves actually did not
appreciate the experience. He noted their rebelliousness: their efforts to rise
up and throw off their shackles, the ways they cagily resisted their work
requirements, the lengths they went to in feigning contentment to elude
harsh treatment from their masters. The happy Sambo, Stampp claimed, was just a
ruse.

            
Three years later, Stanley Elkins published the
equally monumental Slavery . Though a liberal like Stampp, Elkins
accepted the notion of the docile, contented Sambo--though hardly as evidence
of slavery's mildness. Influenced by the psychoanalyst Bruno Bettelheim's
research showing that the Nazi concentration camps "infantilized" their
inmates, Elkins argued that the "closed system" of slavery was so cruel and
all-encompassing that none but the most stouthearted could survive without
their wills being broken or their psyches damaged. Liberal social scientists
latched onto Elkins' theory as a rationale for creating policies to tear down
the barriers that were impeding black advancement in the 1960s.

            The
sociologist Nathan Glazer reviewed Slavery for Commentary and
gave a copy to his friend Daniel Patrick Moynihan, then an aide to President
Lyndon Johnson. In 1965 came the famous Moynihan report on the condition of
black families. Influenced by Elkins, Moynihan suggested that slavery--and the
barriers to male employment imposed by Jim Crow--had instilled in
African-American culture such recurring features as broken families and
illegitimacy. He called for governmental action to undo the damage.

            Next, left-wing historians rose up to defend black culture
against Moynihan's characterizations. In doing so, they partly absolved
slavery. Herbert Gutman's The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom
1750-1925 (1976) showed that slave families, while often broken up when
members were sold or assigned to different plantations, were remarkably
monogamous and stable. In 1974, the radical historian Eugene Genovese (who has
since become a Catholic conservative) published Roll, Jordan, Roll: The
World the Slaves Made . Now a staple in college history courses, Roll,
Jordan, Roll painted a picture of slaves not as mere victims of oppression
but as creators of a vibrant life. While obviously constrained by their
bondage, blacks nonetheless forged a culture rich with religious observances,
folk tales, family traditions, song, and so on. Genovese transformed the debate
by making slaves, at long last, central and even powerful players in shaping
their own lives.

            Many on the left thrilled to
this portrait. Neither Genovese nor Gutman would ever argue, like the Sons of
Confederate Veterans, that slaves were happy in their condition as slaves. But
they might agree that slaves were sometimes happy despite their
condition as slaves. And it's here that the New Left's scrupulous scholarship
inadvertently dovetails with the right's racist interpretations. Thanks to
Gutman, Genovese, and their left-wing peers, we now know that the notion that
"Slaves Were Happy," as the New York Times headline put it, is not
necessarily false.

            In the early decades of this
century, when racist views were the norm, Phillips' picture of slavery as
benevolent institution held sway. In 1956, Stampp's view of slaves as being
just like whites except for their subjugation reflected the tenets of postwar
liberalism. In the era of black power, New Left assertions that slaves made
their own lives resonated loudly. Today we have a therapeutic culture. The
president champions a touchy-feely "national conversation" on race, defenders
of the Confederacy just want to tell their side of the story, school officials
worry about offending the community, and Ed Ball, inspired by the confirmation
of shared blood, wants to use his book profits to fund interracial dialogue.
Slavery has returned as little more than a failure to communicate.

         
      
   
