
   
   
      
         
            Clinton in Clover

            
               If you missed the most
recent installments of this column, here they are: posted Tuesday, Nov.
3, and Friday, Oct. 30.
            

            President Clinton's stock
rocketed around the world as front pages celebrated the Democrats' success in
the midterm elections. "Revenge" was a very popular word in headlines. "The
Revenge of President Bill Clinton" was Thursday's front-page headline in
Le Monde of Paris.
"Clinton's Revenge," echoed La Repubblica of Rome. Most European newspapers pointed up the
"euphoria" in the stock markets or, as La Repubblica put it, "Sexgate:
Failed Operation." La
Stampa of Turin said, "America Absolves Clinton ... The Bush Dynasty Is
Born."

            In
Germany, the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung led its front page Thursday with the headline "Vote of
Confidence for Clinton in the Congressional Elections: Unexpected Win for the
Democrats," while Munich's Süddeutsche Zeitung announced, "Success for Clinton's Democratic
Party" and highlighted the unseating of Sen. Al D'Amato and the party's "theft"
of California.

            In Britain, the Times, under the headline "Clinton's tactics pay off for
Democrats," reported that "stunned Democrats woke up yesterday to find their
election victories had outstripped their loftiest predictions." Meanwhile, the
conservative Daily
Telegraph downplayed the story with a small front-page reference, which
noted, however, that "the vote, which halved the Republican majority in the
House of Representatives and froze it in the Senate, was the best mid-term
performance by a president's party since the 1930s." The Independent shouted,
"Clinton: 'We turned tide of history,' " while the liberal Guardian confined the story
to Page 2 under the headline "Clinton hails 'vindication.' "

            In India,
the Hindu said
that "the Democrats have held their own in a remarkable fashion," while Japan's
biggest-selling paper, Asahi Shimbun, reported that "the outcome of the US
mid-term elections conveyed a clear message from the voters: politicians should
pay more attention to the livelihood of the people." The South China Morning Post of Hong
Kong used the headline "Clinton joy over historic election gain," while the
Straits Times
of Singapore described the Democrats as the "victors." In the Philippines, the
Manila
Bulletin reported that "women, blacks and Hispanics rallied to support
President Bill Clinton against threatened impeachment" and, in Pakistan, the
daily Dawn said, "Americans
reject Clinton's impeachment."

            
In Australia, the Sydney Morning Herald headlined
"Republicans burning with bitter defeat," while in South Africa the Cape Argus said,
"Hillary's power saves Bill's bacon at polls." In Canada, the Globe and Mail said,
"Republicans vow to press impeachment crusade" and that the Democrats "warn
foes to back off."

            In London, the Financial Times gave much greater
prominence to the U.S. offer of a $5 million reward for information leading to
the arrest of Osama bin Laden. Nevertheless, in an editorial Thursday the paper
said that the midterm elections were a victory for political moderation. It
said, "If the Republican leadership allows the religious right to dominate the
debate, the party will condemn itself to another four years outside the White
House. ... The US public has made clear that it likes to take its politics in
moderation."

            
               Le Monde 's second
front-page story, headlined " 'Indian' or 'whale'? A real ecological dilemma,"
was devoted to a bitter conflict between conservationists and Native American
whale hunters at Neah Bay, northwest of Seattle.

         
      
   
