
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Drawing upon her rich
experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her friends) responds to questions
about manners, personal relations, politics, and other subjects. Please send
your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries should not exceed 200 words in
length. Please indicate how you wish your letter to be signed, preferably
including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               My
girlfriend is intelligent, attractive, and affectionate. Maybe too
affectionate. When we're eating in public she likes to play footsie under the
table. That would be OK--I enjoy playing footsie--but she likes to tease me by
digging her heel into my bare toes (I usually wear sandals), often when I'm
ordering. She then watches me squirm to appear nonchalant in front of our
server. My question is this: How do I gently ask her to "play nice" without
hurting her feelings?
            

            
               --Ouch! That
Hurts!
            

            Dear
Ouch!

            Without hurting her
feelings? It sounds to Prudie like your dominatrix friend is
passive-aggressive, with only a tiny quotient of the passive.

            Prudie
does not like to be bossy, but she strongly suggests you do the following,
since she divines you are not going to change your shoes. Next time Miss
Intelligent, Attractive, and Affectionate decides to stab you with her heel,
scream bloody murder--and don't hold back. You will attract momentary attention
from the other diners, but it will be worth it. (This maneuver is called
sending her neurosis back to her.) If the darling girl asks why you have never
hollered before, simply tell her you were not interested in playing her games,
but now you are.

            --Prudie, poetically

            

               
                  Dearest Prudence,
               
            

            
               How may
a proper person handle the delicate matter of bad breath when happenstance
forces one into consulting with someone on the boss' staff? I don't mean to be
indelicate, but "retching" was very close at hand when that person talked.
Prudie, this vile odor was beyond belief!
            

            
               --Sincerely,Dorothy S.
Shreveport, La.
            

            Dear
Dor,

            Prudie, too, has lived
through this a few times. What she has done is try to seem casual and arrange
her hand so it covers her nose. One wants to be helpful and alert the person,
but it is a very difficult thing to do.

            If it is
more than a passing acquaintance, you might want to risk the person's
embarrassment in order to be helpful, with a remark something like "I hope you
don't take offense, but I feel sure you would want to know that, somehow, your
breath has turned sour," or "your lunch is lingering," or whatever you are
comfortable saying. Granted, it is easier to get away quickly and say
nothing.

            --Prudie, breathlessly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Recently you published a
letter asking if you must use skills not in your job description
just because you have them. This is in fact a legal question. In Virginia, for
an employee of a private company, absent contractual provisions to the
contrary, the answer would be a resounding yes. Not only can employers ask,
they can require it; and if you refuse more than once to do something your
employer has asked just because nobody put it in your job description, you
might even be denied unemployment benefits when they fire you.
            

            
               In my experience,
employers tend to be relatively uninterested in people whining about what
someone else should be doing. In the case of the fellow who wrote, I would give
priority to my own work but help out to the extent that I could without
neglecting my tasks. It is generally safe to check what the boss wants.
            

            
               This
is not legal advice, do not rely upon it. If you have a problem seek the advice
of an attorney, usual disclaimers, etc., etc.
            

            
               --AEG
            

            Dear
AE,

            Thank you
for your expertise about employment law, at least in Virginia. The wild card
you may have overlooked is that our computer-expert correspondent was not being
asked by his boss to help everybody. Instead, co-workers themselves were
falling on his neck seeking help. In addition to job description issues, our
writer was trying to determine where good-guyness intersected with doormathood.
And you raise a pertinent point for Prudie: She is not practicing either
law or psychological counseling. She is merely advising 
                  Slate
               
readers who want an outside, unbiased opinion from one of Mr. Kinsley's
minions.

            --Prudie,
nonprofessionally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am a big fan of your
column and, generally speaking, a supporter of the "always leave 'em wanting
more" school of thought regarding product such as yours. However, while I am
consistently impressed by the high quality of your responses, I must
admit I am somewhat underwhelmed by the quantity of your output. Four
letters once a week? (Or thereabouts.) That's it?

            
               It's
not as if you were being printed on a paper medium of limited dimension, where
space issues would be an important consideration. In the realm of cybermedia,
you have unlimited space in which to work--yet you limit yourself. I ask that
you consider expanding the scope of your pleasant palaver, to the enrichment of
us all. After all, Ann Landers and sister Abby give it to us daily with no
diminution of quality or reader interest. You are no less than they.
            

            
               --Sign me, Wanting More
in Rosamond, Calif.
            

            Dear
Want,

            You are
kind to want to see All Prudie All the Time, but 
                  Slate
                is a
banquet table of offerings. We would not want to overdose on the problems of

                  Slate
                readers, would we? As for your reference to Ann Landers and
her sister, Prudie has particular regard for Ms. Landers, and delights in the
observation of many that she resembles her ... though Prudie, of course, is
somewhat younger.

            --Prudie,
appreciatively

         
      
   
