
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Drawing upon her rich
experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her friends) responds to questions
about manners, personal relations, politics, and other subjects. Please send
your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries should not exceed 200 words in
length. Please indicate how you wish your letter to be signed, preferably
including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Please don't laugh. I
have a dilemma about being a house guest. It is to flush or not to flush. When
I stayed with an old schoolmate on a business trip, it was in her small
apartment with only one bathroom. Her room was on one side of the loo, and mine
was on the other. I had to go to the bathroom in the early dawn and was torn
about whether to risk waking her with the noise of the flush or protecting the
silence (and trying to catch up with it in the morning, before she
did).
            

            
               What
would Prudie advise?
            

            
               --Hamlet in the
WC
            

            Dear
Ham,

            Prudie is
not laughing, she is merely smiling with recognition, having had to consider
the same question on occasion. Decorum and politesse dictate that you opt for
the flush. An exception might be if your host or hostess has mentioned being an
extremely light sleeper who, once awakened, is unable to fall back asleep. An
alternative if you simply can't bring yourself to push the handle down in the
middle of the night would be to put a Post-It note on the closed lid advising,
"Please flush." Admittedly this may call for more wakefulness than one may have
given the hour and the circumstance. If you choose silence and can't deal with
the Post-It note, mention your concerns the next morning.

            --Prudie, unflushingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               How
long should you date a man before deciding if he is right for you?
            

            
               --Bewildered in
D.C.
            

            Dear Be,

            There can
be no specified time after which you know if you've found the right partner.
Some people make a good selection almost immediately, just as others can take a
very long time to make a colossal mistake. The romance gods are fickle. Prudie
knows this from experience.

            --Prudie, romantically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               As a
straight male living in Dupont Circle in Washington, I have had the same
problem as "Dimmer." A good friend, staring at a similar blonde, asked how he
could figure this out fast. I responded with the best indicators I know. Feet,
hands, Adam's apple. Almost never fails.
            

            
               --Steve, Singly
            

            Dear
Steve,

            Thank you
on behalf of Prudie's male readers who feel they might fall into the
transvestite trap. It must be true: Takes one to know one ... a man, that
is.

            --Prudie,
tellingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Because
of my healthy appetite, I am quite fond of all-you-can-eat, buffet style
restaurants. My question is: How much should you tip the wait staff? They don't
take your order or bring your food, but they do bring drinks, remove dishes,
and deliver the check. Your advice will be greatly appreciated.
            

            
               --Perpetually Hungry in
L.A.
            

            Dear
Perp,

            Since the
service you receive is not that of a regular restaurant, you might wish to
leave the tipping equivalent of an honorarium. Perhaps 10 percent of your bill
would be correct.

            --Prudie,
expansively

         
      
   
