
   
   
      
         
            All You Can Eat

            It is a truth universally
acknowledged that a man in possession of a good fortune should not upon
returning from his honeymoon let his wife work out at the gym with Jerry
Seinfeld. This is the lesson learned by Broadway theater heir, Eric
Nederlander, 32, when a week after coming back to New York from a honeymoon in
Italy, his new wife Jessica Sklar, 26, met Seinfeld, 44, at the Reebok Sports
Club. Before the newlyweds had time to unpack all their new china, the
National Enquirer and the Star had photo spreads of Sklar and
Seinfeld around town in full lip lock. According to the Globe ,
Nederlander--who will now save a fortune on anniversary gifts--contemplated an
alienation of affection suit against the comedian but finally decided to simply
file for divorce. The publication also reveals why Seinfeld would behave so
perfidiously: He hadn't had "good sex" since last year when he broke up with
his young girlfriend Shoshanna Lonstein.

            The tabs
also tout the "shocking" resemblance between the two women but are
uncharacteristically restrained in neglecting to mention that there is one (or,
more accurately, two) crucial difference in the physiques of slender Jessica
and bounteously well-endowed Shoshanna. Shoshanna, who became a tabloid
celebrity in her own right by dating Seinfeld while she was still in high
school, has recently launched her own line of lingerie.

            Lingerie, says the Globe , will be the focus of
Monica Lewinsky's next career move: It reports that she would like to confer
with Hollywood madam Heidi Fleiss--who had her own lingerie company--when her
fellow Santa Monica College alumna gets out of jail. The Globe does not
reveal if Monica's merchandise will come pre-stained.

            There is,
not surprisingly, even more Lewinsky news. According to the Enquirer ,
during her affair with Clinton, Secret Service agents feared her more than they
did a possible assassin. Citing grand jury testimony, the publication describes
how, last Christmas, the "Secret Service became frantic about the possibility
of Monica turning up at a White House holiday reception hosted by the First
Lady and attended by some 400 guests." An employee in the White House social
office testified that an agent at the party, upon discovering Lewinsky's name
on the guest list, rushed up to the employee and said, "We have to find her
before Mrs. Clinton sees her." It is presumed the agent was successful as there
are no reports that either Hillary or Monica tried to dunk the other's head in
the wassail bowl.

            
Of even greater concern to the Secret Service
were the times the temperamental Lewinsky spent alone with the president. The
Enquirer reports that agent Steven Pape told the grand jury of a
conversation he had with another agent. "If she [Monica] was going to do any
harm to the President ... I said she would do the--you know-- it would be
something along the lines of Lorena Bobbitt, if she was going to hurt him." Had
that happened, MSNBC would have had to change the name of The White House in
Crisis to The President's Penis Is Missing .

            But even
that is not as shocking as the photos all three tabloids have run of Lewinsky
in exercise clothes. Since she was last seen in public, the former White House
intern has ballooned to almost 180 pounds. She has joined a gym and has hired a
$75 an hour personal trainer to help her peel off 55 pounds, reports the
Star . Now imagine how much more happiness and how much less heartache
there would be in the world if only Jerry Seinfeld liked full-figured gals, and
Monica Lewinsky, not Jessica Sklar, had joined the Reebok Sports Club.

            As inverse images of the wages of fame, Lewinsky and
Ally McBeal star Calista Flockhart make a perfect pair. Under pressure,
Lewinsky has expanded. Meanwhile, Flockhart has shrunk. So shocking is her
appearance that the tabs, which luridly chronicle every celebrity chin waddle
and thigh dimple, are now expressing concern about her and other stick figure
actresses. According to the Star the 5 foot 6 inch actress is down to 95
pounds, having lost about 15 pounds in the past year. She is so weak from
dieting and compulsive exercising that the show's producers have cut back on
her screen time, says the publication. Flockhart and her representatives deny
she has an eating disorder. The actress even called a Los Angeles radio station
to say that she enjoys gorging on junk food. Such denials are usually a prelude
to hospitalization, recovery, and a tearful interview with Oprah, Barbara, or
Diane.

            The tabs
also report that two celebrity spouses couldn't quite wait until their dearly
beloved's bodies were fully cold before finding that they could learn to love
again. A few months ago at the funeral of singer Tammy Wynette, her fifth
husband George Richey--perhaps stealing some moves from the finale of a James
Brown concert--had to be repeatedly held up by friends to keep from collapsing.
He even threatened to take the body of his dead wife home. Perhaps he could
have stashed her in the backseat of her Rolls Royce, which, according to the
Globe , he has now given to his new girlfriend, a former Dallas Cowboys
cheerleader 30 years his junior. And Rep. Mary Bono, R-Calif., the widow of
Sonny, started dating nine months after his skiing accident death. Mary, who
won Sonny's congressional seat, has been seeing Brian Prout, drummer for
country group Diamond Rio, reports the Star . Although the congresswoman
says, "I feel like this weight has been lifted off of me," Bono's mother calls
the relationship "disgusting." But, according to the Globe , there may be
more heartbreak in the widow's future. It reports that Prout is a "womanizer
with more notches on his bedpost than Casanova." The Globe even says
that the drummer is already romancing a Nashville waitress.

            
And a book that is portraying the late Princess
Diana as neurotic, jealous, and out of control is causing new grief for Prince
Charles and his lover Camilla Parker Bowles. They have released a joint
statement denying any involvement with Charles: Victim or Villain? , the
Enquirer reports, but royal watchers say the author, Penny Junor, would
not have won the cooperation of so many of their friends without the couple's
tacit approval. The book charges that Diana was the first to cheat (with her
bodyguard), that she used to call Parker Bowles and make death threats, and
that Charles was relieved when she died. But Diana may yet get her revenge. The
Globe relays a "startling report transmitted on the world-wide internet"
that Diana has been cloned by a "mad scientist" and that the baby will be born
by the end of the year at a secret laboratory on an island off the coast of
China.

            The tabs
are getting fed up with women who have become rich and famous by telling
everyone else how to be better. All three tabs have run stories about the nude
photos of Dr. Laura Schlessinger, 51, radio host and moral arbiter, that have
appeared on the Internet. The Globe reports that at first Schlessinger
claimed the more than 20-year-old photos were not of her. She subsequently
filed suit claiming that she owned the photos, and they were temporarily taken
off the Web site. The photos were released by Bill Ballance, 80, a former radio
talk show host who says he and Schlessinger were once lovers, who, in his
memorable phrase, used to thrash around "like a couple of crazed weasels."

            And the Globe is at the forefront of an anti-Oprah
Winfrey backlash this week with the story "Oprah Revolt! Fans charge: You're
too big for your britches!" Actually, part of the problem is that fans liked
the talk show host better when she was bigger britched, before she became the
Vogue cover model. They are also sick of her constant preaching on
self-improvement, says the publication. One "insider" at her production company
is quoted as saying, "Oprah's always been religious, but she's gone overboard
thinking she's been given a specific mission on Earth."

            If Oprah's not safe, no one
is. To prove it, the Enquirer reports that the ghost of mild-mannered
Ozzie Nelson is haunting his former Hollywood home. He's a very friendly ghost.
The publication says female residents wake in the middle of the night when they
feel the late Ozzie nuzzling their necks. Sounds like a premise for a
sitcom.

         
      
   
