
   
   
      
         
            Blinkmanship

            Saturday, an hour before
U.S. planes and missiles were scheduled to attack Iraq, Saddam Hussein
apparently surrendered. In a letter to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
Saddam announced that Iraq would allow U.N. weapons inspectors to resume their
work in Iraq, which Saddam had previously halted. With that, President Clinton
decided that the purpose of the U.S. attack--to punish Saddam's refusal to
cooperate with the inspectors--had been rendered moot. So Clinton called off
the attack.

            Pundits
spent the next two days questioning Clinton's judgment and manhood. They
accused him of "flinching" and letting Saddam start and stop confrontations as
though the United States were "on a yo-yo." "Does anyone seriously believe that
Iraq backed down and not the United States?" asked Bill Kristol on ABC's
This Week . "It was a chance finally to take decisive action, and the
president blinked." On CNN's Late Edition , Susan Page said Clinton was
having trouble explaining "why it isn't the United States who blinked." "Which
one blinked?" asked the front-page headline in Monday's New York Times .
"Diddled again," answered the headline over William Safire's column. "It didn't
take much for Saddam Hussein to get the attack called off, did it?" scoffed
Brit Hume on Fox News Sunday . "We're letting Saddam Hussein drive our
policy."

            This criticism has two parts: "blink" and "yo-yo." The
blink critique assumes that the purpose of preparing the attack was to complete
it and thereby hurt Iraq. But suppose Clinton's deeper purpose is--as he
says--to control and eliminate Saddam's weapons of mass destruction. And
suppose he believes--as he says he does--that the best way to do this is
through the weapons inspections, not through a military assault. In that case,
once Saddam agreed to let the inspections resume, the truly resolute course was
to accept the offer and call off the attack.

            The yo-yo
critique focuses on predictability. First Clinton authorized the attack because
Saddam had halted the weapons inspections. Then, when Saddam allowed the
inspections to resume, Clinton called off the attack. The yo-yo charge implies
that Clinton is letting Saddam manipulate him. What this metaphor nicely
obscures is the rationality behind Clinton's predictability. Yo-yos and other
objects follow laws of nature. Humans follow laws of our own making. We've even
invented a name for these laws: "principles." Clinton's principle is that the
inspections must resume. When Saddam violates that principle, Clinton will
attack. When Saddam yields to the same principle, Clinton will not attack. Yes,
Saddam can choose the outcome, just as you can choose your fate by deciding how
to answer a mugger who says, "Your money or your life." But do you really
imagine that you're the one in control?

            
This is what Clinton tried to explain at his
press conference on Sunday, "Our willingness to strike ... produced the outcome
we preferred: Saddam Hussein reversing course, letting the inspectors go back
to work without restrictions or conditions." The press wasn't buying it. "What
do you say to the criticism that Saddam Hussein is jerking the United States
around, that he is able to provoke a crisis and then end it on his timetable?"
one reporter asked National Security Adviser Sandy Berger. "Don't you think in
the Arab world they're going to look at it and say, 'OK, Saddam won again?' "
asked another. Berger could only reply in exasperation that Saddam had
"capitulated" on the key issue of weapons inspections. "We have to be able to
take yes for an answer," he pleaded.

            The
pundits, captive to the geopolitics of machismo, think saying yes is easy. But
when everyone wants you to say no, saying yes is hard. Yo-yos can't do it.
Neither can cruise missiles. That's why we have presidents.

            
               Recent
"Frame Games"
            

            "Cannibalism": The
House coup is taking the GOP in the wrong direction. (posted Tuesday, Nov.
10, 1998)
            

            "The C Word": The
1998 election didn't kill conservatism. The postelection analysis did.
(posted Friday, Nov. 6, 1998)
            

         
      
   
