
   
   
      
         
            A Question for Ken Starr

            When Independent Counsel
Kenneth Starr testifies before the House Judiciary Committee Thursday morning,
the committee could surprise everyone and accomplish something tangible in the
first minute. Chairman Henry Hyde--or, as is more likely, a committee member
from the Democratic side--should ask him the following:

            "Mr.
Starr, I want to give you a chance to clear your name on the serious accusation
made against you by the judge presiding over your grand jury. As you know,
Judge Norma Holloway Johnson has ruled that there is a prima facie case that
you or your office illegally leaked information to the press in 24 instances
involving 11 different news organizations, and you have filed a sworn affidavit
denying those leaks. You have maintained that any communications from you or
your deputy, Jackie Bennett--who has been identified as your conduit to the
press--were completely proper. You've argued strenuously that neither you nor
Mr. Bennett released any information pertaining to grand jury proceedings.

            
W"e all appreciate the need for reporters to
keep their sources of information confidential if they have promised
confidentiality. But news sources are free to release reporters from this
obligation, and that is what I am asking you to do today. "

            So,
would you be willing, right here today, under oath, to tell all the reporters,
producers, and editors for each of the 11 news organizations with whom you or
Mr. Bennett are alleged to have spoken that you hereby release them from any
promises they or people working with them made to you or to Mr. Bennett to keep
any communications between them and you confidential? And will you, right here,
right now, direct Mr. Bennett to release them from any such promises made to
him?

            
"Finally, I would like your assurance, under
oath, that neither you nor Mr. Bennett have ever discussed with these reporters
how they might protect your confidentiality even if you did have to release
them publicly from any promises. This way, these reporters could be asked
exactly what Mr. Bennett and you told them and they could answer honestly
without violating any pledges of confidentiality.

            "If
you've been unfairly accused, as you insist, sir, you should want these
reporters to talk freely and honestly about what you and Mr. Bennett did or did
not tell them. And, of course, if you never leaked anything illegally to them
and never swore them to confidentiality, there is no harm in releasing them
from a promise they never made."

            
If Starr hems and haws (or refuses to address
the pivotal question of Bennett), we'll know that he and Bennett are not
willing to put their denials to the test. If Starr agrees and is willing to
follow up with a letter to these reporters, the committee--or the investigator
Judge Johnson has appointed to find out about the leaks--could then question
the reporters. The questioning would not be the kind of "who were your sources"
fishing expedition that should trouble anyone who worries about a free press.
Rather, the only question would be "What did Mr. Bennett and Mr. Starr tell you
in connection with each of these stories?"

            Starr and Bennett have
repeatedly claimed that they have nothing to worry about if these or any other
reporters reveal their conversations.

            This would be a quick,
simple, and (unless Starr and Bennett are lying) harmless way to settle a
troublesome issue.

            
               Steven Brill
responds to a flood of anonymous e-mail generated by this piece in "E-Mail to the
Editors."
            

         
      
   
