
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Virtually all the
e-mail Slate receives is signed. However, in recent days, Slate
has been flooded with unsigned e-mail responding to the Steven Brill article on
Kenneth Starr. We are unable to respond individually to this mass of letters,
so here is Steven Brill's general response:
            

            
               First,
my question for Ken Starr has nothing to do with the president's guilt or
innocence. Obviously, the president's disgraceful and probably unlawful conduct
is more important than Starr's, but that does not make Starr's apparent
breaking of the law irrelevant. Second, it's hilarious to hear people say about
Starr's leaks--as I never did and never would with regard to the
president--that breaking a law isn't important because everyone does it, at the
same time that they ridicule the notion that lying under oath about sex would
be OK because lots of people have, or would, do it.
            

            
               A
Question for Bill
            

            Re
"A Question
for Ken Starr": In all fairness, let's put Bill Clinton to the same measure
of scrutiny.

            -- Donald E.
Dunn Clinton, Tenn.

            

               Definition of Leak?
            

            In "A
Question for Ken Starr," Steven Brill's brilliant writing says nothing that the
Clintons' spin hasn't stated from Day 1: "Let us seek to destroy anyone that
speaks in a negative regard about the Clintons." Kenneth Starr has done the job
asked by the courts. Perhaps now that the Clintons have managed to get the
tables turned by using the very press that acted like piranhas in getting the
story and displaying it on our TV screens for months and even hours, Starr
should exercise some of the Bill Clinton "dumb" defense and reply to the
questions proposed by Brill with the wisdom of "It depends on how you define
'leak' "?

            -- Joe Black Tyler,
Texas

            
               Heavy
Gamblers?
            

            Re David
Plotz's Nov. 12 article "Sin City 1, Puritans 0": I am 253 pounds of big-eating
ex-football player. I am also, generally, against gambling. So much for your
theory.

            -- Lowell Mick
White Austin, Texas

            
               Genetic
Burden
            

            I could
not believe what I read in the last paragraph of 
                  Slate
               's Nov. 11
"Today's Papers." To say that finding a genetic link to a "Founding
Father" will bring forth a feeling of patriotic pride in alienated minorities
is absurd. How can you overlook the fact that this "link" is a result of one
race's dominion over another in the form of slavery? Where is the pride in
that? I cannot overlook the fact that this link is a result of slavery. How
could you?

            -- Roxanna Vanessa
Alvarado Culver City, Calif.

            
               Full of
It
            

            As one
who put in an order at Amazon.com and only just received the book (via FedEx)
two days ago, can't I get a chance to read A Man in Full before it's
analyzed to death? A quick 
                  Slate
                search on the subject has
returned eight articles containing the title, though you are certainly not the
only ones on the bandwagon. It seems I can't glance at the New York
Times without seeing an article on Tom Wolfe or his latest work. I suppose
the last straw was seeing that you have a "Book Club" debate on the subject. It's a pretty hefty tome, and
I've never been a particularly fast reader. Can you give some of us a chance
before giving it all away?

            -- Ryan
Kriger Brookline, Mass.

            
               
                  New
York Times Book Review (Yawn)
            

            In his Nov. 14 critique of
the New York Times Book Review titled "A Hundred Years of
Lassitude," Jacob Weisberg ignores the biggest reason that it is so boring.
(I agree with him on this point!) It is boring because many readers couldn't
care less about 70 percent of the books it reviews. The NYTBR has become
heavily weighted in favor of reviews of nonfiction over fiction. Nonfiction
works generally appeal to small groups of academics/devotees of any particular
subject, and those people are likely to read the books regardless of what the
NYTBR says.

            While the
New York Times is perhaps more literate than other newspapers, it is,
nonetheless, a general circulation newspaper and not an academic journal. In a
general circulation newspaper I expect reviews of books that are, or
potentially are, of interest to a broad range of readers. I don't think that
means having to pander to the Oprah crowd. Many fine works of fiction go
undiscovered every year. The NYTBR would be better served reviewing
those.

            -- John
Zimmatore Atlanta

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
