
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

            

               Extramarital Chatter
            

            Not only did Timothy Noah's
Nov. 2 "Chatterbox" contain major factual errors, the comparisons it drew
between the present-day situation and that of Thomas Jefferson is very
disheartening. There are fewer similarities than this rush to analyze and spin
realizes.

            Most glaring was Noah's
statement regarding the basis for his conclusion. "Chatterbox bases this on the
confirmation of his extramarital affair with Sally Hemings." This was not an
extramarital affair under any circumstances. Jefferson's wife, Martha, was
deceased. This makes "extramarital" very difficult. In addition, Hemings was
the half-sister of Jefferson's wife. Jefferson and Hemings engaged in a
long-term, and perhaps monogamous, relationship for almost 30 years! She even
accompanied him during his tenure in France. Where is the correlation to our
modern day president?

            I find it easier to
understand Noah's claims of Jeffersonian hypocrisy. However, even a minute
understanding of Jeffersonian history would inform Noah that scholars for
decades have considered the inconsistencies among Jefferson's statements and
actions a hot topic for study.

            Your
inaccurate presentation of history is dangerous. Slow down, take a deep breath,
and be careful if you plan to play historian.

            -- David
Starmer
            

            Charlottesville, Va.

            
               Timothy
Noah replies: Mr. Starmer is right. I am wrong. The item has been
corrected.
            

            
               Connector
Pork
            

            In "Foghorn Leghorn Meets
an Owl," David Plotz states, "Inglis is so principled, in fact, that he
votes against funding pork projects in his own district. In one famous
case, Inglis helped kill federal funding for a needed highway, requiring the
state to build a toll road instead. He has not been forgiven."

            I have certainly forgiven Bob
Inglis. I'm a native New Yorker who relocated to Greenville, S.C., 10 years
ago. In the eyes of my conservative neighbors I am a liberal--I consistently
vote Democratic and will probably vote for Fritz Hollings. The one thing that
inclines me to vote for Inglis is his attempts to kill the Southern Connector
(the "needed highway" of Plotz's example).

            If there ever was a highway
project that could be defined as pork, it's the Southern Connector. It's a
highway connecting two areas already well connected to the Interstate Highway
System, and will only benefit people traveling from the area southwest of
Greenville to the area southeast of Greenville, and vice versa. Those two areas
are already connected by I-85 and I-385. It seems to me an unnecessary expense
to spend many millions of dollars to reduce a few people's travel time by five
minutes. The only people in Greenville who support the Southern Connector are
the highway contractors who will benefit financially from the project.

            While I
disagree with Inglis' social agenda, I must admit it's nice to have a
representative who recognizes that there is no such thing as good pork.

            -- Al
Vyssotsky
            

            Greenville, S.C.

            
               The King
and Microsoft
            

            It might
be useful to your readers of the Nov. 2 "Explainer" to know the reason that "actions in equity" don't get a
jury trial. Cases in chancery or equity were/are different from suits brought
under the law. In a lawsuit, you are relying on established rights that the
king had laid down; the jurors used to be 12 men from the community who
were "familiar" with the subject and who, when shown or told what the statute
said, could make a fair decision and resolve the controversy. Chancery matters
were more like personal problems taken up before the king or his chancellor
(chief-of-staff-type guy). In these cases, you were asking the king for a
specific, particularized kind of help (a divorce, apportionment of an estate,
etc.), and the king's ruling was more narrowly applied to you. So, for example,
in this case, the government's lawyers want the chancellor/judge to enjoin or
forbid certain Microsoft practices or conduct. You can't point to a bright-line
rule to make the decision; rather, the judge is asked to weigh the equities and
say, "This or that doesn't seem fair to me, and so I order you to do
differently." In law, you say, "The contract/statute/what-have-you says your
remedy is X." In chancery, you say, "This seems about right to me."

            -- Dianne
Carr
            

            Gloucester, Va.

            
               Good
Lord!
            

            Regarding
the Oct. 29 "Today's Papers," I'm afraid you misunderstand how the British legal
system operates. The appeal is not to the House of Lords, with its mixture of
hereditary and appointed-for-life peers (the hereditary part is soon to be
swept away by New Labor). The appeal goes to the law lords who sit in the House
of Lords. They are our equivalent of the Supreme Court and are made up of the
country's most distinguished judges. Their average age is similar to the
Supreme Court justices' (which makes them relatively "aging," as you would
expect), but it is a mistake to think they are necessarily "conservative." In
fact, they are pretty liberal these days--though it does not follow that
Pinochet will lose the appeal.

            -- Andrew
Neil
            

            Editor in
chief, the European , the Scotsman , and Sunday Business
            

            London

            
               
                  Blue
Peter Is Big
            

            Reading
the Alan Brinkley-Sarah Lyall "Breakfast Table" on the subject of British press provincialism, I
was horrified to see your American correspondents describe a Blue Peter
presenter (recently fired for snorting coke) as a "minor celebrity." Excuse me.
A Blue Peter presenter is not a minor celebrity. Blue Peter is
huge. Damn near every English person between the ages of six and 10 watches
that show every week! A Blue Peter presenter is England's Judy Garland,
England's Ron Howard--all six Brady kids rolled into one! It's a deeply lodged
part of the national psyche, and the repository of all manner of naughty
pre-adolescent longings! Twenty years on, I can still recite verbatim an
ingeniously laconic love poem sent to a Blue Peter presenter of my
youth: "Lesley Judd is really fantastic,/ Doing her nut with sticky-back
plastic." (You had to have been there, I guess.) In short, I doubt many
foreigners have heard of Mr. Rogers, but if he were caught snorting coke, I
rather think it would be considered news.

            

               --Larissa MacFarquhar
            

            Baltimore

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
