
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Nov. 21
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Nov. 21, 1998)
            

            The
cover editorial deplores America's habit of legislating by
lawsuits instead of laws. Class-action lawsuits against tobacco companies have
led to regulation and taxation while bypassing the democratic process. Next up:
guns. Mayors in Chicago, New Orleans, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, and San
Francisco are now--or soon will be--filing suits against the gun industry.
... A story says the Russian army is a farce. With no direction, no
discipline, and no food to feed its soldiers, the military is falling apart.
Modern fighting requires "small armies of ready-to-go professionals," not a
huge band of untrained, hungry lugs. Soldiers may soon start looting; a
military coup would be likely if the army could ever organize itself.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Dec. 7
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Nov. 20, 1998)
            

            Two
articles argue that, in lieu of attacking, America's best option with Iraq is
to support a rebel insurrection. Saddam Hussein himself is our primary problem,
and rebels are our best bet for getting rid of him. "Providing military support
for the main opposition group, the Iraqi National Congress, is a high-risk
gamble, but it could deliver a high payoff: ending the Saddam problem, solving
the Gulf security conundrum, and relieving Israel's fear of attack from the
east." ... A story warns that American universities are relying too much
on adjunct faculty. Part-time professors are poorly paid, overworked, and don't
have time to devote to students.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Nov. 22
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Nov. 19, 1998)
            

            The cover
story marvels at the resurgence of Prince Charles. After Diana's death,
disgruntled pundits wanted to pass over the adulterous Charles and make his son
William heir to the throne. But by hiring a PR firm to manage his image, wooing
reporters with occasional jokes, and bonding with Prime Minister Tony Blair,
Charles has staged an astounding revival. The Brits now appreciate his many
good works and his affectionate fathering. The story hints that Charles does
not much like his cold parents. The author gets a rare private interview with
the prince and confirms that Charles does have "large ears, as advertised."
... An article traces a family of impassioned Albanian gun-running
fighters from Brooklyn, N.Y., to Kosovo, where they support the rebel Kosovo
Liberation Army against Serbian oppression. Among the poignant details from the
war: In Albania, Kalashnikov rifles are hidden in watermelons; and in Kosovo,
KLA guerillas are so poor they have to eat toothpaste.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , Nov. 23
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 17, 1998)
            

            Despite the near-attacks on
Iraq, Time and Newsweek run soft covers: herbal medicine in
Time and "super" cars in Newsweek . Time 's cover piece ("It's great business, but is it good for what ails
us?") says herbal remedies can work--Saint Johnswort does cure some folks' mild
depression--but herbs also have nasty side effects. (Saint Johnswort makes your
skin sensitive to sunlight.) Stunning statistic: Americans now visit
alternative-medicine practitioners more often than they visit family doctors.
Time also advises readers how they can profit from the herbal craze:
Buy stock in General Nutrition and Whole Foods Market. Newsweek 's
cover package ("Does Bill Ford Have a Better Idea?") says the
future of cars is fuel-cell engines--they use hydrogen, and their only waste is
water. But don't expect them for a few decades. Until gas costs more, consumers
won't pay the premium for enviro-friendly vehicles.

            
               Time reports on a new
study showing that kids have less free time than ever before: They spend most
of their waking hours on school, homework, and organized sports. Good news:
Kids watch less television. Bad news: "Unstructured play encourages independent
thinking and allows the young to negotiate their relationships with their
peers, but kids ages 3 to 12 spent only 12 hours a week engaged in it."

            

               Newsweek exposes how far the pro wrestling industry will go to keep fans
interested. Pro wrestling used to be merely fake athletic spectacle. Now it is
fake athletic spectacle in which participants are expected to display sexism,
homophobia, and sociopathic behavior. Fans as young as 7 years old cheer a
wrestler who "bases his character on the size of his sexual apparatus" and boo
a "gay" tag team called "Too Much."

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Nov. 23
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 17, 1998)
            

            The
cover story hails forthcoming vaccines. Recent insights into how
our immune system works are making vaccines more effective. Reliable AIDS
vaccines could be ready within a decade; cancer vaccines are further off but
possible. Soon vaccines will be administered by pill, mouthwash, or genetically
altered foods. ... A story says the military is admitting dumber recruits. Needing to
fill vacancies at a time of low unemployment, the armed forces are letting in
more candidates who score unacceptably low on the military's intelligence
tests. Luckily, most of these recruits will clean and cook.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Nov. 23
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 17, 1998)
            

            An essay
says Washington is out of control. Partisan sniping has become more vicious and
personal because of the transformation of parties from fragile coalitions into
ideological groups. From Robert Bork to Clarence Thomas to John Tower to Jim
Wright to Bill Clinton, recent politics has centered on "ethics" and brutal
name-calling. The press encourages this, as there is "considerable peer
pressure to stay cynical." No solution is in sight. ... A story defends
J.P. Morgan, the man, not the bank. Ninety years ago, Americans thought he'd
engineered the panic of 1907 for his own benefit. In fact, Morgan worked
tirelessly to save the American economy, which was near collapse, and he
benefited little from his strenuous efforts to keep banks solvent. In fact,
Morgan was a straight shooter, an art enthusiast, and a decent chap.

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
