
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Nov. 7
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Nov. 7, 1998)
            

            The
cover editorial marvels that President Clinton has been
shown to be "a liar and a philanderer" yet "still he comes back laughing." But
Republicans should pursue impeachment, regardless of the election results: "If
they believed that they had grounds for an inquiry, it should be a thorough
one, for this election has no effect on those grounds." ... An essay says our two-party system is dissolving, especially at the
state level. Republicans and Democrats look more and more like each other. GOP
governors such as George W. Bush and Tommy Thompson are the leading edge of
this movement. State voters don't care about parties: They just want
politicians who get the job done. ... The Economist , marking its
"Science and Technology" section's 20 th anniversary, offers a
challenging science quiz. Question No. 2: "What is unusual about the sheep on
the Scottish island of Foula? a) They eat sea birds. b) They eat seaweed. c)
They eat each other." If you are going take the quiz, stop reading now. The answer is a).

            
               
                  New
Republic , Nov. 23
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Nov. 6, 1998)
            

            The lead
article in the election cover package heralds the onset of "liberal
centrism"--cautious reform pegged to New Deal themes. Similarly, the cover
editorial attributes the election results to a groundswell of American
moderatism: Most people are happy, so why vote for radical changes? ...

               TNR criticizes pols on both sides of the campaign finance debate. One
article warns Democrats (notably soft money spurning Sen. Russell Feingold, the
narrow victor in Wisconsin) not to obscure "real" themes by overemphasizing
campaign finance reform. Another piece raps Republican National Senatorial
Committee Chairman Mitch McConnell for allowing money to substitute for good
politics.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Nov. 8
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Nov. 5, 1998)
            

            The cover
story profiles George C. Wolfe, the producer at New York's Joseph Papp Public
Theater. Wickedly smart, acid tongued, and black, Wolfe deeply intimidates
actors, choreographers, and theater honchos. Last year Wolfe battled kidney
failure and won. This year he's stubbornly producing an expensive and risky
version of On the Town , despite severe doubts in the industry that the
musical could ever be a success. ... A fascinating story describes and
denounces solitary confinement, a punishment now inflicted on 8 percent to 10
percent of prison inmates. Out of their cells for just one hour a day, the
inmates grow slowly insane and even more violent and unstable than when they
entered prison. Many psychologists believe the treatment is inhumane. Wardens
disagree. ... A story profiles famous horse race prognosticator Andrew
Beyer. Beyer, the racing columnist for the Washington Post , dropped out
of Harvard to follow horses and invented a race analysis system that
revolutionized horse play.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , Nov. 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 3, 1998)
            

            
               Time 's cover package attacks corporate welfare: "In some ways, it
represents pork-barrel legislation of the worst order. The difference, of
course, is that instead of rewarding the poor, it rewards the powerful." In
Philadelphia, the government subsidized a shipyard to the tune of $323,000 per
job--the jobs themselves will pay about $50,000 each. Corporate welfare lets
politicians claim they've created new jobs while wasting your tax money. The
package is by populist muckrakers Donald Barlett and James Steele, who won fame
and notoriety for their 1996 Philadelphia 
               Inquirer series
"America: Who Stole the Dream?" ... 
               Newsweek 's cover
package surveys hot new tech towns. New Silicon Valleys have sprouted in
places such as Boise, Idaho; Cambridge, England; and Bangalore, India. Keys to
tech success: nearby research institutions, an educated talent pool,
free-flowing venture capital, and that Valley-style, go-for-broke,
entrepreneurial spirit.

            

               Time notes the rising popularity of Web "palaces." Palaces let animated "avatars"--characters
Netizens create for themselves--interact in a graphic environment. When you
type words, they appear in a thought bubble above your avatar's head. Current
popular palaces: The South Park palace and, you guessed it, porn
sites.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Nov. 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 3, 1998)
            

            The
cover story reports on new DNA tests confirming that Thomas
Jefferson fathered at least one child by his slave Sally Hemings. Many Hemings
descendants were unaware of any African-American ancestry (Hemings was a
mulatto) and equally unaware that they were related to a president. An
accompanying article traces the evolving debate among historians, several of
whom proclaimed Jefferson's purity and must now admit to grave error. Another
piece wonders how the Jefferson legacy might change: "While it will require a
rather large stretch to transform Jefferson from a thinking man's racist to a
multicultural hero, some commentators are sure to make the leap." ... A
story challenges the fairness of the death penalty, noting the
significant numbers of death row inmates who have been found innocent before
they could be executed. Illinois has executed 11 men, but found nine more on
death row innocent. Six of those nine were minorities accused of crimes against
white victims.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Nov. 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 3, 1998)
            

            An essay
argues that True at First Light , labeled as an Ernest Hemingway novel,
should not have been published. The book was winnowed from more than 800 pages
to about half that length in a ham-handed editing process that would have
horrified Hemingway, who carefully chose every word he wrote. Besides, Papa
requested that none of his unfinished work be posthumously published.
... A cautionary tale of the Internet boom chronicles the failure of a
tech startup called PointCast. An early "push technology" firm, PointCast was
on the verge of being bought out for huge dough. Suddenly, the bottom dropped
out when push fell from favor and "portals" became the next big thing.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , Nov. 9
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 3, 1998)
            

            The cover
story praises Benjamin Netanyahu for standing firm in negotiations with the
Palestinian Authority. Bibi has savvily refused to concede territory to the
Palestinians, knowing that he will need land as a bargaining chip during final
settlement talks. (Yasser Arafat controls less than half the land he expected
to control by now.) The piece warns that May 4, 1999, when Arafat has vowed to
declare an independent Palestinian state, could be the launch date for a brutal
war.

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
