
   
   
      
         
            The Message Trap

            Everyone agrees: The
Republicans were beaten by a lack of message.

            Bill Clinton pointed it out
right after the election. He told his staff, according to the New York
Times , that "the election's message was that people wanted elected
officials to address pocketbook issues like Social Security, health care,
education and the minimum wage." Newt Gingrich couldn't have agreed more. "I
think we probably underestimated the need to really aggressively push a much
stronger message about cutting taxes and saving Social Security, winning the
war on drugs, reforming education and national defense," said the speaker the
day before he realized that that underestimate would cost him his job.

            By the
weekend, liberal pundits and conservative pols were joined in messageful
chorus. "Republicans misread the meaning of their 1994 victory. ...Voters want
government to solve problems in education, the environment, child care and
health care," counseled liberal columnist E.J. Dionne. "What we need to do
under my speakership," said speaker apparent Bob Livingston, "is not only
articulate the message but to provide the legislative machinery that it takes
to back it up." Aspiring House Majority Leader Steve Largent, chimed in, "I
think the first thing that we have to do is develop an agenda that can unify
our party. ... We have to have Republican solutions in education, HMO reform,
Social Security, get back to limited government, lower taxes and strong
defense."

            Oh really?

            Where, may I ask, is the
evidence that the public is hot for a party that promises activist solutions to
problems that confront it and its progeny? Surely not from Election Day exit
polls. The New York Times , for example, queried voters about the one
issue that "mattered most" in deciding which House candidate to vote for.
"Education," said an underwhelming 25 percent of voters. And even at that, how
many of those voters really had education foremost in their frontal lobes?
Remember that, in key elections, "education" was the trade name for a firm of
less reputable pursuit. Democratic candidates in the South who actively
supported legalized gambling measures (with the state's share of the take
earmarked for education) scored unexpected victories over anti-gambling GOP
opponents. Voters who opposed the lottery and video poker interests told
pollsters forthrightly that they were "against gambling." Voters who favored
legalizing gambling said they were "for education."

            Trailing
behind education in the exit polls were issues such as "morals and ethics" (19
percent), "the economy and jobs" (14 percent), Social Security (11 percent),
and taxes (8 percent). As for "health care," the occasion of much bipartisan
huffing and puffing about the need to save citizens from the ravages of HMOs,
it commanded the top interest of a mere 7 percent of voters. That was scarcely
more than the 5 percent who dared the pollsters' scorn by admitting outright
that "the Clinton-Lewinsky matter" concerned them most. In fact, if you add the
coded "morals and ethics" vote to the Clinton-Lewinsky category, it virtually
ties for first place among concerns.

            
What the GOP would do well to keep in mind is
that, at least in times of peace and prosperity, most times the American public
doesn't want the federal government to bother it. People expect the government
to keep the Social Security checks and highway money coming and run the courts
and stuff like that. But sweeping reforms--even when they really would be
prudent for the future--make the electorate uncomfortable. Take "saving
Medicare," for example, a goal that pols from both parties like to pop into the
same sentence with "curbing HMOs." There's no way to make Medicare solvent for
the long term except by raising taxes to pay for it or by letting HMOs and
their ilk limit some people's access to some kinds of care. Pick your poison
or, more wisely, shut your mouth.

            Of course that doesn't mean
that Republicans should go back to talking about Monica or even about that
"social agenda" that makes so many voters uneasy. After all, American voters do
like their politicians to flatter them by pretending that they are truly
concerned about important things like making kids smarter and safer and
healthier. The GOP should take a page out of Bill Clinton's playbook and
promise the public 100,000 new teachers or cops or drug enforcement agents or
whatever. Never mind that the money will only pay for a fraction of that (and
that by the time it's spread by formula to every school or precinct, it might
not fully support a single hire). Or call for another tax break to subsidize
the cost of schools or day-care centers or hiring the disadvantaged or
whatever. Sure, most of the subsidy will end up paying for things that would
happen anyway, but people like the idea of tax breaks and nobody ever bothers
to check on who got to pocket the lost revenue.

            Next time, GOP, recruit some
more attractive candidates who don't scare the voters with their moralistic
fervor. But meanwhile, don't weigh yourself down with some heavy-breathing
message that ends up forcing a debate in which a lot of painful choices will
inevitably be laid bare. That was your strategy last January, when you
deliberately scheduled only 89 days for voting business this year with
precisely that sort of inaction in mind. And according to the polls, Congress
has never been more popular than it was just a few months ago when what it was
doing was nothing much.

         
      
   
