
   
   
      
         
            No. 136:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               Fill in
the blank as Chase Untermeyer, President Bush's former appointments secretary,
assesses the new Republican dynasty led by victorious Jeb and George
W.:
            

            
               "It's a
competitive family. I don't think it's competitive with a hard edge to it, but
if you ever see the Bushes playing ________________, it can be pretty
frightening."
            

            by noon ET Thursday to
e-mail your answer (newsquiz@slate.com).

            
               Responses
to Tuesday's question (No. 135)--"What's the Catch Phrase?":
            

            
               "Are you ready to make
real noise?" This slogan is part of a new multimillion-dollar campaign--to
persuade whom to do what?
            

            "To persuade the mute to,
like, get over it."-- Bill Franzen
            

            "To persuade the new Mrs.
Larry King to moan during sex."-- Jon Hotchkiss ( Chris Thomas had
a similar answer, with self-revelation worthy of Daphne Merkin.)

            "It's part of an internal
Kellogg's campaign to motivate shy Rice Crispies."-- Jon Schwarz
            

            "To persuade the United
States to resume nuclear testing ... NOW!"-- Michael Brookes
            

            "To persuade Jews to
participate more heavily in Purim."-- Norman Oder
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Real noise appeals to the
young and appalls the old. Babies bang wooden spoons on overturned saucepans;
grannies rock so silently you can hear the creak of floorboards and hip bones.
Rock 'n' roll is loud and young and rebellious; chamber music is soft and
geriatric and bourgeois complacent. Movies, that youthful medium, are Dolby
loud; books are library quiet. Playgrounds are tumultuous, youthful, and
physical; churches are hushed, elderly, and spiritual. (Well, white churches;
the black church is always shown as a scene of joyful noise. Such is our racial
ideology that African-Americans are always presented as loud and physical.)
Silence is passive acquiescence; noise is open rebellion. Except in the
relentlessly entertaining marketplace, where the television is always on, the
radio always plays, and good consumers undergo a constant acoustic bombardment,
lest they have five minutes to quietly think their own thoughts. It has been
widely observed that prison is noisy, filled with the constant battering of
everybody's radio. And so like some M.C. Escher bird-into-fish print, the
cultural meaning of noise is reversed. Noise is status quo; silence is
subversive.

            So if
grannies are so touchy about noise, why are they always depicted as hard of
hearing?

            

               All-Volunteer Answer
            

            To persuade everyone to join
the Army.

            "It's still 'Be all that you
can be,' but we took the experience the Army can offer and packaged it in a
more contemporary fashion," said Lt. Col. James Sullivan, the Army's chief of
marketing and advertising.

            Both the Army and Navy failed
to reach their enlistment goals this year, the first time for the Navy since
the draft ended in 1973. The $1.1 billion defense bill passed last month
included $113 million to aid recruiting.

            A thriving economy and higher
military standards have shrunk the pool of potential volunteers. "Most of the
people who walk into the office have something wrong with them," said Petty
Officer Benny Granillo, a Navy recruiter.

            There are
1.4 million people on active duty in the uniformed services.

            
               Augmented
Rationalizations Extra
            

            The
Republican leadership responds to yesterday's disappointing returns. (Final
sentences added by "News Quiz.")

            "I think this was sort of
a status quo election. Slavery is still legal, right?"-- Senate Majority
Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss.
            

            "It's too early to be
disappointed. Now, imagine a humorous, self-deprecating remark about what I'll
do later in my hotel room, were I but secure enough in my sexuality to make
such a jibe."-- House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Texas
            

            "I'd say it's
disappointing. Whatever it is that Dick Armey gets up to in his hotel
room."-- Senate Majority Whip Don Nickles, R-Okla.
            

            "You would think to do
something for the first time in 70 years would be a big deal, but not among
Washington pundits. But enough about Dick Armey's hotel room shenanigans; how
about that Illinois Senate race!"-- House Speaker Newt Gingrich,
R-Ga.
            

            "We've got to go after the
minority vote--the Hispanic, African-American, Asian, and every other minority.
And if any of them ever show up in Utah, I'm going to, like, not hurt
them."-- Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah
            

            "The Democrats demagogued,
and we failed to get our agenda out there. And by 'failed get our agenda out
there,' I of course allude to Dick Armey's perverse but disappointing hotel
room antics."-- former Vice President Dan Quayle
            

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
