
   
   
      
         
            

            
               The
Clintometer stands at zero and has been retired. Click for the complete
archives.
            

            
President Clinton will probably decline the House Judiciary Committee's
invitation to testify in the impeachment inquiry, according to his
spokesman. The stated reason: Clinton thinks the inquiry has not been "fair."
This comes after the committee sent Clinton 81 questions, and Clinton responded
this weekend with written answers that conceded nothing new (e.g., he maintains
he did not have sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky and did not lie under
oath about this). The spins: 1) House Republicans will impeach Clinton because
he has failed to absorb the moral lessons of the scandal. 2) House Republicans
will impeach Clinton because they have failed to absorb the political lessons
of the scandal. 3) The impeachment vote will fail, and the House will reject
censure as a compromise because, while expedient, it's toothless and not
specified in the Constitution. 4) The House will opt for censure because, while
toothless and not specified in the Constitution, it's expedient.
(11/30/98)
            

            
Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest bank, is buying Bankers Trust for $10
billion. It is the largest foreign purchase of a U.S. financial institution
ever, producing the biggest financial services company in the world in terms of
assets ($850 billion). The good news: Top executives of both companies will get
multimillion dollar bonuses to keep them in the fold. The bad news: Five
thousand five hundred employees, including administrative staff and some
managers, will be laid off because their jobs have suddenly become duplicative.
(11/30/98)
            

            
Attorney General Janet Reno asked a court for 60 more days to decide whether to
seek the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate former Clinton
aide Harold Ickes in the campaign finance scandal. Reporters complained
that Reno has not explained what she would do for those 60 days. Translation:
Reporters who have been so desperate for political news that they have been
writing speculative stories for days about Reno's decision don't know what they
would do for those 60 days. This comes after Reno decided not to seek an
independent counsel to investigate whether Vice President Al Gore violated
fund-raising laws in the 1996 campaign. Spins on the Gore decision: 1) Reno
nixed the investigation because, as she says, "The evidence fails to provide
any reasonable basis for a conclusion that the vice president may have lied."
2) She nixed the investigation to protect Clinton and Gore. 3) She nixed it
because Kenneth Starr proved that the independent counsel law is bad. 4) She
nixed it because Starr proved that the independent counsel law is bad for the
Clinton administration. 5) Her decision helps Gore's presidential candidacy by
reaffirming his integrity. 6) Her decision helps Gore's presidential candidacy
because it would be hard for him to raise money for 2000 while being
investigated over how he raised money in 1996. (11/30/98)
            

            
Britain's highest court ruled that former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet
can be extradited to Spain for prosecution on charges of murder and
torture. Pinochet had argued that he was immune from arrest because his alleged
crimes were part of his job as head of state. But the judges ruled that
"torture of his own subjects or of aliens would not be regarded by
international law as a function of a head of state." Unless Britain's home
secretary intervenes or Pinochet persuades the British courts to block the
extradition on other grounds, Pinochet will be packed off to Spain. Human
rights activists celebrated the ruling as a breakthrough for international law
and justice. On the other side, former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
argued that Pinochet "is old, frail, and sick, and on compassionate grounds
alone should be allowed to return to Chile." (11/25/98)
            

            U.N.
weapons inspection chief Richard Butler told the U.N. Security Council that
Iraq is not cooperating with weapons inspections as it had promised. The
council took no action. (11/25/98)
            

            Sen. Chuck Hagel, R-Neb.,
announced his bid to unseat Sen. Mitch McConnell , R-Ky., as chairman of
the National Republican Senatorial Committee. McConnell has been criticized
because the GOP failed to gain any seats in the Senate, contrary to
expectations. Explaining that "one of the things Republicans learned in 1998 is
you can't just win by beating up on your opponent," Hagel complained that the
GOP's message has been insufficiently "positive," and he denounced the
"constant, demonizing, negative campaigning" of this year's elections. Analysts
think Hagel has little chance of winning. (11/25/98)
            

             

            
               America Online is
buying Netscape. The deal involves a $4 billion stock swap and a
simultaneous partnership between AOL and Sun Microsystems. Everyone agrees
these transactions create a potentially powerful alliance against Microsoft,
since AOL, Sun, and Netscape had $12.4 billion in combined revenue last year,
compared with Microsoft's $14 billion. The spins, in order of ascending
sophistication: 1) Microsoft wins, because Netscape dies. 2) Microsoft loses,
because Netscape adds muscle. 3) The antitrust case against Microsoft
emboldened its competitors to form this alliance. 4) The pending alliance,
under discussion for the past month, emboldened the allies to testify against
Microsoft in the antitrust case. 5) The sale of Netscape for $4 billion debunks
the antitrust case by proving that Microsoft didn't hurt Netscape much. 6) The
alliance proves that even Microsoft is not safe in the rapidly changing
high-tech economy, as Microsoft openly proclaimed all along. 7) The alliance
proves that even Microsoft is not safe in the rapidly changing high-tech
economy, contrary to what Microsoft secretly believed all along. (For more

                  Slate
                coverage of the deal, see this "Moneybox" and this "Dispatch"
from the Microsoft trial.) (11/24/98)
            

         
      
   
