
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist , Dec. 5
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Dec. 5, 1998)
            

            The
cover editorial berates new German Chancellor Gerhard
Schröder for failing to control his government. Schröder's campaign platform
was vague, and since the September election his leadership has been even
vaguer. Without direction, Germany's economy will soon stall, and its foreign
policy will be confused and ineffective. ... A story says Ivy League universities may soon begin a price
war. Once accused of colluding to keep tuition high, the Ivies are now sitting
atop outsized endowments and could start using generous financial aid packages
to compete for students. ... The obituary mourns the passing of Josef
Stalin's interpreter. Valentin Berezhkov, dead at 82, attended Uncle Joe's
critical meetings with Adolf Hitler and FDR and spoke some of the most
important words of the century as Stalin's mouthpiece.

            
               
                  New
Republic , Dec. 21
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Dec. 4, 1998)
            

            The cover
story by former U.N. Special Commission inspector Scott Ritter blasts the
United Nations and the U.S. government for going soft on inspections of Iraq's
arsenal. The United Nations' insistence on peace at any cost and the United
States' insistence on containment and sanctions instead of confrontation left
UNSCOM without any backers. The only solution: full-scale, surprise
inspections, backed up with an unequivocal threat of military action.
... "TRB" wonders why we're so concerned that President Clinton's
behavior offends the military: "[I]f there's a worse reason for removing an
elected president from office, I can't think of it. That's the way they used to
run things in places like El Salvador and Honduras." ... A story says
Britain is holding Holocaust victims' property. Seized during World War II, the
cash and jewelry was kept by Britain as compensation for wartime losses and
still hasn't been returned to its rightful owners.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Dec. 6
            

            
               (posted
Thursday, Dec. 3, 1998)
            

            The
depressing cover story follows the struggle of two parents trying to save their
toddler, a victim of Canavan disease. The parents desperately lobby the
cautious and slow-moving Federal Drug Administration and National Institutes of
Health to approve experimental gene therapy, but when the treatment comes it
does little. The child is still alive but slowly dying. ... A story
profiles Michael Darnell, the man behind all those Fox "reality" TV specials
( When Good Pets Go Bad , World's Scariest Police Chases ,
World's Deadliest Swarms , etc.). Darnell cares solely about ratings and
dismisses charges of social irresponsibility. His latest masterpiece,
Prisoners Out of Control , was deemed too graphic by Fox execs.

            

               
                  Newsweek and U.S. News & World Report , Dec. 7
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Dec. 1, 1998)
            

            The big Christmas story this
year: Internet shopping. Both Newsweek and U.S. News run cover
packages predicting that consumers will log on to find holiday gifts.
Newsweek 's coverage says the Web beats the malls: It's easier to find what
you want, it's often cheaper, and you don't need to find parking.
Newsweek also lets Martha Stewart describe her successful foray into Web
marketing. Martha's Web readers are younger and richer than her magazine
subscribers. "Still," writes Stewart, "you have to plan well. Who could have
foreseen several-hundred-percent increases in sales of pumpkin-carving kits?
But that's a problem I want to have." Us, too.

            
               U.S.
News ' Web shopping package centers on the America Online-Netscape merger. AOL's 14
million customers form a captive audience for its online mall, and Netscape's
e-commerce software will ease Net transactions.

            

               
                  Time , Dec. 7
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Dec. 1, 1998)
            

            
Continuing its series on the most influential people of the century,
Time picks the 20 th century's top business leaders. At the
top of the list of "Builders & Titans": Henry Ford, profiled by Lee Iacocca. Also
ranked: movie mogul Louis B. Mayer, McDonald's mogul Ray Kroc, and marketing
mogul Leo Burnett. United Auto Workers' President Walter Reuther makes the list
too. The only women included are cosmetics mavens Estée Lauder and Madam C.J.
Walker (who is also the only African-American profiled). A feature on the
century's worst bosses mentions George Steinbrenner, Leona Helmsley, and Armand
Hammer.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Dec. 7
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Dec. 1, 1998)
            

            The
second annual cartoon issue. (Waiter to diners: "Might I suggest the most
expensive wine and the most expensive dinner." Bum to other bum guzzling booze:
"That is not one of the seven habits of highly effective people." Slyly smiling
male brown bear to female white bear at a bar: "Polar? Or simply slow to
warm?") An article traces the evolution of gender politics in New Yorker
cartoons. Decades ago, cartoons frequently featured secretaries warding off
amorous bosses. Today, those amorous bosses are often female. Another piece
analyzes the crash test dummy cartoon, a form invented in 1993 (Policeman to
crash test dummy woman: "Ma'am, it's your husband. There's been an auto
accident.") and already a cliché.

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
