
   
   
      
         
            Party of Virtue, Party of Vice

            
               "Campaign '98"
dispatches from New York and South Carolina (Senate and
governor).
            

            The important thing for a
pundit is to be sure of his or her opinions. There is no penalty for being sure
of one thing now and sure of something else later. Until 6 p.m. ET, when the
first returns came in, the analysts were certain that there would be no
"message" tonight. This would be a status quo election, no big issues were
galvanizing voters, nothing enormous would be decided.

            But by 7:45 p.m., the effort
to impeach President Clinton was "dead as a dodo," and MSNBC pundits were
wondering how long it would be till enraged Republicans deposed Newt Gingrich
as speaker of the House. By 9 p.m., when Chuck Schumer's New York Senate
victory was announced, the evening had officially become a Democratic Rout.

            The best
line of the night came from Sen. Fred Thompson, R-Tenn., when some cable news
anchor asked him to assess the election results so far: "When these things
aren't going your way, you say, 'It's still early.' So, I guess it's still
early."

            In terms of seats changing hands, the Democratic
victory--though remarkable--is very small. Tonight's real landslide victory
belongs to two other parties. First, the Party of Virtue. It was a clean sweep
for the good guys. In tight race after tight race, voters have rejected the
venal and the wicked. North Carolina dumped embarrassing Sen. Lauch Faircloth
in favor of John Edwards, who can't possibly be worse. Alabama dropped its
ill-behaved governor Fob James. New Yorkers had the wisdom to retire their
chief sleaze, Sen. Al D'Amato, in favor of Schumer, who has all D'Amato's good
qualities and only half of his bad ones. Maryland re-elected a harmless
mediocrity (Gov. Parris Glendening) over a holy terror (Ellen Sauerbrey). And
to prove that the Party of Virtue is bipartisan, Illinois may drop ethically
challenged Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun. Any one of those results constitutes a
minor improvement in American politics. All of them together constitute a near
miracle.

            (Tonight's actual miracle:
Reform Party candidate Jesse "The Body" Ventura leads in the Minnesota
governor's race. America has had plenty of athlete politicians and plenty of
actor politicians. Now, at last, we can have both in one package: a pro
wrestler.)

            The other
big winner Tuesday night, oddly enough, was the Party of Vice. There is much
crowing about the resurgence of the Democratic Party in the South, given Fritz
Hollings' Senate victory, gubernatorial upsets in South Carolina and Alabama,
and a probable gubernatorial win in Georgia. Why has this happened? Because the
Democratic Party has become the Lottery Party. In Georgia, retiring Democratic
Gov. Zell Miller instituted a hugely popular state lottery that has raised tens
of millions of dollars for public education. Democrat Roy Barnes, who promised
to continue Miller's policies, is winning the election to succeed him. In
Alabama and South Carolina, the incumbent governors, Christian conservative
Republicans Fob James and David Beasley, resisted efforts to start
Georgia-style lotteries. They are both getting thrown out of office, defeated
by Democrats running on pro-lottery platforms. Who says the lottery is a
sucker's gamble?

            As they do during the final
week of every campaign, the Turnout Bores have hijacked the '98 election. They
have persuaded most of the media that this campaign is a pudding without a
theme, that there are no galvanizing issues, and that everything hinges
on which party does a better job getting its core voters to the polls. (The
question: Can my blacks and seniors beat your Christian conservatives?)

            Never mind that every
election hinges on turnout. Accept that the Turnout Bores are onto something.
In fact, why not take their theory a step further? The election depends on
turnout. And what, more than anything, does turnout depend on? The weather, of
course.

            To that
end, 
                  Slate
                offers a real Election Day forecast, predicting the
outcomes of close Senate and gubernatorial races based on the Tuesday weather
map in Monday's USA Today . (Why USA Today ? It does not suffer
from the notorious liberal meteorological bias that afflicts the New York
Times and the Washington Post .) 
                  In the interest of accuracy,
Slate has updated the predictions based on USA Today 's Tuesday forecast.
The updated predictions appear in italics after the original
predictions.
               
            

            According to USA Today , most of the country will
experience cloudy but good weather Tuesday. Rain will fall from Idaho to
Georgia. At first glance, the map looks like good news for the GOP: They have
close races in many of the rain-drenched states, and rain generally benefits
Republicans, who can count on fervent conservatives to get to the polls in any
weather. But a closer analysis of the weather map suggests Mother Nature
actually favors the Democrats this year. (The survey starts in the Northeast
and works its way clockwise around the country. It covers most but not all
close Senate and gubernatorial races.)

            
               New York: Cool and
cloudy but no rain. Democrats should turn out smartly in New York City, helping
Chuck Schumer unseat Sen. Al D'Amato.

            

               Maryland: There is a 30 percent chance of rain in Maryland, which means
that there is a 30 percent chance of an Ellen Sauerbrey victory in the
governor's race. Her fervent Republican followers would go to the polls in a
typhoon. Gov. Parris Glendening's supporters are so unenthused that they'll
stay home if it merely drizzles. It's raining in Maryland this morning:
Chalk this one up for Sauerbrey.
            

            

               North Carolina : A deceptive forecast.
The rain ought to help incumbent Sen. Lauch Faircloth, but it actually favors
Democratic challenger John Edwards. Showers are expected only in the
western half of the state, which is especially conservative. The rain
could suppress Republican turnout in the west without lowering Democratic
turnout in the center of the state. Edwards scores an upset. The updated
forecast suggests it will rain across the entire state, suppressing Democratic
turnout too. This will help Faircloth win.
            

            
               South Carolina : As in
North Carolina, the election could hang on how far east it rains. Northwestern
South Carolina, the only part of the state that's supposed to get rain, is
heavily Republican. If this forecast holds, Republicans upstate may stay home,
but Democrats in the southeast won't. Democratic Sen. Fritz Hollings should
hold his seat, and gubernatorial candidate Jim Hodges should upset Republican
Gov. David Beasley. If it rains across the whole state, Republican Bob Inglis
could go to the Senate, and Beasley could keep the governorship. More bad
news for Democrats. Tuesday's forecast calls for rain across the state. Beasley
and Inglis benefit.
            

            
               Georgia : Showers over
the entire state will deter Democrats. Republican incumbent Sen. Paul Coverdell
and Republican gubernatorial candidate Guy Millner will win their tight races.
It stops raining in the western half of the state, perhaps raising turnout
in Democratic Atlanta.
            

            

               Kentucky : A bitter pill for Democratic Senate candidate Scotty Baesler,
who has been running even against Republican Jim Bunning. Bunning's campaign
manager was quoted on Monday saying that "if it rains, we win." Forecast: rain
across the state. Republicans pick up a Senate seat.

            

               Nevada : Dry and warm, as always. This
will slightly help Democratic incumbent Sen. Harry Reid in his tossup race with
Rep. John Ensign.

            
               California : Clear
weather throughout the state keeps turnout high and aids Democratic Sen.
Barbara Boxer and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Gray Davis. They win
easily. Rain in Northern California could cut Democratic turnout. This may
lead Republican Senate challenger Matt Fong and gubernatorial candidate Dan
Lungren to upset victories.
            

            
               Washington : News
flash: It's not going to rain in Seattle! Turnout in the Democratic city will
be heavy, and Sen. Patty Murray will hold off Republican challenger Linda
Smith. Oops! Now it is supposed to rain in Seattle.
            

            
               Wisconsin : Cold but
dry, which should give a small boost to Democratic Sen. Russ Feingold.

            And the wild card pick:
Illinois . Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun has been rising in the polls, but she
still seems to trail Republican challenger Peter Fitzgerald. Good news for
Moseley-Braun in USA Today . Chicago, her stronghold, will have dry
weather, and heavily Republican downstate Illinois will be soaked. She holds
her seat against all expectations. The new forecast says Chicago weather
will be "dismal," just as bad as it is downstate. Sorry, Carol.
            

            (We promise that these

                  Slate
                predictions are just as reliable as the weather forecasts
they're based on.)

         
      
   
