
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Vote
Here
            

            We don't wish to seem like
what our colleague David Plotz refers to as "Turnout Bores,"
but it really is a pity if you missed the chance to exercise that precious gift
of democracy, your right to vote, Tuesday. What the high-minded Turnout Bores
usually fail to emphasize in their tiresome calls to moral responsibility ("How
can you leave all those referendums untouched when children are starving in
Russia?") is that voting is fun.

            Having
been through those huge postwar sci-fi voting machines, and then those infernal
punch-card contraptions seemingly designed to deny the franchise to the bottom
nine-tenths of the bell curve, we especially enjoyed the new technological
breakthrough adopted by the election board (or whoever) here in suburban
Seattle. It works this way: You are given a piece of paper listing the
candidates and propositions (a "ballot"), you indicate your choices using a
device called (we believe) a "felt-tipped pen," then you deposit the piece of
paper through a slot in a large container called a "ballot box." What happens
to the piece of paper after that we neither know nor care--having voted and
thus earned our right to feel smug all day. This being the Pacific Northwest,
the ballot is undoubtedly recycled. But if the citizens who open and empty the
ballot box can suppress their eagerness to recycle these pieces of paper long
enough to count them first, so much the better.

            In case you did miss voting Tuesday, or even if you voted,
here is another chance. Nothing so trivial as control of Congress is at stake.
The issue is this: Should 
                  Slate on Paper
                include everything
published in 
                  Slate
                the previous week or only as much as can be
crammed into 44 standard-size pages? 
                  Slate on Paper
                is the text
document we prepare every Friday morning. It is available to subscribers by
download from slate.com, by e-mail,
or (for $70, including your basic online 
                  Slate
                subscription) in
an actual paper edition through the U.S. mail.

            Right now we limit

                  Slate on Paper
                to 44 pages because a) we doubt many people would
wish to download and print out more than that; and b) the snail mailed version
(which believe it or not is just a break-even proposition for us) would have to
cost more like $100 than $70 if it gets any heavier. But as 
                  Slate
               
has grown, this policy has required us to exclude more and more. And some
readers have complained that when they print out 
                  Slate
               , they want
all of it. (Actually, our reader surveys suggest that about half of
those who download the text document read it on-screen rather than printing it
out. For these folks, presumably, size is not as much of an issue.)

            We are in
a genuine quandary. We exist only to give pleasure but are unsure in this case
how to maximize your pleasure in 
                  Slate
               . So we decided to take a
vote. Highly unscientific, of course, but (like all voting) fun. Readers who
have never used 
                  Slate on Paper
                in any of its myriad forms, and
have no intention of doing so, should please sit on their hands. The rest of
you: Please vote now. We have done our best to word the question in a neutral
way, giving unfair advantage to neither side. We reserve the right, of course,
to ignore the voters' wishes. Just like in a real election.

            The official language of this referendum is as follows:

            Should 
                  Slate on
Paper
               , the weekly text version of 
                  Slate
                magazine, be
limited to just 44 pages, no matter how much wonderful writing and brilliant
insight must be excluded as a result? Or should 
                  Slate on Paper
               
include everything published online at slate.com the previous week, no matter
how many pages it takes or how long the Breakfast Tablers or Book Clubbers
blather on?

            
               The
options:
            

            "And you call yourselves
editors? Well, edit for heaven's sake. 44 pages is plenty." (Vote: 44
pages .)

            "Look, I paid 20 bucks for
this rag, and I want all of it. Don't give me this crap about how the crab
claws wouldn't fit on the smorgasbord table." (Vote: Without limit .)

            

               --Michael Kinsley
            

             

         
      
   
