
   
   
      
         
            A Starr Is Boring

            Everyone wants to know how
Congress is going to get out of the Flytrap mess. What's the exit strategy?
After watching Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr for eight hours today, I
propose an idea. Put Starr on every TV channel in the nation and let him talk.
After five minutes, when the entire country has fallen into a deep slumber, the
House can drop the matter. When everyone wakes up, we can pretend it was all
just a nightmare.

            Both
Democrats and Republicans seem weirdly hopeful about today's House Judiciary
Committee meeting, the first and perhaps only major impeachment hearing.
Democrats, who are still enjoying their postelection gloat, know they have won
the war: Clinton is safe, Flytrap is all but dead. They see today as their
chance to punish the enemy, to humiliate Starr for his prosecutorial aggression
and sexual obsession.

            Hard-core conservatives, who dominate the Republican side
of the committee and who willfully refuse to learn anything from the election,
still suffer from the delusion that they can beat Clinton. They feel that
somehow, if Starr explains it just one more time, the American people
will come to their senses. During the lunch break, Rep. Steve Chabot, R-Ohio,
actually tells reporters that today is important because "It's finally an
opportunity for Ken Starr to tell his side of the story." (So what was the 453
page report? The 7,000 pages of documents? The six months of leaks?) Chabot's
spin is the Republican's only hope, that this time will be different.
Starr, they pray, may be Flytrap's Oliver North, the witness who reverses
public opinion by sheer force of personality.

            But Starr
foils both sides.

            
The hearing has the kind of monstrous buzz that
Flytrap hasn't seen since Monica testified in August. Eight networks are here
to cover it live, so are a zillion print reporters. Michael Moore has come with
a camera crew. He has special access and lurks on the dais behind Democratic
committee members. (Moore is ostentatiously underdressed, wearing a windbreaker
and a green baseball cap with a big letter S--for Starr?)

            And the
hearing opens with the kind of vitriol everyone has anticipated. As soon as
Chairman Henry Hyde, R-Ill., bangs the gavel at 10:10 a.m., committee Democrats
start carping that they are being unfairly silenced, that they and Clinton's
lawyers have not been given enough time to question Starr. Rep. Sheila Jackson
Lee, a posturing Texan, says that Democrats are being "bound and gagged in the
courtroom" and compares the hearing to the Chicago Seven trial. Rep. Mel Watt,
D-N.C. calls the hearing a "railroading." Members start yelling "I will not
yield!" It is all very promising and becomes even more so when the ranking
Democrat, Rep. John Conyers of Michigan, gives his opening statement. Staring
at the independent counsel, who's seated below him at the witness table,
Conyers scolds "Kenneth W. Starr" (as he repeatedly calls him) for writing "the
tawdry, salacious, and unnecessarily graphic" report and for "cross[ing] the
line into obsession."

            Then Starr begins his two hour presentation, and he sucks
the air out of the room. Democrats like to say Starr is "dangerous." Boy,
they're right! Starr is a terror, a one man weapon of mass exhaustion. Starr's
strategy, and I'm sure it is intentional, is to seem so unremarkable, so
unthreatening, so uninteresting that his critics can't find anything to attack.
Oliver North he's not.

            Starr's
two hour performance--if you can call it that--consists of him reading a 58
page prepared statement in a monotone. He reads excruciatingly slowly. I
count his pace--100 words a minute. This ... is ... what ... it's ... like ...
to ... listen ... to ... someone ... talking ... at ... 100 ... words ... a ...
minute. ... Now ... imagine ... listening ... to ... this ... for ... two ...
hours.

            
Starr's address is not only tortoise-paced,
it's also familiar, a rehash of everything we've read 50 times before--what his
duties are as independent counsel, how the Lewinsky case came to him, why he
pursued it as he did, how the president lied, etc. I imagine the network news
directors pulling their hair out: We're covering this! Some pudding-faced
old guy reading a two hour statement at 16 rpm! Get me Regis and Kathie
Lee!
            

            (There is
one small diversion in the monologue: Whenever Starr quotes from President
Clinton's testimony, he drops his voice a register and makes it breathy. The
effect is creepy.)

            The attention of the committee members wanders. I begin to
count yawns: Rep. Howard Coble, R-N.C.; Rep. Bob Inglis, R-S.C.; Rep. Charles
Canady, R-Fla. ... I lose count. (Rep. Robert Wexler, D-Fla., the photogenic
and aggressive Clinton defender, does not succumb to this languor. He glares at
Starr as if he's a particularly vicious child molester.)

            During the
lunch break that follows Starr's statement, Democrats are gleeful. "Did you see
that?" says Rep. Zoe Lofgren, D-Calif. "His own guys were falling asleep. Starr
was putting his own guys to sleep." The principal and persuasive Democratic
spin: The only new thing Starr said was that he has exonerated Clinton in
Filegate and Travelgate.

            
But any hope that Democrats can capitalize on
Starr's non-North performance dissolves immediately after lunch, when
Democratic committee counsel Abbe Lowell questions Starr. It is like hammering
water. Lowell tries to get Starr to admit that he should have told the attorney
general about his contacts with Paula Jones' lawyers and that he mistreated
Monica Lewinsky by holding her for hours at the Ritz-Carlton and denying her a
lawyer.

            Lowell
has been given an hour to quiz the independent counsel. Starr runs out the
clock on him. Lowell fires his questions. Each time, Starr looks slightly
pained, then says, "In fairness, Mr. Lowell ...," then wanders off on an
immensely long, barely responsive answer. Just when I think Starr has finished,
I hear, "and, indeed, if I could just add that ..." (I notice another Starr
tic: He uses adverbs to drag everything out. He does not "dispute," he "utterly
disputes." Something is not "misleading," it is "grossly misleading.")

            The interrogation by members that follows is equally
unproductive. (I am writing at 6:30 p.m., when the committee has nearly
finished its questioning, but the Republican counsel and Clinton's lawyers have
not yet taken their turns.) Each member gets five minutes, which, after a windy
introduction, turns out to be time for two questions. Republicans generally
congratulate Starr for his fair-mindedness and resilience in the face of
partisan attack, then toss him softballs about whether the rule of law should
apply to everyone equally. (His surprising answer: It should.)

            Democrats
pursue the Lowell strategy, trying to bully Starr into revealing
embarrassments. One member wants to know what leaks his office made, another
why he didn't stop Linda Tripp from helping Jones' lawyers. But even the
toughest inquisitor--Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass.--can't shake the affectless
Starr, who ducks questions with the grace of, well, Clinton. As the afternoon
wears on, the committee room empties.

            
Frank, as usual, has the keenest take. During
an afternoon break, he tells a crowd of reporters that the day is useless.
"Hearing Ken Starr is a waste of time." No matter what happens here, Frank
continues, it won't make a difference to Flytrap's outcome. Conservative
Republicans are so obsessed with nailing Clinton that they will never
surrender. "The horse is dying, and the logical thing to do is shoot it. But
the right wing says 'No, no, we'll paint stripes on it and call it a zebra.'
They just won't accept defeat." And because they hold the committee majority,
"They are not going to give up without voting out an article of
impeachment."

            Which brings me to the
person who deserves the most sympathy in all this: Henry Hyde, or "poor Henry,"
as Frank calls him. His committee's conservatives are pressuring Hyde to do
something, anything, to make the scandal viable again. In the last few days
they have proposed subpoenaing John Huang, taking over the campaign finance
investigation, going after Kathleen Willey, going after Kathleen Willey's
lawyer. Hyde can't control them. Nor can he rein in the Democrats who accuse
him of partisanship.

            Hyde's
own reputation has been ruined by the news of his adultery, his committee is in
shambles, there is no way out of the Flytrap mess, but what can he do? Still
"poor Henry" must sit up on the dais, ashen-faced, and preside over this sorry,
sorry Starr spectacle.

         
      
   
