
   
   
      
         
            No. 141:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               Accepting
his new post as editor of Newsweek , Mark Whitaker asked his colleagues,
"What can we do to make Newsweek a must-read?" Participants are invited
to offer suggestions.
            

            by noon ET
Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Wednesday's question (No. 140)--"Don't Legislate; Medicate":
            

            
               According to Houston
psychiatrist Dr. David Krueger, "Part of the reason so many women take these
types of drugs is that men tend to have trouble admitting they have a problem."
What types of drugs?
            

            "Sex-change
hormones."--Ariel Kaminer
            

            
"Chocolate."-- G.C.
            

            "Unclear antecedent
blockers."--Colleen Werthmann
            

            "Roofies. 'It turns out
many women have a more satisfying sexual experience if unconscious,' explained
Dr. Krueger. 'Yes, I do happen to be single. Why do you ask?' "--Beth
Sherman
            

            "Crack. 'Of course,'
Krueger said, 'I may be oversimplifying.' "--Tim Carvell
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Full Responsibility Wraparound
            

            Responses to "News Quiz"
naturally vary in both quality and quantity. Fill in the blank, for example,
typically sparks the most responses. Today's question generated only about half
the usual returns, and here's why: It's not very good. And here's whose fault
it is: mine. Devising the question calls for the deft and tactful art of the
straight man, for playing George Burns to your Gracie Allen. It's not just a
matter of lobbing one over the plate for you to hit out of the park. It's
putting one over the plate that, when you clobber it, erupts in a shower of
confetti that coalesces into a single scarlet flamingo that flies over to the
box seats and bites George Steinbrenner on the ass. But not today.

            The drug
metaphor is opaque and clumsy. And the central premise invites the too-familiar
gender-wars responses. Plus, there is something uncomfortable about male
admissions of inadequacy; it's like pleading guilty to a burglary so you won't
get nailed for a murder. Incidentally, the most common response was, as many of
you suspected, jokes about men's reluctance to ask for directions. However,
we've declined to run such observations out of respect for Jerry Seinfeld. And
again, it's all my fault for leading you into this swamp. I'll try to do better
tomorrow. And I'll never again use a manly baseball metaphor. (Picture me
humbly not spitting.)

            
               A Gram Is
Better Than an Answer
            

            Lifestyle drugs.

            As
distinguished from medicines that relieve pain or cure illness, many drugs in
this category have failed to meet financial expectations. Drugs to promote hair
growth (Propecia) and to stop smoking (Nicotrol) have had disappointing sales.
With the exception of Viagra (with projected first year returns of up to $1
billion, the most successful drug rollout in history), men have been a harder
sell than women, who buy 60 percent of the top three anti-smoking drugs. Men
tend to abandon such remedies if they're not immediately effective.

            
               Leverage
Your Germanness Extra
            

            "German is the ideal to
the American male. It's strong, and it's all about precision and expertise. We
said: 'If you leverage your Germanness, that's really potent for this
particular target audience. It just triggers all the things they want to think
about themselves.' "--Jennifer Laing , Saatchi & Saatchi, on
advertising strategy for Beck's beer; she does not say if this would have been
a good advertising strategy for the Wehrmacht
            

            "I can smile, but it's
hard to think about whether that stereotype is realistic. As long as you, as a
German, make a joke at your own expense, it's OK."--Axel Meermann ,
global marketing director, Beck's beer; he does not say if it's OK if such
jokes are made by me, as a Jew

            "[Hitler's rule was] an
aberration, but not an organic aspect of German society."--Henry
Kissinger ; he does not say if the rule of Augusto Pinochet, which he helped
engineer, was an organic aspect of Chilean society

            "To some people, 'Berlin'
still sounds too Prussian, too authoritarian, too centralized."--Chancellor
Gerhard Schröder ; he does not say if "hell" sounds too hot

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
