
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

            
               Not All
Jewish Women Are Like Lewinsky
            

            The last
paragraph of the Nov. 9 "Today's Papers" struck a discordant note with us. After cataloging
pejoratives associated with Jewish women, which a group is trying to counter in
the media, the paragraph asserts that Monica Lewinsky fits them all. This
implies, unfairly and falsely, that Lewinsky is somehow representative of
Jewish women. That implication is snide and condescending. Surely you wouldn't
be so flippant with a list of pejoratives associated with another minority
group--blacks or Hispanics, for instance--or pretend that one negatively
perceived member of the group stands for the whole. The "joke" was anti-Semitic
and unfunny. It is particularly annoying to read this on the anniversary of
Kristallnacht .

            -- Maud Lavin and
Locke Bowman Chicago

            
               Scott Shuger responds:
I did not create the list of pejoratives thought to be associated in the public
mind with Jewish women; the group of Jewish women did. I also wrote that
eradicating that stereotype was a fine goal. I did not write that Monica
Lewinsky was representative of Jewish women. I wrote that she fit the group's
list and that, given the tremendous exposure she's had this year, this
certainly reinforces the stereotype and therefore makes the group's aim more
difficult to achieve. To pretend that Monica is not a problem for the image of
Jewish women is like pretending that O.J. Simpson is not a problem for the
image of black men. To notice such things is not bigotry. But wanting to ignore
them is.
            

            
               Holes in
the DNA
            

            Your Nov. 2 "Chatterbox" on Jefferson and the DNA tests is erroneous. The DNA
tests only prove that a Jefferson was the father of Sally Hemings' last
son. But that could include any of Jefferson's six male cousins--the sons of
his father's brother. The more important finding is that the DNA tests prove
Jefferson--or any other Jefferson--could not be the father of Hemings'
first son, the one who was born after she returned from France with Thomas
Jefferson and his family, pregnant at the time.

            Historically, the Hemings
family always claimed that this first son was fathered by Jefferson. The
interesting question now is who was the father of her first son, since he could
not have been a Jefferson. And since we can't trace the paternity of her other
children because there are no male descendants, the likelihood that the
paternity was from other men is as likely as any other possible answer, now
that we know that she had her first child by a non-Jefferson family member,
i.e., that she had children by at least two different men from different
families.

            Finally,
the largest obstacle in proving that it was Thomas Jefferson who was the father
of Hemings' last son is the fact that Jefferson was 65 years old at that time,
with no record of potency for almost two decades. You jump to conclusions too
quickly, forgetting that scientific answers such as DNA tests are most reliable
in providing negative answers--and often ambiguous in providing positive
answers.

            -- Harold L.
Orbach Manhattan, Kan.

            

               Micromiracle
            

            Michael
Lewis is a breath of fresh air in his "Dispatches"
on the Microsoft case. He reports it to us mortals in a funny and
understandable way without putting in so much information that it becomes
unintelligible. He is a breath of fresh air. I also think it is commendable
that his articles, although unfavorable to Microsoft in the main, are being
hosted on a Microsoft-owned site. This is refreshing.

            -- Mary
Nugent Crumlin, Northern Ireland

            
               Guatemala
Gringos
            

            I realize
that "The Breakfast Table" feature is supposed to be light,
breezy, and chatter-driven, but little did I realize that Kathie Lee Gifford
was doing double duty this week. It is heartening to know that despite not
having reaped the obvious benefits of British colonialism, Guatemala still
represents a cheap silver buying opportunity for fat American wallets. Hope the
hurricane hasn't ruined the shopping down there!

            -- Shalini Devi
Gujavarty Jersey City, N.J.

            
               Address your e-mail to
the editors to letters@slate.com. You must include your address and daytime
phone number (for confirmation only).
            

         
      
   
