
   
   
      
         
            The Semi-Conductor

            In many fields, growing old
means cutting back on your professional responsibilities. But for orchestra
conductors, figures of mythic virility and longevity, advancing age seems only
to entail taking on more obligations. Consider Kurt Masur, the 71-year-old
music director of the New York Philharmonic. Last week, it was announced that,
beginning in 2000, Masur would become the principal conductor of the London
Philharmonic. In London, the Guardian reported that the German maestro
would, naturally, be resigning his New York position, which pays him $1.3
million a year. But the paper was forced to print a correction: Masur is not
leaving New York. He will be conducting in both cities until at least 2002,
when his New York contract expires.

            With just
two big jobs, Masur is far from the busiest of the big guns. The title probably
belongs to Plácido Domingo, the globetrotting tenor. Anticipating the decline
of his prolific singing career--he's 57, and most voices don't last past the
early 60s--Domingo has pursued a sideline in opera conducting. In 1996, he was
appointed artistic director of the Washington Opera. Nov. 1 it was announced
that he would also be replacing the retiring director of the Los Angeles Opera.
Domingo intends to run both institutions without cutting back on his
performance schedule at the Metropolitan Opera and elsewhere, his "Three
Tenors" concerts with Luciano Pavarotti and José Carreras, his recording
calendar, or his bookings as a guest symphony conductor. Perhaps the
paella will suffer at Domingo, a Spanish restaurant he owns in midtown
Manhattan.

            Domingo's helicopter-to-rehearsal lifestyle is now the
model for conductors whose salaries often match those of star athletes and
CEOs. Norman Lebrecht of the London Daily Telegraph , perhaps the only
music critic with much of an instinct for sleuthing, has unearthed some of the
closely guarded salaries. In 1996, the conductor Lorin Maazel earned $4.5
million, including $1 million as the chief conductor of the Pittsburgh Symphony
and an additional $2.7 million from the Bavarian State Radio Orchestra. The
pianist-conductor Daniel Barenboim earns $3 million or more as music director
in Chicago, artistic director and general music director of the Deutsche
Staatsoper Berlin, and as a touring conductor with both the Berlin and the
Vienna philharmonics. Perhaps most amazing is Charles Dutoit, who serves as
artistic director of the Montreal Symphony Orchestra, musical director of the
Orchestra National de France, and the artistic director and principal conductor
of the Philadelphia Orchestra's summer season in Saratoga. In his spare time,
Dutoit likes to ... guest conduct.

            Such hall
hopping undeniably adds to the wealth and fame of the world's top conductors.
But is it good for music? The era of the ludicrously prodigious maestro has
coincided with a sense of unease about the state of the symphony, especially in
the United States. Many orchestras are in poor financial shape, faced with
rising costs, declining box office revenues, and a cutback in public subsidies.
At the New York Philharmonic and elsewhere, labor and administrative conflict
seems perpetual. And among people with long musical memories, there is a
general feeling that while this may be a period of high competence, it is not a
great moment for orchestras or conductors. A common complaint is that the sound
of the big five American symphonies--New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Cleveland,
and Chicago--while still of extremely high quality, is more and more
homogenized. Might these phenomena--the lackluster symphonic scene and the
overbooked conductor--be related?

            
The great American orchestras were built by
conductors who by today's standards would be hopeless homebodies. The Boston
Symphony was honed and polished by the Russian exile Serge Koussevitsky, who
conducted 100 concerts a year for 25 years until 1949 and was midwife to the
creation of great works by Stravinsky, Schoenberg, and Copland. The
Philadelphia Orchestra was led by Leopold Stokowski, who reigned supreme for 26
years until 1938, when Eugene Ormandy succeeded him--and stayed for 42. George
Szell had a similar role in shaping Cleveland into a great musical city, as did
Fritz Reiner in Chicago. These men might travel to Europe for the summer
festival season, but they lived in the cities in which they played. They
auditioned musicians personally and knew them well. If a guest conductor
visited Philadelphia, you would probably find Ormandy backstage or in the
audience. Today, by contrast, conductors tend to have a much more tenuous
relationship with their home cities. Rather than live in some backwater, they
jet in and out for rehearsals and conduct 30 performances a year there instead
of 100. For nine months at a stretch, they are somewhere else.

            The
musician who first set this pace was the ex-Nazi Herbert von Karajan, who in
the late 1950s was simultaneously principal conductor of the Berlin
Philharmonic, the Vienna State Opera, and the Salzburg festival. Von Karajan's
ricocheting around Europe stoked an epic recording career and helped build an
estate that was worth $300 million when he died in 1989. There is no one so
dominant now, but Karajan remains the model for the hyperactive batons of
Maazel, Barenboim, Zubin Mehta, Riccardo Muti, Seji Ozawa, and Claudio Abbado.
These conductors compete in a kind of orchestral arms race. The advent of jet
travel--and supersonic jet travel--has made it possible for them to work
virtually simultaneously not just in several cities but on several continents.
The ambition of the conductor is abetted by the avarice of the agent, who
receives a commission of up to 20 percent on the fees and salaries he
negotiates. The most powerful of these is the reclusive Ronald Wilford of
Columbia Artists Management International, who manages the world's leading
conductors and uses his market power to drive fees ever higher.

            There are a few honorable exceptions to the
orchestra-collecting trend. Perhaps the most admirable is Simon Rattle, who
took the insignificant Birmingham Symphony Orchestra and, over a period of 16
years, developed it into a distinguished ensemble. Despite many lucrative
offers, Rattle has been loath to even spend much time visiting elsewhere.
Rattle has now stepped down from the podium at Birmingham and is weighing
offers. It is expected that he will again choose to work with one orchestra
rather than several. Michael Tilson Thomas, who in 1995 became the music
director of the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra, draws praise for doing more
than hanging his hat there. Finland-born Esa-Pekka Salonen gets high marks for
his commitment to the Los Angeles Philharmonic, as does Leonard Slatkin at
Washington's National Symphony.

            Why would an orchestra prefer
an overpaid, absentee landlord like Muti or Abbado to a dedicated resident,
especially given that the latter is likely to come much cheaper? Partly, it's
the battle for prestige. A provincial orchestra with an off-brand conductor
seems doubly provincial. But the bigger issue is finance. Orchestra boards
believe that a star like Muti sells tickets, even to the majority of concerts
he doesn't conduct. And even the occasional presence of a musical superstar
makes it much easier to raise money. At a recent fund-raiser, the Washington
Opera took in an extraordinary $2.6 million, thanks to the charming presence of
Domingo.

            There are many more
orchestras than there used to be and arguably fewer great conductors. The
result has been a bidding war for top talent and an opportunity to make money
that few can resist. The recent transformation of the conductor's career
parallels what has happened elsewhere in the economy. As the income of top
performers of all kinds has risen exponentially, the old patterns of indenture
have fallen away. The ability of a Zubin Mehta ($6 million plus per year) or a
Charles Barkley ($4.6 million) to make really big money has led to a system of
free agency. In basketball, where teams are constituted by the season, each
player looking out for his own career doesn't appear to harm the overall
quality of the game. But in symphonic music, where great achievement comes from
teamwork over a much longer time frame, the moonlighting maestro is playing too
fast.

         
      
   
