
   
   
      
         
            Peace vs. Justice

            
               If you missed the most
recent installments of this column, here they are: posted Tuesday, Nov.
24, and Friday, Nov. 20.
            

            Issues of justice and
reparation for past abuses of human rights dominated much of the world's press
over the past few days. In Britain and the rest of western Europe, the crisis
over the detention of Gen. Augusto Pinochet remained a hot story. Several
British Sunday papers reported an imminent deal between Britain and Chile that
would allow the general to be sent home to face trial there. "Ministers back
Chile offer to try Pinochet" was the main front-page headline in the
Observer , and "Labour in secret deal to send Pinochet home" was the
headline in the Sunday Telegraph .

            But this
potential face-saving way out of the crisis was dismissed in Monday's papers,
which reported that no deal had been reached. The Times said that the only
possible grounds by which British Home Secretary Jack Straw (the British
equivalent of the interior minister) could now refuse proceedings for
Pinochet's extradition to Spain were compassionate ones, taking into account
his age and health, but this argument was rejected in an editorial in the Guardian. "The Chilean foreign minister's 'offer' that Pinochet
stands trial at home kills the health question: if he is well enough to stand
trial there, why not here and in Spain?" the Guardian said.

            On its front page, the Guardian claimed Monday that the United States is "quietly putting
pressure on the British Government" to have Pinochet sent home. "The US
Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright, has raised the issue twice in the last
fortnight with the Foreign Secretary, Robin Cook," it said, adding that
Washington's involvement has added to the British government's dilemma. The
Independent,
another British liberal daily, led
its front page Monday with a report that Straw would face a "huge revolt"
within the governing Labor Party if he allowed Pinochet to return home. The
British press has been divided on the issue along political lines, with the
conservative Times and Daily Telegraph calling for Pinochet's
repatriation and the Guardian and the Independent opposing
it.

            On the
continent, last week's decision by the British Law Lords to deny Pinochet
immunity from extradition to Spain was heralded as one of major international
importance. Spain's El Mundo last Wednesday called it "a truly historic decision" in
defense of human rights, but the conservative Le Figaro of Paris described it as "a bad decision" made
under political pressure. "For the first time, perhaps, a juridically
incompetent tribunal has rendered a verdict of universal significance," it
said. "Since no international tribunal exists to judge such events, the English
took the place of this institution which it is now more than ever necessary to
create." Devoting two full pages to the issue on Thursday, Le Monde of Paris called Straw's
legal obligation to give a "well-motivated" decision on the matter an "almost
impossible" one to fulfill.

            
On Sunday, Le Monde reported on an
inside page that Pinochet's lawyers were pleading "mental indisposition" as
grounds for sending him home, but it devoted its front-page lead to Monday's 44
nation Washington conference on the restitution to victims of the Holocaust of
possessions stolen from them by the Nazis and their foreign collaborators,
describing it as the most important such meeting ever held. It also published a
long article on the new Paris Museum of the Art and History of Judaism, "which
finally makes the Jewish cultural heritage enter into the collective French
memory."

            In an
editorial Monday, the same newspaper recalled the crimes against humanity
committed by the Congolese dictator Laurent Désiré Kabila--held responsible by
the United Nations for up to 300,000 deaths--who has been attending a
Franco-African peace summit in Paris. Justifying his attendance, Le
Monde said that "war brings inhumanity with it and peace is obviously the
first condition of the rights of man."

            Pinochet was squeezed off the front pages of German and
Italian newspapers Monday by the case of the Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah
Ocalan, whom Italy has refused to extradite to Turkey because its laws forbid
extradition of anyone to a country that practices the death penalty. Ocalan was
arrested in Italy at Germany's request, but Bonn has now dropped its request
for his extradition and has jointly proposed with Italy that he be tried for
terrorist crimes by a currently nonexistent international tribunal. Turkey
remains furious, and most Italian papers led Monday on negotiations being held
with Russia that would allow Ocalan be extradited to Moscow, the city from
which he was expelled to Rome without any warning to the Italian
government.

            Germany's Die Welt, under the front-page
headline "1998--A Year of Catastrophes," reported the Worldwatch Institute in
Washington as saying that a record 32,000 people have already died this year in
natural disasters around the world.

         
      
   
