
   
   
      
         
            

            
               
                  New
Republic , Nov. 30
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Nov. 13, 1998)
            

            The cover
story claims that probable House speaker apparent Bob Livingston will face the
same bickering and upheaval that Newt Gingrich did. Why? 1) The GOP coalition
is still wildly divided ideologically; 2) rules that impose term limits on the
speaker and committee chairs mean members are always jockeying for their next
powerful position; and 3) the self-imposed term limits of many Republican
members encourage them to eschew working within the system in favor of making
trouble.

            
               
                  New
York Times Magazine , Nov. 15
            

            
               (posted
Friday, Nov. 13, 1998)
            

            A special
issue about status. (It follows special issues about money and business travel:
We get the idea, already.) An essay distinguishes between class and status:
Class is Old World, assigned and never changing. Status is American, attained
and fought for. Accompanying short pieces reveal status symbols for various
cliques. For retirement-villagers, a valid driver's license; for vegetarians,
eating only raw foods; for Las Vegas gamblers, winning so much that you're
banned from the casino; for gay men, an adopted baby; for Catholic priests,
fancy cuff links, their only outlet for vanity.

            

               
                  Time and Newsweek , Nov. 16
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1998)
            

            Newt Gingrich is on both
covers, post-mortems on his resignation and the elections are inside. The
newsweeklies agree that the speaker's ego did him in. Time salutes Hillary Clinton's soldierly campaigning: She swung
voters, women especially, in almost all the races she worked on. One reason
why: As a wronged wife, Hillary is unassailable by the media or the GOP.
Newsweek gets the best quote from Jesse "The Mind" Ventura, Minnesota's governor-elect:
"In June I was at the University of Minnesota, and all these kids said, 'We're
voting for you.' And so I asked them, 'Why are you voting for me?' And the
leader of the kids said, ' 'Cause you're cool.' And I thought, 'Well, good
enough. I'll take that.' I am cool. ... Mentally, I'm still 21 or 22 in a lot
of ways."

            In Newsweek , George
Stephanopoulos outlines keys to an Al Gore presidential campaign: 1) He must
express a clear agenda, not just be "Clinton without the personal baggage." 2)
He must parry opponents' attacks better. 3) He needs to get lucky the way
Clinton did in 1992.

            

               Time notices the meteoric rise of the Onion , once a small
University of Wisconsin humor 'zine, now a force on the Web. Its secret is
deadpan parodies of news stories ("Report: Drug Use Down Among Uncool Kids").
Books and TV specials are on the way.

            
               
                  U.S.
News & World Report , Nov. 16
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1998)
            

            The lead
article leaps onto the Texas Gov. George W. Bush bandwagon. Bush,
who gets high marks for his positivism and inclusiveness, may succeed in the
2000 presidential race, because he can steer clear of the flailing Republicans
in Washington. Obstacle: He may not have the guts to withstand a "meat-grinder"
campaign. ... A story asks if Russia is the new Weimar. Parallels abound, from
tottering President Yeltsin (akin to weak pre-Hitler President Hindenburg) to
vulturous oligarchs (Weimar tycoons) to the staggering inflation and recession.
Two important differences: As yet, no proto-Hitler figure has emerged in
Russia, and Weimar didn't have itself as an example to avoid ... An
article surveys Asia's economic woes and finds glimmers of hope,
from Malaysia's currency stability to the nationalization of South Korea's
banks.

            
               
                  The
New Yorker , Nov. 16
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1998)
            

            An essay
hates the new "super-Capone" strategy used by prosecutors such as Kenneth
Starr. The government nailed Capone for tax evasion instead of murder. Now,
zealous prosecutors in search of big game use even pettier crimes to indict
friends of the true target, coercing testimony with the threat of legal
action. Starr pressured Kathleen Willey's friend Julie Hiatt Steele by
questioning the legality of her adoption of a Romanian orphan. "[I]nvestigative
techniques that seem perfectly reasonable when they're applied to murderers or
Mafia dons may be unreasonable when they're applied to speeders, jaywalkers, or
twenty-five-year-old seductresses." ... A story follows a Montana punk
band named Sputnik on its shoestring-budget tour of small clubs. Punks face a
dilemma: If they stay underground, they can't support themselves and they're
miserable; if they get popular, they've sold out and will be both self-loathing
and rejected by fans. Sputnik hasn't had to face the latter problem yet.

            

               
                  Weekly Standard , Nov. 16
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1998)
            

            An essay
argues that voters did not reject Republicans because of the way they handled
the scandal. In fact, Democrats won because they have seized congressional
control of issues such as Social Security, Medicare, and education, despite the
fact that GOP governors are winning with those same issues. The GOP's "bedrock
strength is its willingness directly to confront troublesome questions of
public and private morality. ... Someone must step forward who is capable of
making the case for conservative principle as the animating force of a
governing Republican party." ... A funny set of dispatches chronicles
Election Night at, among other places, the DNC victory party (hastily assembled
when it became clear there was something to celebrate), the RNC "victory" party
(still termed so despite being less than victorious), the AFL-CIO headquarters
(where they wouldn't watch ABC news because of a labor dispute), and a bar in
Marietta, Ga. filled with glum conservatives.

            
               
                  The
Nation, Nov. 23
            

            
               (posted
Tuesday, Nov. 10, 1998)
            

            The
cover package assesses
the future of progressive politics. A postelection editorial on ballot measures
asserts that progressives won big on campaign finance reform (in Massachusetts
and Arizona), but lost on cultural issues (gay marriage bans in Hawaii and
Alaska). (For 
                  Slate
               's take on this theory, see "The Triumph of ...
Liberalism?") ... An article cheers the ascendance of "living wage"
movements in local politics. The author argues that these movements, which aim
to bring higher wages and more benefits to workers, are beneficial even if they
force some companies out of the cities that support them.

            

               
                  Economist , Nov. 7
            

            
               (posted
Saturday, Nov. 7, 1998)
            

            The
cover editorial marvels that President Clinton has been
shown to be "a liar and a philanderer" yet "still he comes back laughing." But
Republicans should pursue impeachment, regardless of the election results: "If
they believed that they had grounds for an inquiry, it should be a thorough
one, for this election has no effect on those grounds." ... An essay says our two-party system is dissolving, especially at the
state level. Republicans and Democrats look more and more like each other. GOP
governors such as George W. Bush and Tommy Thompson are the leading edge of
this movement. State voters don't care about parties: They just want
politicians who get the job done. ... The Economist , marking its
"Science and Technology" section's 20 th anniversary, offers a
challenging science quiz. Question No. 2: "What is unusual about the sheep on
the Scottish island of Foula? a) They eat sea birds. b) They eat seaweed. c)
They eat each other." If you are going take the quiz, stop reading now. The answer is a).

            
               --Seth
Stevenson
            

         
      
   
