
   
   
      
         
            Big Holiday Question No. 148:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               A family
photo, the single word "Noel," a naked babe draped in colored lights sipping
champagne--there are many styles of holiday card, and now's the time to mail
them. You are invited to describe the Christmas card sure to be sent by a
corporation, world leader, or other personage.
            

            by 5 a.m. ET
Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Tuesday's question (No. 147)--"Australia; Convicts; George III?":
            

            
               "This seems like the
perfect place to release them." Where? What? Says who?
            

            "Monticello; my last
remaining slaves; says Strom Thurmond."-- Alex Balk ( Tim Carvell
had a similar answer.)

            "New Mexico; D.H.
Lawrence's oversexed girlfriends; says Frieda."-- Chris Kelly
            

            "The New York Times
op-ed page; tedious narcissistic ramblings; says Maureen Dowd."--Jennifer
Miller
            

            "Netscape NetCenter; our
constant busy signals; says Steve Case."-- Steven Levy
            

            "A chartered DC-9 at
35,000 feet; dozens of turkeys rescued from a poultry farm; says PETA activist
Christie Brinkley. ('Fly! Go free!' she said as fellow activists looked on in
horror.)"-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Comedy
attacks. It is difficult to be amusing in praise of something. But risking
holiday sentimentality (with the ready-made excuse that it's just the chestnut
stuffing talking), I'd like to mention some things I'm thankful for, like Tim
Carvell's two (!) responses involving pushing people or poultry out of
airplanes; Jennifer Miller's two (!) bits of self-revelation about her dark and
ferocious inner life and apartment; Larry Amaros' determination that the Olsen
twins wander parched and frightened, not merely in the Serengeti but during the
dry season. It's this kind of pathological attention to detail that makes
American industry the envy of the more materialistic parts of the world, and
"News Quiz" such a pleasure to work on. Thank you all very much. (Especially
the people whose feelings I've hurt by not mentioning your names here. I'm
sorry. If this were a TV show, I could run a long list of thank-yous that you'd
ignore on your way to the kitchen for another beer. And I'd be getting some fat
residual payments, that great Writers Guild health insurance, and jeez, just
the weekly paychecks would be terrific. I never should have taken that swing at
Brooke Shields.) Happy Halloween, everybody.

            
               The
Feminization of Culture Answer
            

            Oxygen Media, a new cable
network for women; hundreds of reruns of the Oprah Winfrey Show ; says
Oprah Winfrey.

            The
channel being created by former Nickelodeon president Geraldine Laybourne,
Marcy Carsey of Carsey-Werner-Mandabach, and Oprah Winfrey will "superserve
women," says Laybourne. While most of the programming will be original, there
will be plenty of room for reruns of Carsey-Werner shows, including
Cybil and Grace Under Fire , said Carsey. That's superservice.

            
               Parade of
Fun Extra
            

            Which of
these is a Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade float from a proud corporate sponsor
kids love, and which is one of the New York Public Interest Research Group's 20
Most Dangerous Toys?

            
               Toy or
Float?
            

            1. Mr. Peanut's Circus

            2. Hasbro's Teletubby Po

            3. Folgers Coffee's Rip Van
Winkle Wakin' Up

            4. Mattel's Baby Dil's
World

            5. Bell Atlantic's Maurice
Sendak's Wild Thing

            6. Playskool's Talking Pay
Phone

            7. Ocean Spray Cranberries
Inc.'s Peter Pan's Pirate Ship

            8. Hanes Hosiery's Party
Time!

            9. Unique's Flying
Propellers

            10.
Betacarotine

            

               Answers
            

            1. Float--and you know what
kids love with those salted nuts? Mr. Beer.

            2. Dangerous toy--vinyl face
made with phthalates, cause of liver cancer in laboratory mice.

            3. Float--celebrating kids'
willingness to settle for instant coffee?

            4. Dangerous toy--pieces
could cause choking.

            5. Float--kids are thankful
for reliable local phone service.

            6. Dangerous toy--plastic
coins can lodge in child's throat.

            7. Float--kids wave bye-bye
to urinary tract infections.

            8. Float--we gather together
to count the Lord's pantyhose.

            9. Dangerous toy--but not
nearly as dangerous as rusty flying propellers coated with broken glass.

            10. Actual part of parade,
listed as a "celebrity character for kids."

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
