
   
   
      
         
            

            
               The
Speaker Speaks
            

            Eight
years ago House speaker presumptive Bob Livingston, then an obscure junior
congressman, and 
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg, then an obscure writer
for the New Republic , were both on an official U.S. delegation to
certify the legitimacy of an election in Guatemala. It was Bush administration
policy that democracy was spreading in Latin America and that the election was
going to be fair. Weisberg wrote in TNR about his adventures:

            When we arrived back at
the Supreme Electoral Headquarters at the Hotel El Dorado two hours before the
polls closed, our delegation was already working on its statement. Bob
Livingston, a bluff Republican representative from Louisiana, had somehow
become our chairman and was summing up the prevailing consensus that the
election was free and fair. I pointed out that at least two of us had heard
charges of vote buying. "Vote buying isn't fraud," Livingston bellowed. "I
could show you vote buying all over Louisiana."

            The logic
here is that of Tallulah Bankhead's famous remark about cocaine: "Of course
it's not addictive, darling. I use it all the time." But Livingston's exquisite
ethical sensitivity should serve the new speaker well as he presides over
congressional investigations of presidential perjury, campaign finance abuse,
and so on.

            
               Where in
the World Is Michael Lewis?
            

            Many readers find it
suspicious that Michael Lewis has stopped filing dispatches from the Microsoft
antitrust trial, and they do not accept our explanation that he got bored,
found the hard wooden seats nightmarishly uncomfortable (especially combined
with the judge's power-mad restrictions on leaving to go to the bathroom), felt
he had said most of what he wanted to say, has a pressing book deadline, and so
on. They think he was canned because his reports were critical of
Microsoft.

            It's not
true. It simply isn't true. There is no evidence for it because it's not ...
not--well, it's all nonsense, is what it is. In short, it's not true. And if
we're stammering a bit, that may reflect the strain of not making any jokes.
Because we wrote a jokey little item in this space two weeks ago about having
Lewis killed and whatnot, and some people have taken it seriously. We hope that

                  Slate
                hasn't attracted the kind of readership that needs the word
"PARODY" or "SATIRE" or "HUMOR" stamped on every bit of good-hearted raillery
(and we hope that what we publish in these genres is funny enough not to
require labeling).

            
Lewis is alive and well and willing to testify
that 
                  Slate
                expressed nothing but disappointment at his entirely
voluntary decision that he'd had enough. One part of the problem here may be a
misunderstanding of how journalism, especially magazine journalism, works. How
mysterious is it, really, that a writer should drop out of a project before it
is completed? Answer: Not very. Does such an occurrence justify paranoid
speculation about corrupt motives and conflicts of interest? Answer: No, not at
all. Many people might suppose that it is highly unusual for a writer to agree
to produce some piece of writing and then fail to produce it, perhaps offering
a variety of whiny and often hypochondriac excuses about hard wooden benches
and so on. That is because many people do not know writers. In fact, such
behavior is extremely common. In fulfilling perhaps half of a medium-term oral
agreement to cover a trial of uncertain duration and with long periods of
boredom and discomfort, Michael Lewis is actually above average! So we thank
him for his dispatches and invite readers to check out his
replacements: Herbert Stein, Jodie T. Allen, and others still to come.

            Warning: The previous
paragraph contained jokes.

            

               --Michael Kinsley
            

         
      
   
