
   
   
      
         
            No. 135:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               "Are you
ready to make real noise?" This slogan is part of a new multimillion-dollar
campaign--to persuade whom to do what?
            

            by noon ET Wednesday to
e-mail your answer (newsquiz@slate.com).

            
               Responses
to Monday's question (No. 134)--"Dewey Eats Truman":
            

            
               Participants are
invited to provide a postelection headline that, in a just universe, would run
Wednesday in the media outlet of their choice.
            

            "D'Amato Wins; Sulfur
Fumes at Victory Bash Fell Three."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Women's Wear
Daily : D'Amato Concedes. Vows Return to Runway."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            "USA Today : Midwest
Autumn Colors Extravaganza."-- Brooke Saucier
            

            "CNN
Newsstand/Time : Sen. Al D'Amato Sprayed With Deadly Sarin Gas."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "All Good Candidates Lose;
Eric Zicklin 'Too Busy' To Vote."-- Eric Zicklin
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            "By the time you read this, I
will already be politically dead." This is the election message Al D'Amato
could send just a few short hours from now. (Or a few regular-size hours.) This
would be great for the country but tough on "News Quiz," already perilously low
on favorite targets. Tina Brown--gone. Strom Thurmond--could go like that.
(Imagine me snapping my fingers, but in an attractive Italian suit and a better
apartment.) Gwen Verdon--that was a freak accident; I'm sick about it. The
trend is clear.

            Consider
cartoons: Tom needs Jerry, Bugs needs Elmer, J. Edgar Hoover needs decent
Americans exercising their political freedoms. Our foes define us. Far more
quiz responses kicked at D'Amato than at anyone else. (News Quiz encouraged
this piling on, but certainly some of it was heartfelt.) What will we do
without him? Sure, Rudy Giuliani is drawn to national office like a rat to the
flame, if the flame is a trash fire or maybe a pile of old tires. (Sorry,
moth.) But his fall will be swift and extremely amusing, yet brief. Whom will
we choose who more durably embodies coldhearted thugishness, a lack of vision,
and a deep contempt for our democratic institutions? Perhaps we need a retreat.
Can we meet this weekend at Bohemian Grove?

            
               One Angry
Man Extra
            

            Actual highlights of Bill
Gates' video testimony yesterday at the Microsoft antitrust trial:

            I don't remember using those
words.

            I don't know.

            I don't remember sending
it.

            Well, how would I know
that?

            I have no idea what those
numbers are.

            I don't remember.

            I really don't know what that
means.

            I have no idea what you're
talking about when you say "ask."

            I don't know.

            I'm not sure.

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
