
   
   
      
         
            No. 147:

            By Randy
Cohen

            
               "This
seems like the perfect place to release them." Where? What? Says who?
            

            by 10 a.m.
ET Wednesday (please note the early deadline) to e-mail your answer to
newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Responses
to Monday's question (No. 146)--"Funny as a German Banker":
            

            
               Fill in the blank.
Rolf-Ernst Breuer, chairman of Germany's Deutsche Bank, may acquire America's
Bankers Trust for $9 billion despite declaring, "Our motto is '__________
first.' "
            

            "Our Teutonic sense of
order demands that we acquire a company starting with the letter 'A'
first."-- Sam Coppersmith
            

            "Sell off the hedge funds
first."-- Steven Levy
            

            "Brat first."-- Jennifer
Miller ( Michael Gerber had a similar answer.)

            "If we're going to buy
Bankers Trust, let's wait until Bob Hope dies first."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Kill Pvt. Ryan first.
(But no, Randy, that's not fair, and you know it. You can be the birthplace of
Heidegger, Hegel, Leibniz, Bach, Beethoven, Brecht, and Martin Luther, but you
start one little world war ... OK, two.)"-- Chris Kelly
            

            Click for more
responses.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Ask a German question, expect
a World War II answer, which to those of us with delicate bourgeois
sensibilities, risks trivializing the Holocaust. With sufficiently dark humor,
any topic can be fair game. But the enormity here is so daunting. From one
point of view--mine-- Apt Pupil is unacceptable because it uses the
Holocaust as dramatic fodder for a lame and shallow drama, but Hogan's
Heroes is acceptable because its dimwitted POW humor steers clear of the
Holocaust. Needless to say, this is not a position one could defend for very
long. It's a tough call, particularly given the good will of "News Quiz"
participants.

            More
cheering: The Anti-Defamation League's survey describes a continuing drop in
America's "hard core anti-Semites"--from 29 percent in 1964, to 20 percent in
1992, to 12 percent currently. Clyde Haberman notes in the New York
Times , "The older and more poorly educated a person was, the more likely he
was to hate Jews." If only there were some kind of greeting card to send these
people, maybe--given their poor education--featuring a cartoon bear.

            
               Deutsche
Marks the Spot Answer
            

            "Our motto
is 'Europe first,' " said Rolf-Ernst Breuer last March, leading many to believe
that Deutsche Bank would not expand into the United States. But Monday Deutsche
confirmed its $9.67 billion offer for Bankers Trust, a cash transaction that
would create the world's largest financial services company, with over $800
billion in assets.

            
               Free
Speechless Extra
            

            Question: "They're really in
the vanguard of setting the agenda for the corporate culture along the lines of
the radical gay movement." Who is?

            Answer: Levi Strauss &
Co., says William Donahue, president of the Catholic League for Religious and
Civil Rights.

            For an AIDS prevention event,
Levi's planned to display a Christmas tree decorated with condoms at Wollman
skating rink in New York's Central Park, the well-known public space. Donahue's
group, the same organization that protested the opening of Corpus
Christi , pressured the rink's managers into canceling the event. With
characteristic commitment to free speech, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani applauded the
cancellation, calling the Levi's plan "one of the most idiotic ideas I've ever
heard of."

            

               Disclaimer: All submissions will become the property of Slate and
will be published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may publish your
name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
