
   
   
      
         
            The Triumph of

            As Democrats eagerly tout
their break-even performance in House, Senate, and gubernatorial races as a
grand triumph, and as Republicans spin the same numbers into an affirmation of
the conservative status quo, both sides are overlooking the election's most
astonishing results: the ballot initiatives.

            Initiatives have made news
in recent years by advancing conservative causes: limits on gay rights,
immigration, and affirmative action. And there were certainly some initiatives
to delight the right this year, too. Voter initiatives approved in Alaska and
Hawaii banned gay marriage. An initiative in Michigan upheld a ban on assisted
suicide. Initiatives in the deep South further restricted the rights of
prisoners (who knew there were any restrictions left to impose?). An Alaska
measure made English the state's official language. And a Washington initiative
modeled on California's Proposition 209 abolished state affirmative action
programs.

            But the
overriding theme of the 1998 initiatives is not conservative at all. It is that
American voters, at least in this complacent year, are a lot more liberal than
Republican pollsters would have you believe.

            Initiatives rewarded both lefty libertarians and
paleoliberals. On the libertarian front, five states--Alaska, Nevada, Oregon,
Washington, and Arizona--put medical marijuana on the ballot, and five states
approved (or in Arizona's case, re-approved) it. That means the entire Western
flank of the nation now permits marijuana as medicine. Oregon voters also
killed an initiative to re-criminalize marijuana possession. Initiatives in
California and Missouri expanded legalized gambling, a libertarian cause
increasingly embraced by Democrats. And both Colorado and Washington rejected
bans on partial birth abortion.

            (The
Colorado abortion vote is a powerful argument against those who say that
initiatives are dangerous because they are too crude and voters are too easily
conned. At the same time Coloradans refused to ban partial birth abortion, they
also voted to require parental notification for children seeking
abortion. The split vote on abortion suggests a subtlety among voters that
critics of initiatives rarely acknowledge.)

            
The initiatives also expressed a surprisingly
strong faith in government and a willingness to expand it. Voters gave a
full-throated endorsement to public education. Californians approved a $9
billion school bond issue, and Rhode Islanders OKed a (much) smaller one.
Coloradans rejected a proposal to give tax credits for private school tuition,
and South Dakotans rebuffed an effort to stop financing schools with property
taxes.

            Five
states--Arizona, Maine, Michigan, New Jersey, and North Carolina--endorsed
ballot initiatives to expand state environmental funding and, in all but
Arizona, by huge margins. South Dakotans voted to restrict corporate hog
farming, as well. Only in Oregon, where a massively broad ban on logging was
proposed, did an environmental initiative fail. On animal rights, too, voters
cast ballots for more government regulation, choosing to ban cockfighting in
Arizona, animal baiting in Missouri, and animal traps and horsemeat sales in
California. (Alaska did reject a ban of wolf traps, and Ohioans voted to
continue the hunting of mourning doves.)

            Washingtonians voted to raise the minimum wage. Floridians
imposed a new waiting period for gun purchases. Arizona and Massachusetts both
passed campaign finance reforms allowing public funding of state candidates.
Nebraska--conservative Nebraska--turned down an effort to impose mandatory
restraints on state spending. Iowa gender neutralized its constitution (New
Hampshire did not), and Florida passed an equal rights initiative. And, in the
"it may not sound like progress but it is" department, Utah residents
overturned a 102-year-old law limiting the property rights of married women,
and South Carolinians struck the miscegenation ban from the state
constitution.

            Democrats
afflicted with a foolish optimism may view these initiative victories as a sign
of an impending liberal majority. I suspect they represent something else: the
generosity of the prosperous. According to exit polls, American voters feel
happy and rich. These votes reflect a generous, expansive mood. Sick people
want to smoke a joint? Let 'em, what harm does it do? More money for schools?
Sure! Clean water? You bet! These are not liberal activist votes, cast because
the initiatives advance a progressive agenda. They seem to be smile-on-the-face
votes, cast because the initiatives are modest and well-intentioned and, at
worst, harmless.

            
               Weather
Update
            

            On
Monday and
Tuesday, in homage to the "turnout is everything" analysts, I predicted the
outcome of tight races based on the USA Today weather map. Today is
judgment day. How accurate was the weather forecast election forecast?

            
               New
York
            

            
               Prediction: Dry
weather increases Democratic turnout, and Chuck Schumer wins.

            
               Result: Dry weather,
and Schumer won.

            

               Maryland
            

            
               Prediction: If it
rains, devoted Republicans vote and Ellen Sauerbrey unseats Gov. Parris
Glendening.

            
               Result : It rained,
but Glendening won easily.

            
               North
Carolina
            

            
               Prediction: Rain
should suppress Democratic turnout, and Sen. Lauch Faircloth wins
re-election.

            
               Result: It rained,
but Democrat John Edwards defeated Faircloth.

            
               South
Carolina
            

            
               Prediction: Rain
should suppress Democratic turnout. Republican Gov. David Beasley should win
re-election, and Republican Senate candidate Bob Inglis should defeat incumbent
Sen. Fritz Hollings.

            
               Result: Fog and rain
across the state, but Hollings and Democratic gubernatorial challenger Jim
Hodges won.

            

               Georgia
            

            
               Prediction: Showers
across the state might deter Democrats, but if it stops raining in Atlanta that
could be good news for Democratic gubernatorial candidate Roy Barnes and
Democratic Senate candidate Michael Coles.

            
               Result: Scattered
showers across the state but mostly decent weather. Barnes won the
governorship, but Coles lost to incumbent Sen. Paul Coverdell.

            

               Kentucky
            

            
               Prediction: Rain
throughout the state helps Republican Jim Bunning win the Senate seat.

            
               Result: It rained, and
Bunning won narrowly.

            

               Nevada
            

            
               Prediction: Dry,
pleasant weather helps Democratic incumbent Sen. Harry Reid.

            
               Result: Dry weather,
and Reid eked out a victory.

            

               California
            

            
               Prediction: Generally
good weather helps Democrats Barbara Boxer and Gray Davis. If it rains in
Northern California, Republicans Matt Fong and Dan Lungren could win
upsets.

            
               Result: Good weather
held, Boxer kept her Senate seat, and Davis won the governor's race.

            

               Washington
            

            
               Prediction: If it
doesn't rain in Seattle, Democrats turn out for Sen. Patty Murray and she holds
her seat.

            
               Result: It didn't
rain, and Murray fended off challenger Linda Smith.

            

               Wisconsin
            

            
               Prediction: Cold but
dry weather boosts Democratic Sen. Russ Feingold

            
               Result: No rain and
Feingold defended his seat.

            

               Illinois
            

            
               Prediction: If it
rains downstate but is clear in Chicago, Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun might steal a
come-from-behind win.

            

               Result: It rained downstate but not in Chicago. Even so, Moseley-Braun
lost.

            
               Overall
Result for the Mother Nature Index: 54 percent (7 out of 13 races picked
correctly), which is not much worse than the average election prognosticator
and a lot better than the average weather forecaster.

         
      
   
