
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Turkey
            

            

               
                  Slate
               's Thanksgiving schedule: Our weekly text file, 
                  Slate
on Paper
               , will be in your e-mail
in-box or available for download two days early, around midday Wednesday. A nearly full
week's worth of 
                  Slate
                will also be posted online Wednesday. After
that it gets pretty quiet around here, but check in throughout the long weekend
for "Today's Papers" and in case Chatterbox has a postprandial thought or
two.

            

               Fixings
            

            "So," we e-mailed Steven
Brill, "did they ask your question?" In 
                  Slate
                last week, the
founder and editor in chief of Brill's Content proposed a killer question
for the House Judiciary Committee to ask Kenneth Starr. The question, which
actually was a long series of questions, boiled down to: "Will you waive any
privileges you have so we can get to the bottom of whether your office has been
illegally leaking to reporters?" Brill replied that several Democrats had asked
the question, but Starr had refused to answer on the grounds that a federal
judge had ordered the investigation of these leaks to be kept confidential.
Brill noted that this order for confidentiality had been requested by Starr
himself.

            Brill's
question could have been a lot simpler. It could have been something like:
"Have you or anyone in your office leaked information from grand jury testimony
to the press--before or after the testimony was given?" As any newspaper reader
knows, the correct answer to this question is obviously yes. But Starr couldn't
say yes because he's said variations on no for months and would be conceding a
public lie. Is this beginning to sound familiar?

            
Brill didn't do it the easy way for two good
reasons. First, he is admirably opposed to perjury traps, and therefore he
didn't want to be seen as proposing a tooth for a tooth. And in fact he did not
propose one: His question involved stripping away Starr's protections against
the truth, not forcing him to repeat the lie under solemn oath. Second, Brill,
as a media philosopher, is understandably queasy about using the law to "out"
journalists' confidential sources. He has an explanation of why it's OK in this
case, but his queasiness moderates his delight at putting the screws on Starr
the way Starr put them on Clinton.

            But let
us rise above high-mindedness for a moment. The symmetry between Starr's case
against Clinton and the case against Starr himself is so striking that it would
seem heavy-handed in the plot of an opera. The general arc of self-destruction
is the same: Like Clinton, Starr did something wrong but not fatally wrong.
Then he issued a mixture of lies and weasels about it, making it virtually
impossible for him to give an honest answer if asked a straightforward
question. That gave his enemies a way to trap him into an undeniably serious
crime: perjury under oath in an investigation of alleged high crimes by the
president of the United States. In both cases, the investigation itself would
produce the crime.

            Many details are also eerily similar:

            Starr's leaks pretty clearly
violated the federal rules of criminal procedure, just as Clinton's lies in the
Paula Jones deposition pretty clearly violated the perjury laws. But neither
the rules nor the laws are usually enforced in circumstances like these.
Prosecutors leak all the time.

            As Brill points out in the
December issue of his magazine, Starr's weasels laughably echo Clinton's.
Clinton has said oral sex doesn't count. Starr has said that leaking grand jury
testimony before it's actually delivered doesn't count.

            Both men skillfully make
their weasels do double duty: keeping them kosher on a technicality and
misleading the public about the actual facts. Is Clinton saying he didn't
commit perjury because of the peculiar definition of sex in the Paula Jones
suit, or is he saying he actually didn't have sex? Is Starr saying he didn't
violate the criminal procedure rules because he doesn't believe they apply to
pre-testimony leaks, or is he saying he actually didn't leak? The answer is yes
to all four. Starr has been especially squirmy about this. He has made his
pre-testimony-leaks-don't-apply argument in sealed court papers and also has
publicly denied believing anything so foolish, Brill points out.

            Like Clinton, Starr has used
nonexistent or self-imposed secrecy requirements to avoid answering troublesome
questions. Clinton invoked grand jury secrecy, though you are always free to
reveal your own testimony. Starr, as noted, asked for the leak investigation to
be put under seal, then publicly regretted his inability to discuss a matter
under seal.

            Starr is not persuaded by the
White House's various novel theories of "privilege" (exemption from testifying)
for Secret Service agents, family pets, and so on. In fact, the very raising of
these privileges in court--and dropping them when the judge says no--is one of
the counts in Starr's this-is-not-an-indictment of the president. Yet Starr,
too, has run a few novel and self-interested public interest theories up the
flagpole, such as his claim that his leaking (if it exists, which it doesn't)
is covered by a rule that allows prosecutors to reassure the public about the
integrity of an investigation. His investigation's integrity, he notes, has
been challenged. This is a delightful example of what lawyers call a "bootstrap
argument": If anyone points out that you've broken the rules, that's a
challenge to your integrity, which requires reassuring the public, which means
you have no longer broken the rules! Anyway, as Clinton's lawyer David Kendall
pointed out at the hearing, this rule is about official statements, not
anonymous leaks.

            Finally,
despite all the evasive techniques, Clinton and Starr have both told the lies
they struggled to avoid. No one thinks even oral sex, as practiced outside the
laboratory, actually escapes the Paula Jones suit's stringent definition of
which organs must come into contact with which body parts. As for Starr, as
Kendall pointed out at the hearing, the independent counsel put out a press
release the day Flytrap broke declaring, "Because of confidentiality
requirements, we are unable to comment on any aspect of our work." (At the
hearing Starr told Kendall he disagreed with his own press release.)

            
In his massive reply to Brill's massive
"Pressgate" article, Starr wrote that Brill was "mistaken" to assume that it
was the "practice" of Starr or his office "to release to media the contents of
statements made by witnesses outside the grand jury." He wrote, "Let me repeat
categorically: the OIC [Office of Independent Counsel] does not release grand
jury material directly or indirectly, on the record or off the record." I
suppose the words "practice" and "grand jury testimony" leave Starr a tiny bit
of wiggle room. It would be a joy to watch him perform that particular
wiggle.

            Letters to Brill, of course,
are not under oath. At the impeachment hearing last Friday, Barney Frank,
D-Mass., tried to spring the perjury trap, but Starr thwarted him by repeating
that he didn't do any illegal leaking (he didn't add "by my definition") and
that he couldn't discuss the matter because it was "under seal" (he didn't add
"at my request").

            But all is not lost.
Kendall, the president's lawyer, not even intending a perjury trap, asked Starr
whether anybody had been fired for leaking, and Starr said, "No, because I
don't believe anyone has leaked grand jury information." That's awfully close.
Once again, words such as "believe" and "grand jury information" give Starr
some possible defenses. But invoking such defenses publicly would destroy his
reputation. He could invoke them if called before a grand jury and hope that
word didn't leak out, but tragically--and mysteriously!--it has a way of doing
so.

            Starr, in
short, fell into a perjury trap that no one had even set. Should we snap it
shut or release him?

            The best case that can be made for letting President
Clinton off the hook for Flytrap--besides the fact that everyone is sick to
death of it, which strictly speaking is not a legal argument--is that he was
caught in a perjury trap. Consensual sex between adults is no crime, lying
about an ancillary matter in a civil suit deposition is a crime that would
never normally be prosecuted ("Oh yes it would" ... "Oh no it wouldn't" ...
yadda, yadda, yadda), and so Clinton's one legally indefensible act was lying
to Starr's grand jury. After four years of investigation, in other words,
Starr's only good card is a crime he carefully arranged for Clinton to commit
just three months ago. And you don't crucify a guy for that.

            Or that's the argument. Good
enough? Maybe not. Clinton still lied under oath to a grand jury. Perjury is a
serious offense. Those who make and enforce the law have a special obligation
not to flout it. It's not about sex, it's about ... you know. So where does
that leave Kenneth Starr?

            

               --Michael Kinsley
            

         
      
   
