
   
   
      
         
            Several Hundred Years of Solitude

            Roughly two-thirds of the
way through the enthralling Edo show at the National Gallery of Art, there's a
glass case containing two outsize dishes, each a couple of feet in diameter.
White and cobalt blue, these porcelain dishes have as their decoration fanciful
maps of the world, with the islands of Japan in the center. Like Saul
Steinberg's famous map of the United States from the New Yorker's point of
view, these maps relegate the rest of the world to the truncated periphery,
with such speculative identifications as the "Land of Dwarves" and the "Land of
Women." Of course, by the 1830s, when these dishes were made, the Japanese knew
better but, like Steinberg's, the maps capture the cultural confidence of the
playfully arrogant islander. The humiliating visit of the black ships of
Commodore Matthew Perry, demanding trade rights and treaty concessions for the
United States, was still two decades away, and the Japanese could retain for a
little longer the illusion that their two centuries of peace and feudal harmony
would last forever. By 1868, when Edo was renamed Tokyo, the dream was
shattered, and Japan began the hard work of entering the modern world.

            "Edo: Art
in Japan 1615-1868," expertly organized by Robert T. Singer of the Los Angeles
County Museum of Art, shows off roughly 300 objects from this peaceful
interlude. Almost all are from Japanese collections, and many are designated as
"National Treasures." The Edo period extended from the end of the civil wars of
the 16 th century (the source of all samurai films) and the
consolidation of power under the warlord Tokugawa Ieyasu, to the Meiji
Restoration, when Japan adopted something resembling a parliamentary monarchy
under the emperor. The successive Tokugawa leaders established their power base
around their castle in Edo and developed a clever system of keeping the feudal
lords (the daimyo) under their tributary thumb. The daimyo were required to
spend alternate years in Edo, while their families lived there all the time, as
hostages of sorts. This arrangement called for constant traveling, and these
travels to and from Edo were carried out with a good deal of pomp and
circumstance. Many of the objects on display in the National Gallery derive
from these ceremonial processions. There are cases filled with elaborate and
witty helmets from the early 17 th century, shaped like the knobby
turbo seashell or with rabbit ears appended; swords designed more to impress
than to kill; saddles decorated with such whimsical and hardly threatening
motifs as powder puffs and cosmetic brushes.

            The layout of the show is neither by chronology nor by
medium, and the big thematic divisions--"Style," "Samurai," "Travel and
Landscape," and the like--give the impression that time stood still.
Politically, and to some extent artistically, the impression is accurate. (A
survey of American art from the landing of the Pilgrim Fathers to the end of
the Civil War--the chronological extent of the Japan show--would look
ridiculous laid out on a similar model.) From the stunning rooms of the Style
section, you ascend one of I.M. Pei's sky-lit spiral staircases (transformed
into a bamboo and pebble grove) to the more austere world of Samurai, "Work,"
and "Religion and Festivals." All seems orderly and timeless, just as the
Tokugawa--with their xenophobia and rigid social class boundaries--wanted it.
Toward the end of the show, though, especially in the section devoted to
entertainment, a sense of historical change enters in. In the pleasure quarter
of Edo, the feudal divisions between commoners and nobility broke down, and
this "floating world" gave birth to new and vigorous forms of popular
entertainment. Sumo wrestlers and Kabuki actors were the celebrities, and
artists advertised their prowess in cheap color woodblock prints (see Katsukawa
Shun'ei's The Sumo Wrestlers Kajihama and Jinmaku , circa 1790, and
Toshusai Sharaku's The Kabuki Actor Otani Oniji III as the Servant
Edohei , 1794).

            From the
start of the show, two opposing tendencies are immediately evident. One is the
retreat from materialism and the modern city into a monochromatic refuge of
meditative calm. This tendency is associated with Zen and looks back to the
tradition of the scholar-aesthete hermit imported centuries earlier from China.
Everything is pared down, black-and-white, elemental. Some of the finest of all
Zen paintings are on view in Washington, including the bare-bones Circle,
Triangle, Square , by Sengai Gibon, perhaps the single most famous Zen
image. At the other extreme is the eager embrace of urban chaos, masquerade,
and color. The woodblock prints of the late 18 th century adopt
technicolored effects drawn from many different traditions, including Western
perspective--which struck Japanese artists as a tricky and artificial set of
rules. Both these contrasting traditions, Zen austerity and floating-world
carnival, brought about a greater individualism in Japanese art. Zen masters
were known for their eccentric and unpredictable behavior, and a kindred
idiosyncrasy was valued in the Edo demimonde.

            
In all the sections of the show, even the least
conducive to frivolity, there is an element of playfulness and oddball
aesthetic daring. In the Religion and Festivals section, for example, one finds
among pictures of Buddhas and Shinto deities (see Ogata Korin, Gods of Wind
and Thunder ) a large ink-brushed hanging scroll depicting nothing but
vegetables (Ito Jakuchu, Vegetable parinirvana , circa 1780). In the
center is a long white radish with forked roots, surrounded by melons and
gourds and turnips and squash. This painting, as any 18 th century
viewer would recognize, is a parody of scenes of the dying Buddha surrounded by
his followers. And yet, this painting of mourning vegetables has a peculiar
gravity about it. Jakuchu, a vegetarian who managed his family's vegetable
business, seems to have taken vegetables pretty seriously. More obvious in its
intent to amuse is a striking 19 th century Kabuki costume with a
shoot-me-here target on the back and an arrow through the bull's-eye. Here
again, though, there is an appealing restraint in the elegant design and muted
greens of the costume. The most satisfying objects in the Edo show are those
that find ways to reconcile the two opposing tendencies--Zenlike austerity and
floating-world flamboyance--of the period.

            There is
another reason, though, for the extraordinary pleasures this exhibition
provides, and that is the uncanny familiarity of Japanese art for Western
viewers. Exotic and remote as this island world was, it had a special appeal
for late 19 th century Europeans and Americans. Impressionism, the
most popular of all Western art movements, is inconceivable without the
provocation of Japanese art. The Edo show includes the woodblock print
depicting an angular courtesan (by Keisai Eisen) that Vincent van Gogh used as
the basis for his own painting ( The Courtesan , 1887), now on view in the
van Gogh show elsewhere in the National Gallery. Because of the tremendous
vogue of such images, collected and reworked by Edgar Degas and Claude Monet
and Mary Cassatt and then adopted in our own popular culture, we recognize
immediately the polymorphous personae of the floating world--the sumo
wrestlers, the geisha and her admirers (see Kitagawa Utamaro, The Mosquito
Net , circa 1797), and the swashbuckling samurai.

            And which of our own mountains is more familiar to us than
the cone of Mount Fuji? The nomadic traveler Lafcadio Hearn compared it to an
inverted half-open fan, or "some exquisite sloping of shoulders toward the
neck." In Katsushika Hokusai's Sudden Wind on a Clear Day (circa
1830-1832), the wind has exposed the whole sweep of the landscape, and the
visible grain of the wood reads as the ridges of the mountainside. Returning to
those playful ceramic maps of the world, one notices that the artist has dipped
his brush in blue and painted the profile of Fuji on the main island of Japan.
For a split second it's possible to imagine that it really is the center of the
world.

             

         
      
   
