
   
   
      
         
            The Golden Fleece

            In the 1980s, the spectrum
of fabric quality ran from beloved natural fibers down to mediocre cotton-poly
blends, then dipped into trashiness with pure polyester. Today polyester fleece
is the uniform of hikers, climbers, backpackers, college kids, and people who
want to look like them. As in the '70s, you're nothing in the '90s if you're
not in polyester--preferably polyester from Patagonia, The North Face, Marmot,
REI, or L.L. Bean.

            Don't
write this off as a mere fashion fad. Polyester is undergoing a renaissance
because fleece is truly a miracle fabric: It's warm and durable but
lightweight, and it dries faster than natural fibers. At the same time, it
feels natural to the touch, not scratchy like the poly of yore. And while
fleece takes over the sweater and sweat shirt market, other synthetic fabrics
are horning in on the long underwear business, with equally good reason.
Polypropylene and other newer polyester blends beat out cotton for keeping your
skin dry and warm. In short, in high performance clothing, fake is great.

            Fleece is a 100 percent polyester fabric that's made like
terry cloth. First a machine knits the fleece, leaving tiny loops on its
surface, then the fabric is treated in three ways. 1) Napping: Machines smack
the fleece with tiny wires that break the loops. 2) Combing: The strands of
fleece are groomed to stand up crew cut straight, thereby creating air-trapping
space. The trapped air creates warmth. 3) Shearing: The upright strands are
shorn to a uniform height, which stops the strands from getting tangled up like
dreadlocks, a problem that leads to pilling.

            All this
manufacturing goes on not at Patagonia or The North Face or any of their
competitors--these companies just design and sew the garments. The fleece used
in high end outdoor clothing is made by two textile firms: Malden Mills and
Dyersburg, the Coke and Pepsi of fleece. Malden Mills holds a near monopoly on
high performance fleece (to find out why it's a monopoly you can love, click ),
while Dyersburg feasts on the leftovers. By all accounts, both mills produce
superb fabric.

            
So, is all fleece basically the same? It is if
you're the kind of shopper who only buys premium brands. Otherwise you have to
contend with cheap Asian imports. People I talked to at Malden and Dyersburg
complained mightily about shoddy Asian fleece flooding the market and
undercutting them. In this case, there's a good reason to buy American: Most
Asian fleece has been napped, but it hasn't been combed or sheared. Thus 1) Its
subpar air trapping begets a pitiful warmth-to-weight ratio; and 2) it tends to
pill. Some Asian fleece will even pill--horrors!--before it leaves the sales
rack! (You can test this by rubbing the fleece with your palm.) To be fair, the
Americans admit that Asian fleece has made great strides, but the West is still
best.

            Asian
fleece is mostly relegated to down-market brands--the name "Kmart" was floated
by one Malden spokeswoman. The top brands proudly announce that they use Malden
(trademark: Polartec 100, 200, or 300) or Dyersburg (trademark: E.C.O. or
Dyertech). All except for Patagonia, that is, which pretends its Synchilla
fleece is something else. Despite costing more and supposedly being better,
Patagonia's fleece is from Malden and Dyersburg, just like everyone else's. If
there's some other difference between them, I don't know about it, because
despite many phone calls and e-mails, Patagonia refused to answer my questions
on this point.

            Why not buy the cheapest gear you can find that uses
American fleece? Because design makes a difference. Compare Campmor's $60
Polartec 300 jacket with The North Face's $160 Denali jacket, also featuring
Polartec 300. Both use the same fabric, Malden's excellent heaviest weight
fleece. There are three good reasons to pay $100 more for the Denali, and one
so-so one: 1) The Denali has a nylon shell over its torso, improving wind
resistance. 2) The Denali has more pockets, with zipper closures. 3) The Denali
has flaps behind the zippers in its armpit vents (all high-tech jackets have
zippered armpit vents), while the Campmor has no flaps, so cold seeps through.
4) The cool North Face logo and jacket cut will impress your gearhead friends
more than the budget Campmor logo and cut.

            To test
the designs of these and two other popular fleece tops, I went to Duke
University's zoology department, where many walk-in refrigerators and freezers
are to be found. The entrants in my little competition were the Campmor, the
North Face, the Marmot E.C.O. vest ($89, fleece made by Dyersburg from recycled
plastic soda bottles), and the Patagonia Synchilla Snap-T ($86, the it-fleece
of the prep-school, Phish-fan set).

            
Duke's walk-in fridge runs a cool 40 degrees
Fahrenheit. With a long sleeve, polypropylene T-shirt as a base layer (more on
that later), I wore each fleece in the fridge for about 10 minutes. The Marmot
vest performed best, keeping my torso toasty but, of course, leaving my arms
quite cold. The other fleeces would have been plenty warm during exercise, but
standing still I felt a bit chilly. The North Face did a fine job here, while
the Campmor faced the aforementioned armpit zipper problem. The Patagonia had
two drawbacks: While in calm conditions the Snap-T was the warmest of the
entrants, it was especially nonwind-resistant (the fridge had a fan). That was
in part because it had no nylon lining, but it was still less wind-resistant
than other competitors without a lining. Also, the Patagonia had no pockets for
my hands--a shocking oversight.

            Next, I ventured into the
freezer, a chilling minus 8 degrees Fahrenheit. None of the fleeces came close
to weathering this kind of cold. An outer layer is clearly necessary in these
conditions, even when you're vigorously exercising (which I tried to do in the
freezer until I quickly became lightheaded from the icy air).

            Overall
winner: The North Face Denali jacket, with a great design but at $160 the
highest price tag by far. Sometimes you get what you pay for.

            General conclusion: Look for designs that minimize fleece's
weaknesses. Fleece's Achilles' heel is that, without a nylon coating, it lacks
any wind resistance--a slight breeze that wool and cotton would turn back cuts
right through fleece with a nasty bite. Two other weaknesses of fleece to keep
in mind: 1) If you fall onto a nubby carpet while wearing fleece, as I did
intentionally, the fleece gets irreparable bald spots at the impact points.
This is especially relevant to all the children's fleece being sold now--tykes
are prone to carpet falls. 2) Fleece easily melts, even when exposed for less
than a second to the flame of a cigarette lighter.

            The things
to look for are a good fit, an attractive look, a nylon shell, and ample and
amply sized pockets. Fleece makers offer a few other options. Shearling fleece
looks more like sheep's wool, with a pebbly texture. Instead of being sheared,
shearling's strands are coaxed into clumps. Some think the resulting nooks
create better insulation and wind resistance. I didn't try shearling, but no
one I spoke with recommended it. Another option is to blend spandex with fleece
to make it stretchier and more form-fitting. Malden does this with its
Powerstretch fabrics, available in The North Face's Aurora vest, among other
products.

            
Now that fleece is the insulation of choice,
other fake fabrics have grown popular as "base layers." Synthetic long
underwear used to be made of polypropylene; some of it still is. The advantage
was that polypropylene dried much faster than cotton, spreading sweat across
the fabric to increase the sweat's surface area and speed up evaporation. But
the fabric has severe weaknesses, as I found out from testing a Wickers brand
long sleeve T-shirt made of pure polypropylene ($17.99): 1) Polypropylene
retains odor (just trust me on this). 2) It's got the same icky feeling against
your skin as groovy '70s polyester shirts. Sleeping in it was uncomfortable,
and in time I predict it might cause itch- and abrasion-themed nightmares. 3)
While it spreads your sweat across the fabric surface until it evaporates, the
sweat stays against your skin.

            Lately,
better synthetics have come along. Powerdry, a polyester fabric designed by
Malden Mills, and CoolMax, a polyester concoction from DuPont, boast two layer
"dimensional wicking," an industry buzz phrase meaning sweat leaves your skin
instantly then spreads out on the top layer of the fabric. I tested a Duofold
short sleeve T-shirt made of CoolMax ($15.99) and an REI zip turtleneck made of
Powerdry ($34). According to Malden, Powerdry's "patented BiPolar construction
has two unique surfaces: the soft inner layer rapidly wicks perspiration away
from the body, while the durable outer layer spreads moisture for maximum
evaporation." I have no reason to doubt them. DuPont claims CoolMax has
"four-channel fibers" that give it "the fastest drying rate of any fabric." The
only difference I could detect between them was in their feel against my skin.
CoolMax and Powerdry fared equally well in battling the sweat I worked up
running laps around 
                  Slate
               's offices, but CoolMax gets the nod
because not only does it not retain odor, even when worn for two days and
nights without deodorant, but it truly feels like silk. I'm going to buy
CoolMax for all my underwear--it's a terrific product.

            If you
missed the link, click to see why Malden Mills is a monopoly you can love.

         
      
   
