
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Beloved
                (Buena Vista Pictures). After weeks of buildup, critics
are ambivalent about Oprah Winfrey's adaptation of Toni Morrison's novel:
"[T]he movie is undeniably a labor of devotion and intelligence, but, in the
end, a labor is just what it is" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment
Weekly ). The film gets a few outright raves, and Oprah's performance is
universally lauded. "As for Winfrey, one can only say, My God, what a blaze of
genius she is" (Stephen Hunter, the Washington Post ). But critics praise
the film's intentions more than the film itself. Other complaints: 1) At nearly
three hours, the running time is too long. 2) The plot is hard to follow if you
haven't read the book. 3) The film is too literal an interpretation of a book
whose very essence is obliqueness and indirection. (Find out more about the
film at the official site.)

            

               
                  Bride of Chucky
                (Universal Pictures). For the fourth sequel to a
movie that wasn't great to begin with, this installment in the story of a
demonic doll is getting surprisingly good reviews. Detractors are predictably
disgusted: "[T]he novelty of a bloody horror film built around a malevolent
doll carrying the soul of a serial killer has worn thin" (Lawrence van Gelder,
the New York Times ). But fans say the addition of Jennifer Tilly as
Chucky's human girlfriend (who is later transformed into his doll-girlfriend)
ratchets up the star power and the fun. They also praise the film's "flair,"
"wit," and willingness to make fun of itself (Leonard Klady, Daily
Variety ). (Visit "Chucky's Toybox," an unofficial fan site that has film clips,
pictures, news, and a message board all about Chucky.)

            

               
                  Practical Magic
                (Warner Bros.). Muddled and pointless is how
critics describe this girl-power witch movie. Despite two dazzling leading
ladies (Nicole Kidman and Sandra Bullock), the film is said to be unsexy; and
though a comedy about three sisters cursed with witchcraft who inadvertently
kill their boyfriends, it is also said to be unfunny. Also annoying: the
obligatory "Dancing Around Like Idiots" scene (Mick LaSalle, the San
Francisco Chronicle ) and "estrogen-soaked soundtrack" (Susan Wloszczyna,
USA Today ). A few indulgent critics call it a "guilty pleasure" that is
"transcendentally silly" (Janet Maslin, the New York Times ). (Visit the
official
site.)

            

               Theater
            

            

               
                  Corpus Christi
               , by Terrence McNally (Manhattan Theater Club).
After getting the best possible PR--an angry religious group demanding
censorship and a slew of editorials citing the First Amendment--McNally's
latter-day gay interpretation of the life of Jesus is universally panned.
"Corpus Christi has all the power of a slap across the face with a limp
lettuce leaf" (Jennifer Harper, the Washington Times ). Contrary to
expectations, the play is neither lascivious nor particularly blasphemous. It
"positively exudes a puppy-like friendliness and eagerness to ingratiate"
(Donald Lyons, the Wall Street Journal ).(Learn
more about the protests against the play; read Jacob Weisberg's
review in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               Music
            

            

               
                  Live: 1966
               , by Bob Dylan (Columbia Records/Legacy). Critics wax
poetic about the official release of the hitherto bootlegged "Royal Albert
Hall" concert: "[S]tunningly good. The band creates waves of music that crash
onto the shore and Dylan is almost giddy as he rides them in" (David Hinckley,
New York Daily News ). This pivotal concert bridges the gap between
Dylan's beloved acoustic phase and his controversial electric phase, and the
interplay between a defiant Dylan and the disapproving crowd is said to fuel
the performance. (
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg finds the album
"disappointing." Read his review/attack on the myth of bootlegs in general.)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  The
Poisonwood Bible
               , by Barbara Kingsolver (HarperFlamingo). Kingsolver's
latest is hailed as a step forward in maturity and scope. The story of a white
missionary family in the Congo, the novel is praised for its attention to
detail, female voices, and critical take on colonialism. A minority of
reviewers find the political messages "heavy-handed" and say the novel is more
like a "starklylit morality play" (Michiko Kakutani, the New York
Times ). (Listen to Kingsolver read an excerpt from this book.)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Oct.
14:

            
               Movie -- Holy
Man ;

            
               Movie -- The
Mighty ;

            

               Movie -- Slam ;

            
               Movie -- A Night at
the Roxbury ;

            
               Dance -- Swan
Lake (Neil Simon Theatre, New York City);

            
               Book -- Work in
Progress , by Michael Eisner with Tony Schwartz;

            

               Book -- Pure Drivel , by Steve Martin.

            Oct.
7:

            

               Movie -- Antz ;

            
               Movie -- What Dreams
May Come ;

            

               Movie -- Happiness ;

            
               Book -- I Married a
Communist , by Philip Roth;

            
               Television -- The
Secret Diary of Desmond Pfeiffer ;

            

               Art --"Van Gogh's Van Goghs: Masterpieces From the Van Gogh Museum,
Amsterdam."

            Sept.
30:

            

               Movie -- Ronin ;

            
               Movie -- Urban
Legend ;

            
               Book -- Two
Cities , by John Edgar Wideman;

            
               Opera -- A Streetcar
Named Desire ;

            
               Music -- Painted
From Memory , by Elvis Costello with Burt Bacharach;

            

               Television -- Felicity ;

            

               Art --"From Van Eyck to Bruegel: Early Netherlandish Painting in the
Metropolitan Museum of Art."

            Sept.
23:

            
               Report -- The Starr
Report ;

            
               Book -- Bag of
Bones , by Stephen King;

            
               Book -- Model
Behavior , by Jay McInerney;

            
               Book -- Birds of
America , by Lorrie Moore;

            
               Movie -- Rush
Hour ;

            
               Movie -- Permanent
Midnight ;

            

               Movie -- A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries .

            
               --Eliza
Truitt
            

         
      
   
