
   
   
      
         
            Murdoch and Gays

            
               If you missed the most
recent installments of this column, here they are: posted Friday, Nov.
6, and Tuesday, Nov. 3.
            

            Britain's biggest
circulation newspaper, Rupert Murdoch's tabloid the Sun , asked on its
front page Monday, "Are we being run by a gay Mafia?" This was a comment on the
fact that Tony Blair's 21 member Cabinet until lately contained four known
homosexuals. One of them, Culture Secretary Chris Smith, has been openly gay
for many years. Welsh Secretary Ron Davies recently had to resign after an
encounter in a well-known gay haunt in south London, which led to him being
mugged. Trade and Industry Secretary Peter Mandelson, the architect of Blair's
election victory last year, was "outed" last week on television, and
Agriculture Secretary Nick Brown outed himself on the weekend after a former
gay lover tried to sell the story of their relationship to Murdoch's Sunday
paper, the News of the World .

            In its front-page editorial,
the Sun , which used to have a homophobic reputation, claimed that the
Brown affair had "set alarm bells ringing"--"[n]ot because people despise gays,
or fear them, or wish to pillory them," but because "the public has a right to
know how many homosexuals occupy positions of high power." It went on, "Their
sexuality is not the problem. ... The worry is their membership of a closed
world of men with a mutual self-interest ... there are widespread fears that
Members of Parliament, even ministers, are beholden to others for reasons other
than politics."

            The paper
also announced a "hotline" for gay MPs to phone. "Do you want to come out?" it
asked:

            Are you a gay MP who'd
like to come out? The Sun has set up a hotline on 0171 782 4105 for ministers
and MPs who are secretly homosexual. Don't worry about the cost, we'll ring you
back.

            I called
several times, but the line was always busy.

            Murdoch's upscale newspaper, the Times, welcomed what it saw
as a new public tolerance in the generally favorable response to Brown's
admission of his homosexuality and said Monday that "the media appear to be
lagging behind the electorate whose mores reflect a more forgiving view of what
they expect of their MPs. ... American politics appear to be undergoing a
similar transformation." "Last week's elections suggest that American voters
either did not care about President Clinton's private life, or saw it as
irrelevant to their political choices."

            The
liberal Guardian
accused Murdoch of playing a double game by allowing one of his British
tabloids effectively to "out" a Cabinet minister and another to announce "that
homosexuality is a state of being so unremarkable that it is astonishing that
people still think it worthy of comment." Asking how Murdoch would justify the
News of the World 's outing of Brown, the Guardian said in an
editorial Monday: "It is, of course, a futile question. Mr
Murdoch lives in America and can never be held accountable for the effects his
British papers have on our culture. He cosies up to politicians or parties he
thinks might be useful to the promotion of his business interests. He berates
them or threatens to withdraw his affections when they do not jump with
sufficient alacrity to his orders." Of Blair, who has enjoyed close relations
with Murdoch, the paper said, "With every passing day he has a clearer idea of
Mr Murdoch and his true nature. He should sup with a long spoon."

            
In Israel, the liberal Ha'aretz led its front
page Monday with a report that political pressure at Cabinet level was
preventing the army from taking action against at least five new hilltop
outposts that settlers have built in the West Bank since the Wye agreement was
signed two weeks ago. "Other than confiscating a single tractor last
week--returned to its owner yesterday--the army has taken no action to stop the
construction," the paper said. On Sunday, Ha'aretz urged the Israeli
government to ratify the Wye agreement soon, despite the renewal of suicide
attacks against Israelis by Palestinian terrorists. It said in an editorial, "A
diplomatic policy of vengeance--a vicious circle of terrorism and
settlement--would not only disrupt implementation of the Wye accord, it would
also steer Israeli-Palestinian relations away from the path of accord, perhaps
irrevocably."

            In the conservative Jerusalem Post, Professor Efraim
Inbar of Bar-Ilan University said in an op-ed
piece Monday that Israelis were now more interested in their personal
security than in the security of their country. "The new notion of personal
security has eclipsed the traditional Israeli preoccupation with assuring the
security of the Jewish state and its society in the midst of a hostile
environment," he wrote. But he warned against this tendency, saying that
Israeli society's "unwillingness to sacrifice some of its standard of living to
acquire better defenses against less concrete and immediate threats could be
destructive."

         
      
   
