
   
   
      
         
            Israel: Giving Peace a Chance?

            
               If you missed the most
recent installments of this column, here they are: posted Friday,
Nov. 20, and Tuesday, Nov. 17.
            

            Le Monde of Paris showed sudden
optimism Sunday about a Middle East peace settlement. In an editorial titled
"Israeli Neorealism," it said that the hand-over of the little West Bank town
of Kasbatieh last Friday shows that "very slowly, in distrust, recrimination,
and mutual regret, by the government of Benjamin Netanyahu and also by Yasser
Arafat, the Israelis and the Palestinians are progressing toward peace."
Pointing out that Netanyahu had battled against the Oslo accords and promised
his fellow countrymen that they wouldn't have to give up territory in exchange
for peace, Le Monde said he has now come to recognize that territorial
concessions are necessary. "In his day, another Likud leader, Menachem Begin,
went down the same road," the paper said. "He said that Sinai belonged to the
Israelis. And to make peace with Egypt, he gave it Sinai, even charging a
certain Ariel Sharon--now foreign minister--to expel the settlers who had
established themselves there. Are we permitted to dream?"

            On the
continuing showdown with Iraq, the liberal Independent of London
called for the lifting of sanctions because, "in the long run, free trade is
the surest way to undermine totalitarianism." In an editorial Monday (once you're on the page, scroll down to read
the piece), the Independent said it is now widely assumed that "the
object of Western policy in Iraq is the removal of Saddam Hussein--a polite way
of saying killing him, because it is hard to see how he might be dislodged
otherwise." But the paper said that even if it is argued that the rule of law
would continue to be flouted as long as Saddam was in power, "there can be no
consensus that the death penalty is called for."

            In Paris, Libération published extracts from a conversation between its
Moscow correspondent and Galina Starovoitova, President Boris Yeltsin's former
adviser, three days before her assassination in St. Petersburg last Friday.
"The greatest threat today is the lack of a liberal anchorage in the country,"
she was quoted as saying. "The people are disoriented. There is a political
void." The conservative Le
Figaro of Paris said Russia is haunted by "political terror" and described
Starovoitova as the latest victim of "a series of politico-Mafia murders."

            Despite the furor in Turkey
over Italy's refusal to extradite Abdullah Ocalan, the Kurdish rebel leader,
the Turkish Daily
News said Saturday that "it would be wrong and even self-defeating to
make the entire Italian nation pay the price for the mistakes of a few
misinformed and misguided people in their government. ... We do not and should
not have a vendetta against the Italian people. So let us stop this campaign of
antagonism towards Italy and start using our resources and friends in Italy to
convey our clear messages to the masses."

            London's
Financial Times pointed out in
an editorial Monday that Ocalan is being sought on charges of violence and
terrorism not only in Turkey but also in Germany. It proposed that Germany
request his extradition from Italy and put him on trial for the offenses of
which he is accused there. At the same time, it called on the Turkish
authorities "to answer the genuine demands of the Kurdish people for more
autonomy and more economic development." A military solution "is neither
workable nor stable," the paper said. "That should be the clear and repeated
message from Turkey's friends in Europe, the US and the Middle East."

            
The Independent reported on its front page Monday that six leading London law
firms are being investigated on suspicion of laundering profits from drug
trafficking, gun running, and contract killings by international racketeers,
including Colombian cocaine barons and the Mafia. Saying the firms include
"household names," the paper added that they are suspected of acting as fronts
for clients who include "crime syndicates in eastern Europe, Italy and the US,
British gangs and the Colombian cartels." It quoted police sources as saying
that arrests are imminent.

            In Israel Monday, the
Jerusalem Post said that,
next week, Israel will "officially release a so-called dirty list, containing
the names of more than a dozen international organizations, both public and
private, which the government alleges hold information on Holocaust victims and
other related activities, which they are refusing to publish." Bobby Brown, the
Israeli prime minister's adviser on Diaspora affairs, will release the names
during the State Department's Holocaust era restitution conference starting in
Washington Sunday, the paper said, adding that the list will include the
Vatican, the Czech Republic, the KGB, and Britain's MI-5 espionage service.

            On the
sale in New York of Vincent van Gogh's Self-Portrait Without Beard for
$71 million, the Financial Times --noting that his Portrait of Dr.
Gachet , bought in 1990 for $82.5 million by Japanese industrialist Ryoei
Saito, reportedly was sold off to satisfy creditors after Saito's death--said
that "Van Gogh, the artistic genius, has been reduced to the status of mere
collateral." It concluded, "The price of artistic genius, it seems, is often a
better guide to the state of the banking market than the aesthetic spirit of
the age."

         
      
   
