
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Drawing upon her rich
experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her friends) responds to questions
about manners, personal relations, politics, and other subjects. Please send
your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries should not exceed 200 words in
length. Please indicate how you wish your letter to be signed, preferably
including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I am heartsick about my
sister. Well, actually, about her boyfriend. She's been seeing someone
exclusively for more than a year. It's exclusive on her part, but everybody
knows he is cheating on her. That is not the only problem. He belittles her in
public and is quite a cheapskate. I have gently tried to tell her she is too
good for this lout, but she will have none of it.
            

            
               I feel
helpless, and I worry for her. I am the older sister, if you hadn't guessed. Is
there anything to be done?
            

            
               --Banging My Head
Against a Wall in Portland
            

            Dear
Bang,

            Prudie is reminded of the
delicious Dorothy Parker remark "She has put all her eggs in one bastard."

            How sad for you to be a
bystander while your sister is having a romantic near-death experience. Alas,
the kind of bystander you are is helpless because people in these
relationships have blinders on and defenses in place. Prudie, too, abhors these
transcendentally horny louses, but outside observers don't get a vote.

            Your
sister, alas, does not regard Lover Boy as a problem. Yet. But have hope. The
day will come when your sib will see things clearly for herself, and her loving
sister will be there to help her pick up the pieces. Since you have gone on
record about what you think of this boulevardier , say no more. It would
be the vocal equivalent of throwing good money after bad.

            --Prudie,
sympathetically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My company has sales
teams, and my problem has to do with my traveling partner. We are in the air a
lot, and in hotels and restaurants. I am mortified much of the time because
"Elaine" is always dropping things into her purse. On airplanes she helps
herself to the little liquor bottles (she doesn't drink) and those plastic salt
and pepper things. In restaurants she cleans out the bread basket and transfers
everything to her purse.
            

            
               I know
when she is seen doing this people think we are a pair of nuts (and assume
she's doing it for both of us), and I also worry that this is stealing. Can you
help me come to terms with this situation? Thank you.
            

            
               --No Sticky Fingers
From Chicago
            

            Dear No
Stick,

            Prudie is sympathetic to your
traveling partner because, well, Prudie herself is partial to those little
brown sugar packets in restaurant sugar bowls. While never having had the
inclination to transfer an entire bread basket to her handbag, Prudie has on
occasion taken a particularly good tasting piece of bread for later--provided
there is a paper napkin for wrapping. If one was to filch a cloth napkin, that
would be stealing.

            Your friend's appropriation
of food put on the table, you should know, is not dishonest. The two of you
have essentially paid for everything served to you. Granted, most twosomes
would not polish off the entire contents of a bread basket, but it is
the diners'. The same is true for the airplane offerings.

            If it will
help you feel better about things, encourage "Elaine" to ask the server for a
take-home container for whatever she wishes to transport out of the dining
room. Prudie finds most restaurants more than happy to oblige. If, however,
your associate thinks she is engaging in petty larceny and gets her jollies
from purloined rolls, indulge her, knowing that it is a harmless habit.

            --Prudie, portably

            
               Dear
Prudence,
            

            
               I'm a happy-go-lucky,
75-year-old retiree who, alas, gets incredibly annoyed when
strangers--typically on the phone--call me by my first name. I'm a liberal
Democrat and am not old-fashioned, but such pseudo "friendliness" turns me
off.
            

            
               It also makes dealing
with business people difficult. Example: Just the other day I called a salesman
regarding refinancing the house and left my name and number. When he called
back he said, "Hi John, this is Mr. Blank."
            

            
               I told him I'd prefer to
be called Mr. Jones. He got annoyed and told me he has close-knit relationships
with his clients. He then continued to call me John throughout his explanation
of what refinancing involved.
            

            
               When
he finished I told him, again, I did not wish to be called John. He became
flustered, said goodbye, and hung up. I've not heard from him since. I ask you,
am I out of step with the world? Is it OK for young secretaries to assume we're
on a first-name basis? Quite frankly, I consider such an approach an invasion
of my privacy. I also consider it a put-down. What sayest thou?
            

            
               --Wondering in Tucson,
Ariz.
            

            Dear
Mr. Won,

            Prudie is in your camp.
People who presume to use a first name in a business call seem thoughtless.
They register on the Prudometer right next to those who invite you to "Have a
nice day."

            Using the first name of
someone who is unknown to you is presumptuous, disrespectful, and improper.
Your "Mr. Blank," who tried to make a case, yet, for why it was OK to call you
John, sounds like a horse's patootie. That he didn't follow up on the financial
transaction is no loss. Surely you will find someone with equal skills who will
call you "Mr."

            Prudie, on occasion, has
asked service people on the other end of the line who launch into a first-name
address, "Do we know each other?" This is usually sufficient for them to swing
into a "Mrs." mode. Only a clod would persist.

            What is
behind this pseudo familiarity/equality, Prudie thinks, is California
casualness and a touchy-feely cultural shift that have replaced formality and
civility. Rest assured that you are not out of step--or if you are, that Prudie
is right there with you.

            --Prudie, respectfully

            
               Dear
Prudence,
            

            
               I have moved back to my
hometown and renewed acquaintances with old high-school girlfriends. As time
goes on we are becoming closer and spending more time together. The problem is
this: Most of them smoke, and I do not. When we go out to dinner we always sit
in the smoking section. When I visit their homes, they smoke constantly. When
they come to my home, they are forever going out to the balcony to smoke. I
know that breathing this smoke is harmful to me. Normally I avoid smoke, yet I
pretend it doesn't bother me with these friends.
            

            
               The
question is, should I consider my own health and the fact that when I am with
them I am inhaling probably a pack of cigarettes? Should I stop seeing them? I
don't really want this, but what else to do? Yes, I could ask them not to
smoke, but since there are five of them who do smoke, it seems like the
majority rules.
            

            
               --L.G., St. Petersburg,
Fla.
            

            Dear L.,

            Your old high-school
girlfriends are causing you to regress to ... high school. You are feeling that
you've got to go along with everybody else to "fit in." Prudie is mindful of
the fact that a gemütlich bunch of girlfriends is wonderful, but this
crowd is hazardous to your health, the deleterious effects of secondhand smoke
having been accepted by most people.

            It is
interesting that this clique is composed entirely of smokers. There is a slim
possibility that your chums, out of affection for you, will not smoke in your
presence and would give up the smoking section in restaurants. Failing that,
bear in mind that the concept of majority rule applies to elections and
community decisions, not health risks. Prudie is reminded of a Russian
expression: Once your head is cut off, there is no use crying about your hair.
If you become ill--or worse--a group of girlfriends will be meaningless. Please
put your lungs before your social life, otherwise Prudie will worry.

            --Prudie,
deep-breathingly

         
      
   
