
   
   
      
         
            Election Night Excuses

            

               1 We did better than Newt Gingrich said we
would.
            

            Gingrich,
with typical chutzpah, has predicted the GOP could pick up 40 or more House
seats. Democrats, with equal chutzpah, will portray anything less as a
Democratic victory.

            
               2. We
did better than the pundits said we would.
            

            The
conventional wisdom on likely Republican gains has ranged from six to 20 House
seats and from three to five Senate seats. If Democrats hold the GOP below the
upper end of this range, they'll claim victory. If Republicans beat the lower
end, they'll claim victory.

            

               3 We did well, considering how heavily we
were outspent.
            

            Democrats
will use this alibi in nearly every close race. Republicans will claim that
many of their candidates were outspent, if you count the additional "union
money."

            
               4. We did
well, considering the president's difficulties.
            

            Democrats
will offer this excuse without acknowledging that it implies the public is
still upset with the president's behavior. Simultaneously, they will assert
that the election is a mandate for ending the investigation of the president's
behavior.

            
               5. We did
well, considering the backlash against the investigation.
            

            
Republicans will offer this excuse without acknowledging that the backlash is
mainstream. Instead, they'll portray it as a surge of turnout among diehard
Clinton supporters.

            
               6. We did
well, considering the six year itch.
            

            Democrats
will point out that the president's party usually loses dozens of congressional
seats in his sixth year. What they won't mention is that the reason Clinton
didn't lose those seats in his sixth year is that he lost them in his
second.

            

               7 Americans re-elected the Republican
majority.
            

            This is
the ultimate Republican fallback. Even if the GOP somehow loses seats in both
houses, it can ignore its relative setbacks and reassert its absolute
supremacy.

            
               8. The
Republicans failed to win a filibuster-proof majority.
            

            This is
the ultimate Democratic fallback. If Democrats lose fewer than five Senate
seats, they'll say they weathered the tide because voters decided not to
entrust Republicans with complete control.

            
               9. We
won the close races.
            

            Both
sides will use this line. "Close races" are the ones your side won. If a race
looked close but you ended up losing it, then it wasn't really close, so you
needn't mention it.

            
               10.
Their candidate won on local issues.
            

            A good spinner never
admits that his party's candidate lost because of the national party's
positions. If an anti-health maintenance organization, pro-public-education
Democrat wins, Democrats will say it's because voters liked her positions on
HMOs and education. If she loses, they'll say its because voters disliked her
position on building a local freeway.

            

               11 Their candidate won with vicious negative
ads.
            

            If their
candidate wins, it's because his negative ads distracted voters from the
issues. If your candidate wins, it's because voters agreed that the other
candidate was wrong on the issues--as your candidate pointed out in his
negative ads.

            
               12. Our
candidate lost because of vicious media attacks.
            

            If your
candidate ran negative ads and their candidate didn't and your candidate still
managed to lose, you can always accuse the media of attacking your candidate.
This argument comes in particularly handy when the media have criticized your
candidate precisely for running negative ads.

            
               13. Our
candidate lost because he screwed up.
            

            If an
anti-tax, family values Republican wins, it's because voters liked his
positions on taxes and family values. If he loses, it's because he was unfairly
savaged by the local press for calling his opponent a putzhead.

            
               14. Our
candidate did well in a tough district.
            

            The
Democratic Party recruits each candidate by telling her that her district
opposes the Republican candidate on the issues. The Democratic candidate spends
a year on the campaign trail repeating this line. Then, on election night, the
candidate and the party claim that she lost because the district was
Republican.

            

               15 Our candidate did well, considering he
was up against an entrenched incumbent.
            

            This is
the least bogus spin. Generally, incumbents do have enormous advantages in
clout, money, and name recognition. But when a challenger has these advantages
and still manages to lose, his party will invoke the "entrenched incumbent"
excuse anyway.

            
               16. Our
candidate did well to make the race close.
            

            This is
the corollary to spin No. 9. If your candidate was blown out, you brush it off
by saying it was never really a race. If your candidate wasn't blown out, you
call this an achievement.

            
               17.
Their candidate won thanks to a vocal minority.
            

            This will
be the trademark spin of this year's elections. Everyone knows turnout will be
low. So if you lose, you can always claim that the silent, nonvoting majority
supported your candidate.

            

               18 Their candidate won on our
issues.
            

            The GOP's
1996 treatment of Clinton is an excellent example. Throughout the campaign,
Republicans call the Democratic candidate a liberal. After he wins, they say he
won by running as a conservative.

            
               19. Our
candidate lost on their issues.
            

            If
Republican Matt Fong loses the California Senate race, conservatives will say
he blew it because he's a "squish," i.e., a moderate. If Democrat Glenn Poshard
loses the Illinois governor's race, liberals will say he blew it because he's
anti-abortion.

            
               20. The
polls show voters support us.
            

            If your
party gets creamed, you can always find comfort in the exit polls. Somewhere in
the blizzard of questions, a couple of findings will suggest that voters sort
of agreed with your party's position on something or other, even if they voted
against all your candidates. And after all, isn't that what really counts?

            
               Recent
"Frame Games"
            

            "The Flytrap Ad
War": Why the GOP's new ads are too clever by half. (posted Friday, Oct.
30, 1998)
            

            "Clinton's Peace
Therapy": Is the Middle East deal a new chapter or a reminder of Monica?
(posted Wednesday, Oct. 28, 1998)
            

         
      
   
