
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Drawing upon her rich
experience of life, Prudence (Prudie to her friends) responds to questions
about manners, personal relations, politics, and other subjects. Please send
your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com. Queries should not exceed 200 words in
length. Please indicate how you wish your letter to be signed, preferably
including your location.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I
disagree with your opinion that nine years of living together equals marriage.
A person is either married or not, like being pregnant. While the father can be
friendly and caring to his daughter's live-in boyfriend, he is not a son-in-law
and shouldn't be treated as such. Call me old-fashioned, but I believe
commitment means marriage. Anything less is just dating.
            

            

               --Happily Married
            

            
               Ms.
Duffy Lewis
            

            
               Mt. Pleasant,
S.C.
            

            Dear
Hap,

            Prudie will split the
difference with you. Of course you are right that not being married is not
being married, and living together does not "equal" marriage. Commitment,
however, need not involve marriage. Prudie knows committed couples whose
relationships have all the ingredients of a really good marriage, and all
that's missing are recognition from the state and contractual obligation.
Prudie, in fact, can speak of this with firsthand knowledge.

            The age
and experience of the couple may be a factor. A committed relationship between
twentysomethings would, of course, have different underpinnings than one
between middle-aged people who have had, perhaps, a marriage or two under their
belts.

            --Prudie,
perspectively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Though I do realize that
you are the expert on all things advisory, I would like to suggest a different
solution for Dorothy S. on the subject of bad breath. Tic-Tacs.
            

            
               Keep
some on your person, and when confronting the foul offender, produce them, pop
a few into your mouth, and offer them to the co-worker. It may not work, but
I've always gone by the rule "If someone offers you a Tic-Tac, take it."
They're also nice because they are not quite as blatant as breath mints but get
the job done.
            

            

               --Hopefully Helpfully,
            

            
               R.
Kriger
            

            
               Brookline,
Mass.
            

            Dear
Hope,

            Prudie
thanks you for your diplomatic idea--and guesses the Tic-Tac people do, too. As
the Brits might say, your approach is brilliant. It being only polite to offer
a companion what one is oneself ingesting, you will have spared the offender
embarrassment and, with any luck, caused the smellable breath to be sucked
away.

            --Prudie, refreshingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I am
married to a very nice man 10 ½ years older than I. The problem is I don't love
him. I've tried to explain this to him, but he just keeps apologizing for
things. I feel like I'm living with my brother. (By the way, Hubby is 60, and
I'm 50. He makes me feel old before my time and embarrasses me often in
public.) He also lost a very good paying job shortly after marriage, and now
we're in debt up to our eyeballs. How can I make him understand I want
out?
            

            
               --Please Help!
            

            Dear
Plea,

            With this
announcement: "I am filing for divorce." If it's really a no-hoper, you must be
assertive and spare both of you more years of unhappiness. If Prudie sounds
lenient regarding divorcing, it is because she herself has lost more than one
husband ... in divorce court. Life is too short, my dear, to continue with a
husband who feels like a brother, makes you feel old, embarrasses you, and has
put you both in debt.

            --Prudie,
experientially

            

               
                  Prudie,
               
            

            
               I was recently at a
restaurant, and when the bill came, the waitress had written at the bottom,
"Suggested tip: 17.5 percent." Then when the credit card slip came, the
"suggested tip" had been written in. I was appalled for so many reasons ...
that she had to put a suggested tip (as if I didn't know) and that she put it
higher than normal (the service certainly was not above and beyond the call of
duty) and that she further did not give the option of a lower tip.
            

            
               What
does Prudie suggest in such a situation? I have no problem with the extra 2.5
percent above the norm, but to have it forced on me in such a forward manner
seemed extremely rude.
            

            
               --Peeved in Palo Alto,
Calif.
            

            Dear
Peev,

            Everyone knows that a
restaurant waitstaff has many jobs, but giving instructions for the amount of
the tip is not one of them. Prudie would give anything to know what you did,
caught off guard as you were. She hopes that you thought fast and lined through
the "notation" and wrote in what you wanted to leave.

            You would
not have been out of line to have brought this aggressive and off-putting
action to the attention of the owner or manager, whichever one was present that
night. For future reference, should a serving person deliver substandard
service, the diner is perfectly within his or her rights to specify "no tip."
This way it is clear that the lack of a tip is neither an oversight nor
miserliness but a reminder that a tip is a voluntary thank-you for good
service.

            --Prudie, gratuitously

         
      
   
