
   
   
      
         
            On Murdoch, Malaysia, and Murder

            
               If you missed the most
recent installments of this column, here they are: posted Tuesday, Nov.
17, and Friday, Nov. 13.
            

            Friday's Sydney Morning Herald led with a
story on the attempt by Rupert Murdoch's News Corp to start a
fourth TV channel, calling its effort "an ambitious campaign to shake up
Australia's television industry." Current foreign ownership laws prevent
Murdoch from acquiring a TV network, since he already owns 70 percent of
Australia's newspapers. Nonetheless, his team is pressing for meetings with the
government to change the policy.

            The
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation conference in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, has
concluded--to little end, said a Nov. 19 report in the Herald : The
summit was "plagued by internal fighting over free trade and human rights" and
yielded only a meaningless communiqué. Hong Kong's South China Morning Post, more
optimistic about the "pledge to mount a region-wide economic growth campaign
and launch simultaneous stimulus measures across the Asia-Pacific to lift the
region out of its slump," reprimanded U.S. Vice President Al Gore for his
comments on Malaysian human rights issues. "There is still a world of
difference between speaking to a political forum in Washington and at an Asian
banquet where you are the guest," scolded an SCMP editorial, adding that
Gore's criticism of the Malaysian government for imprisoning former Deputy
Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim has probably "sharpened the divide" between Asian
countries and the United States.

            Meanwhile, British papers focused on the defeat in the
House of Lords of the government's proportional representation bill. The vote,
the papers concurred, leaves next year's European elections in chaos. It marks
the fifth and final defeat of this particular bill and the most serious defeat
of any government bill since 1986. Had it passed, the bill would have altered
the system to allow voters to elect a party rather than a candidate. Some
papers, including the Daily Telegraph, noted that Tory Lords leader Viscount
Cranborne has said that if the bill is reintroduced, his party might follow
parliamentary traditions and "cooperate."

            A London
Times feature took up the debate over whether Hillary
Clinton, soon to grace the cover of Vogue , is "the sexiest woman alive"
or merely "has matured as a First Lady better than a fine wine." For this
"once-bespectacled feminist who recently turned 51," gushes the Times ,
"her new role as cover girl is merely belated proof of her transformation--no
snorting--into one of the most revered and glamorous First Ladies ever."

            
Both the Jerusalem Post and Ha'aretz led
with Israel's imminent pullback from the West Bank--the first phase of
implementing the Wye agreement. The pullback, which may take only a few hours,
is scheduled to take place today in conjunction with the release of 250
Palestinians from Israeli prisons and the opening of the Palestinian
International Airport in Gaza. Before signing off on the pullback, however, the
Israeli Cabinet will review Palestinian compliance to date with Wye. According
to Ha'aretz , settler leaders deluged Parliament with last-minute
letters, faxes, and phone calls protesting the move.

            From
Belgrade, Yugoslavia, text from Radio B92 gives us the latest on Kosovo: Kosovar
Albanian negotiators have called for a referendum to determine the future
political status of the 90 percent ethnic Albanian province in southern Serbia.
A NATO rapid response team to rescue international monitors in Kosovo could be
ready by early December. Meanwhile, in Belgrade, several hundred teaching staff
and students of Belgrade University's philology department stopped work for an
hour yesterday to protest the government's dismissal of certain faculty
members. This is a prelude to a planned full-fledged boycott starting Nov.
23.

            Pakistan's News International and India's Times both ran brief
reports on the massacre of nine members of a Christian family in Pakistan
Wednesday. The unidentified killers, said News International Pakistan ,
used the victims' blood to scrawl "This is the end of black magic" on the
walls. The Times noted that Christian groups in the region have faced
harassment by Sunni Muslims because they oppose the imposition of Shariat
Islamic Law.

            The Zimbabwe
Standard reported what it called "one of the most disgraceful
incidents of unbecoming behaviour at the Parliament of Zimbabwe": A female
member of Parliament was verbally and almost physically attacked--"nearly
beaten up"--by a fellow legislator in the Members' Bar last week. The attacker
claimed the victim was part of a reactionary gang plotting to remove the city
mayor from office. The incident, said the Standard , is being
investigated.

         
      
   
