
   
   
      
         
            The C Word

            Cynics think postelection
spin is just a one-dimensional game of manipulating expectations and persuading
the media that you surpassed them. For the most part, that's true. But spin can
also be profound. It can address more than who's up and who's down. It can
redefine people, issues, and events by rotating their facets so that people see
them from new perspectives. For this reason, the contest of interpretation that
consumes the 24 hours after an election is as important as the election itself.
It defines the election and its mandate.

            This is
what's happening to Newt Gingrich and the Republican Party in the wake of
Tuesday's elections. Gingrich has built a career and a movement by manipulating
terms such as "liberal" and "welfare state" to caricature and marginalize his
enemies. Now the tables are turned. The word "conservative" is being
manipulated by Gingrich's enemies and the media to caricature and marginalize
Republicans. If Gingrich isn't careful, the C word could go the way of the L
word, and conservatives could go the way of liberals.

            Around 9 on Election Night, under fire from journalists
over the GOP's mounting disappointments, Republican flacks began falling back
on their safest success story: the victories of George W. and Jeb Bush in the
Texas and Florida gubernatorial races. This defensive maneuver quashed one
dangerous story line--"Why are all the Republicans losing?"--at the expense of
opening another: "Why are all the Republicans except the Bush boys losing?"

            The media
took up this question and, over the next two hours, hammered out a consensus:
"Moderate" Republicans were winning, while "ideologues" were losing. The Bush
boys became Exhibits A and B. As network anchors and analysts batted around and
refined the theory, the previously sacrosanct C word began to creep into the
discussion, alongside "right-wing" and "extremist." "Bad night for
conservatives," declared ABC's Peter Jennings. CNN's Bill Schneider contrasted
the success of the GOP's moderate "governors' wing" with the defeat of "the
congressional wing that's been dominated by conservative ideologues." By
Wednesday morning, reporters such as Bill Plante of CBS were recycling the
conventional wisdom that the losers were "Republican conservatives."

            
Political factions on all sides encouraged this
theory. Moderate Republicans such as New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani, angling for
advantage within the GOP, touted the Bush brothers as evidence that the party
should spread "a broader tent." Gloomy conservative pundits, eager to finger
culprits, accused congressional Republicans of having provoked needless
hostility.

            The three
most accomplished spinners of the Clinton White House egged on the conflict. On
CNN, Mike McCurry predicted that "right-wing Republicans" in Congress wouldn't
take kindly to George W. Bush's "conservatism with a compassionate face." This
deliciously backhanded phrase--an allusion to Czechoslovakia's "socialism with
a human face," which was crushed by Soviet tanks in 1968--conveyed three
corrosive messages: that conservatism lacked compassion to begin with, that
conservatives couldn't tolerate compassion, and that for this reason,
conservatism, like socialism, was doomed. On ABC's Nightline , George
Stephanopoulos predicted a "civil war" between "the conservatives and the
moderates," citing the Bushes and other Republican governors as leaders of the
latter faction. Rahm Emanuel predicted that "the extreme right" would tighten
its control over the GOP's "moderates." Before the night was over, Jennings was
asking whether "we're going to see a real power struggle now between moderate
Republican governors and the leadership in Congress," and ABC analyst George
Will was predicting a showdown in 2000, with moderates rallying around George
W. Bush.

            If the consensus interpretation of the 1998 elections is
that moderates won and conservatives lost--and that the Bush boys represent
what moderates are and what conservatives aren't--then conservatism, as a word
and as a philosophy, is in deep trouble. This is what happened to liberalism
two decades ago: It became associated with everything on the left that seemed
immoderate. If, conversely, conservatism were to become associated with
everything on the right that seems immoderate today, the list would include the
Starr investigation, moral intolerance, racism, and disregard for the material
concerns of ordinary people.

            These were
precisely the associations pasted on conservatism in the decisive hours after
Tuesday's elections. TV reporters and analysts repeatedly identified
conservative ideologues with the impeachment inquiry. They portrayed the
Christian Coalition as conservatism's standard-bearer, declared the coalition's
candidates losers, and contrasted this with the success of "the centrist,
pragmatic Republican governors." They exalted the Bush brothers' outreach to
blacks, hispanics, and women, and implied that other Republicans had written
off these groups. Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, agreed on Nightline that the
GOP had neglected women and ethnic minorities. By Wednesday morning, NBC's Tim
Russert and ABC's Cokie Roberts were chiding the GOP for confining its appeals
to white men.

            
Just as liberalism was reduced to a synonym for
weakness, conservatism is being reduced to a synonym for meanness. Even the
defeat of Sen. Al D'Amato, R-N.Y., who was renowned for gobbling up federal
pork and was endorsed by the nation's leading gay rights group, is being
celebrated by the New York Times as "a public verdict on the
bare-knuckle style of Republicanism that has become the fashion in Washington,"
in contrast to the "conciliatory style" of "moderate" Republicans. Worse yet,
conservatives' enthusiasm for the impeachment inquiry and for moral issues in
general is being framed as a distraction from material concerns such as health
care, education, and retirement security. On NBC's Today show Wednesday
morning, Russert declared the gubernatorial contest in Alabama "a very
instructive race. The Republican, Fob James, according to business leaders down
there, emphasized prayer in school rather than jobs for kids who graduate from
school." Russert concluded, "The perception is [that] House Republicans are
more interested in cultural issues, in philosophy and ideology, than they are
in the pragmatic performance of Republican governors."

            Gingrich,
the maestro of demonization, recognizes this unfolding catastrophe and is
desperately trying to avert it. He appeared on every network Tuesday night to
insist that the Bush brothers and other victorious Republican governors such as
George Pataki (New York), John Rowland (Connecticut), Tommy Thompson
(Wisconsin), and John Engler (Michigan) were conservatives. He argued that
these governors shared the congressional Republican agenda enshrined in the
1994 Contract With America. "Every single one of them is a tax-cutting,
reform-the-government, conservative Republican," Gingrich declared on ABC. The
next morning, at his postelection news conference, Gingrich accused the media
of misrepresenting the victorious governors as moderates rather than
conservatives. And he pointed out that indisputably conservative candidates had
won contests, such as the Senate races in Illinois and Kentucky.

            Gingrich has a point. In their haste to proclaim Tuesday's
elections a repudiation of conservatism, the media have oversimplified some
winners as moderates and some losers as conservatives. Results that don't fit
the theory, such as the defeat of Matt Fong in the California Senate race, have
simply been ignored--as has the fact that the Republicans retained their
majorities in both houses. Meanwhile, plenty of other good explanations have
been offered for the GOP's setbacks. Some analysts think Senate Republicans
alienated conservative voters by giving up on tax cuts and caving in to Clinton
in the budget negotiations. Others blame Republicans for muting substantive
conservative issues such as education reform in a misguided wager that the
Lewinsky scandal would bring conservative voters to the polls. Others blame the
GOP's scandal ads for stirring up Democratic voters.

            Poor Newt. What's being done
to him and his conservative allies this week is just as unfair as what they've
spent their careers doing to liberals. And just as effective.

            
               Recent
"Frame Games"
            

            "Election Night
Excuses": William Saletan analyzes 20 classic postelection spins.
(posted Monday, Nov. 2, 1998)
            

            "The Flytrap Ad
War": Why the GOP's new ads are too clever by half. (posted Friday, Oct.
30, 1998)
            

         
      
   
