
   
   
      
         
            Byrd Call

            The papers lead with Sen. Robert Byrd's announcement that he'll make a
motion to dismiss President Clinton's impeachment trial next week.

            Byrd, described in the usual way as the silver-haired, all-but-marbled
repository of Constitutional wisdom and "defender of Senate prerogatives," was
basically just counting votes. He said that there weren't enough to convict,
and witnesses weren't going to change anything. But as the Washington Post puts it, "Byrd has been one of the Senate's
toughest critics of Clinton's behavior in the Lewinsky scandal, and virtually
every scenario for convicting the president has included the 81-year-old West
Virginian defecting from the Democratic camp." Republicans were disappointed.
The Post gave prominent play to Rep. Henry Hyde's frustrated riposte
from the floor of the Senate: "You're saying, I guess, that perjury's okay if
it's about sex, that obstruction is okay...."

            The New York
Times and the Los Angeles Times put Byrd's bombshell in the context of
moves by members of both parties to get things over with. Republican Orrin
Hatch, the papers report, said that the Senate should hear witnesses and
adjourn the trial, letting the House vote stand as "the highest form of
condemnation." The LAT lead says that the impeachment case "appeared to
lose significant ground." The NYT says "the Senate appeared hungrier
than ever for a graceful exit from a potentially prolonged trial."

            No one predicts that Byrd's motion will pass. The LAT main story is
the clearest about how the surprise announcement was made, in a press release
distributed in the Senate gallery.

            There are two key subordinate trial stories. The Post 's second lead
(and the NYT 's third story; the LAT ran it inside) details a
legal subplot, complete with a walk-on by Ken Starr. The House managers want a
tete-a-tete with Monica Lewinsky, but she won't talk to them. Lewinsky's
lawyers say she doesn't want to help "either side." The managers called in
Starr to make her; late yesterday Starr asked a U.S. district court to revoke
Lewinsky's immunity agreement if she doesn't play ball with Hyde and Co. Judge
Norma Holloway Johnson will decide over the weekend.

            The other story addresses how the trial in the Senate progressed. The
LAT and WP segue into it after the big Byrd news; the NYT
offers its usual R.W. Apple "In the Chamber" report. All three papers enjoy the
oddness of the proceeding, wherein Senators, forbidden to speak, had to submit
written queries to Chief Justice Rehnquist through their party leaders. But all
agree that the Senators used the opportunity almost exclusively to lob softball
questions, some of them prearranged.

            Over the last few weeks a story about the Chief Justice has rarely been
complete without a reference to the zeal with which he enforces time limits on
oral arguments in the Supreme Court. (He's often described as cutting attorneys
off "mid syllable" when the clock runs out.) The papers, with perhaps a bit of
disappointment, note his uncharacteristic laxness on this point as he presided
over a day of questioning that was supposed to consist of five-minute
responses. The first answer went on for nine minutes.

            The Post has a perhaps-too-friendly story about the Pope, who's
visiting Mexico: "To understand the significance of this pontiff, it helps to
see him through his own eyes, and measure him by the yardstick of church
history." The LAT is more probing about his effect on the church's
infrastructure in Latin America. He wiped out the liberation theology movement,
which had enlivened the church, particularly by attracting new clergy. Now
they're low on priests, and capitalism stands rampant, with its attendant onus
on the poor. A gently critical NYT op-ed piece by a professor named
Jorge G. Castaneda makes the same point.

            The two Times see the Olympics scandal spreading past Salt Lake City
and touching next summer's games in Sydney. The papers report that gifts from
that city to two African International Olympic Committee members in 1993 may
have tipped the balance in a close vote that saw the Australians beat out
Beijing by but two votes. The WP limns the pampered lives of IOC
officials, who jet around the world in first-class comfort, accumulating
largess in the form of medical treatment, college tuition, and slick land
deals. Most amusing example: the case of the Korean's representative's
daughter, a budding concert pianist with a knack for scoring high-profile gigs
in upcoming sites for the Games.

            From the footnote-to-history department comes a WP story about the
Richard Nixon estate's campaign to be compensated for papers taken by the
government after Nixon resigned. The estate is asking for $210 million,
counting accrued interest. Specifically, it wants $90,000 for a confiscated
file of telegrams and letters sent in response to Nixon's famous "Silent
Majority" speech. Alexander Butterfield, the aide who stunned Watergate
investigators with news of Nixon's taping system a quarter of a century ago,
yesterday testified that the massive response to the speech was fabricated.
This was known already, though the Post doesn't say so. But Butterfield,
now 72 and sporting a watch with a picture of Nixon meeting Elvis Presley on
it, has the details. He said he enlisted help before the speech from labor
unions, the VFW, William Casey, and even H. Ross Perot, who said he'd bring a
locomotive full of mail into Union Station. "He did generate a lot of mail,"
Butterfield is quoted saying. The locomotive never materialized.

         
      
   
