
   
   
      
         
            Vidiocy

            The New York Times ,
Los
Angeles Times , and Washington Post lead with yesterday's Senate
developments--approval of a trial schedule that could bring things to a close
by February 12 and a contentious vote about witnesses resulting in the
possibility that Monica Lewinsky may end up on the Senate floor. (That's just
an expression.) USA Today , betting on impeachment fatigue, puts Lewinsky's
testimony status inside and goes its own way with Russia's faltering role in
the International Space Station. NASA has just learned that Russia
won't be ready with the next piece of the station on time. And this comes on
top of Russia's decision to keep its own aging station, Mir, in orbit, raising
fears that Russia and its programmed contribution of up to $10 billion cannot
be depended on.

            The coverage explains that each impeachment witness will be questioned for
four hours by each side. Two senators, one from each party, will supervise. The
witness plan authorizes videotaping of witnesses Lewinsky, Vernon Jordan, and
Sidney Blumenthal, but requires majority votes of approval before their
videotapes can be shown in the Senate and before the witnesses could be called
to testify before the Senate in person. (Even so, the LAT says in its
lead's subheader that yesterday's votes "could pave way for public broadcast"
of witness tapes.) Also decided yesterday was that Republican managers cannot
seek any additional evidence or testimony uncovered during these witness
depositions without getting the approval of both Trent Lott and Thomas Daschle.
The NYT and LAT call this provision giving Daschle a "veto" power
over the subsequent course of the trial. The NYT goes much higher than
the LAT or Post with word that the notion of a "split decision,"
where a finding of fact is voted on in addition to the ultimate issue of
impeachment, is still a live option.

            The NYT reports that the White House expressed concern that the
schedule is actually open-ended, with spokesman Joe Lockhart, threatening that
the defense team might well respond with delays of its own. The LAT lead
reports that President Clinton visited Capitol Hill Thursday to attend a
memorial service for Lawton Chiles, a onetime Florida senator and governor,
with the paper noting that Chiles' daughter made a clear reference to the
impeachment trial by stressing to the senators in attendance the importance of
mercy. But it's the WP , in an inside story, which observes that Clinton
in his brief remarks eulogizing Chiles seemed to take an oblique swipe at
Russell Feingold, the lone Senate Democrat to vote against the White House in
the past two days.

            The NYT and LAT off-leads and inside stories elsewhere report
that the governor of Missouri, Mel Carnahan, a proponent of capital punishment,
commuted the death sentence of a convicted murder to life in prison without
parole after the pope, during his recent visit to St. Louis appealed directly
to him to "show mercy" in the case. The man was convicted of the 1988 shotgun
killing of a married couple along with their disabled grandson.

            Alan Greenspan's appearance Thursday before the Senate Budget committee gets
the usual amount of ink. The NYT front emphasizes his warning not to
count on projected government budget surpluses to fix Social Security,
primarily because budget forecasts have proven to be so unreliable. The
WP front seizes on Greenspan's declaration that the boom in Internet
stock prices is "good for our system," in that it's channeling capital to
promising new enterprises before they actually turn a profit. A Post
inside piece notes instead that despite his doubts about the reliability of
surplus projections, Greenspan supported Clinton's advocacy of using surpluses
to draw down the national debt and to help fund Social Security. The Wall Street Journal piece on the Chairman's appearance
stresses this Social Security stance.

            According to inside stories in the WP , NYT , and WSJ ,
Marine General Anthony Zinni, commander of all U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf,
testified at a Senate hearing yesterday that he had reservations about the
Clinton administration's proposal to arm opposition groups in Iraq because such
a move could create a "rogue state" there that's even more destabilizing than
Saddam Hussein's regime. None of the stories mention the prime recent example
of Zinni's concern: the factions in Afghanistan at war with each other and
associated with worldwide terrorism were incubated by a concerted U.S. mission
in the 1980s to arm indigenous forces against the Soviet occupiers. The
Journal account of Zinni's appearance reports that he also resisted
calls to expand the U.S. air campaign against Iraq to include attacking
airfields. Former Vietnam shoot-down Sen. John McCain bristled at this, saying
Zinni's testimony was an "insult to my intelligence." Meanwhile, the NYT
reports that Madeleine Albright has introduced a new term for what the
administration would like to see happen in Iraq: a "regime change." The term
has the advantage of avoiding mention of such gritty matters as arms shipments
or coup plots, etc.--sort of like referring to death as a "health change."

            The LAT reports on a minor variant of the Y2K problem: pre-paid
headstones with precarved year-of-death prefixes reading 19--,
owned by folks who are living longer than they expected to.

            The WSJ "Washington Wire" reports that the Pentagon is mulling easing
anti-drug

         
      
   
