
   
   
      
         
            The Peace of Prints

            As befits the day, the papers are relatively quiet, finally getting to lead
with the cold-snap set-pieces they've been denied by months of balm. The
Washington Post tells of a nation plagued by
cancelled planes and trains, giving us along the way the definitive holiday
crisis quote: "How can I tell him he might not get to see his Bubbie in Boca?"
Meanwhile, the New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times home in on California's freeze, which has done serious
damage to the state's orange crop--destroying, says the NYT , more than a
third of it. Yesterday's LAT said "nearly half," but today's settles on
one-third.

            A NYT front-pager reports that on Thursday, Sen. Daniel Moynihan came out in favor of censuring President
Clinton rather than removing him from office. This despite, notes the
Times , his earlier comments criticizing Clinton for not adequately
apologizing for his affair with Monica Lewinsky and his opinion that perjury
might well be an impeachable offense. The reason Moynihan offered is that
ouster would "destabilize the presidency." The paper explains that Moynihan's
stance is "particularly credible" because he is not running for
re-election.

            A piece inside the Times braces with the reminder that a full blown
Senate trial could scorch plenty of earth, stating that President Clinton's
legal team is prepared to call friends of Monica Lewinsky to testify that she
frequently exaggerated the details of her trysts with Clinton.

            The LAT front features a take-out on Chief Justice William Rehnquist,
soon to preside over the Senate's impeachment trial. The piece notes that
Rehnquist wrote a book about impeachment in 1992, in which he discussed the two
most significant previous impeachments (both unsuccessful), that of Supreme
Court Justice Samuel Chase and of President Andrew Johnson. The paper notes
that the book, for much of this year one of the capital's most sought after, is
out of print. And that the publisher has just announced a reprint run of 25,000
copies. According to the LAT , Rehnquist has stamped his Court with
collegiality and efficiency--last September, for instance, he led a judicial
conference in which 1,701 appeals were considered and voted on before lunch.
The story features an anecdote purporting to show how Rehnquist punctures
posturing lawyers, in which the pin cushion part is assigned to Kenneth Starr.
But the Starr quote cited doesn't seem particularly pompous. In effect, the
tale merely serves as a device for taking a swipe at Starr, which may be
justifiable, but this piece doesn't bother to justify it. The WP , in its
Rehnquist story earlier in the week, used the same anecdote and committed the
same sin with it.

            The NYT reports on the Air Force's official analysis of that plane crash last year in
which a young bomber pilot broke formation and disappeared with a plane full of
bombs and was later discovered to have crashed into a Colorado mountain. The
report calls it a suicide, ascribing it to the 32-year-old captain's mental
turmoil over his mother's religiously based pacifistic disapproval of the
military and over a failed romance. The man's parents deny this, claiming
instead that something happened on the flight to make their son lose
consciousness. The Times notes that the report is silent regarding two
widely mentioned rumors--that the pilot was taking the plane off to a militia,
and that he committed suicide because he was a tormented closeted gay. The
Times itself is oddly silent about some relevant context though, never
noting that the sort of speculative psychological explanation indulged in here
by the Air Force is strikingly similar to that wielded by the Navy when, in its
initial official report on the disastrous gunnery explosion aboard the
Iowa , it posited a crewmember's gay-tinged suicide. So the reader missed
being reminded that in the Iowa case, a straightforwardly mechanical
cause for the mishap was ultimately found instead.

            Today, after 36 years, the NYT 's Russell Baker files his last "Observer" column. Baker has read tired and grumpy of late,
but his best columns have always been wonderful correctives to everybody
else's. Today's Papers recommends his book "Growing Up" as an autobiography of
the absolute first rank.

            The WP runs an AP dispatch inside reporting that a retiring Florida
Supreme Court justice has expressed "grave doubts" about the guilt of some of
the convicts executed during his tenure. The judge notes that in the past ten
years or so, 53 people on death rows across the country have been released on
DNA grounds. "But how about before we could rely upon DNA?" the judge is quoted
asking. "What happened to those people?"

            Another WP AP item reveals that President Clinton pardoned 33
convicted criminals yesterday, for offenses ranging from going AWOL to blowing
up a building. The group includes three people convicted of lying.

         
      
   
