
   
   
      
         
            Two Scoops!

            The New York
Times leads with the day's biggest scoop. President Clinton's State of
the Union address will introduce a carrot-and-stick funding program to improve
elementary and secondary schools. The Washington Post leads with a scooplet--the
president's lawyers will challenge some of the facts gathered by Kenneth Starr.
The 
               Los Angeles
Times
               , 
               USA
Today
               , and Wall Street Journal have no scoops at all, and
are left to report what the senators said on Sunday's political talk shows.
(The WP informs that fully one-fifth of the Senate--19
senators--appeared on the Sunday shows.)

            The NYT's State of the Union article--which may of course prove to be
a trial balloon--says that Clinton wants to tie federal funds to whether
schools test their teachers. So-called "social promotions"--promoting
unqualified students from grade to grade so they stay with their peers--will be
discouraged as well. Finally, Clinton and his speechwriters also intend to
discuss Social Security, unveil a plan to safeguard Russia's nukes, and beef up
US defenses against biological weapons attacks. The president's speech
(scheduled for Tuesday) will not directly address his legal troubles since he
hopes to shift voters' attentions away from the impeachment trial. Predictably,
the NYT story is sourced to "White House officials" and "aides" in the
first few paragraphs; oddly enough, it quotes Bruce Reed (Clinton's chief
domestic policy advisor) by name at the end.

            The WP reports that the president's lawyers plan on a "fact-driven"
defense, which means challenging the Starr report's specific allegations rather
than arguing that none of the allegations warrant removal. All papers report
that most senators expect witnesses to be called. Democratic senators are
threatening to call Kenneth Starr as a witness.

            The international lead is that the Yugoslav army is attacking the town in
Kosovo where 45 ethnic Albanians were executed on Friday. Needless to say, the
fighting and the massacre are signs of a breakdown in the cease-fire agreement
signed four months ago. NATO has condemned Milosevic but chooses not to bomb
him.

            On what would have been Rev. Martin Luther King's 70th birthday, most papers
run several King-related stories. The WP presents a vignette of life on
Washington D.C.'s Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue ("Life and death, faith and
despair, violence and a tenuous brand of peace coexist"). The NYT runs a
story on Jews and blacks as well as a William Safire column recounting the time
he, a young press agent, organized a press conference for the then obscure
King. Roy Cohn warned Safire that the FBI thought King a "commie"; Morton
Janklow advised Safire to ignore Cohn. Shelby Steele in the WSJ argues
that King's rhetorical prowess made whites ashamed about this country's racial
history, unwittingly encouraging liberal whites to feel "responsible" for
blacks, which prevents blacks from becoming truly free. Steele thinks King
should be revisited as a man who "made freedom first of all a black
responsibility."

            The WP reports on a Boulder, Colorado company that is designing a
"robokoneko" ("robot kitten" in Japanese). Why a kitten? Because baby cats are
"cute, media-friendly" says the robokoneko's designer. Apparently the kitten's
"brain" will actually build itself--programmers write mini-programs that are
able to build new mini-programs which will eventually fuse into a simulacrum of
a kitten's thought process. The end-program will ultimately be strapped to a
working wire-and-steel kitten. The WP warns that this robotic cat may
not "walk between your legs as you go down the stairs"--the article doesn't
actually specify how this robot will be cat-like at all--but readers can rest
assured that the final product will be readily convertible into 1) a
self-directed housecleaning robot or 2) a Mars rover. (No kidding.)

         
      
   
