
   
   
      
         
            Pilot Error

            While the New York Times , Los Angeles Times , and Washington
Post all have big impeachment trial post-mortems, the actual lead in the
NYT and the WP is something different.

            The Washington Post goes with the blistering crackdown
by a no-nonsense Dallas district court judge, Joe Kendall, on the American
Airlines pilots who've been calling in sick for the last week. (It's illegal
for them to actually strike.) The Post story, much more colorful than
the NYT and LAT front-pagers on the same subject, has the judge
comparing the pilots to Mafia extortionists, promising the union that its
assets will fit in the "overhead bin of a Piper Cub" after he got through with
it, and even pointing out that many of the pilots had learned their trade while
in the U.S. armed services. (That last is a cheap shot; as the paper notes,
some of the pilots are combat veterans who risked their lives for the country
at the time.)

            The New
York Times leads with President Clinton's conditional decision to
participate in a NATO peacekeeping mission in Kosovo. The paper says about 4000
Army and Marine soldiers will be stationed in the southern part of the Serbian
province--if the two sides fighting a civil war there can come up with a
cease-fire agreement in the negotiations currently under way in Paris. That's
not for certain. The NYT , ever suspicious of the president's
motivations, goes out of its way to report that White House aides "expected
Clinton's announcement to draw concentrated news coverage and commentary to
compete with lingering musings over the trial"; the WP , playing the
story just below its one-column lead, details the complex and delicate planned
mobilizations and postings of the multinational troops.

            But back to Clinton. The Los Angeles Times lead is just a poll story, the old
news that Americans didn't like impeachment, want to get back to business,
etc., etc. The companion story, a news analysis by Janet Hook, sees "the
makings of a honeymoon" in D.C. Both sides, Hooks reports, want to get down to
legislating. The WP analyzes the scandal's effect on the 2000 elections.
In a nice passage Dan Balz writes, "Virtually every candidate contemplating a
presidential campaign will look in the mirror this weekend and see a possible
answer for what the country wants after Clinton"--Al Gore the Eagle Scout,
Elizabeth Dole the antidote to Clinton's locker-room antics, and so forth.
Those who make it to the end of the story will probably say amen to the closing
quote, from a Steve Forbes adviser: "I think [the public] probably will not
want to hear the word impeachment for another 120 years."

            The WP also has a very long, intensely reported recap of the
political phenomena that, all along, seemed systematically to help the
Democrats and hurt the right. It includes a trenchant "for want of a nail" tale
explaining how an early Dick Gephardt-Newt Gingrich agreement to keep the Starr
Report under wraps broke down. (Gingrich was incommunicado the day the report
was unexpectedly delivered to Congress, even as an overheard remark of Barney
Frank's enraged a Republican representative, leading him to introduce a motion
to make the report public.)

            The NYT 's main impeachment post-mortem-- pace Janet Hook--is a
pessimistic one. Democrats and Republicans hate each other, the paper says.
(This is a follow-up to a ferocious inside story the paper ran yesterday, in
which Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott got a full year of pent-up disgust at
Clinton off his chest.) The most telling point of analysis in the piece comes
from a Republican adviser, who says that since Clinton won't be able to get
anything done anyway, he might as well concentrate on electing Gore and a
Democratic House of Representatives next year.

            The WP fronts a look at how certain Salt Lake Cityans went nuts to
get their burg an Olympics. The conclusion: "The decision to go low, to do what
ever it took to win, was a step-by-step and relatively open process involving
large numbers of people." A major report on the LAT front page details
how tobacco companies strong-armed smoking-cessation-aid manufacturers to keep
them out of the smoking wars.

            The NYT has a classic obit to show off today, about the best polo
player ever, Cecil Smith; the piece, by Frank Litsky, effortlessly takes the
reader back to the days when the sport was played by the likes of Walt Disney
and Will Rogers, and tens of thousands watched games. In 1933, Smith, a Texan,
led a dusty group of cowboys to take the national championship away from the
hoity-toity East Coast. He continued to ride up until he was 92, three years
ago. The NYT Magazine 's cover look at Steven Spielberg is marred by
banal, sycophantic writing ("...within a few minutes, [Spielberg] has put them
at ease. He has that effect on people"), writer Stephen Dubner's tiresome
injections of himself into the story ("We first meet up early Thursday
morning..."), and minor irritants like referring to Spielberg's assistant by
her first name. (A female movie exec gets the same treatment.) In this context,
it's not clear whether the writer or the subject appreciates the irony of the
profile's key scene--Spielberg fatuously defending the behavior of his close
personal friend Bill Clinton ("Morality is defined not just by a sexual
dalliance") as he puffs contentedly on a cigar.

         
      
   
