
   
   
      
         
            Missing in Action

            The WP and NYT lead with the run-up to Thursday's start of the Senate
impeachment trial. The LAT goes with yesterday's air action in the southern
"no-fly" zone over Iraq between U.S. and Iraqi fighters. And USAT, which
devotes its front-page "cover story" to the eve-of-trial situation in the
Senate, leads with a survey out today of 213 companies showing that large
firms' health benefit plans will go up about 7 percent this year, far outpacing
the current inflation rate of 1.5 percent and making for the first big rise
since the early 90s. The paper says the up-tick is primarily driven by the
consolidation of HMOs, and that it's bad news for employees, who typically pay
more than 20 percent of the cost of their coverage. The health cost story runs
inside at the WP .

            According to the papers, the only thing that's really known about the
impeachment trial proceedings scheduled to start in the Senate on Thursday is
that they're scheduled to start in the Senate on Thursday. Comments made by
senators in breaks from yesterday's continuous palavering suggest that the fast
track proposal is, in the words of the NYT , "foundering," with a number
of Senate Republicans bucking their leadership to complain that the House
managers are entitled to more time to make their case against President
Clinton. According to the WP , Rep. Henry Hyde, the leader of the House
impeachment team, also weighed in with Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott
against a fast track. A related fault line is whether or not the proceedings
should include the calling of witnesses. On the one hand, a trial without
witnesses seems odd and on the other, there is concern that with a full slate
of witnesses, the Senate cannot avoid the rancor just seen in the House. "We
think that would really become a zoo," Sen. John Kerry tells the Times .
Another issue is whether the Senate is constitutionally empowered to consider
censure. Things are so confused that Sen. Lott has, according to the
LAT , urged citizens to call their senators and express their views, a
remarkable statement, says the paper, in light of the public's overwhelming
opposition to impeachment.

            According to the LAT lead, yesterday's combat over Iraq represents
both the determination of the U.S. to enforce the "no-fly" zones and of Saddam
Hussein to flout them. The Iraqis sent up more than a dozen warplanes and the
U.S. responded with four fighters firing six missiles. The LAT account
makes it seem that the U.S. aircraft fired on the Iraqis simply because they
were in the zone, whereas the WP and NYT accounts add that the
Iraqi planes first illuminated the U.S. aircraft with their fire control
radars, indicating possible imminent missile launch (although no Iraqi missiles
actually were). But none of the accounts address the issue this difference
raises: What is the U.S. rule of engagement here? Is the mere presence of Iraqi
aircraft in the "no-fly" zone considered justification or is some further more
conventionally understood provocative act required?

            Also, for a press that's become quite intoxicated with the technical details
of our weapons, especially when they work, there's a notable lack of
information in the accounts about how each of six U.S. missiles could fail to
hit obsolescent Iraqi planes. The NYT quotes the DOD spokesman saying
that the Iraqi pilots had been able to get out of range of the missiles. This
is doubtful, if the U.S. missiles were fired within their range envelopes,
which is U.S. practice, because missiles are many times faster than airplanes.
More likely is that the Iraqi pilots saw the missiles coming and then, probably
with the help of distracting countermeasures, made sudden maneuvers the
missiles couldn't duplicate. Another possibility is that the shots were all
taken looking down at the Iraqi planes, with the clutter of the desert
background confusing the radar-guided missiles. But none of these matters make
it into the reporting. In addition, only the LAT and the WP run
the incident on their fronts. The NYT puts it on page three and
USAT saves it for page nine.

            In the past year, the papers have made much of the various safety and
environmental negatives posed by the wild proliferation of sports utility
vehicles. A front-page WSJ feature adds another to the list. At least in this
week's blizzard in Chicago, the "off-road" monsters got stuck in the snow like
crazy.

            Maureen Dowd makes the case today for President Elizabeth Dole. On the
principle that we will want our next president to be everything this one is
not, she writes, "After President McMurphy, we will want Nurse Ratched."

         
      
   
