
   
   
      
         
            DiMaggio Streak Ends

            The New York Times
and Washington Post lead with the Federal Trade
Commission's announcement on Monday that it has settled its antitrust suit
against Intel Corp., just a day before the trial was to begin. The settlement
is also the top non-local story at the Los Angeles
Times . USA Today , which doesn't front Intel, leads with the
Supreme Court's rejection of Timothy McVeigh's appeal of his Oklahoma City
bombing conviction, a story that nobody else fronts. The appeal had alleged
jury prejudice brought about by news coverage of the case. USAT explains
that the McVeigh turn-down still leaves room for additional appeals, which
could delay the imposition of his death sentence for years. What gets a lot of
top front space with pictures everywhere is the death of Joe DiMaggio at age 84
a few months after lung surgery.

            The papers explain that the central issue in the Intel case was whether it was monopolistic for the company
to require computer manufacturers to share details about their machines as a
condition for their getting information about Intel chips. If the company had
gone to trial it ran the risk of being legally judged to be a monopoly, which
the papers explain, could have many adverse legal consequences across a wide
range of issues. The settlement avoids that branding in return for Intel's
agreeing to very specific provisions--not detailed in the papers--governing
when it can withhold technological information from computer makers. Both the
WP and LAT say that many thought the government's case might have
been hard to win.

            Everybody notes that the settlement, in its low-key, no-name-calling style,
stands in distinct contrast to Microsoft's approach to its legal tussle with
the government, and everybody says that Intel went this way precisely to avoid
the PR beating it thinks Microsoft has been suffering. (For all the comparisons
to the Microsoft case, none of the papers explain why the one company is being
pursued by the FTC and the other by the DOJ.) The Wall Street Journal adds that Intel's irenic bent reflects
the change of leadership at the company, from the former CEO who was a
"merciless competitor and litigator" to the current one, who personally
successfully negotiated a longstanding patent dispute with the concern's chief
competitor.

            One discrepancy in the LAT account of the settlement: the paper says
the agreement calls for the company to "mend its strong-arm tactics." This is
bad newspapering because the company isn't admitting it practiced strong-arm
tactics, and besides, the use of the phrase makes it appear as if the
LAT is condemning the company, which it shouldn't really be doing
without first adducing a great deal more evidence about Intel's practices than
it does in this story.

            The NYT and WP fronts report that Wen Ho Lee, the Taiwan-born
Los Alamos lab scientist at the center of the China bomb spying controversy,
was fired Monday, after being questioned by the FBI. Although not formally
charged with anything, Lee is now officially the prime suspect in the case.

            Joe DiMaggio's passing draws tremendous ink volume. Besides the sprawling
front-page coverage, there are editorials in both Times , as well as a
strong op-ed presence, which includes the effort in the NYT in which
Paul Simon, of "Where have you gone, Joe DiMaggio?" fame, explains that when
they met, the Yankee Clipper protested that he hadn't gone anywhere--he'd just
finished doing a Mr. Coffee commercial, not to mention being a spokesman for
the Bowery Savings Bank.

            Despite the general consensus that DiMaggio was exactly the kind of quiet,
workmanlike player that is practically gone from today's courts and fields, a
sort of anti-Rodman, if you will, it's useful to note, as the WSJ does,
that in 1938 DiMaggio held out for more money (he wanted at least $40,000 and
the Yankees were offering $25,000.) And the LAT op-ed page runs the
piece he wrote right afterwards to mend the fences with the fans, in which he
advances the same "if movie stars can get it, why can't I" arguments you hear
today. But clearly DiMaggio knew not only on which side his bread was buttered,
but also who buttered it: his op-ed was titled "I am Lucky to Be a Ballplayer."
Lest the coverage completely disappear into the metaphorical, in his WP
column, George Will cites some of Joe D's stunning stats. Yes, there's the
familiar 56-game hitting streak. But there's this more recherch, one: The
number of times DiMaggio was thrown out in his major league career going from
first to third? Zero.

            
               Did we miss something? Today's WP runs a story under the
headline "For Alexander, '96 Loss Sowed Seeds for 2000 Victory."

         
      
   
