
   
   
      
         
            Hi, Fidelity

            The Washington Post and New York Times
lead with the likely easing today by the Clinton administration of some
restrictions governing U.S. interactions with Cuba. The Wall Street Journal also flags this story in its front-page
news box. USA
Today reefers the Cuba story at the bottom of its front, while leading
with the endorsement by new California Governor Gray Davis in his inaugural
address of a plan to increase diversity in the state's university system by
admitting the top 4 percent of each California high school graduating class.
The paper notes that the proposal would counter the effects of Proposition
209--which among other things banned affirmative action in state university
admissions--by raising the numbers of minority students admitted at the expense
apparently of other higher-achieving students elsewhere. The state Board of
Regents, of which Davis is a member, could take up the idea next month. The
biggest mystery of the day has to do with the Los Angeles
Times lead, which also covers the Davis inaugural. The story somehow
manages not to mention the 4 percent solution. ("Specific policy proposals,"
explains the LAT , "will be saved for release later in the week.")

            Is this merely faulty reporting or a conscious attempt not to alert the
majority of its readers that a law they voted for--but that the LAT is
against--is about to be undone? Similar news tailoring seems to be going on at
the WP , which in an inside story on Davis, delays until the
second-to-last paragraph word of his 4 percent plan and never mentions that it
threatens to undo Prop 209.

            The main upshot of the Cuba moves, say the NYT and WP , is that
Cubans would be able to receive more money from American friends and family
members, there'd be more direct flights between the two countries, and direct
mail service would be reestablished. Additionally, the Baltimore Orioles would
be allowed to play the Cuban national baseball team, once here and once in
Cuba. The papers report that Madeleine Albright recommended the Cuba ease-up to
President Clinton yesterday and that he is expected to announce it today.

            The papers all note that despite the new measures, the Clinton
administration is nonetheless resisting bipartisan calls for a more sweeping
opening to Cuba, such as dropping the 37-year-old economic embargo altogether.
The WSJ offers a domestic political reason for this continued
intransigence: a desire not to hurt Democratic prospects in Florida in the 2000
presidential election. "That's something Gore can do right after he's elected,"
the paper quotes a "senior White House official" as saying.

            The WP emphasizes the baseball angle a bit more than the others, even
working that detail into its headline, "U.S. Ready to Play Ball with Cuba." The
NYT mentions the Orioles' losing record last season, leading the reader
to wonder why they, rather than the World Series-winning Yankees, were tapped
for this bit of diplomacy. The Post advances a plausible answer: unlike
the Yankees, the Orioles don't suit up any Cuban defectors. None of the papers
mention why baseball may be especially well suited to this particular irenic
cause: Castro was once a very good pitcher, even drafted by the Washington
Senators.

            A front-page WP story reports on the latest impeachment defense thinking at the White House. One
example according to the Post : The president's lawyers are planning to
argue that when their client denied he had sexual relations with Monica
Lewinsky, he could have been focusing on the role of intent made relevant by
the definition of sexual relations he was given. That definition referred to
fondling certain parts of the anatomy "with an intent to arouse or gratify the
sexual desire of any person," and it could be argued that no one has proved
that Clinton had any such intent even if he did in fact touch Lewinsky as she
testified. In other words, if Clinton's earlier position was that he didn't
have sex with her, this new move is that he didn't have sex with her on
purpose. Note that for this to work, the president's lawyers have to argue that
not only was Clinton not trying to gratify Lewinsky, but he wasn't trying to
gratify himself either. Puhhhhleeeeze.

            The Post front features a story recounting horror tales of domestic
servants brought to the D.C. area by various foreign diplomatic employers and
then treated horribly. A separate story inside focuses on one Ethiopian woman's
tale of working for years without any time off for three cents a day for an IMF
staffer, who also beat her. A question: Before doing these stories, did the
Post look into whether or not any of its employees are likewise
underpaying, or otherwise mistreating their servants? Not to mention making
sure they have proper visas and legitimate Social Security withholdings.

            The WP TV column reports that Al Franken, in preparing a new spate of
shows for his about-to-be-resuscitated news spoof "Lateline," reached out to
various political types to do some script doctoring. For a show having to do
with something called the "Moral Coalition," for instance, Franken got former
Christian Coalition head Ralph Reed to vet the script. Reed added two jokes.
The NBC censor cut one for being too racy.

         
      
   
