
   
   
      
         
            Mother Truckers

            The New York Times
and Washington Post lead with the apparent victory in
Nigeria's first free election in sixteen years of Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo. Both
papers report that the defeated challenger has charged vote fraud. The Los Angeles
Times goes with word that a congressional study to be released today
concludes that despite the much improved air quality in the Los Angeles Basin,
Angelenos are still breathing unusually dangerous levels of cancer-causing
pollutants, yielding a risk of cancer 426 times the safety standard established
by the Clean Air Act. USA Today leads with Janet Reno's request that a federal
commission study the legality of taking DNA samples from every person arrested
in the U.S., as opposed to the current practice of taking them only from those
convicted of violent crimes and sex offenses. An inside story at the WP
reminds just how pressing this issue is with a report that research scientists
are working on a palm-sized DNA lab that cops could use on blood, saliva or
semen at a fresh crime scene to clear or implicate suspects within minutes.

            Both Times report that the margin of victory in Nigeria was millions of votes, and that therefore the
fraud observed on behalf of both candidates by international election monitors
including Jimmy Carter probably did not affect the outcome. Given that
allegations of fraud are the spine of the Nigeria story, both papers are rather
vague about what is thought to have gone on. The NYT goes no further
than quoting Carter as saying he'd observed stuffed ballot-boxes and inflated
vote tallies. (He's also quoted referring to "results that were manipulated,"
but the paper doesn't explain how this differs from the other two infractions.)
The WP notes that in one location, residents complained about being
unable to vote and leaves it at that. Also, both papers say Obasanjo was a
former military ruler of the country, but neither mentions in their capsule
governmental histories when he ruled or under what circumstances he ceased
doing so.

            The LAT reports that the congressional bad air news about L.A. will
probably spur the EPA to establish a nationwide network for monitoring
cancer-causing pollutants in the air. The story says that despite the breathing
bummer, it used to be 40 percent worse before the Clean Air Act was adopted in
1990. Some of the biggest news here is buried after the "jump." For instance,
why wait until the 18th paragraph to reveal that the information in the study
was previously collected by the state of California, which never released it?
Or until the 22nd paragraph to mention that the risks of getting cancer from
the Socal air are still much lower (about 250 times lower) than the risks of
getting it from cigarettes?

            The WP front says that a comprehensive study released yesterday
concludes that mothers who work outside the home are not harming their
children. The story says that via standardized tests and parent interviews,
the study concluded children whose mothers worked during the first three years
after giving birth were not significantly different from those with unemployed
mothers. But since, according to the Post , the variables considered
included how many hours weekly the mother was employed and whether periods of
unemployment were interspersed with her working, it's curious that the story
didn't include any comparisons across those parameters. Do the children of
mothers who work only ten hours a week or who knock off completely during the
summer fare better than those who work more? The paper doesn't say. It also
would have been interesting if the paper had mentioned whether the study's
author, psychologist Elisabeth Harvey, has any children. Ditto for the status
of the Post reporter here, Barbara Vobejda.

            The LAT 's "Column One" describes the blooming of a little-known
economic phenomenon cropping up here and there in small communities threatened
by the outflow of local cash to say, big retail chain stores in the nearby
city: the creation of local currencies, good only in town. There are now, says
the paper, 65 such local denominations, like the Ithaca (New York) HOUR (the
original--created nine years ago), the Berkeley BREAD, and Kansas City's
(Missouri or Kansas? The paper doesn't say) Barter Bucks. Surprisingly, local
currency is clearly legal. U.S. law prohibits local governments issuing money,
but not nonprofit collectives.

            The NYT fronts a story by ace auto reporter Keith Bradsher on
Detroit's move to incorporate aging-friendly features in new cars, like
oversized control knobs, larger trunks for golf clubs, and ignition keys that
go on the dashboard rather than on the steering column (arthritic wrists find
they're easier to turn there). And stand by for seats that swivel out for easy
entry and exit. This is driven by demographics--in the past decade, the median
new car buyer's age has gone from 40 to 47. But the car companies are
proceeding slowly and minimally, lest they turn off legions of younger
customers.

            The WP 's Howard Kurtz reports that a forthcoming book on Al Gore says
that after he had three daughters, he became a devotee of the book "How to
Choose the Sex of Your Baby," and subsequently fathered a son after following
the book's dictates, which included drinking strong caffeinated coffee before
sex. The big news here: that Gore drinks coffee.

         
      
   
