
   
   
      
         
            Torn NATO Watch

            Today brings the deadline for agreement in the Kosovo peace talks, and
everyone leads with the standoff between President Clinton and Yugoslav
President Slobodan Milosevic over the latter's compliance with the proposed
accord. Yesterday Milosevic reiterated his staunch refusal to withdraw forces
from Kosovo--"even if the price is bombing"--and shunned meetings with American
diplomats. The president responded by threatening NATO attacks on Serbia, to be
launched immediately if Milosevic doesn't accept the Western-drafted compromise
and evacuate the great majority of his troops. The New York Times
pointedly reminds its readers that NATO's last threats of air strikes were
scrapped for last-minute negotiations, which merely won admittance of an
unarmed monitoring team (a far cry from military withdrawal). The papers all
quote the president as saying that strikes will definitely be ordered if the
deadline passes without agreement, but they give varying impressions of when
the first bombs could actually fall. The Los Angeles
Times puts NATO "on the brink" of launching strikes, with "warplanes
ready to scramble," but the Washington Post writes that bombing would have to wait for
final approval from member officials. The NYT reports that Clinton "set no
clear timetable" for action and that 48 to 72 hours would pass between NATO
orders and actual strikes.

            Only the NYT story includes this reflection on the impeachment
verdict, shared by the president during his news conference on Kosovo: "I think
the Constitution has been, in effect, re-ratified."

            Politely acknowledging yesterday's LAT scoop, the NYT off-lead
confirms and elaborates on US involvement with Kurdish rebel Abdullah Ocalan's
capture. Anonymous government sources admit that throughout Ocalan's four
months on the lam, the US funneled surveillance data on his whereabouts to
Turkish commandos, and lobbied Ocalan's would-be protector countries against
sheltering him. The officials stress that the US had no "direct involvement" in
the pursuit, and that the Israelis did no more than monitor Ocalan's
movements.

            The WP fronts allegations made by Juanita Broaddrick, known
throughout the impeachment scandal by her Jones lawsuit alias "Jane Doe No. 5,"
that she was raped by Bill Clinton in 1978. The Post conducted
off-the-record interviews with Broaddrick last spring, but wasn't granted
permission to print them until now (by Broaddrick? By the judge in the Jones
case? The paper doesn't say). Details of the alleged encounter echo the ones
revealed on the op-ed page of Friday's Wall Street Journal :
then-gubernatorial candidate Clinton invited an innocent Broaddrick to have
coffee in his hotel room, and then forced himself on her, biting and bruising
her lips. Previously, Broaddrick both denied the allegations and kept them from
the public, and Kenneth Starr and FBI investigators deemed her story too shaky
to pursue. But the allegations were reviewed by House Republicans anyway, in a
sealed room just prior to their vote on impeachment. The paper offers no
speculation as to how Broaddrick's accusation might complicate the president's
legal troubles or the dimming scandal. Broaddrick tells the Post that she
remained silent until now out of fear and shame, but is now talking in order to
teach her twin granddaughters the value of honesty: "I want them to say, `That
was a neat thing you did.'"

            The NYT and the LAT front a new effort by the Labor Department
to avoid musculoskeletal disorders in the workplace. Ailments such as carpal
tunnel syndrome, lower back pain, and tendinitis account for a third of all
serious workplace injuries each year, and guidelines will require over 2
million employers to prevent and treat their assembly line workers, database
clerks, and journalists, among others. Business groups and congressional
Republicans have long opposed such standards on the theory that compliance will
cost more than the $15-$20 billion a year currently spent on workers'
compensation for these injuries.

            A story inside the NYT describes how West Coast media titans are
already wining and dining Presidential hopefuls from Bill Bradley to John
McCain. Most of the politicians are on an unabashed fundraising mission, but
the moguls are simply trying to "enliven the presidential dialogue" and
"stimulate discussion on meaningful subjects." The story does not consider that
the businessmen may have more practical reasons for securing political
friendships. For example, no mention is made of host Barry Diller's extensive
cable-and-internet-business holdings, which could be massively affected by
regulatory legislation expected from Congress later this year. The gatherings,
sighs Diller, are "simply a reaction to the emptiness of the current retail
political process."

         
      
   
