
   
   
      
         
            Clinton's Back On Drugs

            The LAT, NYT and WP lead with President Clinton's quickie trip to Mexico for
a meeting with President Ernesto Zedillo that focused mostly on the two
countries' future plans for combating drug trafficking. USAT puts Clinton in
Mexico on page nine, leading instead with the Army's expected announcement
today that it will initiate the creation of quick response "strike forces" of
3,000 to 5,000 troops to ultimately replace its current World War II-era
organization based on divisions of between 12,000 and 15,000 soldiers. The new
smaller units will be designed to better meet the exigencies of post-Cold War
threats and scenarios. One issue not decided yet, says the paper, is whether
the time-honored names and insignia of current divisions will survive in the
new scheme.

            The backdrop to the Clinton trip is the continuing skepticism in Washington
about the vigor of Mexico's prosecution of the drug war. The papers take
Clinton's remarks yesterday that Mexico should not be penalized for its
performance in this area to mean that he plans to recommend later this month
that Congress again certify the country as a reliable anti-drug partner.
Failure to do so, explain the NYT and LAT , would mean possible
trade sanctions against Mexico and a frosting of relations between the two
countries.

            The visit also addressed non-drug matters, the papers report. The two
presidents signed agreements to increase air travel between their countries, to
suppress the spread of tuberculosis, and to improve communications between law
enforcement on both sides of the border to cut down on migrant death and
injury. And according to the two Times , both Clinton and Zedillo, in
their only public appearance of the visit, cited the success of NAFTA. In true
Beltway fashion, the WP spends most of its lead discussing the visit's
domestic political angle--that for the first time in more than a year, Clinton
can undertake a foreign trip without being dogged by scandal. Indeed, the
Post big print relegates "Mexico" to the story's subhead and never
mentions drugs or trade, opting instead for the headline: "Clinton Enters a
Renewal Phase."

            A WP front-pager looks beneath the veneer of Elizabeth Dole's
self-described accomplishments as head of the Red Cross to discover in her
tenure there a more mixed record. Yes, she is a fund-raiser par excellence, and
she did preside over the resolution of the agency's tainted blood problems.
But, the paper says a 1996 outside study of the Red Cross found Dole's
management style wanting and critics have noted her tendency to add political
allies to her payroll, including Mari Masing Will, the communications director
for her husband's 1996 campaign. Then there was the prime-time television Red
Cross "spectacular" made with $1.3 million of the charity's funds that
prominently featured Ms. Dole and ran eleven days before she stepped down to
consider a presidential run.

            The WSJ reports that net income at companies in the Dow Jones Global stock
index rose 3 percent in the 4th quarter, a sharp improvement over the third
quarter, which the paper takes to signify that the American consumer's appetite
continues apace.

            The NYT and LAT run front-page obits on Watergate figure John
Ehrlichman, while the WP and USAT put theirs inside. The
H-bomb-headed domestic policy maven turned criminal was convicted and
imprisoned for his role in the Watergate cover-up and the burglary of the
office of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist. Henry Kissinger is quoted in the
LAT epitaph saying of Ehrlichman that "he was a victim of the Vietnam
War and a tough-guy atmosphere in the Nixon White House." The NYT effort
credits Ehrlichman with a bit more of a stand-up attitude than that, quoting
him saying in 1977 that he ran into trouble because "I abdicated my moral
judgments."

            A reader's letter to the WP notices something telling in a previous
Post story about "deadwood" federal employees. The story had mentioned
that in its effort to better understand the problem, the government's Office of
Personnel Management had "interviewed 200 supervisors who directly managed
3,114 employees. Of that total, 429 were supervisors themselves." In other
words, notes the reader, 629 supervisors in the sample were directing the work
of 2,685 nonsupervisory workers, which translates to one manager for every 4.3
employees.

         
      
   
