
   
   
      
         
            Fur Enough?

            The New York Times
leads with a new poll purporting to show that most Americans now condemn the
Senate for its handing of the impeachment trial, with Republicans taking most
of the blame. The Times also gives prominent top-front play to
yesterday's testimony by Vernon Jordan, which is the Washington Post lead. The Jordan news is, according to the
Post : no news. The only exception is that yesterday Jordan told House
prosecutor Asa Hutchinson that he now remembers having breakfast with Monica
Lewinsky on one occasion, something he denied in previous questioning. This
could be significant, explains the paper, because Lewinsky also insists that at
that meeting, Jordan told her to make sure notes she'd drafted to President
Clinton were not found. Jordan still denies that. USA Today
leads with a Portland, Oregon jury's award of $107 million to four abortion
doctors it found were threatened by anti-abortion activists' "Wanted" posters
of abortion providers and by their web site comparing such doctors to Nazi war
criminals. The verdict is also the top non-local story at the Los Angeles
Times . It is also fronted at the WP but runs inside at the
NYT .

            The NYT says its phone poll of 1,058 adults suggests that the public
views the impeachment process, not as an honest investigation of possible
crimes committed by Bill Clinton but as a Republican drive to undermine him.
The paper finds that most Americans think impeachment by the House was adequate
punishment of Clinton, that the Senate didn't need to call witnesses to reach a
decision, and doesn't need to make public the videotaped testimony it decided
to take anyway. The paper sums up the popular sentiment thus: "Enough already!"
The poll finds that just under half of all Republicans feel the whole thing
will make it harder for Republican candidates to win elections in 2000.

            The first sentence of the LAT anti-abortion web site story mentions
that the site featured blood-dripping fetuses, a fact not mentioned by
USAT . Nor by the NYT or the WP . Why the silence?

            The USAT and LAT stories explain that the judge defined
"threat" in such a way that the jury could consider the impact on the mental
state of the plaintiff doctors of nationwide violence aimed against other
doctors and clinics. USAT points out that this definition departs from
the standard laid down by the Supreme Court in 1969, which limited "threat" to
those words that produce or are likely to produce "imminent" lawless action.
The LAT says however, that the trial judge's approach reflects current
appellate case law. The paper effectively sums up the troubling side of the
wider definition of "threat" by quoting one of the defendants' lawyers saying
that under it, "virtually any document that criticizes an abortionist by name
is threatening. I think the effect on political protest will be
devastating."

            One of the annoying tics of newspaper coverage of jury awards is the
tendency to not cover the final money judgement with the same vigor as the
initial sum. Therefore, it's a good start that USAT reports that most of
the defendants in this case have preemptively gotten rid of their assets and
hence that the plaintiffs will probably never collect a cent of the millions
mentioned in the headlines.

            A front-page story at USAT and stories inside elsewhere describe what
the Post calls a "Perry Mason moment" yesterday at the Microsoft trial.
Lead DOJ trial attorney David Boies got a Microsoft senior VP to admit that
there was a major inaccuracy in the video the company played in the courtroom
in an attempt to show that disengaging MS' internet browser from its Windows 98
software makes the latter run slower. The inaccuracy, Boies said, drawing on a
frame-by-frame analysis revealing the continued presence of a browser screen
tag, was that the browser had not actually been removed. Later in the day,
after what the Post describes as the VP's "frantic" phone calls back to
company HQ, he changed his account to say that the software in the video really
did have the browser removed, but that the screen tag usually signifying
browser operation had mistakenly not been removed. The Wall Street Journal sees the Microsoft defense as
"reeling," and says the VP with the balky video is the third straight company
witness to retreat on the stand from a staked-out position.

            The LAT reports that the city of Beverly Hills may be about to
implement an unprecedented consumer notification procedure relating to one of
the town's most cherished substances: fur. The city council has, says the
paper, agreed to hold a special election on requiring all local furriers to put
warning tags on their garments that would read: "This product is made with fur
from animals that may have been killed by electrocution, gassing, neck
breaking, poisoning, clubbing, stomping, or drowning and may have been trapped
in steel-jaw, leg-hold traps." Today's Papers can't help but notice that this
story includes far more detail about methods of extinguishing life than any of
the stories about that anti-abortion web site.

         
      
   
