
   
   
      
         
            A Tip for Parents

            The Washington Post leads with today's expected congressional
testimony by a senior DOJ official weighing in against renewing the Independent
Counsel statute, which is the first time the Clinton administration has
officially taken this stand, and marks a reversal of Justice's longstanding
support for the IC. The New York
Times plays this story top-front, but leads instead with Madeleine
Albright's meetings in Beijing with top Chinese officials, in which she
expressed the U.S.'s displeasure with their recent crackdown on opposition
groups, but was nonetheless encouraging about China's chances of joining the
World Trade Organization. The Times sees the meeting as illustrating the
Clinton administration's persistent separating of human rights and economic
issues when it comes to China. The Los Angeles
Times fronts Albright, reading her stance as more of a "honeymoon is
over" break from past Clinton China policy, but leads with the pledge by what
it calls one of the nation's most aggressive labor unions to spend $1 million a
year to organize physicians, especially those who are salaried employees of
large organizations, such as HMOs. USA Today
leads with revelations at a congressional hearing yesterday that the IRS cannot
perform some of the basic accounting and record-keeping tasks it expects of
taxpayers. According to the story, based on a GAO report, sloppy IRS practices
meant that in the first nine months of 1998 the agency doled out $17 million in
fraudulent and wrong refunds and that it lost track of a Chevy Blazer and a
$300,000 laser printer. The IRS didn't dispute the charges, but attributed the
problems to outdated computers and personnel turnover, problems it's
addressing, says the paper, but which take time.

            According to the Post and NYT (which scrupulously credits
today's Post for all such details), Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder
will testify that the IC statute cannot be fixed, but also that there is no need
to do so, since the DOJ can investigate most official wrongdoing itself. When
there would be a conflict of interest in doing so, Holder will say, the DOJ
could still name special counsels. But the papers don't say how this capability
is thought by the administration to avoid the perceived most problematic
feature of the current law: that if an independent counsel is to be truly not
controlled by the executive branch, he must be virtually immune from dismissal.
Both papers show how times have changed by quoting Janet Reno in 1993, when the
Clinton administration was plumping for the statute's renewal: "It is my firm
conviction that the law has been a good one, helping to restore public
confidence in our system's ability to investigate wrongdoing by high-level
Executive Branch officials."

            The WP , which along with the Boston Globe previously broke the
news that U.N. weapons inspection teams operating in Iraq employed equipment
and personnel provided by U.S. intelligence services, today deepens the story with the claim that such infiltration
went on for three years, was without the knowledge of the U.N. teams, and
produced much valuable intelligence that was completely unrelated to the
inspectors' assignments. This contrasts, the paper explains, with previous
Clinton administration reactions to the original story according to which any
such use of intelligence equipment or agents was done with the full witting
cooperation of the inspectors and produced information related to their
inspection mission. The story contains excellent detail about how the covert
intelligence collection worked: the radio relay system used by the U.N.
inspectors to transmit images from the hinterlands back to Baghdad concealed
antennas used to intercept Iraqi military transmissions. The story also reveals
that some of the UN inspectors suspected U.S. hanky panky, as did an Iranian
spy in Baghdad, whose radio message about the operation was intercepted by
British intelligence. When the Brits asked the U.S. what was up, says the
paper, they weren't told.

            The fronts at USAT , the WP and LAT report that the
nation's main group of pediatricians has substantially backed off its long-held
neutral position on circumcision for male infants. The group now holds that the
practice is not essential to a child's well-being and that "parents should not
be coerced by medical professionals" into having it done. Also, the group says
that if the procedure is done, the baby should receive pain relief beforehand.
The report does say that physicians should respect opting for the operation on
religious or cultural grounds.

            Today's Papers has more than a passing interest in a civil case written up
in the "Work Week" column of the Wall Street Journal . Seems a federal court jury awarded
$700,000 (later reduced to $300,000) to a United Airlines employee when she
suffered a breakdown after three years on the night shift and United turned
down her request to switch to days. The column also passes along heartening
news about ex-welfare hires: they quit at a much lower rate than other
employees.

            
               First the credibility, then the credit. "The Reliable Source" in the
WP reports that yesterday when Bill Clinton went book shopping during
his ski vacation in Utah, he tried to pay with his American Express card. There
was only one problem: it was expired.

         
      
   
