
   
   
      
         
            The Lovely Linda

            "She can't dance/She can't sing...but she's got to be a part of that pop
music thing." The words of Marshall Crenshaw, who once played John Lennon in
Beatlemania , came to mind this afternoon with the news of the death of
Linda McCartney. For most of the 1970s, Linda was one of the most universally
ridiculed figures in pop music, her shortcomings as a singer and musician all
too vivid on Paul's records and, especially, his tours. In the '80s, one wag
got his hands on a soundboard tape of Linda's microphone during a performance
of "Hey, Jude," and radio stations put its one flat note into heavy rotation.
That, combined with the image of Linda as groupie-in-shutterbug's-clothing
conjured up by an infamous piece from the Clay Felker era at the Village
Voice , established Linda as a figure of almost singular unpopularity (the
"almost" courtesy of Yoko Ono, who in the public's addled mind, bore the added
stigma of breaking up the Beatles.)

            Why this should be, when it wasn't her idea to join Wings in the first
place, and when by all available evidence she kept Paul McCartney wildly
happy--and with him raised a flock of spirited children whose achievements are
beginning to come to light? Had she been born 20 years earlier, she would have
been the decorative spouse who kept the creator satisfied as she gave him a
stable home; two decades later, she'd have been Baby Spice with a brain,
Courtney Love on speaking terms with her biological father, Paula Abdul as a
photographer instead of a choreographer.

            Paul now becomes the odds-on favorite for next year's Album of the Year
Grammy, but it's worth noting that the Big Moments in his life, John's death in
particular, have not brought out the best in him. For 30 years now, audiences
hoped he'd serve up wrenching, emotional music--his version of "Mother" from
"Plastic Ono Band"--and it just doesn't seem to be in his nature. All the same,
the critical re-assessment of Paul is already upon us, and Linda's death will
speed things along. That assessment will overrate Paul's post-Beatles
output--in particular, I'm guessing, the music he makes next, just as Tug of
War was overrated in the wake of John's murder--and underrate his work in
the Beatles, an explosion of pop craftsmanship without precedence, overshadowed
by Lennon's mediagenic personality and subsequent martyrdom. I feel like in
couple of months, it'll be safe for me once more to admit that Paul was my
favorite Beatle.

            
               Bitch, Bitch, Bitch: I've always been grateful to Elizabeth Wurtzel
for teaching me the meaning of the word Schadenfreude . It was a concept
that came up a lot in the days immediately following Tina Brown's installation
as editor at The New Yorker , as many journalists of my acquaintance
gleefully counted down the moments until Wurtzel was deposed as pop music
critic. Her writing since certainly confirms that rock 'n' roll was not her
ideal subject, but the idea that the value of her provocative thoughts is
somehow debased by her candor about her personal life, or by her willingness to
appear topless on the cover of her book, is hilarious. In case you missed it:
that battle was fought in the '80s, and Madonna won. So get over it... My first
(and only) conversation with Wurtzel, during a sort-of job interview, placed
her on my short list of Fluff & Folders, right alongside Warren Beatty and
Diane Sawyer. Fluff & Folders are people so charming on first meeting that
if one were to ask me, "Can you do my laundry tonight?" my only response would
be, "Fluff & fold?"...

            
               A Magazine About Nothing: There's plenty of buckshot being sprayed at
Lynn Hirschberg and Vanity Fair in the wake of l'affaire
Seinfeld , in which the sitcom icon obtained a pre-publication copy of a
VF story being written about him. VF says their investigation
indicates the Hirschberg gave Seinfeld the piece herself. Hirschberg denies the
charge. Believe whom you will, but it's Jerry who behaved most caddishly by
reading a yet-to- close story about himself, requesting corrections, firing his
publicist, and afterwards--his stated pleasure in the story
notwithstanding--leaving both writer and magazine twisting in the wind publicly
by not taking the blame for wanting to check out the piece in advance. Like he
doesn't know that's against the rules.

            
               --Chris Connelly
            

         
      
   
