
   
   
      
         
            No Chinese Checkers

            Both the New York Times
and the Los Angeles Times lead with yesterday's revelation that a
special House committee's secret report concludes that over the past two
decades American companies have transferred significant amounts of military
technology to China, thereby damaging U.S. national security. This story is
also the off-lead at the Washington Post , which leads instead with Sen. Trent Lott's
proposed plan for a streamlined and quick impeachment trial, and at USA Today ,
which leads instead with polling showing an easing of Americans' fears about
Y2K. Despite any general Y2K calming, a Wall Street Journal front-pager notes a dawning realization
among technology workers: come next New Year's Eve, many of them will be not at
parties, but at work monitoring their computers' Y2K performance.

            The NYT , LAT and WP note that the China report was unusually bipartisan, receiving unanimous
committee approval and finding Chinese acquisition of military secrets
transpiring during Republican and Democratic administrations alike. The
WP sees in the findings a criticism of the Clinton administration policy
of loosening export restrictions, which, according to the papers, the committee
wants re-cinched. But the WSJ points out that the pot-and-kettle aspect
of the findings may help deflect criticism of Bill Clinton. The congressional
report, prompted by a NYT story last spring describing the unsupervised
flow of sensitive satellite technology to China's strategic rocket programs,
confirmed that transfer, but, say the papers, went much further, also
uncovering the theft by the Chinese of nuclear weapons design technology from
American labs and examining the too-loose export controls governing advanced
computers. Also included was a look at the covert donations to American
political campaigns made during the 1996 election by a Chinese aerospace
executive. The papers draw their information from remarks made by the committee
chairman, Rep. Chris Cox, but, says the NYT , it's unclear exactly how
much more the general public will ever be allowed to learn about the
committee's findings.

            It's been known for a few days that Sen. Lott favored a streamlined trial for Clinton, but what's new today are
some of his details. According to the WP , the proposal would have the
Senate voting by the fourth day of the trial about whether or not the alleged
offenses, even if proven, would count as high crimes and misdemeanors. If that
proposition didn't get a two-thirds majority, then the Senate would move on to
consider censure. The paper says leading House impeachment manager Henry Hyde
expressed "major concerns" about Lott's plan to the senator yesterday--mainly
that it doesn't provide for the calling of witnesses.

            The NYT succinctly explains why the Lott plan is gaining ground in
the Senate: it gives the Senate an opportunity to avoid a long trial, while at
the same time affording senators some kind of vote on Clinton's
impeachment.

            For a second straight day, Iraq anti-aircraft fire drew a tough U.S.
response. This time, after a British plane was shot at, American warplanes hit
the three ground targets implicated with missiles and smart bombs. As it did
the day before, yesterday Iraq again claimed to have shot down a U.S. plane.
The papers all note that the U.S. denies this, but none observes that Iraq
hasn't done something that countries who have shot down planes have done since
the Red Baron got bagged--produced wreckage. If Hussein's goal is not so much
to shoot down a U.S. plane as to keep the no-fly zones in the news, his
strategy may be self-defeating: The LAT puts the story above the fold,
but repetition is driving it inside elsewhere--page 12 at USAT , page 29
at the Post .

            The WP finds front-page space today for what you might call the
Y2K problem for classicists--there is no agreed-upon way to
write out 1999 in Roman numerals. Who cares? Well, explains, the paper, there
are the architects (How to mark the cornerstones of buildings?), and the movie
producers (How to write the copyright date at the end of the credits?). Thank
God the government's National Institute of Standards and Technology is working
on this.

            The WP 's Richard Cohen makes the point that the rescue of those
balloonists is rich-dude welfare. How much welfare? Well, Cohen asked the Coast
Guard to run the numbers and learned that rescuing Richard Branson and company
cost taxpayers $130,275. And, he adds, under the law the Coast Guard cannot
even send Branson a bill. Today's Papers says hooray for Cohen and is still
amazed that news stories don't routinely do this kind of math. For instance, TP
is still waiting for a news story that states the cost so far of the Houston
octuplets.

         
      
   
