
   
   
      
         
            Takedown Ticktock

            The Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times lead with the U.S. and its European allies putting diplomatic
pressure on both Yugoslavia and ethnic Albanian leaders to accept a peace
accord regarding Kosovo province before a Saturday deadline, while making
preparations for NATO airstrikes in case they don't. The New York Times
doesn't front Kosovo, its lead instead illustrating another step America is
taking from an investigation of government to a government of investigation
with the news that the DOJ is considering appointing a special prosecutor to
inquire into charges of misconduct by Kenneth Starr. USA Today
fronts neither story and leads instead with word that any day now, the EPA will
propose new emissions standards that would require minivans, light trucks, and
most SUVs to run as clean as cars by 2007. The new rules, says the paper, could
add considerably to sticker price.

            The WP explains that the principal stumbling block to a Kosovo
agreement is that Slobodan Milosevic, head of Yugoslavia and a Serb, remains
opposed to a NATO peacekeeping force on Serbian soil. Both the WP and
LAT leads report that Madeleine Albright spoke to Milosevic on the phone
yesterday, telling him that airstrikes would hit his country hard. The
LAT says NATO is thought to be targeting military communications sites
and barracks. The Post says the planned airstrikes would be the "biggest
projection of military power" since a NATO-led peacekeeping force moved into
Bosnia more than three years ago. But the paper doesn't explain if this means
just in this theater of operations, or if it would also be bigger than the
raids recently conducted against Iraq. The LAT points out that it was
NATO bombing that helped force Milosevic to sign the Dayton peace accords that
ended the fighting in Bosnia.

            From the reporting, it's a little hard to understand the U.S. thinking on
Russia's role in all this. The LAT quotes Albright saying she was
hopeful that Russia would participate in any Kosovo peacekeeping force and that
she believed Russia was delivering a message to Milosevic as tough as the one
she delivered to him. But, as does the WP , the LAT also reports
that Boris Yeltsin on Thursday warned the U.S. not to stage any airstrikes, and
said that Russia would stand by its Slavic brethren.

            The LAT front goes long with a fascinating blow-by-blow on the
capture of Abdullah Ocalan over the byline of Richard Boudreaux, with the
assistance of such stalwarts as John-Thor Dahlburg, Norman Kempster and Robin
Wright. The story flatly asserts the involvement of U.S. and Israeli
intelligence agents and the government of Kenya, and strongly suggests advance
knowledge if not the full cooperation of the government of Greece. Perhaps the
biggest news of the piece is that Ocalan's presence in Nairobi was first
detected, two days after he arrived, by FBI agents still there as part of the
investigation of last summer's bombing of the U.S. embassy. British and Israeli
agents independently became aware of his presence shortly thereafter.

            A NYT front-pager covers the nearly tax-free status of cruise ship
companies, a scandal first widely publicized by Donald Barlett and James Steele
in their celebrated Philadelphia Inquirer series on America's economic
disparities in the 1980s, "What Went Wrong?". For instance, reports the
Times , the Carnival Corporation, larger than many Fortune 500 companies,
earned $2 billion in the past three years while paying less than 1 percent in
income tax. This virtual immunity from tax, explains the Times , as well
as similar insulation against the nation's labor, safety, and environmental
laws, is enjoyed by all 17 major cruise lines because they are registered in
foreign countries, even though their base of operations is in the U.S. and 90
percent of their passengers are Americans.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that Warner Bros. has refused a
request from the Marines to use a clip from its movie "Full Metal Jacket" in a
training CD-ROM about how to survive sniper attacks. The studio based its
refusal on "serious piracy" concerns. In other words, in Burbank helping
Marines stay alive runs a distant second to squeezing out every last licensing
dollar. The Marines should remember that the next time the studio comes asking
for technical assistance on a picture (as it no doubt did on "Full Metal
Jacket").

         
      
   
