
   
   
      
         
            Can America Stand Pat?

            
               USA
Today and the Los Angeles Times lead with a special Senate committee's
report on the Y2K problem. (The report was first discussed last week in the
Washington Post , which today runs a story on it
inside, as does the New York
Times .) The top non-local story at the WP is the consummation of
the long-awaited deal by which the federal government and the state of
California have agreed to pay a lumber company $480 million to preserve
Northern California's Headwaters Forest, which had been the largest stand of
ancient redwoods in private hands. This also makes the LAT front. The
NYT fronts Headwaters too, but leads instead with growing support in
Congress for walling off Social Security funds from the rest of the federal
budget. The main divide among advocates of the move, the story explains, is
between those who want to do it now and those who want to do it gradually.
Yesterday, House Republicans introduced a gradual plan. Gradualism has the
advantage of allowing for a combination of new spending and tax cuts near-term
and shoring up Social Security in the long haul. The story delays until the
13th paragraph the news that all current talk of budget surpluses depends on
counting Social Security among general revenues, and never mentions that in
business accounting, earmarked pension funds are not considered among a firm's
assets.

            The subhead over USAT 's Y2K story says the Senate report "cites
vulnerability but little risk of disaster" and the story proper quickly
includes calming words from two senators. Nonetheless mentioned are potential
problems with paychecks and medical records, and accidental nuclear launches.
The LAT lead stresses the risks a bit more, with its first paragraph
mentioning computer crashes, disruptions leading to civil unrest in some
countries, and the risk of terrorist attacks amid the resulting confusion.
USAT plays terrorism lower. Both papers make the point that whatever Y2K
risks there are will be more acute in many foreign countries than in the
U.S.

            The NYT off-lead reports the murder of eight tourists visiting the Bwindi Impenetrable Forest
in Uganda to see rare mountain gorillas. The story also makes the LAT
and WP fronts. The two Americans among the dead were executives at
Intel. The murderers were said to be a band of machete-wielding Hutu rebels,
remnants of the forces that massacred more than half a million rival Tutsi
tribesmen and moderate Hutu in Rwanda in 1994. The Times notes that
tourist treks aiming to see mountain gorillas became popular after the movie
"Gorillas in the Mist," about researcher Dian Fossey, but oddly does not
mention that Fossey was also murdered in the jungle.

            The WP goes above the fold with a picture for Pat Buchanan's decision
to run for president for a third time. In New Hampshire, Buchanan, the paper
reports, launched his effort with a speech criticizing economic globalism, the
UN, immigration, affirmative action and abortion. His peroration was "As they
say, mount up and ride to the sound of the guns."

            The Wall Street Journal "Tax Report" informs that the new IRS
capability to accept tax payments via credit card has become unexpectedly
popular among the super-wealthy. Already, says the paper, at least seven
taxpayers have asked to charge between $1 million and $9 million on their Amex
or MasterCard. And at least 20 have asked to charge more than $100,000. Can you
guess why? Well, the Journal points out, charging $4 million could rack
up enough frequent flier miles to buy 40 friends first-class round trip tickets
to London.

            The claws are out and the fur is flying as the Monica show, (during which,
reports the WP , Lewinsky says President Clinton is a "good kisser" who
"struggles with his sensuality") opens tonight. The LAT front quotes a
commentator saying, "This country's appetite for the salacious, the sexy and
the personal is truly a bottomless pit...." The commentator? Lucianne Goldberg,
who goes on to say, "Most pudgy little princesses from California don't get
themselves into this kind of a jam and make all this money." Publisher and TV
host Judith Regan says Lewinsky "isn't a victim. She's an adulterer and she
should be walking around with a scarlet A." And she "seemed more interested in
making money than contemplating the deep meaning of her actions." The
LAT notes that Regan tried and failed to land the Lewinsky book, but
didn't mention that Regan's commitment to asceticism and deep contemplation
included publishing Rush Limbaugh and Howard Stern.

         
      
   
