
   
   
      
         
            For You, Just 1999

            On this day of all days of discretionary news, the papers revert to type.
The New York Times
leads with money--the Euro is here. The Washington Post leads with Beltway politics--Trent Lott is
trying to hammer out a workable Republican consensus on impeachment strategy.
And the Los Angeles Times goes with smog--the EPA rejects
California's smog control strategy as being too lax. Vexed items Washington
wants in and California wants out include mandated ride-share programs,
pollution controls on restaurant char-broilers, and tougher regs on aerospace
plants.

            The NYT lead and front-pagers at the LAT and WP all
report that finance ministers from 11 countries yesterday celebrated the first
technical step towards a common European currency--formally locking in the rate of exchange
of their individual currencies with the euro, which provides the starting point
for trade in the new currency come Monday. The rates mean that the euro will
start out worth $1.17. As the papers explain, although actual euro notes and
coins will not circulate until Jan. 1, 2002 (at which time national currencies
will begin phasing out), the banks and stock exchanges of the 11 partners are
henceforth required to carry out all non-cash transactions in euros.

            An inside piece in the WP notes a euro-related problem U.S-based and
other transnational businesses on the Continent haven't quite gotten their
minds around yet: wage transparency. That is, the advent of the new currency
will make it suddenly easy to compare salaries earned in different countries
for the same work. The story mentions a school of thought according to which
the euro's transparency effect will eventually tend to make salaries more
comparable across borders, with the suggestion that the uniformity will be
established at a level closer to the high salaries than the low ones. But it
doesn't explain why the reverse couldn't turn out to be true instead.

            It has always seemed a little odd for papers to insist on coming out on such
dead news days as Christmas and New Years. A lot of it is just so much
strutting--sure, spending the day with the family is alright for those weenies
at the WSJ or USAT, but we're a newspaper over here for chrissakes. And the
result is that when the world predictably stops on its axis, the workaholic
papers have to absolutely cram 2 inches of new information into 60 inches of
space. The Post 's lead about Lott is a case in point: its narrative,
about how Lott's proposing a strategy for avoiding a full trial and an instant
censure deal and how conservatives in the House and Senate are less than
thrilled, was pretty much the Post 's lead yesterday too. The suck-it-up
publication policy seems even less sensible given that the papers now have the
ideal vehicle for transmitting what little holiday news there is: their web
sites. Save the trees, guys.

            In the spirit of 2000, marked down to 1999, the NYT editorial page
hurries to a consideration of the millenium. In the Times grand manner,
citing the likes of Dionysius Exiguus, Herod and the Islamic calendar, the page
finally comes down in favor of getting blitzed next year. Thanks to its
ever-more supple closing times, the paper also includes a ground-level account
of the Times Square action last night, featuring the biggest and most orderly
crowd in years. A crowd of students, tourists, and cops. And oh yes, at least
one media critic, a man who "marked the passing of another year by vomiting
discreetly against a corner of the Viacom Building...."

            Just when you thought it couldn't get any wilder than that--it does and Al
Gore decides to run for president! PARTAAAY!! At least, that's what the
WP front says he's gone and done--with a headline stating "Gore Makes It
Official: He Will Run in 2000/Filing Establishes Presidential Campaign." Why
then does the NYT say instead with its headline that what Gore is doing
is "Forming Organization for 2000 Bid for President," and with its body type
that Gore "will take his first formal step toward running for president in
2000"? Which is it? Is he deciding to run or running to decide?

            The NYT front and the WP inside feature stories about what's
being done to those two top Khmer Rouge officials who gave themselves up to the
Cambodian government last week--they're being sent on a beach holiday. Oh sure,
according to the NYT , they have been so hounded by reporters that to
avoid questions they've had to stay inside their beach hotels, but they've been
provided with security guards to protect them from people whose lives they've
ruined, and the Post says there are reports the government's given them
each $10,000 expense accounts for the trip. And nobody's worked them to death
or bashed their heads in with a shovel.

            In the last week, the papers have tried every way possible to tie up this
past year in a ribbon and present it to the ages. Finally, in today's
Post , a "Style" section writer finds the right words. They're not his.
They're Hers. It turns out Monica Lewinsky's adios to the grand jury is the
fitting farewell to 1998: We're really sorry for everything that's happened.
And we hate Linda Tripp.

         
      
   
