
   
   
      
         
            Tina Goes to Hollywood

            The queen is dead.

            Come Aug. 1, New Yorker editor Tina Brown will depart and make room
for the magazine's fifth--but not yet announced--editor. The bomb was dropped
at a hastily convened meeting at 10:30 this morning. Indeed, many of the
magazine's staffers were still sipping their first cup of coffee when word went
out that Tina wanted to address "the staff." And so they gathered in what is
known as "the piazza," an open space adjacent to the corridor where the
magazine's senior editors sit.

            Sporting a simple blue suit, her hair streaked with just the right amount of
blond, Tina walked into the piazza and started speaking while stragglers were
still making their way up the stairs. This was, she said, a very difficult
thing to do, but she had been presented with an opportunity that she simply
couldn't refuse. After uttering the usual platitudes about how The New
Yorker is the best magazine in the business, Tina became farklempt
as she pronounced, "I love you all." Then, of course, came the hugs--along with
tears from the members of Tina's inner-circle who are surely wondering what all
of this means for them.

            And what does it mean for Tina's devotees? Culturebox can only speculate.
Tina is certainly responsible for bringing in most of the magazine's hottest
writers, and here we're referring to people like the unrivaled David Remnick
and Malcolm Gladwell, both of whom cut their teeth at the Washington
Post . Some will probably follow Tina to her next stop, a new media venture
formed by Miramax that will publish a monthly magazine and books, as well as
produce films and television shows. (She will be the chairwoman and a part
owner of the new company.)

            But what will become of The New Yorker ? During Tina's tenure, the
magazine's editors were always talking about "the mix"--the never-ending
struggle to strike the right balance between the slashy and the serious. The
charge that Tina was too fond of the former is by now a cliche. It is also
probably the last thing on the mind of billionaire Si Newhouse, who suddenly
seems concerned with turning a profit at the magazine. And who can blame him?
After all, as Fortune put it recently, the president and CEO of Conde
Nast, Steven Florio, "turned a mildly profitable property into one of the
greatest money pits in American magazine history." Under the Florio brothers,
Steve and Tom, The New Yorker has lost a whopping $175 million. It's no
surprise, then, that Newhouse has decided to merge the magazine into his Conde
Nast empire. Next year, the The New Yorker 's sinecured staffers will
move into Conde Nast's new headquarters and will fight for phone lines and desk
space with the rest of Si's magazines.

            As for who will preside over this dark day in New Yorker history, we
can only report what we have gleaned from the rumor mill over on 43rd Street.
The most obvious candidate seems to be Graydon Carter, the celebrity (if not
celebrated) editor of Vanity Fair who has perfected the formula for the
profile that simultaneously glamorizes and eviscerates its subject. It seems
less likely that Newhouse will go with an inside The New Yorker
candidate, though if he does, the best choice might be James Stewart, a
respected newspaperman who did a tour as Page One editor of the Wall Street
Journal in the early 1990s. Dark horses inside the magazine include Remnick
and Kurt Andersen. To this mix, Culturebox would like to add a candidate of its
own: Chip McGrath, the editor of the New York Times Book Review . A
former staff member at The New Yorker , McGrath was passed over when
Robert Gottlieb acceded to power, but over the past few years he has done a
bang-up job at the Book Review , giving it all of the heft of the New
York Review of Books with none of the intellectual snobbery. All the while,
he has been writing nifty pop culture pieces for the New York Times

               Magazine , so he seems to have that ingredient of "the mix" covered as
well.

            Place your bets.

            -- Jonathan Mahler
            

         
      
   
