
   
   
      
         
            Oral History

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times lead with yesterday's Supreme Court decision saying schools must
provide whatever nursing care is required to enable students with physical
"special needs"--such as those in wheelchairs or on ventilators--to attend
mainstream classes. The 1975 law governing the educational access rights of the
disabled states that schools don't have to pay for "medical services," but the
Court ruled that only applies to services provided by physicians. The New York Times ,
which also fronts the Court's disability decision, leads instead with the NYC
school chancellor's threat to quit if the city goes ahead with a planned
tax-funded private school voucher program, but the paper's top non-local story
is the U.S.' imposition (as promised last December) of 100 percent tariffs on
certain European luxury goods. The LAT also fronts the story, differing
from the NYT and the Wall Street Journal in stating that the new tariffs will
not be imposed before mid-March.

            The coverage of the Court's call for classroom nursing support notes that it
means fresh mainstream classroom access for many handicapped children and
billions in unexpected costs for public schools, and hence for taxpayers.
USAT says that in the particular case that went to the Court in which a
boy, a high school sophomore, was rendered quadriplegic by a childhood
accident, the cost to the school system of his attending classes was as much as
$30,000 per year, compared to the nationwide average of $6,495 for "regular"
students. ("Regular" is the paper's word; better would have been
"able-bodied.") The LAT says that nationwide, the additional care could
cost $500 million per year.

            There is one area that all the stories on this decision gloss over. They
each mention that the plaintiff's child in the case was injured in a childhood
accident. All but the NYT note that it was a motorcycle accident when
the boy was four years old. But everybody leaves it at that. Which leaves
Today's Papers' nose twitching. Did one of the parents drive a motorcycle
around with a four-year-old on the back? Or let somebody else do so? (Without a
helmet?) If the answer to either question is yes, then here we have a case of
the cost of parental irresponsibility being doled out to everybody else, a
phenomenon the papers should be more curious about.

            The NYT explains that the 100 percent tariff imposed on the likes of Louis Vuitton handbags,
Parma ham, pecorino cheese and Scottish cashmere sweaters is a response to
Europe's recent establishment of import limits on bananas grown by American
companies in Central America. The story also reports that on Wednesday the
House of Representatives passed a threat to keep the Concorde from landing in
the U.S. in retaliation for a European ruling, designed to promote European
aviation equipment sales, that would ban many older U.S. planes from Europe.
The story does not explain when or under what circumstances the House threat
becomes a reality. The Times notes that the U.S. moves are largely
symbolic in that the goods involved and the Concorde flights are a very small
part of European/U.S. commerce. (Although they probably disproportionately
affect Times readers.)

            The LAT , WP , and USAT front wash-ups from the Monica
Lewinsky interview with Barbara Walters last night and her new book, out today.
The NYT fronts a picture of Lewinsky from the interview, but stuffs her
words inside. The USAT headline focuses on Lewinsky's claim in her book
that President Clinton is "a selfish man who lies all the time." The LAT
likens her story to a "romance novel, heavy on grief, despair and passion." And
records her reaction to being presidentially dumped: "All I did was cry and eat
pizzas and sweets." The WP passes along her claim that when stung by Ken
Starr she considered killing herself by jumping out the hotel window, and the
tidbit that to keep potential evidence out of investigators' hands, her father
burned her White House souvenirs on the family barbecue.

            The WP reports that a U.S. expert on bio-warfare walked through
Capitol security yesterday carrying 7.5 grams of powdered anthrax in a plastic bottle,
and then proceeded to a House hearing where he displayed his deadly sample. The
man then testified that in addition he has done likewise "through all the major
airports, and the security systems of the State Department, the Pentagon, even
the CIA, and nobody has stopped me."

            The WSJ reports that thanks to the raging bull market, just last year
six colleges and universities--Grinnell (!), Brown, Purdue, Minnesota,
Rochester, and Caltech--joined the ranks of schools with billion dollar
endowments. And then the Journal asks the very natural question that the
schools themselves never raise, Why, in light of this investment success, don't
the schools use more of their own resources to help students? Why, in other
words, the higher and higher tuitions and the proposed $52.1 billion in federal
student aid? To drive the point home, the paper quotes a Harvard economist's
calculations that it would only take a 1.8 percent return on its endowment for
Harvard to provide all its undergrads with a free education.

            *Know, like, thyself* The WP reports that in her book, Monica
Lewinsky derides Linda Tripp's accent and her "lumpy figure."

         
      
   
