
   
   
      
         
            President Company Not Excluded

            
               USA
Today , the Los Angeles Times and New York Times
lead with today's anticipated Senate not guilty votes. The Washington Post , for the second day in a row, gives the top
of the paper to something else--today to the horrors of North Korea's
famine--and tucks impeachment just underneath, but festooned by the front's
boldest headline type.

            The papers spend most of their impeachment ink counting votes and recounting
bits of closed-door speeches press-released to them. They note that Republican
Sen. Olympia Snowe's announcement that she will vote to acquit President
Clinton on both impeachment articles means there's a very good chance the
perjury charge won't even get a simple majority, and some chance that the
obstruction charge won't either. It's also reported that Republican Susan
Collins might vote no on one or both articles. The LAT is most definite
about this, citing sources close to her saying Collins will vote no twice.

            On the other hand, say the papers, two other Republicans also widely thought
to be not guilty voters, Sen. Gordon Smith and Sen. Robert Bennett, announced
their intention to convict on both articles. The LAT quotes Bennett as
predicting that "Clinton" will become "a synonym for an elegant, well-crafted
lie." But this isn't much worse than the remarks by Sen. Dianne Feinstein
quoted by the NYT : "The president acted immorally. He acted recklessly.
He acted disgracefully. He willfully misled the American people, the members of
his Cabinet, his staff and his judicial system. In doing so, he brought shame
and dishonor upon the office of the President and especially upon himself." And
she's a Clinton supporter .

            The papers say that after the midday impeachment vote a formal censure of
Clinton will fail. Then there will be an attempt at an informal censure, which,
the LAT explains, would be read into the record but not acted on.

            The NYT says that the day's solemn mood was "somewhat tarnished" by
reports that Clinton planned an all-out drive to help Democrats win back the
House. Wonder why the Times doesn't mention that it was where those
reports first appeared. The papers mention that Clinton plans to address the
nation tomorrow after the trial's conclusion and that he will be mindful not to
repeat the celebratory mood of that post-impeachment South Lawn pep rally. The
WP quotes Sen. Bob Kerrey's response to the question, What did he want
to hear from Clinton today? "As little as possible."

            A story reefered on the WP front quotes "several knowledgeable
Democrats" as saying that Hillary Clinton will seriously consider whether to
run for the Senate from New York in 2000 once the
impeachment trial is over.

            The NYT top front features an interview with Linda Tripp, complete with a large color photo
of the heavily made up and made over stay-at-home federal bureaucrat. According
to the story, Tripp says she betrayed Monica Lewinsky to save her from being
abused by President Clinton. "I would hope some other mom would do for my
daughter what I did for Monica, despite the fact that it looks horrible...,"
the paper quotes Tripp saying as she broke down in tears. Tripp also says that
it was Lucianne Goldberg's idea for her to talk to Ken Starr, and for her to
reveal Lewinsky's affair to Paula Jones' lawyers. Tripp also tells the
Times that she had her first discussion with the Jones lawyers in
October, 1997. She also admits telling Lewinsky the lie that she was turning
over on Monica because Tripp had also been the target of a Ken Starr sting
operation.

            Everybody fronts the precedent-setting verdict of a Brooklyn federal jury finding that
several gun manufacturers were legally responsible for the criminal use of
firearms, awarding $500,000 in damages to a New York teenager wounded in a 1995
shooting. The decision is likely, say the papers, to lead more cities and more
shooting victims to mount such liability lawsuits. It's a bit curious that the
WP , a paper read in a city with its share of shootings, chooses to put
the story on the very bottom of the front page, below a story about the
scandal-driven rise in sex talk and one about the possibility of more flights
being added at National Airport. Similarly, why is the Post waiting
until page 32 to tell us that the U.S. has decided to send more than 2,000
Marines into Kosovo as part of a multi-national peace-keeping force? And why is
everybody else likewise paying little attention to this?

            A LAT front-pager claims that despite a stock price and profits that
continue to climb, Microsoft's power in the computing world is beginning to
wane. The story points out that in contrast to a year ago, a few computer
companies are now offering PCs not just with Netscape instead of Internet
Explorer but even with non-Windows operating systems. Also, the story notes
even though Internet company consolidation continues to proceed at a furious
pace, Microsoft hasn't made a major acquisition since the DOJ brought its case
last year.

            
               Uh, like, wasn't that the problem in the first place? The Wall Street Journal "Washington Wire" reports that the New
Hampshire state Democratic Party chairman says Clinton shouldn't gloat when he
attends a fund-raiser in his state next week, but adds, "I'm not sure anyone
[there] can control their passion."

         
      
   
