
   
   
      
         
            Marine Corpse Maneuvers

            
               USA
Today leads with the acquittal of Marine pilot Richard Ashby in
connection with the deaths of 20 people that occurred when the airplane he was
piloting struck an Italian ski lift in 1998. The story is also top front with
pictures at the other majors. The New York Times
and Washington Post go with the announcement yesterday
by Republican congressional leaders that their budget plan will set aside money
for Social Security while also providing for a tax cut. The Post says
this is a vague proposal, with the size of the tax cut still undefined. But the
paper does say that over the next ten years, the GOP aims to use all the
non-Social Security budget surplus for tax relief, while President Clinton
would devote some of it to Medicare, special savings accounts, and extra
defense and domestic spending. The NYT says the GOP proposed tax cut
before the 2000 election will be quite modest, growing to "historic" dimensions
only in subsequent years. The Los Angeles Times leads with bad news for
California's schools: low reading scores. The death of former Supreme Court
justice Harry Blackmun, age 90, makes everybody's front, the headlines making
it clear that his authorship of the Roe v. Wade opinion is at this point viewed
as his signal legacy.

            
               USAT reports that Ashby's mother and sister squealed with joy at the
verdict, but that Ashby took the news undemonstratively. (The paper says he was
sitting when the verdict was read. Unlikely. The other papers have him
standing.) Relatives of the victims, says USAT , sat in "shocked
silence." USAT , the WP and LAT report that the Italian
prime minister, in the U.S. to meet today with President Clinton, said he was
"baffled" by the verdict. The NYT says he was "infuriated."

            The WP and NYT make it clear just how sweeping the acquittal
was: Not only was Ashby cleared of involuntary manslaughter and negligent
homicide but also of charges of dereliction of duty and destruction of
property, even though he was flying lower and faster than the rules allowed.
None of the papers mention it, but the trial outcome is part of a disturbing
recent trend in U.S. military justice. What do the U.S. Navy shootdown of an
Iranian airliner, the "friendly fire" missile attacks on Allied troops during
the Gulf War, the Tailhook sexual assaults, and the U.S. Air Force shootdown of
two U.S. Army helicopters in the Iraqi no-fly zone all have in common?
Miraculously, the military justice system found that none of these actions was
anybody's fault.

            The LAT lead says a new federal assessment of California's fourth
graders' reading skills shows that only 20 percent of them are proficient
readers, putting the state second to last (only in front of Hawaii) in the
nation in this category. As if realizing what the study suggests about the
cognitive prowess of LAT readers, the paper points out that the federal
assessment "also" showed that eighty percent of the state's fourth graders are
not proficient readers.

            The Wall Street Journal main "Politics and Policy" piece argues
that President Clinton's decision to keep his distance from the press in the
wake of the Lewinsky and Broaddrick allegations has hurt the public's
understanding of his policies. And will hurt historians' understanding of them
as well.

            Follow up: Yesterday, in discussing the Supreme Court ruling that physically
disabled children are entitled to the provision of publicly-funded continuous
classroom care, this space wondered how it was that none of the papers covering
the decision seemed at all curious about how the disabled boy in the case could
have been paralyzed in a motorcycle accident as a four-year-old. Well, Today's
Papers couldn't take it any more and quickly found out some further interesting
facts: The boy was injured when, after his father put him on the back of a
motorcycle, the baby blanket that the father placed around his shoulders became
entwined with the cycle's drive shaft, breaking the boy's neck and snapping his
spinal cord. The parents sued the motorcycle manufacturer and accepted a
settlement offer of $1.3 million. Leaving aside the question of how it is that
anything about the motorcycle design or manufacture could have been nearly as
implicated as the father's ill-advised decision to put the four-year-old on a
motorcycle, it should be noted that that $1.3 million was primarily proffered
to pay for the costs entailed by the boy's injury. Hence, here's a crucial fact
not reported in any of yesterday's stories: the parents had already been
given more than enough money (by their own estimate) to provide for the
additional cost of keeping him in a mainstream classroom.
            

            The WP reports on one rather peculiar preparation made for Clinton's
visit to the Interior Department yesterday. Seems Interior honchos decided to
use a 5-foot-wide version of the departmental seal as the event backdrop, a
seal featuring blue, snow-capped mountains, an orange sunset, and a buffalo
grazing. Problem was, it was discovered late in the game that the buffalo is an
anatomically correct he. And that Clinton when he spoke at Interior would be
standing, wags the Post , "right near its anatomical correctness." Hence
the last-minute airbrush job by government workers, avoiding the appearance of
any interspecies sensuous gestures.

         
      
   
