
   
   
      
         
            Balkan Bob & Burning Bush

            The New York Times leads with
a report on the increasing cynicism and resignation of the religious right
regarding the political process. The Los Angeles
Times fronts Bob Dole's peace mission to the Balkans. The Washington Post goes with the dramatic decline in the fire
death rate. In its off-lead the Post reports on the building excitement
over Texas Governor George W. Bush's prospective presidential candidacy. The
paper quotes a confidant of the as yet undeclared candidate in summing up the
ferment: "the fires are burning as hot as the sun . . . it's saddle up and
ride."

            According to the New York Times , while some of its influential
leaders are complaining about the lack of obeisance on the Hill, the Christian
coalition is struggling to coalesce around a clear strategy and a single
presidential candidate. The paper notes the forthcoming publication of a book
by two former Moral Majority officials, arguing that government cannot correct
what is wrong with America. The Times , concludes that the troubles of
the religious right will increase the willingness of Republican candidates to
distance themselves from the coalition. Oddly, this analysis does not factor in
the effect of the failed impeachment move on the mood of Christian
conservatives.

            The LA Times leads with Dole's announcement that Albanian Kosovars
are prepared to sign the interim peace accord that emerged from the recent
talks in Rambouillet. Yugoslav President Milosevic would not grant Dole a visa,
forcing the former-Senator to exercise his influence from neighboring
Macedonia. The paper notes the scheduled arm-twisting visits of European and
U.S. officials from Balkan "contact-group" nations, leading up to the
resumption of talks on March 15. The Post looks on the bright side of
things, noting Dole's assertion that Kosovar acquiescence might pressure
Milosevic to accede. The NYT emphasizes that Dole "failed to clinch a
deal" and that agreement remains "uncertain." The Times does not spare
the "most embarrassing" details of what it portrays as a misadventure,
including the fact that a 29-year-old commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army
stood Dole up, leaving him to wrangle over the telephone with another guerilla
leader.

            The Post lead reports that in 1997, firefighters responded to 1.8
million fires, down from 3.3 million fires 20 years earlier. Last year, U.S.
fire deaths totaled 4,050, dropping from 6,215 in 1988. The paper reports that
the good news is due to many factors, including: the increasing prevalence of
smoke alarms, major strides made in the treatment of burn patients, tougher
building codes, tighter standards for fire resistant furnishings, migration of
many hazardous jobs overseas, the growing percentage of meals that are eaten
outside of the home, the increase in the use of microwaves and the decrease in
smoking. Republican Representative Curt Weldon, chairman of the House fire
caucus, offers an alternative explanation: when the economy is strong, "they
don't need to commit arson or bail out a business."

            In its off-lead, the WP fans the flames of the Bush buzz in
anticipation of the launch of his exploratory committee today. The paper
reports that a slew of supporters arrive daily to pledge allegiance, offer
assistance and grab a piece of the action. According to the papers the support
is unprecedented for a first-time candidate and is "both spontaneous and
organized." The paper reports that GOP state legislators will deliver letters
personally pledging support to Bush, as they were instructed to do by veteran
strategists.

            Yesterday, the NYT led with a special report alleging that the
Chinese made a leap in their nuclear capability using secrets stolen from Los
Alamos and that the White House attempted to sweep the issue under the rug to
avoid disturbing its "strategic partnership" with China. The WP picks up
on the story, pointedly noting that the espionage was previously
reported by the Wall Street Journal and the Washington Post . The
WP , goes on to cite actions the administration has taken to toughen
security and White House denials that Clinton sought to minimize the Chinese
espionage. The paper avers that "a former top Los Alamos official told The
Post last month that it would be difficult to demonstrate the importance of
what may have been revealed to the Chinese 'because they already had done
advanced work in this area.'" The WP notes that the alleged spying was
one of three cases of purported espionage. Is The Post downplaying the
Times scoop or did the NYT overplay its hand?

            The Times fronts a report that more than 10 percent of U.S. health
care workers are allergic to latex. The allergy impedes the careers of medical
professionals because latex gloves are required by many hospitals and medical
offices. While normally reports on allergies might not rouse the Sunday morning
reader, I'm sure most will read on to discover that, indeed, the afflicted are
equally irritated by latex precautions for other extremities. The paper notes
that due to the balloon factor, children's birthday parties are also a
menace.

         
      
   
