
   
   
      
         
            Boy Vey

                   BRENTWOOD, Calif.--As we begin the autopsy for Boys R Us--the beer
'n' boorishness, boobs 'n' bang-bang, jeans 'n' sneakers, rock 'n' freaking
roll pop culture that won the Cold War--it might be wise to determine a time of
death. What'll it be: the day Kurt Cobain killed himself? The day Keith
Olbermann left ESPN? The day Bill Watterson stopped drawing Calvin and
Hobbes ?
       Or was it yesterday, when an action film starring Bruce Willis got
squashed in its opening weekend by Lost in Space --featuring a fully
clothed Heather Graham; the youngest girl from Party of Five ; and a
human body count of zero--and Titanic . Some of us around here still
remember when Titanic was going to be the Ultimate Boy Movie, based on
the Ultimate Boy Tragedy, courtesy of Jim Cameron, the Ultimate Boy Director,
the guy who put Jamie Lee Curtis in That Dress, shot down her cleavage, and
blew up a bridge beneath her.
       Cameron is the Kim Philby of Boys R Us, the man whose Girl Movie in Boy
Movie's Clothing led to Celine Dion's "My Heart Will Go On" and to the detritus
of Leomania. Titanic spent 15 weeks atop the U.S. box office, beating
the pants off such movies as Wild Things --whose Boy Culture appeal was
summed up by its star Denise Richards when she told Entertainment
Weekly , "I don't want my dad to see my breasts. I'm hoping he'll cover his
eyes."
       Meanwhile, "My Heart Will Go On" has pulled two different albums to the
top of the charts, humiliating new releases from Van Halen and Pearl Jam. But
the music industry has been hip to the death of Boys R Us since last summer,
when Lilith Fair out-grossed Lollapalooza. Last year for the first time,
according to the Recording Institute of America, more girls than boys bought
records. Three years ago, Trent Reznor was singing, "I wanna fuck you like an
animal"; last year, in "Not Tonight," Li'l Kim and a gaggle of female rappers
were demanding oral satisfaction.
       Elsewhere on the cultural landscape, the news for Boy Culture gets
bleaker. Television? Two words: Dawson's Creek . Talk radio? Goodbye,
Rush ... hello, Dr. Laura. Even sports are under siege. The U.S. women's hockey
team wins the gold medal? No problem ... but when the men's hockey team loses
and gets frisky with a fire extinguisher at the Olympic Village, they
practically have their citizenship revoked. After years of watching locker-room
celebrations, I thought I was supposed to enjoy it when athletes got rowdy. Not
anymore. Check out Boston, where golden-armed QB Drew Bledsoe is in Dutch for
stage-diving during an Everclear show last year, and Red Sox slugger Mo Vaughn
still can't get a long-term contract after a couple of strip club
incidents.
       Has every American male teen had his allowance suspended or his
part-time job taken away? They're not buying records or movie tickets or novels
or Levi's or Arch Deluxes or Nikes. Even the people who make Budweiser have so
little faith in the buying power of their core audience of males that they're
test-marketing Catalina Blonde, a near-beer expressly designed for women. And
just when you thought the sport utility vehicle craze could four-wheel Boy
Culture back to the mountaintop, here comes the VW Bug, complete with a "Drive
it? Hug it? Drive it? Hug it?" ad campaign so insufferable it makes Hello Kitty
look like Pulp 
               Fiction .
       So where can Boys R Us make its last stand? There are Comedy Central's
unashamedly foul South Park ; Howard Stern and Jerry Springer; and Pamela
Anderson, who could undergo a million makeovers like the one she just received
and still be the star of The Video. My hopes were pinned on J.J., the
California gray whale nursed back to health by Sea World and then released into
the ocean. J.J. promptly ditched the four (!) transmitters researchers had
implanted to monitor all perigrenations and breeding patterns. Track this, you
aqualosers! Born free, baby! J.J showed up just when boys were in gravest
need--in between Hugh Hefner's calling off his divorce and the release of
Godzilla --to remind us that, whether we see them or not, America's males
are out there, ready to resurface. Trouble is, J.J.'s a she.

            -- Chris Connelly
            

         
      
   
