
   
   
      
         
            The Kip Kinkels of the 19th Century

            First Jonesboro, now Springfield--are schoolyard shoot-'em-ups the product
of inadequate gun regulation or violence on TV? Let Culturebox stop you before
you debate this silly point again! The answer is guns, whatever Sissela
"Mayhem" Bok may tell the New York Times . How does Culturebox know?
Teenagers have been up to this sort of thing since long before South
Park and the Mighty Morphin Power Rangers . Take this scene from
Culturebox's favorite childhood book, Farmer Boy by Laura Ingalls
Wilder, based on Wilder's husband's memories of growing up in upstate New York
in the early 19th century:

            Almanzo Wilder, 9, is loath to go to school because he hates watching the
school's five toughest teens beat up yet another teacher and drive him out of
town. Ingalls writes: "These big boys were sixteen or seventeen years old and
they came to school only in the middle of the winter term. They came to thrash
the teacher and break up the school. They boasted that no teacher could finish
the winter term, and no teacher had."

            Literary embellishment? The exaggerations of memory? Culturebox called
Joseph Kett, a professor at the University of Virginia and the leading
historian of adolescence in America. Kett cites an 1837 report written by the
father of public education himself, Horace Mann. In it, Mann calls for reform
to correct an intractable problem: the "breaking up of rural schools." "It had
the status of a rural folk practice," says Kett. "Schoolmasters often expected
to be tossed out the window. Sometimes it was just a winter ritual to let off
steam. Other times it was not so much fun."

            Other school activies common in the early 19th-century, according to Kett:
wild student riots on college campuses, sometimes leading to the deaths of
professors or locals (in the 1820s, Harvard students set off a keg of
gunpowder); high school duels involving knives or guns, sometimes culminating
in the deaths of students; scrimmages between higher and lower classes,
sometimes leading to massive injuries on one side or the other, or both.

            What calmed schools down in the latter half of the century? The introduction
of less brutal disciplinary methods; sports, particularly football; the
increased presence of girls; the levelling off of class differences between
students and teachers. (Students, who were usually wealthier than their
teachers, regularly underscored that point by beating the teachers up.)

            What about guns? "Guns were not as ubiqitous at the time as you might
think," says Kett. "They were very expensive because they had to be handmade."
That began to change in mid-century, with the development of small-arms
manufacturing. So where were the random shooters of the second half of the
19th-century? "You have to remember that the Kip Kinkels of the 1850s weren't
in school," says Kett. "Those kinds of kids just didn't go. If you were very
unhappy, you took off and went somewhere else. The kid in the state of
perpetual rage, he'd probably wind up on a whaler."

            
               --Judith Shulevitz
            

         
      
   
