
   
   
      
         
            Mills for Their Grist

            Defense, of two different kinds, dominates today. The Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times go with Wednesday's effort before the Senate by President
Clinton's defense team. And the New York Times
and USA
Today go with the U.S.' renewed interest in erecting a missile defense
system.

            The papers report that the Clinton lawyers yesterday waged an aggressive
attack on the perjury and obstruction of justice charges lodged against their
client. The day's arguments are widely seen as a continuation of the Clinton
team's willingness to not only question whether the prosecution's facts mandate
impeachment but also to question the facts themselves. But for the most part
the coverage makes it clear that the weapon of the day was nonetheless not the
scalpel but the broad brush.

            The papers' consensus star of the day, Clinton attorney Cheryl Mills (the
papers want whenever possible to have heroes and villains and they love new
faces), responded to the House prosecutors' charge that Clinton had violated
Paula Jones' civil rights with what the LAT calls a "spirited defense"
of Clinton's civil rights record, referring along the way to Bill Clinton's
shopkeeper grandfather's penchant for selling to blacks when few whites would.
Mills also put her client firmly in the civil rights pantheon of Abraham
Lincoln, John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King. The WP plays Mills'
civil rights salute high, while the NYT puts it at
the very bottom of its account. The LAT also plays it high, but then
late in its story flatly states that in making this response "Mills strayed
considerably from the facts of the case." And the Post dings Mills for
saying that the Jones case was thrown out without mentioning that the president
paid $850,000 to make it go away.

            All the papers report that Pat Robertson said Clinton's State of the Union
speech was a "home run," mooting his impeachment. And they all quote Clinton
attorney Gregory Craig's claim that "if you convict and remove President
Clinton, then no president of the United States will ever be safe from
impeachment hearings." But none of them wonder, Why would we want that?
Obviously, impeachment was designed as a sanction that would regulate
presidential conduct, a feature utterly lost if it were to become a dead
letter.

            The USAT lead flatly states that the Pentagon plans to construct a
primarily ground-based anti-missile
defense system by 2005 and that the next federal budget, due out on Feb. 1,
will plan for $10.5 billion spread out over six years for just that purpose.
The paper goes on to point out that most of the hardware that would go into
such a system has never been tested. The NYT says that although the
Pentagon is sure the new system will be developed, President Clinton has not
given final approval. And the Times emphasizes not the hardware but the
legal constraints, noting that Clinton last week wrote to Boris Yeltsin
broaching the topic of renegotiating the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty the U.S.
and Russia have signed so as to allow the development of the system. Both
stories emphasize that the renewed interest in missile defense has been
prompted by the rather sudden development of long-range missiles by rogue
states, such as North Korea. The WP also fronts the story.

            Another Rashomon effect is on display in the papers' treatment of Alan
Greenspan's congressional testimony yesterday about the just-announced Clinton
proposal to allow some Social Security funds to be invested in the stock
market. The WP calls him "wary" and the NYT says he sees a
"possible threat." Meanwhile, USAT says he "opposes" it and the
LAT says he "assails" it.

            The Wall Street Journal front-page news box and the LAT
front report that a California jury has ordered the insurance company Aetna to
pay $116 million in punitive damages for refusing to cover an experimental
treatment for a patient who later died. The papers say the award is another
sign that the public feels health care companies are too bottom-line
oriented.

            Inside USAT is a great example of a piece that gets beyond the
oft-repeated facts. It's a commonplace now that the Brady Bill has kept
thousands of guns out of the hands of felons. But it turns out, reports the
paper, none of the more than 13,000 people (mostly convicted felons)
stopped so far from buying guns by the FBI's recently instituted instant
background check has been arrested, even though trying to buy a gun by lying
about one's background is a federal crime.

            Back to Cheryl Mills for a minute: None of the papers note that two of the
civil rights heroes she compared Clinton to were also secret philanderers.

         
      
   
