
   
   
      
         
            Robeson Revised

            A friend of Culturebox's--Jonathan Mahler, editorial page editor at the
Jewish weekly Forward --wishes to note the following for the record:

            This year Paul Robeson would have turned 100, which makes it the year we
celebrate him in conferences, film festivals, books, reissues of concert
performances -- even an unsuccessful campaign to create a Paul Robeson stamp.
Robeson posthumously won a lifetime achievement award at the Grammys. In
November, he'll be honored at Carnegie Hall.

            A typical quote from the ongoing encomium: "[W]hat made Robeson
controversial was his willingness to step outside the frame which usually
contains the works of artists and his status as an artist to advance a complex
program of civil and human rights changes around the world and in the United
States." (Jeffrey Stewart, curator of a Robeson exhibit at Rutgers, his alma
mater.)

            That's not all that made Robeson controversial, though, and a coalition of
the far right and far left has emerged to drive that point home. From a recent
cover story in Political Affairs , the journal of America's Communist
Party: "As the centennial celebrations are taking place today, many are
shamelessly going out of their way to distance Robeson from his Party.
Unfortunately, if these lies go unanswered, Paul's legacy will be at war with
the life he actually lived. We cannot allow the ruling class to praise him, in
order to tear him down. We cannot allow them to turn Robeson into an ordinary
liberal. The real Paul Robeson was no liberal -- he was a freedom fighter, a
revolutionary, a Communist, a 20th century giant." (Jarvis Tyner, a vice
chairman of the Communist Party.)

            The American Spectator couldn't agree more. In its July issue, author
Stephen Schwartz writes that the Robeson commemorations is the latest attempt
to sell the American people a "falsified" and "upside-down" version of their
history.

            Whatever the real version of that history would look like, one thing we
know: Robeson's committment to communism was not good for the Jews. When
Robeson visited Moscow during the anti-Jewish purges, Stalin released the
Yiddish poet Itzak Feffer from a labor camp and had him cleaned up to see
Robeson. As the two men sat in Robeson's bugged hotel room, Feffer gestured
emphatically to Robeson and scribbled him notes in a desperate attempt to
convey the fact that he and numerous other prominent Jewish cultural figures
were going to be executed imminently. Robeson got the point. Still, when he
returned to the United States, he continued to preach support for Stalin and
denied that he had witnessed any anti-Semitism while in Moscow. Only after
Robeson's death did his son finally reveal the truth.

         
      
   
