
   
   
      
         
            Pontifficating

            All the majors lead with the last day of the White House's defense in the
Senate and lavish most of their attention on the concluding speech given by
former Arkansas senator Dale Bumpers.

            The consensus is that Bumpers' aw-shucks style and his rhetorical flourishes
were viewed by the Senate audience as a refreshing contrast to the lawyerly
nit-picking (such as that displayed by Clinton private attorney David Kendall,
who also spoke yesterday) that had heretofore carried the day. The New York
Times 's R.W. Apple assesses Bumpers' effort as "rare eloquence" and the
Los
Angeles Times calls it an "extraordinary appeal." The Washington Post plays high Bumpers' challenge to the Senate
not to vote for impeachment in order to avoid heightening people's alienation
from their government. The NYT plays this much lower. The papers note
that Bumpers made no effort to defend President Clinton's conduct, calling it
"indefensible, outrageous, unforgivable, shameless." The LAT goes high
with Bumpers' view that nonetheless, Clinton's actions "do not even come close
to being an impeachable offense" because they were not "political offenses
against the state."

            The NYT notes Bumpers' observation that Clinton should have thought
about the consequences of his actions beforehand. But the paper leaves out what
happened next, which is however reported by the WP : Bumpers pointed at
his former colleagues, saying, "Just as you and you and you and you, and
millions of other people who have been caught in similar circumstances, should
have thought of it before." The Post is also alone in noting that
Bumpers broke new ground for President Clinton's defenders by explicitly citing
Clinton's high poll numbers as a reason to acquit.

            The coverage suggests that in the wake of Bumpers, momentum is building
among senators to press for a quick resolution of the trial, even to the point
of omitting all witnesses. USA Today emphasizes this more than the details of
Bumpers' speech. And the LAT 's lead editorial calls for bringing the
trial to a rapid end. It's recognized all around that today the proceedings
will enter a far more spontaneous stage, with senators submitting their
questions in writing to Chief Justice Rehnquist. The WP runs questions
submitted by readers. It will be interesting to see if the actual questions
posed are equally sharp.

            The off-lead at the two Times and the WP is yesterday's murder
conviction in Mexico City of Raul Salinas de Gortari, brother of a former
Mexican president. Salinas was found guilty by the trial judge of being the
author of the successful 1994 assassination of a fast-rising political star. He
was sentenced to fifty years in prison. The outcome signals, says the
NYT , that Mexico's elite no longer enjoys its traditional impunity.

            The Wall Street Journal "Washington Wire" runs some poll
figures about the budget surplus: 45 percent prefer using it for Social
Security, 29 percent want it to go for domestic spending, and only 22 percent
favor tax cuts.

            The LAT front carries an exclusive account of a particularly twisted
computer crime. In the first prosecution ever under California's cyber-stalking
statute, an L.A. man (who, natch, lived with his 80-year-old mother) is being
tried for using the Internet in an attempt to set up the rape of a woman who
had spurned him. The man sent out email and posted online ads purporting to be
from the woman suggesting she desired to act out fantasies of being raped. The
postings resulted in six different men showing up at the woman's apartment at
various times, although no rape occurred. The man was caught with the
assistance of the Internet providers involved, which included AOL and Hotmail.
It's hard to know what the woman could have done to protect herself, the
LAT notes--after all, she didn't own a computer.

            The NYT front reports that the Pope is returning to Mexico. But it's
an inside piece at the WP that has the most surprising news about the
upcoming visit--this time, he has corporate sponsors, including Pepsi, Federal
Express, Sheraton Hotels, Kodak, Hewlett-Packard and Mercedes-Benz. Church
officials defend the practice, says the Post , as a way of avoiding
charging the poor to see the pontiff. Perhaps the wackiest papal product
placement is the Frito-Lay promotion that plays off the word "papa,"
which--thank God--means both "pope" and "potato."

         
      
   
