
   
   
      
         
            Return of the Screw

            Yesterday's sideshow--Ken Starr asking a judge to make Monica Lewinsky talk
to the House managers--takes center stage at the papers today because the judge
agreed, bringing Lewinsky back to the town that knew her when.

            The Washington Post has a one-deck banner ("Judge Orders
Lewinsky to Cooperate") about the resulting "uproar," the latest one to
distract senators. Yesterday's uproar was prompted by Sen. Robert Byrd, who
said he would introduce a motion to dismiss next week. The Los Angeles
Times goes with a sensational two decks across four columns ("Judge
Orders Lewinsky to Meet Prosecutors; Senate in Turmoil") over a lead describing
a "storm of partisan fire" in the Senate. Both papers seem caught up by the
senatorial confusion and the drama of Lewinsky jetting back into the capital as
the ruling was issued. The New York Times plays it much more calmly; the
one-column lead story sees "turmoil" but holds the line at full uproariness.
The NYT is most clear in describing why Lewinsky was so summarily
ordered to talk: Her immunity agreement not only said specifically that she
must cooperate with "congressional proceedings," but also that she talk to
Starr's attorneys before "representatives of other institutions" if she's asked
to. She'll be doing the talking today, the papers say.

            The continuation of the question period in the Senate trial is the second
story in the NYT . R.W. Apple has what may or may not turn out to be a
significant chink in the Republican armor: House manager Lindsey Graham's
concession that "Reasonable people can disagree on what we should do [i.e.,
convict or not]." The WP is more interested in Trent Lott's efforts to
keep the Republican forces in line. You have to read a while in all the papers
before you find out that no one thinks Byrd's motion will pass when he makes
it. The WP is good on the reasons for the Democrats' dyspeptic reaction
to the trial managers' Lewinsky gambit: they view it as a violation of the
supposed bipartisan agreement worked out before the Senate trial. But the paper
points out that such fracturing was inevitable, because those first days of
relative amity came at the expense of the senators' actually making a decision
on witnesses.

            Doyle McManus, the LAT 's D.C. bureau chief, looks at the situation
pessimistically: "The likely result: an ugly battle along party lines, a series
of arguments over witnesses, and at least several more weeks of trial for the
Senate."

            On the WP 's op-ed page, David Broder makes an iconoclastic case for
the Senate's hearing one witness: Betty Currie. He says the obstruction of
justice charge is still volatile, and that she, by being convincing one way or
the other, can prevent the proceedings from being decided on something other
than a party-line vote. The NYT editorial page restates its position on
l'affaire Lewinsky --Clinton's a jerk, but jerkiness isn't cause for
removal from office--and backs Byrd, calling his proposal "a just way to bring
this tormented case to a close." The House managers' legal dance with Lewinsky,
the paper says, is just a move to "hijack control of the trial."

            There's grist for Clinton partisans on the front page of the NYT as
well. A lengthy story details a "small secret clique" of lawyers who consulted
with Paula Jones' successive legal teams. They hate Clinton and have diverse
connections to Ken Starr, Robert Bork, Dan Quayle, and other conservatives. The
article begins with a pointed reference to Hillary Clinton's charge that a
"vast right-wing conspiracy" has Bill Clinton in its sights.

            The NYT has a front-page story about the shockingly high rate of
female suicide in China, which could be as much as five times the rest of the
world's average. The problem is in the country's rural areas, where there seems
to be an epidemic of impulsive suicide attempts, made more gruesome by the
availability of a pesticide that doesn't taste too bad.

            The WP fronts an announcement that it will begin front-page color on
Thursday, this courtesy of "eight new Mitsubishi printing presses." The sports
section and the weather map will brighten up as well.

            The NYT 's "Week in Review" has a funny compilation of stories about
self-defeating behavior in job interviews. The stories, which according to the
paper come from a survey of execs at 200 major companies, include a tale about
an interviewee who ordered a pizza for delivery during a lunch-hour interview,
and another about a prospect who, when asked to bring references, showed up
with two people in tow.

            To a cheesy fashion spread featuring Mick Jagger's daughter, the NYT
Magazine appends a tacky postscript: a hymn to the Rolling Stones' fashion
sense from designer Tommy Hilfiger, who just happens to be the sponsor of the
band's current tour.

         
      
   
