
   
   
      
         
            Not Taking the Initiative

            The New York Times
leads with the Supreme Court's ruling that the voter referendum process should
be maximally free of government-imposed obstacles, a story that also makes the
Washington Post and USA Today
fronts. The WP leads with word that President Clinton has sent an
$850,000 check to Paula Jones as settlement in full of the sexual harassment
suit she had brought against him. None of the other papers runs this story on
its front, which makes sense since the decision to pay was reached two months
ago (the only real news coming with the actual check is that nearly half of the
money was Hillary's). USAT puts it on page 12, thereby enabling it to
get on instead with Day Two of Michael Jordan is God and God is Dead, with not
just a combination lead and "cover story" but also an 8-page "pullout keepsake"
and two other stories inside. The Los Angeles
Times goes with an impeachment run-up story.

            The NYT points out that twenty-four states, mostly in the West and
midwest, provide for voter referenda, and that they have been a particular
effective vehicle for pursuing socially controversial positions. Such
controversy, explains the paper, had led several states including Colorado to
try to stem their use. But yesterday, reports the Times , the Supremes
struck down Colorado's laws requiring that circulators of
initiative petitions be registered to vote in the state and wear identifying
badges, and have their name, address and pay on file. The mostly 6-3 ruling
argued that such regulations conflict with the First Amendment value of
uninhibited communication with voters.

            The LAT lead, titled "Senate Braces for Days of Judgement in
Momentous Trial," is mostly such desiccata as that "one hundred senators will
sit as both judge and jury..." and "Starr's investigation of possible crimes
became a yearlong running national soap opera...." And in an apparent Iron Eyes
Cody memorial moment, it claims that last week when Sen. Patrick Leahy first
heard the articles of impeachment formally presented, "a single tear coursed
his cheek." Note to readers: if a story's headline is built around words like
"anticipates" "expects," "awaits" or "braces," odds are good there's not much
actual news in it. But the second half of this story does include some
observations that drive home the oddity of the looming process: one of the
prosecutors, Rep. Asa Hutchinson, is the brother and apartment mate of one of
the jurors, Sen. Tim Hutchinson, and one juror, Sen. Barbara Boxer, is related
by marriage to the accused.

            Another sports story getting prominent play today is the auction of Mark
McGwire's 70th home run ball. Four of the majors say it fetched just upwards of
$3 million, while the LAT says $2.7 million.

            The NYT and LAT fronts report that Planned Parenthood and
several doctors have brought a private federal civil suit against the
proprietors of an anti-abortion Web site that suggests abortion providers
are like Nazis and groups the names and faces of some doctors providing the
procedure on a Wanted Poster-style list it calls the "Deadly Dozen." Included
in this list was the name and likeness of a doctor shot by a sniper last fall
in upstate New York. This is the first such lawsuit brought under the 1994
federal law that prohibits force or threats of force against abortion clients
and providers, and the first to wrestle with what exactly on a Web site
constitutes an illegal threat.

            A piece inside the WP asserts that a speedy impeachment trial will
probably not disrupt Congress' legislative agenda, because "the Senate rarely
does much in the first few weeks of a new session." But why not go further and
use some of the Post 's research horsepower to actually document this
idea--with a chart covering recent sessions that graphs Congress' legislative
output against the months of the year?

            An AP dispatch in the WP states that a new study in JAMA shows
that in 1995 an estimated 20,000 people in the U.S. got salmonella from alfalfa
sprouts. An epidemiologist at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is
quoted as suggesting therefore that consumers "should consider this danger when
deciding whether to eat alfalfa sprouts." Now, what exactly is the cash value
of that "guidance"? Does one dare eat the stuff or not? Newspapers should avoid
passing along scary information nobody can do anything with. Today's Papers
says either get the experts to come across with more info or pass on the
story.

            At the very bottom of the LAT 's "Commentary" page is a small-print
item "For the Record" stating that in a previous article on the page, the
Radical Reconstructionist Thaddeus Stevens was "incorrectly described." But no
more detail is given about this. Not explicitly stating previous mistakes in
such correction notices is LAT policy. But this seems ill-advised. In
this case, for instance, the reader is left wondering what horrible goof is
being suppressed, when actually it's just that congressman Stevens of
Pennsylvania was mistakenly described as a senator from Massachusetts.

            The National Security Agency has, according to the WP , identified and
responded to a new potential threat to its supersupersupersecret spy
operations. Henceforth, headquarters are off-limits to Furbys. Spooks who have
already brought the toys into their offices are advised to "contact the Staff
Security Officer for guidance."

         
      
   
