
   
   
      
         
            Boom or Robust

            The papers all lead with the U.S. economy's latest and cleanest bill of
health yet. Figures released by the Commerce Department show that the economy
expanded by an unexpectedly vigorous 5.6% in the last quarter of 1998, with
inflation and unemployment still deep in remission. The papers explain that
recession anxiety may actually have helped ward one off: fiscal turmoil in Asia
resulted in low long-term interest rates and commodity prices, which in turn
have kept business brisk and spending high. Only the New York Times story actually quotes a Commerce
official; most of the valedictory analysis comes from exuberant Wall Street
analysts. The giddiest of the lot is quoted in both the Los Angeles
Times and the Washington Post : "The US economy is the wonder of the
world," he tells the Post .

            The WP and the LAT report more slaughter of ethnic Albanians
in Kosovo at the hands of Serbian police. The latest atrocity is a mass killing
of 24 civilians and rebels during a raid on their supposed stronghold. In
response, the NYT fronter relays, the Clinton Administration is shopping
a plan around Capitol Hill to commit 2000-5000 American ground troops to an
international cease-fire-monitoring force in Kosovo. While the other two papers
report on the killing, the Times devotes a large chunk of its story to
fretting over whether Richard Holbrooke will be involved in the monitoring
effort. Although he's been busy fending off an ethics investigation and tending
to his investment bank's business, he's still solidly in the loop, and will
probably find a way in.

            Speaking of ethics and investigations, everyone reports U.S. Attorney
General Janet Reno's decision to spare Harold Ickes an independent counsel
investigation into his alleged cover-up of campaign finance chicanery in the
last Presidential election. All papers report that Reno's decision effectively
truncates the possibility of further investigations into President Clinton's
fundraising for the his 1996 run. The Post writes that the Department of
Justice's campaign finance task force has been continually stymied by
unfavorable court decisions and lack of cooperation from essential witnesses,
and will soon close shop.

            As for the daily impeachment trial update: the three witnesses have been
subpoenaed, and their depositions scheduled for Monday. Meanwhile, the
WP and the LAT report on the waning popularity of the
conviction-without-removal plan posed by some moderate Republicans earlier this
week, whereby the President would be found guilty of the facts of the case but
allowed to stay in office. The plan is drawing criticism from both ends of the
spectrum: conservative Republicans fear it will siphon off pro-impeachment
support, and Democrats argue that it's a backhanded way of punishing the
President without satisfying Constitutional standards. "You can't be a little
bit pregnant," Democratic Senator John Breaux tells the WP . Instead,
most Democrats are leaning towards brisk, bipartisan, post-trial censure of the
President. The NYT piece focuses on the culture clash between zealous
House Managers and their more deliberative Senatorial hosts. The Senators lord
it over the managers, acting "wiser and better" than their House peers, claims
one irate House Republican.

            An LAT front pager describes how the U.S. Department of Labor has
added teeth to its efforts to eliminate the wage gap between the genders. Women
now make 74 cents for every dollar earned by their male co-workers-a mere
15-cent improvement since the Equal Pay Act outlawed gender-based pay
discrimination way back in 1963. Now the days of simple coaxing and lobbying
are over: a well-funded compliance office at Labor conducts "glass ceiling
reviews" of male and female managers at businesses that hold government
contracts. Those found to intentionally discriminate against women must pay
punitive damages, back pay, and/or wage increases. Some businesses have called
this approach too aggressive: "it's like trying to catch a fish with an A-bomb"
protests one dissenter. But even more of these bombs may detonate soon:
President Clinton's budget allocates more funding to equal-pay enforcement, and
Congress may soon expand the 1963 Act to allow for greater damages awards.

            Finally, the WP describes the near-hysterical reaction to a recent
foray by a much-worshipped icon who made a rare venture out to share his
message with the masses. Preceded by pomp, shielded by minions, and thronged by
reverent devotees, he meditated and preached on race, poverty, morality, and
the significance of the coming millennium. "Children screamed. Grown women
shrieked. Little girls cried from happiness," the story recounts. Sure, the
pontiff was in St. Louis this week; but this story describes Michael Jordan's
visit to a Washington, D.C. public school to plug his new charitable
foundation.

         
      
   
