
   
   
      
         
            Jury Dullification

            Day One of the Senate impeachment trial leads all around. Banner headlines
are the order of the day. The LAT and NYT headlines focus the most on President
Clinton's alleged conduct, with the former citing charges of "perjury" and
"obstruction," and the latter charges of "egregious and criminal conduct."
USAT's big print emphasizes procedure, with "Prosecutors: Call Witnesses
Against Clinton." The WP header combines form and substance with "Prosecutors
Lay Out Clinton's 'Scheme'" running over a reference to their request for
witnesses. But only the NYT headline mentions what this is all
about--the House's attempt to remove Clinton from office.

            The WSJ observes that three of the four House prosecutors who spoke
yesterday have substantial courtroom experience with the Justice Dept or as
local prosecutors, and that they emphasized the more difficult to prove of the
two impeachment articles, obstruction of justice.

            The NYT excels today at focusing on clear detail. The paper notes a
new argument from prosecutor Rep. James Sensenbrenner on the topic of whether
or not perjury counts as a high crime or misdemeanor, namely that bribery is
listed as a high crime and under federal sentencing guidelines, perjury and
bribery carry the same penalty. Also, it's the NYT that makes the
striking point that despite all the day's presentations and those to come, the
rules of impeachment leave senators "free to vote as they choose for whatever
reasons they cho[o]se or for no stated reason at all, without regard to the
usual rules of evidence."

            Among the House members who pressed the case against Clinton, The NYT
gives the highest marks to Rep. Asa Hutchinson. The Times says
Hutchinson made some fresh points out of familiar details, and then the paper
clearly states them: 1) In response to the White House claim that any help
given to Monica Lewinsky in her job search was not a quid pro quo because the
help preceded Lewinsky's role in the Paula Jones case, Hutchinson showed how
nonetheless the job search assistance effort became markedly more urgent once
she did have such a role; 2) To the White House claim that President Clinton
could not have been attempting to sway Betty Currie's testimony because his odd
conversation with her took place before she was called as a witness, Hutchinson
observed that Clinton had just been questioned at length in the Jones
deposition about Currie and hence it was clear to him then that she was likely
to be called; 3) To the White House claim that President Clinton's denial of a
sexual relationship with Lewinsky was literally true because of the odd
definition of such relations he was presented with, Hutchinson points out that
Lewinsky's denial predates the appearance of that definition and hence should
be considered a common sense falsehood that Clinton encouraged. By contrast,
the Post spares the reader these details, saying only that Hutchinson
presented his case "with a bit of folksiness and some narrative drive."

            The difference here is an important one. The Post 's assessment occurs
in the off-lead, a piece lamenting the absence of cross-examination and witness
breakdowns. The reporter, David Von Drehle, immediate past honcho of the
paper's "Style" section (not, please note, its "Substance" section), marvels
that senators could sit still and pay attention to all this. His piece runs
under the headline, "On The Floor, The First Day Wore On, On, On." The paper's
television critic, Tom Shales, is similarly restless: "Who'd have thought," he
asks, "that making history could be such excruciatingly ponderous torture?" In
other words, by the Post 's lights, it's not that the House Republicans
are mean-spirited, unfair, or immobilizing the government. It's much worse than
that: they're not entertaining . This confusion of merit with style is
catching on. The LAT lead editorial, arguing that Clinton's misdeeds are
not impeachable, is headlined "We've Heard it Before."

            Meanwhile, the WP reports that every day this week, U.S. fighter jets
have attacked Iraqi anti-aircraft and surface-to-air missile batteries. But the
majors' editors have consistently stuffed these incidents inside. Indeed, the
Post dispatch is on page...25.

         
      
   
