
   
   
      
         
            Uniform Pay Raise

            The Los
Angeles Times and Washington Post lead with Wednesday's Supreme Court
decision upholding the limitation on the First Amendment rights of illegal
immigrants imposed by the 1996 immigration reform law. The Court ruled that an
illegal's claim of being banished from this country on political grounds is not
a defense against deportation that requires additional federal court hearings.
The New York Times
goes instead with the Senate's passage and sending on to the House a military
pay and pension package that exceeded the Clinton administration's proposal.
USA
Today leads with a compendium of Y2K alarms from aviation bigwigs,
congressional reports, and the CIA. The upshot is that aviation control
facilities in Russia, China, Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa are
sufficiently millenium buggy that they could suffer computer problems
equivalent to those created by a massive snowstorm. But the story's
headline--"Foreign Flying Risky on Jan. 1"--seems a bit shrill given that the
text below also credits Western Europe and Japan with having undertaken fixes
that could mean only minimal disruptions in those places.

            The WP makes it clear that yesterday the Court also forbade illegal
immigrants' use of the federal courts to fight deportation until they have
already exhausted all administrative procedures. In short, the ruling supports
the way in which current immigration law deprives illegal immigrants of a
defense and a venue. Both papers note that even before this decision, the new
law has produced a much more active deportation rate, and so even though the
decision doesn't have that much direct impact because comparatively few illegal
immigrants claim political persecution, it may still cut a rather wide swath,
because in the words of the Post , it has "great potential to intimidate
immigrants and make them wary of speaking out about any political matter for
fear of drawing attention to their illegal status."

            The principal features of the Senate's military pay bill, reports the Times , are a 4.4
percent pay raise across the board, increased educational aid funds, new
401(k)-style savings accounts, a return to a higher retirement pension rate,
and $180 a month to the low-ranking troops eligible for food stamps. The paper
reports that the Clinton administration favors pay increases but only if
Congress increases the Pentagon's overall budget to pay for them. Otherwise,
explains the paper, the DOD may have to cut training or spare parts to afford
them. The story, by experienced Hill and Pentagon reporter Eric Schmitt,
communicates the widespread sentiment among members of Congress that these
costs are inevitable if readiness is to be maintained. But there is no
discussion of such readiness-enhancing but cost effective ideas as targeting
bonuses for the specific warfare specialties where retention is worst, or
restricting them to those in combat specialties (a surprisingly low percentage
of military personnel). Nor does the story mention that service members receive
a portion of their compensation tax-free, receive housing subsidies on top of
their salaries, and pay below-market prices for goods at base commissaries and
exchanges. Or that they typically become eligible for their pensions in their
early forties, and hence these shouldn't be viewed as needing to be competitive
with civilian post-65 retirement packages. The WP coverage is silent
about these wrinkles as well.

            
               USAT and the WP front a study being published today in the
New England Journal of Medicine that seems to show that the race and sex of patients presenting with chest pains
determine the course of treatment doctors pursue. Previous studies had produced
similar differences, but have been generally discounted as based on such
differences as illness severity, insurance coverage, or patient preference.
But, explain the papers, this study eliminated those explanations by using
demographically diverse actors describing their chest pain from identical
scripts. It's the WP that passes along the reward doctors received for
participating--a bottle of Williams-Sonoma tomato sauce.

            The WP fronts the greatest hits from the upcoming Barbara Walters
interview with Monica Lewinsky. In it, says the paper, Lewinsky says she's no
longer in love with Bill Clinton, that she's through having affairs with
married men, and that she wants to apologize to the country for the yearlong
political ordeal she helped trigger.

            A front-page Wall Street Journal feature reports that one of the fastest
growing job categories in the country is fitness trainer, whose ranks have
doubled this decade, to 100,000.

            The WP runs a story inside poking fun at the list of top 100 most
important news stories of all time released yesterday by a panel of
journalists. The piece notes that the Cambodian "Killing Fields" genocide does
not make the list, although Babe Ruth's 60th home run does (#89), finishing
five places newsier than the election of Winston Churchill. And the Challenger
explosion outranks China's Great Leap Forward. And while we're at it, how, pray
tell, could the San Francisco earthquake finish 29 places ahead of the founding
of Microsoft?

         
      
   
