
   
   
      
         
            Rational Exuberance

            The Los Angeles Times leads with California's stronger than expected
economic growth in the final months of 1998. The story notes that the state
data dovetails with the Commerce Department report issued Friday, indicating
that the nation's gross domestic product grew 6.1 percent in the fourth
quarter. The Washington Post leads with an exclusive, reporting that
earlier this month the Clinton administration stopped issuing new licenses for
the export of military or dual-use equipment to Greece due to Pentagon
suspicions that the Greeks had provided the Russians with NATO aircraft jamming
codes. The New York Times leads with a Clinton administration report
that condemns China's recent record on human rights, including China's
squelching of the formation of a opposition party, religious expression and the
freedom of the press.

            The LAT pairs its lead on rosy job growth in California with an
analysis of the "nearly sublime" national economy. The paper observes that the
torrid pace of growth has confounded prognosticators, who had widely expected
that contagion from the international economic crisis would slow the U.S.
expansion. The NYT fronts the revised GDP numbers, pointing out that
inflation dipped to 1.0 percent last year, the lowest level since the launch of
Sputnik. The papers report that the Dow retreated because of fears that the Fed
will raise interest rates to cool the exuberant economy.

            The Post exclusive informs that a Defense Department team has
investigated allegations of a Greek breach of NATO security and concluded that
there has been "no compromise of technology whatsoever." The Pentagon suspected
that the Greeks were giving NATO codes to Russia in exchange for a radio
jamming system to disrupt Turkish combat jets. The Post observes that
animosities between Greece and Turkey, long the most serious tension within the
NATO alliance, have worsened with the Ocalan affair. The exclusive notes that
"aides said" that "some members of Congress" plan to press for more information
and are dissatisfied with the Pentagon response. Is this sourcing detail a clue
as to why a story of dismissed suspicions, which are sure to stoke
international sensitivities, turned up as the Post 's lead?

            The NYT story on the State Department's rebuke of China in its 22nd
annual human rights report, observes that the criticism came on the eve of
Secretary Albright's trip to China, at a time when Clinton is being attacked
for being to easy on Beijing. The LAT reefers the story. Though each
story provides some detail on human rights flashpoints, no story notes that the
report covered 194 countries and no story explains that the report is compiled
to provide an authoritative basis for international affairs decisions by the
three branches of the U.S. government. In what the White House promoted as a
major speech on foreign policy challenges, the president advocated an active
role for the United States throughout the world and defended his policy of
engagement in China, as the Times and the Post , report in
front-page articles.

            A NYT editorial calls on the president to address Juanita
Broaddrick's assertion that Clinton raped her in 1978. The editorial evinces
the paper's discomfort with this disquieting story and the media's discontent
with the terse denial issued by the president's attorney. The Times
opines that "the public and the press are in a muddle as to what to think" and
that "the White House is banking on the Broaddrick's story's lacking legs." Of
course, the editorial itself lends the story legs.

            The Arts section of the NYT reports on the debate over the
accessibility of academic writing, which has been stoked by an Edward Said's
article denouncing abstruse writing. The fact that Said's article provoked
"discourse" is not simply a factor of his having recently assumed the
presidency of the Modern Language Association. Said is considered a prime
offender when it comes to inaccessible communication. The Times informs
that a journal, Philosophy and Literature , has started to hold an annual
Bad Writing Contest, in which leading scholars take the prize. The paper refers
readers to an Internet site that automatically creates an impenetrable
"post-modern" essay each time a user logs on.

            Yesterday's LAT Metro Section conveys a cautionary tale: beware of
flying bovines. In Northern California, a wandering 750-pound cow was hit by a
northbound Mercedes, which sent it hurtling into the path of a southbound
pickup. Tragically, a truck driver was killed when the airborne heifer smashed
through the windshield of his vehicle and struck him in the head. The bovine
bounced off the truck and was hit by another pickup. Curiously, the story does
not report on the condition of the cow.

         
      
   
