
   
   
      
         
            House It Gonna Work?

            The Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times lead with yesterday's revelation that the House-appointed
"managers" of the impeachment case against President Clinton are leaning
towards conducting a full-bore trial in the Senate, complete with the
examination of witnesses. USA Today goes with the latest in a string of
encouraging crime stories: the paper's own survey of 1998 homicide statistics
shows that the total number of murders in America's ten largest cities is down
12 percent compared to 1997. (The LAT front reports that the Los Angeles
murder rate has dropped 27 percent from last year, resulting in a 28-year low.)
The New York Times
leads with initial government data showing that most states are in compliance
with the 1996 welfare reform requirement that 25 percent of recipients hold
jobs or actively prepare to do so. The Times points out, however, that
many states are not meeting the law's required percentage of working two-parent
welfare families and that the government statistics do not show whether welfare
workers have found good jobs.

            The WP and LAT leads, as well as a NYT front-pager,
report that the House managers' aggressive position puts them in conflict with
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, who just the day before had come out in
favor of a quick timetable that would probably preclude hearing from most of
the scandal's key figures. And it is the Senate, the papers remind, which
controls how an impeachment trial will proceed. The NYT reports that
House managers and some House Republican aides said they were stunned and
angered by Lott's disinclination to call witnesses. One is quoted as calling it
"a slap in the face of the House."

            The NYT says that all the House managers agree on the necessity of
witnesses, whereas both the WP and LAT mention that one of their
number holds they should be called only if absolutely necessary.

            The WP off-lead breaks an exclusive: A little-known national security
boutique firm called Vector, which went under last fall and whose president was
a former director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, is being investigated by
several federal agencies. The company specialized in the highly secretive
business of acquiring foreign weapons and radars for U.S. intelligence
agencies, and the authorities are looking into irregularities surrounding some
of its deals. Such as allegedly procuring missiles from North Korea that
somehow never got into U.S. hands, and whose current whereabouts are unknown.
Or, as part of a deal to procure Chinese missiles, supposedly giving Beijing
sensitive technical information about the U.S. shoulder-fired Stinger
surface-to-air missile. This story has some familiar elements that could give
it legs: phony paperwork to disguise weapons' true destinations and colorful
characters crossing back and forth between private deal-making and
government-sanctioned covert operations. Can you say Iran-Contra?

            The papers continue to cover the apparent threshold-crossing performance of
e-commerce. The Wall Street Journal notes an obvious but unanticipated
consequence: an upsurge in business for such non-netly concerns as the U.S.
Postal Service, Federal Express and UPS.

            Back to the impeachment witness-or-no-witnesses story for a beat. The
Times is alone in observing that White House aides were "amused" by the
GOP split on witnesses. The use of that word, in the absence of either direct
or indirect quotations from aides, raises a host of issues: Were those aides
really so unsophisticated as to reveal such a politically loaded emotion in
front of a reporter? If so, then why aren't we told what the aides said? If
not, then shouldn't the paper back down to "seemed amused?" Or to "were said to
be amused by White House sources?" This is not trivial, because communicating
White House amusement is likely to have adverse political consequences for
President Clinton, and so it seems only fair to insist that the Times
make it clear that it's not being spun--or spinning.

         
      
   
