
   
   
      
         
            Depose or Deep Pose?

            Today's questioning of Monica Lewinsky by House prosecutors leads at
USA
Today and the Washington Post . The New York Times
goes with the unveiling of the Clinton administration's proposed $1.7 trillion
budget. The Los Angeles Times lead is a poll putting George W. Bush
first among Republican voters and Elizabeth Dole second, and purporting to show
that each right now would beat Al Gore. The story also states that a House or
Senate incumbent candidate's vote on President Clinton's impeachment would not
affect most voters' attitudes towards him or her, and that most voters also
think impeachment should not be an issue in the upcoming presidential
campaign.

            Both Lewinsky leads say that the questioning will focus on the obstruction
of justice charge. USAT reports that senators are now saying the perjury
charge is "doomed." And both say not to expect any big bombshell from the uh,
big bombshell.

            The WP does go on at some length though to say that based on
Lewinsky's prior grand jury testimony, she could in fact represent a substantial threat to Vernon Jordan, who has never before
been asked about her testimony, but presumably will be when he's deposed later
in the week. For instance, notes the Post , when first asked about some
pages he made to Lewinsky, Jordan told the grand jury he was certain he wasn't
calling her to ask about the Drudge Report's revelations of Lewinsky
relationship with Clinton. But later he said that's exactly what the pages were
about. And Jordan testified that he never had an inkling during his assist to
Lewinsky's job search that she and the president were intimate. But Lewinsky
testified that she told Jordan this. And Jordan said he did not discuss
Lewinsky's Jones case affidavit with her beforehand and only skimmed it
afterwards. But Lewinsky swore she showed him a draft and discussed a wording
change with him.

            The NYT says President Clinton's proposed fiscal 2000 budget proposes
billions in new spending while preaching fiscal conservatism, via combining
such liberal domestic programs as urban housing vouchers and classroom
construction with cherished Republican priorities like the military, the police
and small business. The Times says that with his State of the Union and
now this budget, Clinton has moved into a policy vacuum created by a year of
scandal and the Republicans' failure during that time to offer their own
coherent response to the long-term problems of the nation's costliest domestic
programs.

            Front-page stories at the LAT , and NYT and inside stories
elsewhere describe the just-announced discovery that AIDS is linked to a virus found in chimpanzees native to
West Africa. The virus does not sicken the chimps but apparently, after jumping
to humans through the blood exposure involved in chimpanzee hunting and
slaughtering, transmutes into the HIV virus. Scientists hope that investigating
this process will help them learn more about ways of combating the disease. A
lengthy Wall Street Journal takeout points out a possible side
benefit of the news: focusing more attention on the extensive "bushmeat" trade
in Africa that is decimating the chimp population. The paper adds that many
African nations aren't happy to be identified as the original source of a viral
plague that's infected 34 million people. (Odd locution: there are some African
nations that are?)

            Last week, the NYT reported that for the first time ever the U.S.
military has asked for the power to take charge in the case of major terrorist
strikes on American soil. Today the story is developed at the Times as
well as at the WP and WSJ . As the Times reported
previously, today's coverage mentions the concern some civil libertarians have
about this unprecedented augmentation of domestic military authority. The
Journal effort is typical in repeating the calming assurances of DOD
officials, quoting one who emphasizes that "the military wouldn't get involved
in law enforcement." The reader is left puzzled, since it seems obvious that if
a military unit were to take charge during any sort of domestic terrorist
strike it would have to do precisely that, and besides, the U.S. military is
already involved with law enforcement. Remember those Marines who shot that
young rancher while on a stakeout a while back?

            A front-page WSJ feature uses hundreds of Microsoft e-mail exchanges
released in connection with the company's myriad court cases as well as
interviews with Microsoft officials to tell the story of what the paper calls
the company's heated internal conflict over whether or not to
abandon Windows and its successor PC operating systems in favor of a
programming base that would run on any kind of operating system reachable via
the Internet. The coterie of Internet "doves" inside the company's senior
reaches even, says the piece, once produced an in-house strategy presentation
called "Java Is Our Destiny."

            In the course of his assessment of the likely impact of the Clinton scandal
on the book biz, the WP 's literary reporter David Streitfeld points out
that the New Yorker 's Jeffrey Toobin has performed the "journalism
equivalent of a triple lutz": writing books on Iran Contra, OJ, and
Bill-Monica.

         
      
   
