
   
   
      
         
            Not Without a Hitch

            Everybody leads with the wrap-up of yesterday's impeachment trial closing
arguments and the set-up of today's deliberations. The Los Angeles
Times headline suggests the drama associated with a criminal trial:
"President's Fate is Now in Hands of Senate Jurors." Down below in the body
type, though the stories get more real. The LAT says there is "virtually
no chance" President Clinton will be removed. The New York Times
says his acquittal is "all but assured." And the Washington Post says the House Republican prosecutors face
"near-certain defeat." Perhaps USA Today is the realest: "It's also unclear whether
the Senate will formally reprimand Clinton once he's acquitted."

            And USAT 's headline isn't even about the what of the verdict--it's
about the how: "Closed Senate Debate Likely." That's because there don't appear
to be the 67 votes required to suspend the rules, a point that the WP
and NYT also cover in additional front-page stories. The NYT lead
editorial finds the prospect of closing the doors on the impeachment
deliberations "inconceivable." For the LAT , the main unanswered question
is whether enough Republicans would join the Democrats to keep either of the
two impeachment articles from winning a simple majority.

            In light of the presumed outcome, the WP sees the rhetoric coming
yesterday from both sides--each of the 13 House prosecutors and President
Clinton's lawyer Charles Ruff--aimed not so much at the Senate jurors as at the
history books. The NYT notes that Ruff worked in references to peace in
the Middle East and that Henry Hyde dipped into Henry V's Agincourt speech, as
well as quotations from de Gaulle, Septimius Severus, Horace Mann, Edward
Gibbon and Saul Bellow. The WP notices the cumulative effect of this hot
air front moving through: One senator after another getting up from his desk to
stretch and wander to the rear of the chamber.

            The only thing resembling impeachment news is the Hitchens/Blumenthal saga.
The LAT and WP leads report that Henry Hyde wrote a letter to the
Senate asking for a postponement in the start of deliberations to allow the new
questions about Sidney Blumenthal's truthfulness to be addressed. He was turned
down. Christopher Hitchens himself makes an appearance on the WP op-ed
page: "What a fuss! What a load of phony differences without distinctions!
Blumenthal has already told the grand jury that Clinton concocted this foul
story, with its equally foul implications. He has now admitted to telling some
such version to 'friends' of his as well as journalists (and I still consider
myself to be both). That story got into the press, a lot. The message was
therefore delivered to Ms Lewinsky. QED." Hitchens goes on to say that he
devoutly wishes he'd written an intended column on the matter a week earlier,
so that he "could have been a truer friend" by warning Blumenthal off making
"any unguarded statement." But that having not happened, he sees Blumenthal as
"being readied to be used as yet another human sacrifice by his employer." One
question about all this: Was it fair for the Post to give Hitchens the
room to defend himself when the legal constraints Blumenthal is under no doubt
kept him from being able to write a column of his own about the matter?

            Last summer, when the U.S. destroyed a purported pharmaceutical plant in the
Sudan with cruise missiles, saying that it was in fact making nerve gas for
Osama bin Laden, the NYT quickly raised doubts about the government's
account of the facility. Today it raises more, with an inside piece stating that chemists hired by
the plant's owners examined soil samples from the plant and found no traces of
chemical weapons compounds. One problem though: although the piece makes it
clear that these chemists have the same monetary tie to an interested party as
any expert witness, the headline does not. It simply says, "Experts Find No
Arms Chemicals at Bombed Sudan Plant." Not a false headline, to be sure, but a
misleadingly un-nuanced one.

            A NYT front-pager warns that the social ill effects of fearing the
Y2K problem--such as bank runs, hoarding of food and gas, fires caused by newly
acquired wood stoves and a rise in gun violence accompanying the upsurge in gun
sales to those fearing post-millennial-bug civil unrest--could end up being
much worse than any pure outcome of the problem itself, especially since the
actual problem is being attacked with billions of dollars of remediation.
According to a story flagged on the Wall Street Journal front, not all of the hoarding will be
done by cammoed guys in Montana cabins either. It turns out that in
anticipation of possible Y2K-driven supply interrupts, companies like Xerox are
planning to take on more inventory than usual in the last part of 1999. Which
is driving a search for extra warehouse space and could even effect the GNP.
And wait, that doesn't include the 1.999K problem! For that, check out the
WSJ 's "Work Week." It seems that certain older software systems use
"9999" to signal an error or the end of the program. Which means September 9,
1999 may be a bit of a glitchfest. There are, says the paper, nine such
problematic dates this year.

         
      
   
