
   
   
      
         
            Unreasonable Dowd

            The LAT leads with the emerging diplomatic wrangle over whether or not
international sanctions against Saddam Hussein should continue. The WP goes
with the Senate's apparently growing enthusiasm for censuring President Clinton
rather than conducting a full-blown impeachment trial. USAT follows-up its Salt
Lake City Olympics probe lead from yesterday with the news that federal
investigators are broadening their inquiry to include possible tax fraud
charges against the Utah city's Olympic organizers for allegedly using
tax-exempt funds to purchase lavish gifts and other favors for relatives of
International Olympic Committee members. The NYT's top non-local story claims
that a recent U.S. effort to help Mexico's armed forces defeat drug smugglers
is in a shambles, souring relations between the two countries. The 73
helicopters the U.S. donated to Mexican drug forces have been plagued with
mechanical problems, the paper says, and angry Mexican generals have sharply
cut back on the number of troops they will commit to the program. And, says the
Times , citing U.S. intelligence, drug flights into Mexico ceased in late
1995, shortly that is, after the start of the vexed program--with smugglers
putting their loads on container ships instead. The story gives a little too
much free play to the suggestions of various U.S. officials that the root of
the problem lies with the Mexican authorities. After all, the U.S. military
hasn't exactly turned the tide with its anti-drug efforts in this country
either.

            The LAT lead explains that eight years of Saddam sanctions with no
indication that they will bring him down or to heel any time soon has led to
disenchantment in Western Europe, Russia, and Turkey concerning their continued
advisability. On the other hand, the U.S. is emerging from Desert Fox as
committed as ever to sanctions. The paper quotes a senior State Dept. official
saying that if--as seems likely--Iraq chooses to end its cooperation with UN
weapons inspectors, "it has literally chosen for sanctions in perpetuity."

            The WP , on the strength of interviews with senators and staffers,
claims there is a general consensus that a Senate trial will start before any
action is taken on censure. The paper adds though that there is strong support
for censure among Democratic senators, and that about a dozen Republican
senators have also shown interest. The latter suggests, says the Post ,
that Senate Republicans are looking for ways to avoid a long trial and the
damage to the party's public standing one could bring. As to how a deal is
worked out, the paper reports that Sen. Robert Byrd, "whose influence on such
matters is enormous," told the White House not to try and broker a deal--this
is something, he advises, that should be worked out strictly among
senators.

            The NYT runs a front-page above-the-fold story reporting that a
subsidiary of RJR has pleaded guilty to federal criminal charges of smuggling
cigarettes into Canada through a New York Indian reservation in order to avoid
paying U.S. and Canadian taxes. The paper points out that this is a landmark
development, because while experts have long claimed that nearly one-fourth of
all American cigarettes sold overseas get there through smuggling rings, the
companies have previously always denied allegations that top executives knew of
or were involved in any such alleged illicit traffic. What's more, the
companies have long argued, says the Times , against higher cigarette
taxes by suggesting that an increase would encourage smuggling. The story,
although reefered, runs inside at the LAT . The WSJ consigns it to the
bottom three paragraphs of a story about unrelated RJR financial news.

            The NYT is the first of the majors to throw editorial cold water on
the high multiple birth trend as exemplified by those Houston octuplets, with
the comment: "[T]his trend should not be encouraged. Such multiple births are
dangerous to the babies, who are born so tiny and premature that they are at
high risk of lifetime health complications. Even if the babies emerge healthy,
the parents are faced with an enormous burden of care that few are prepared to
meet without outside assistance. Moreover, the cost of multiple births is very
high...."

            
               USAT columnist Walter Shapiro thinks he knows a way out of the Larry
Flyntization of American politics: An amnesty day for adulterous politicians
who fess up. On the opening day of the new Congress, no less.

            A front-page WP piece reminds us that it's unfair to depict everybody
in Congress as crooked clowns. After all, not everybody in Congress has
approved nearly $500,000 in payments and salary to a part-time clown on his
staff. No, says the paper, citing previous reporting by the Indianapolis
Star and Salon , just Rep. Dan Burton, a fierce critic of Bill
Clinton's campaign finances. Apparently, other members of the clown's family
have also received questionable payments.

            Maureen Dowd uses her column today to count all the ways the Clinton scandal
has been bad for America. It's been bad for journalism, she writes, because
it's left Larry Flynt, Matt Drudge and Salon "running the show, dishing the
dirt, while the rest of us try to figure out where the slippery little line
between private and public is." The latest Drudge Report rightly reminds that
Dowd hasn't always worn white gloves to the keyboard: "Weren't you the one," he
asks, "who wrote about Nancy Reagan allegedly having an affair with Frank
Sinatra in the White House--on the front page of the New York Times ?"
Drudge could have added that unlike the "dirt" he has dished on Clinton this
year, Dowd's Nancy/Frank story has never been substantiated.

         
      
   
