
   
   
      
         
            Radar Days

            The Los
Angeles Times and Washington Post lead with yesterday's skirmish between an
Iraqi anti-air missile battery and several American combat aircraft enforcing
the no-fly zone over northern Iraq. The New York Times
fronts Iraq, but goes instead with the decision by Cambodia's prime minister to
defy international pressure by not putting on trial two top Khmer Rouge leaders
who just defected into his custody last Saturday. At USA Today ,
the Iraq combat is on the front below the fold, Cambodia is nowhere in sight
and the lead is the real possibility that the NBA season will be canceled
combined with a warning from the head of the players' union that if so, the
players might start their own league. It's not just USAT that puts such
a high premium on sports--according to a story the Nation's Newspaper runs
inside, in the annual AP poll of U.S. newspaper editors and broadcasters, the
runaway number one story of the year was You Know What, but number two was the
McGwire-Sosa home run race.

            The papers report that yesterday's action in Iraq began when an Iraqi
battery fired three missiles at U.S. planes. U.S. aircraft then fired
radar-seeking missiles and laser-guided bombs at the battery, destroying it.
The Iraqis claim that four Iraqis were killed and that one U.S. plane was
almost certainly shot down. The U.S. doesn't dispute the death toll but
dismisses the shootdown claim as groundless. Everybody quotes President
Clinton's defense of the U.S. pilots' response and his support for continuing
to control much of Iraq's airspace. The LAT and NYT explain that
the no-fly zones were not explicitly established by the U.N., but are rather a
U.S. creation. The WP mentions that the Iraqi ambassador to the U.N.
made this complaint, but doesn't address the fact of the matter. Clinton's
adamance about the zones fits well with the NYT 's claim that many in the
know in Washington believe yet another military confrontation with Iraq is
inevitable in the weeks ahead.

            The WP has the most tactical detail on the incident, saying that the
Iraqis fired three missiles without providing radar guidance until the last
possible instant, to deny U.S. planes counter-targeting, a technique, the paper
points out, that bagged an Air Force pilot over Bosnia in 1995. The papers note
that the incident came after much belligerent talk from the Iraqis and after
they directed ineffectual anti-aircraft fire toward a British aircraft over the
weekend, giving rise to theories that Iraq is trying to undermine the U.S.
policy of containment among U.S. allies. The WP has a senior U.S.
officer suggesting a more prosaic explanation: "I think what he's trying to do
is shoot down one of our airplanes."

            The LAT top front quotes Bill Clinton's assertion that the Social
Security computer system is "now 100 compliant" with standards and safeguards
protecting against Y2K problems. Even so, the paper says some experts say it
would be premature to declare that the problem has been beaten throughout the
federal computer world. The WP and NYT carry the story
inside.

            A USAT front page story reveals that three of the five most crowded
U.S. commercial airline routes (and eight of the top twenty) have one thing in
common: they go to Orlando. The Dallas/Orlando flight, for instance, averages
87 percent occupancy. Overall, says the paper, U.S. flights are departing on
average 71 percent full.

            The NYT goes top-front with an update on a media story it has broken
ground on before: the increasingly pronounced split between the races when it
comes to the popularity of TV shows. Last year, for instance, the paper
reports, "Seinfeld" finished but 50th in blacks' homes, while the number one
comedy among blacks was "Between Brothers," which finished 112th among whites.
The preference trend, the Times explains, influences the way the shows
look. Since, for instance, whites rarely watch shows with mostly black casts,
and since advertisers focus on the more numerous and generally more affluent
white viewers, network shows on in prime time with black or even integrated
casts have become relatively rare, reversing a trend towards cast integration
that was big in the 70s and 80s. One producer sums up the situation by saying
there's now a "chitlin circuit" on TV.

            The NYT front reports that preliminary figures suggest that Internet
commerce really arrived this Christmas season, finally exceeding the hype. And
the Wall Street Journal has a stat about non-holiday Web
activity that drives home the point that some sort of benchmark has been
passed: the total worth of the investment firm Charles Schwab has just
surpassed that of Merrill Lynch. The significance of this is, explains the
Journal , that Schwab does 54 percent of its trading online. So, the
biggest online brokerage house is now just the biggest brokerage house.

            A WP business section story claiming that Bill Gates has been
deeply stung by the accusations against him and his company opens with an
anecdote that's evidently supposed to humanize him but which will probably have
the opposite effect. It seems that last summer Gates and his wife took several
dozen friends on a vacation trip out West, and at one point they stopped at a
restaurant for dinner. During the meal, a couple of strangers eating nearby
joined the group and proceeded to mercilessly tease Gates, amazing all of his
guests. But in fact, says the Post , the "strangers" were actors, hired
by Gates and coached by him in detail.

         
      
   
