
   
   
      
         
            Max Senate Comedy

            The impeachment trial continues to lead all around. Today's big story is the
Senate's closed-door debate of a motion to summarily dismiss the charges
against President Clinton. The debate went until nearly 10 PM Washington time
last night and will continue again today. The secret session came about after a
motion to hold all impeachment deliberations in open session was defeated. The
New York Times
lead editorial calls the shuttered approach "an affront to the public."

            The papers report that with the matter of whether or not to call witnesses
hanging in the balance, much of yesterday was taken up by senators trying to
gin up a fast-track strategy that would bring the proceedings to a close
expeditiously without witnesses. But, say the papers, none has the votes yet.
And so the Senate Republicans are encouraging the House Republican managers to
cut down their proposed witness list. The Washington Post says the House team appears ready to do so,
with a list including Vernon Jordan, Betty Currie, and White House aides John
Podesta and Sidney Blumenthal. The NYT says the House managers are
leaning toward calling Jordan and away from calling Currie. The Post
adds that there has been some interest in calling Dick Morris, whom the paper
reveals, was debriefed by prosecution staffers on Sunday. But in the end, says
the paper, such interest waned. One wonders why, given that the WP says
one of the things Morris had to say in his dry run was that President Clinton
expressed concern to Morris about the gifts he'd given Lewinsky.

            The NYT , WP and Los Angeles
Times all report that Trent Lott submitted ten questions to President
Clinton, and that the White House says neither Clinton nor anybody else there
will provide answers. The LAT sees the stonewall as a sign that Clinton
is confident he'll win the case.

            The papers report that one idea being kicked around by senators is one vote
on whether the charges against Clinton are true and another on whether he
should thereby be removed from office. The NYT offers the best
explanation of why this is attractive to Republicans: This would be a stringent
form of censure, but the finding of facts would only require 51 votes, which
means it's doable.

            Everybody fronts yesterday's 5-4 Supreme Court ruling that the 2000 Census
must be an actual headcount, not the statistical sampling that's alleged to be
more accurate. The main political impact of the decision is that it will affect
how many congressional seats each state gets, and perhaps will also affect
which party's members occupy them, because the conventional wisdom is that
sampling favors Democrats, by being more able to include folks in cities and
recent immigrants.

            The WP front reports that U.S. aircraft enforcing the no-fly zone
over southern Iraq fired missiles at an anti-air site and that Iraqi officials
claim eleven civilians were killed when one of them went wide of the mark.
Later, says the paper, the Pentagon acknowledged that a brand-new type of
video-guided missile may have missed its intended target and hit houses
instead. Significantly, the U.S. attack was preemptive, part of a tougher
effort to suppress Iraqi anti-air activities without waiting for full-blown
attacks against U.S. planes. USA Today fronts the Vatican's criticism of the U.S.
campaign in Iraq, and the incident is inside at the two Times .

            Another story receiving wide play--front at USAT and the NYT ,
flagged in the Wall Street Journal news box--is Intel's decision to climb
down from its previous plans to ship its new Pentium III chip with the capacity
to allow Web sites to identify a computer. The feature has been called "cookies
on steroids," says USAT , inspiring privacy concerns among many
netizens.

            The WSJ reports a new development in the music business in England,
inspired by a recent rash of charges of song ripping-off--plagiarism insurance.
Huge legal fees involved in successful defenses against such charges by the
likes of Andrew Lloyd Webber are cited as creating the market. The
policies--underwritten by Lloyd's of London--provide coverage for all damages
and defense costs in such cases. One special requirement: taking out the policy
must be kept a secret, to avoid inviting lawsuits.

            Today's WP answers some questions tendered here yesterday regarding
the financing for Monica's sudden blowing into town. Her travel expenses,
including luxury accommodations at the Mayflower Hotel, are being paid by Ken
Starr until such time as she is called to testify at the impeachment trial.
Then Congress pays for them.

         
      
   
