
   
   
      
         
            Saigon, Flanders, the Magna Carta, and Henry Hyde

            All three papers--the Washington Post , the Los Angeles
Times , and the New York
Times --lead with the hyperbolic rhetoric of the House prosecutors as
they closed their argument on day three of the Senate impeachment trial. The
House Saturday rammed home its point that Clinton's alleged lying meets the
standard of "high crimes and misdemeanors" and is not the sex-sullied
triviality that the Clinton defense team contends. The Senate (and the papers)
give high marks to Rep. Lindsey Graham, who made the pertinent point that
perjury has dethroned judges in past impeachment trials. Rep. Henry "Hotshot
Historian" Hyde wrapped up the day with grandiose allusions to our forefathers.
Hyde intoned, "If we [view Clinton as above the law], we break faith with our
ancestors from Bunker Hill, Lexington and Concord to Flanders fields, Normandy,
Iwo Jima, Panmunjon, Saigon, and Desert Storm." Separately he invoked the Magna
Carta, the Ten Commandments, Roman Law, the Gettysburg Address, and the Spirit
of '76.

            The NYT front page analysis spotlights the (predictable) shattering
of the bipartisanship illusion, a theme that resonates throughout today's
coverage. The partisan rancor was symbolically illustrated Saturday when Senate
Majority Leader Trent Lott penned a letter to Minority Leader Tom Daschle
proposing the formation of a bipartisan group to map out potential witnesses.
Daschle icily rejected the idea as premature.

            The reigning consensus after day three is that the House did a surprisingly
good job, and the burden now shifts to the Clinton defense team to forestall
witnesses. The Clintonites will have to improve on their vague snipes of the
last three days; Saturday Clinton lawyers railed against the House and invoked
the the "interests of the American people" refrain.

            An illuminating piece inside the WP article reports that foreign countries are jumping on the lucrative anti-tobacco
bandwagon and suing U.S. tobacco companies--in U.S. courts. Guatemala,
Nicaragua, and Panama have in recent months filed what Philip Morris
justifiably calls "copycat lawsuits" to recover government-paid health care
costs and other damages. The legal merit of such claims by foreign countries in
U.S. courts is shaky, legal analysts say.

            The LAT "Sunday Report" says that the federal government's largest
education grant program ($118 billion over three decades) has bombed. The
program, called Title 1, was meant to zap the gap between rich and poor
students but has achieved minimal discernible progress. The reasons? The money
is spread too thin, and too much of it goes to hire tutors and part-time
teachers ("paraprofessionals") rather than full-time certified teachers.

            The 15 ethnic-Albanian "rebels" allegedly shot Friday in Kosovo by Serbian
forces turned out to be 45 massacred civilians, many of whose mutilated bodies were
discarded in a mass grave. The story, coupled with gruesome photos, runs on all
fronts. The papers conclude that this could sound the death knell for the
disintegrating peace agreement.

            The WP reports inside that Richard Holbrooke may soon--finally--be nominated as the U.S.
ambassador to the U.N. Sources say that Holbrooke has almost cleared the
financial disclosure investigation that has delayed his nomination. The
Post notes that the U.S.-U.N. tiff over Iraq has made it a particularly
precarious time for the ambassadorial seat to be empty.

            A squib inside the NYT "Week in Review" promisingly entitled "Burping Cows and Space Toilets. Beam Me Up, Mr. Speaker!"
doesn't disappoint. The piece contains choice excerpts from Rep. James
Traficant Jr.'s occasional one-minute morning harangues on the House floor.
(Quite often he concludes with "beam me up," a rhetorical plea to the Starship
Enterprise.) Here's the space toilets classic:

            "Mr. Speaker, space. The final frontier. The search for new life, new
civilizations and now new toilets. That is right: NASA has a $30 million space
toilet. You strap yourself in and 12 high-pressure air jets aid your relief ...
Mr. Speaker, I say [it] is time to call out the Roto-Rooter man ... Beam me up,
Scottie, nature is calling."

         
      
   
