
   
   
      
         
            All Dictioned Up

            Once again the Senate impeachment trial is the consensus news leader, with
today's installment given over to yesterday's votes to press on and to
closed-door depose three witnesses. The decisions were virtually straight party
votes, with the sole exception of Wisconsin Democrat Russell Feingold, who
voted against dismissal and for witnesses. The headlines at USA
Today --"Senate Will Hear Witnesses"--and the Washington Post --"Senate Votes to Take Testimony"--focus on
the immediate event. The big print at the New York Times
takes a longer view: "Senate Refuses to Dismiss Case and Agrees to Call
Lewinsky; Daschle Sees Clinton Survival." The paper's smaller subhead notes
that the vote count shows Minority Leader Daschle is right, a point that the
Los
Angeles Times elevates to the second line of its banner headline:
"Senators Reject Ending Trial/56-44 Vote Shows GOP Lacks Margin to
Convict."

            The meaning of the votes is best summed up by the WP , which states
that the Senate has told the House managers they have the chance to make their
case and that in all likelihood doing so will not matter. One manager, Asa
Hutchinson, is quoted by the Post as seeing the glass half full: "It
shows the strength of the managers' case," while another, Henry Hyde, opts for
half (or more) empty: "I'm glad those people weren't at Valley Forge or the
Alamo."

            The papers turn from "How will it end?" to "When will it end?"--addressing
the trial schedule from here on out. The Post says that if the three
depositions just approved don't drag out and aren't sensational, the White
House will likely not conduct the full-blown discovery it has recently
threatened. (But the LAT notes a possible obstacle: the House managers
are continuing to press for live testimony.) The NYT says there are
endgame disagreements inside the White House, with Charles Ruff on the side of
speed, opposing David Kendall, on the side of thoroughness. Two other tidbits that only the Times has: 1) When President
Clinton got the news of the votes, he was on the phone with Al Gore and several
western governors talking about salmon restoration; and 2) Monica Lewinsky will
be questioned by Rep. Ed Bryant, "because he was the questioner Ms. Lewinsky
disliked least when she met with several of the managers last weekend."

            
               USAT off-leads word that Ford will announce today that it is buying
the car unit of Volvo (burying until deep in the story the part of the company
being left behind: trucks). The paper says Ford was motivated by Volvo's strong
brand image based on safety and because the average Volvo sells for $35,000,
twice that of the average Ford. The story is carried inside at the WP ,
LAT , and NYT , and is flagged in the Wall Street Journal front-page news box. The Journal
reports that Fiat had offered more money than Ford for the Swedish automaker,
but that Ford has become viewed as the "acquirer of choice," because of its
track record of injecting capital and expertise into new purchases without
diluting a brand's character.

            A WP editorial decries the Senate Armed Services Committee's approval
of increases in military pay and pensions even more generous than those
recommended in the new Clinton budget. The paper makes a good distinction
between rendering military pay strictly comparable to civilian pay and making
military pay high enough to attract and retain sufficiently qualified troops in
the various specialties the services require for true readiness. It's the
latter that the budget should reflect, not the former. The editorial goes on to
suggest that the readiness pay standard should be applied year by year instead
of long-term. It should be added that there's a simple extension of this idea
that would help retention of the right kind of personnel while avoiding waste:
target pay raises and bonuses not just to combat specialties but also to
combat-oriented tours of duty. An Army Ranger is no doubt deserving of an ample
extra reward when he's jumping out of planes and sleeping in a foxhole, but not
when he's serving as a clerical assistant at the Pentagon, returning to his
nice suburban home every night in time for dinner with his family.

            Everybody's been talking about the growth of online stock trading, but today
at the NYT front and inside at the WP , the emphasis is on the
growth of online stock trading problems. The Times says investor
complaints about online trades have quadrupled over the past year. The chief of
the SEC, Arthur Levitt, is quoted in both saying that investors must not let
the ease of mouse transactions goad them into trading too quickly or too
often.

            In a front-pager headlined "An Official's Vocabulary Lesson/Some Words are Defined by More
than the Dictionary," the WP tells how on Monday a white Washington,
D.C., city government department head resigned after many blacks in his agency
complained bitterly over his use of the word "niggardly" in a business meeting
with two subordinates, one white and one black. The Post notes that
"niggardly" is etymologically completely unrelated to "nigger" (it has Middle
English roots and means stingy) and says that if in fact the man used the word
innocently and in its correct context, then the loss of his job is "truly
remarkable." The paper cites other phrases that will have to be dropped if the
standard of this case is widely adopted: "a chink in the armor," and "a nip in
the air."

         
      
   
