
   
   
      
         
            Talking 'Bout My Generation

            A friend of Culturebox's (independent filmmaker Allison "Gas, Food,
Lodging " Anders, if you have to know) feels moved to make a few obvious
points about Frank Sinatra:

            If you were rebelling against the status quo in the '50s and '60s, no one
was more uncool than Frank Sinatra. He was everything I and my friends
rejected--the phony suave with fake self-control, the finger-popping slick. Not
everyone in Frank's generation was equally loathsome. Dino and Jackie Gleason,
for instance, were all right. But Frank lacked a sense of humor. He took
himself so seriously . And nothing makes you more bratty and defiant than
a self-important adult.

            The advent of Elvis was in large part an attack on Sinatra and his
generation, a way of saying no to people sitting on wooden stools under a
spotlight crooning insincerely. Rock 'n' roll wasn't smooth, like Frank. It was
rough and ragged and raw. If Sinatra was the father of rock 'n' roll, as almost
every tribute of the past few days has claimed, it was only Oedipally, as the
oppressive father figure you were just itching to slay. A Sinatra biographer
was on a TV show the other day saying that every singer nowadays uses some sort
of phrasing that Frank invented. That is nonsense. You will hear nothing of
Frank in Elvis, the Fab Four, or Sonic Youth. God knows you will not find it in
Jimi Hendrix or A Tribe Called Quest. Country and blues are a far more obvious
source of rock 'n' roll phrasing--Ray Charles, Hank Williams, Woody Guthrie,
Howling Wolf. For attitude, don't look to Sinatra. Look to Williams and Robert
Johnson.

            That Sinatra actually had less of a connection to my generation than
other members of my mothers' generation is perfectly captured in a clip they've
been showing over and over again on TV. It's the one with Frank and Elvis doing
that dreadful duet, in which both were forced to mimic themselves as
respresentatives of The Voice for two succeeding generations. Frank comes off
as a clueless fool. Elvis seems embarrassed.

            Compare this to the dignified and not at all campy duet of Bing Crosby and
David Bowie on the infamous Christmas special in the '70s. What the contrast
shows is that Frank, even more than Crosby, was a symbol of everything we did
not want to be. If you're under 50 and you groove on Sinatra as much as Elvis
or the Fab Four or Phil Spector or Hendrix or the Sex Pistols or Nirvana--or if
his death means as much to you as the death of Elvis, Lennon, Sandy Denny,
Cobain, Gram Parsons, or Tupac--well, I'm sorry, but you've clearly forgotten
how cool you used to be.

         
      
   
