
   
   
      
         
            Gloating Rights Act of 1999

            The New York Times ,
Washington Post , and Los Angeles
Times lead with the issues that the Senate must soon resolve to
complete its impeachment trial. The situation is also flagged in the Wall Street Journal front-page news box. With conviction
and removal of President Clinton almost surely off the table, say the papers,
stress will instead be on: whether or not to call any of the already deposed
witnesses to the Senate chamber for questioning, whether or not to release to
the public the videotapes of their depositions, and whether or not to vote on
findings of fact in the case or on a formal censure of Clinton instead.
Although support for these choices play out largely along party lines, the
papers note that Republican support for the choices that make life more
complicated for Clinton has flagged somewhat in recent days. USA Today
leads with the nationwide gas wars, caused by an oil glut and petroleum
industry improvements. The upshot: the national average price of a gallon of
gas is now 97.9 cents--18 cents below a year ago and the lowest since 1979.
Adjusted for inflation, the paper says, gas prices are the lowest in
history.

            On the impeachment front, despite the handwriting on the wall, there are
still plenty of Republicans strolling the halls of Congress with ink remover.
Trent Lott, say the papers, sent Clinton a letter signed by him and half of the
Republican caucus, for a total of 28 senators, requesting that the president
make himself available for a deposition. But even that letter stated that the
Senate would not attempt to compel Clinton to testify.

            One sign that there really is light now at the end of the impeachment tunnel
is that according to USAT , the House managers expect to lose on their
request for live testimony. Another: according to the WP , the White
House acknowledged yesterday that a Democratic pep rally on the South Lawn
immediately after Clinton was impeached provoked many in Congress and promised
that if Clinton is not convicted the White House would be a "gloat-free zone."
The LAT has this too, explicitly crediting the quote to spokesman Joe
Lockhart.

            An LAT front-pager and a story inside the NYT report that the
offices of onetime Yeltsin intimate, gezillionaire Boris Berezovsky (the
LAT headline calls him the "Rasputin" of the current scene), were raided
this week by government agents on the trail of Berezovsky's political espionage
organization. The LAT says the raid uncovered evidence of tapped phone
conversations of Yeltsin family members.

            An inside story at the WP piggybacks on a story in this week's New
Republic amassing strong evidence that Tom DeLay, a leading congressional doubter of President
Clinton's truthfulness under oath, said under oath in a civil case that he was
not an officer of a Texas pest control company even though at about the same
time he reported to Congress that he was the company's chairman. The
Post reports that a Capitol Hill newspaper, The Hill , has turned
up evidence that DeLay made further misstatements about the amount of money he
was drawing from the company and also about the amount of speaking fees he
received.

            The USAT front reports that in response to rising passenger "air
rage" over poor airline service, a bipartisan bill, the "Airline Passenger
Fairness Act" will be introduced in the Senate on Friday. Oddly, the story
doesn't say what rights will thereby be protected, although presumably they
won't include the right to intestinally offload onto the liquor cart (an actual
incident).

            An inside story at the NYT says that the gay oriented magazine,
The Advocate , reports that a gay Marine who was pseudonymously the subject of a NYT
Sunday Magazine article last year appeared in several gay pornographic films
while he was on active duty. (He had not, says today's story, informed the
magazine of this.) The story doesn't explore whether this fact would be grounds
for dismissal under the present "don't ask, don't tell" policy. Which is too
bad, since it's actually an interesting test case. If a soldier is completely
circumspect in his military life and makes every effort to disguise his
involvement in explicitly gay-only-oriented activities to the point of using a
pseudonym, etc., in what sense is he "telling"?

            Today's coverage of the impending Senate actions on impeachment includes a
journalism tic that Today's Papers deplores. The NYT states,
"Tonight, in an effort to put the President in an awkward position , more
than two dozen Republican senators wrote to Clinton to ask him to voluntarily
testify in the trial." The italicized motive-attributing phrase (italics added)
is completely unsupported in the story. And therefore shouldn't be there. The
telltale sign that such phrases represent the illicit smuggling into a story of
a political opinion is that just below this the story continues, "The White
House has steadfastly said that Clinton would not take such a step and
instantly rejected the proposal." Forget the slight note of character build-up
that comes with "steadfastly," but please do notice that this sentence does not
read, "In order to make Republicans look bad, the White House has..."

         
      
   
