
   
   
      
         
            Eyes Shut

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with what it foresees as imminent renewed political
and economic turmoil in Russia. The New York Times
leads with the continuing rise in cable rates even as the medium approaches
near-total deregulation. Relying on a confidential consultant's report, the
Washington Post goes with an exclusive, claiming
that the newest federal edifice in Washington, D.C., the Ronald Reagan
building, is quite vulnerable to terrorist attack. USA Today
leads with a forecast that this week severe late-winter snow storms will hit
much of the country east of the Rocky Mountains, while tornadoes will hit
Texas, Arkansas, and Missouri.

            The LAT says Russia may see yet another Cabinet shake-up as it faces
a cash crunch in April, when it's scheduled to begin making $4.6 billion in
foreign debt payments. The paper says Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov, Russia's
de facto leader with President Boris Yeltsin so often in the hospital, has made
getting more loans from the IMF his primary economic objective rather than
substantive economic reform. But, of course, the IMF would like to see some
reform before ponying up more money. The paper says that although Yeltsin is
"largely incapacitated," he would get involved in loan talks with the IMF if he
thought it necessary.

            Whereas the LAT lead's headline says Russia is "amid crisis," a
Wall Street Journal front-page feature runs under
the header: "Resilient Russia Dodges Calamities Predicted After Ruble's
Collapse." The paper goes high with the claim by a former prime minister that
"doomsday was a wrong estimation of what would happen, and what will happen."
The Journal enumerates some of the things it says have nonetheless not
yet finished Russia off: Average wages down 40 percent from a year ago, 1.1
million folks have lost their jobs (since when?) and the ruble is off by
two-thirds. But with imports now priced out of the market, domestic production
is on the rise in some industries and Russia's trade surplus is up twenty-fold
from the beginning of last year. Which helps explain why GDP isn't falling as
fast as was forecast, and why the stock market is "stirring." And the country's
entrenched barter economy means that companies can press on regardless of
customers' ability to pay in cash.

            Since the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the NYT reports, cable rates have climbed overall about 22 percent--more
than four times the rate of inflation. What's happened, as if you didn't know,
is that while cable price controls came off, much of the expected
competition--such as satellites and wireless cable--hasn't materialized yet.
The result threatens to be what Sen. John McCain is quoted as calling "an
unregulated monopoly."

            The WP lead reports that since the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, the
government's agency in charge of federal buildings has been warned repeatedly
about risks posed by the Reagan Building's large underground garage
and unrestricted entrances. But, says the paper, since the building opened
with huge cost overruns, there has been tremendous reticence to create a strong
visible security presence that would cut down on revenue by discouraging the
public from visiting the retail stores, restaurants and convention facilities
in the building. Note: like the Oklahoma federal building that was destroyed by
a truck bomb, the Reagan building houses a day-care center.

            The LAT , WP , and NYT front the death yesterday,
apparently from natural causes at age 70, of Stanley Kubrick. Kubrick, was, the
papers note, obsessed with control and detail (in a career spanning almost 50
years, he made only 13 features) and was one of the first commercial directors
to wrest artistic control of his pictures away from the studios. According to
the coverage, he completed his last movie, Eyes Wide Shut , about sexual
obsession and starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, just last week.

            The NYT "Media Talk" column reports that recently, shortly after the
American Journalism Review ran a piece by a former Gannett editor
criticizing her former employer for newsroom cost-cutting, the Gannett chain
pulled all its annual advertising from AJR .

            The NYT 's Fox Butterfield writes that a new DOJ study indicates that
carjacking is far more prevalent than most crime experts had thought--the crime
occurs about 49,000 times a year. About half of these involved use of a gun,
and in 16 percent of them the victim was injured. Butterfield notes that the
trend appears to illustrate several unintended consequences of
get-tough-on-crime developments. With the advent of major improvements in car
locks and security systems, unattended locked cars became much harder to steal,
and drug-related forfeiture programs gave criminals an incentive to not be
caught by police in their own cars. A separate Times item reports that
yesterday morning Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna Shalala foiled
an attempt to rob her at a bank ATM and gave the police a getaway car license
plate that directly led to the arrest of three suspects in the crime.

            
               Still not a clue, though. The WP reports that the rabidly
anti-Clinton legal foundation Judicial Watch now has its own online store,
where you can buy a Judicial Watch report or a Judicial Watch baseball cap.

         
      
   
