
   
   
      
         
            Atomic Bombshell

            The New York Times
lead reveals China's plunder of nuclear technology from American government
laboratories, and the U.S.'s subsequent mishandling, avoidance, and suppression
of follow-up investigations. The story, sourced to unnamed "U.S. officials,"
gives damning shape and detail to recent news rumblings about illicit Chinese
acquisition of U.S. defense technology. In the mid-1980's, reports the paper, a
Chinese-American scientist working at the Los Alamos government laboratory sold
China the recipe for launching multiple warheads from a single missile, thus
providing China with the "backbone of a modern nuclear force" and a
near-duplicate of one of America's most advanced atomic tools. The espionage
was detected in 1995 when researchers noticed the stunning similarity between
Chinese and U.S. systems. They also found evidence that China had been
continually exploiting lax U.S. security measures to steal information. But the
thefts were only haltingly investigated by the FBI, and no arrests have ever
been made.

            Notra Trulock, the Energy Department's chief of intelligence and the sole
hero of the account, continually tried to alert higher-ups at his agency, the
FBI, and the White House about the size and impact of the theft. But his
repeated warnings were brushed off ; last year, Elizabeth Moler, the
then-acting Energy Secretary, told him to withhold his findings from Congress,
who could use them to criticize Clinton's policy towards China. The
Times also suggests that the White House itself downplayed the findings
in order to protect its delicate rapport with China. Finally, last fall Trulock
secretly shared his findings with a bipartisan congressional panel monitoring
the U.S.-China security situation.

            Lest readers underestimate the story's import, the Times quotes
officials who rank the breach as far worse than the one committed by Aldrich
Ames, and on a par with the misdeeds perpetuated (also at Los Alamos) by Julius
and Ethel Rosenberg.

            Meanwhile, the Washington Post front page reports that Chinese officials
are threatening military strikes against Taiwan if the U.S. provides Taiwan
with missile defense systems. The story carries no mention of the Times '
revelations, but emphasizes that U.S.-China tensions have already chilled to
their coldest point in years.

            The NYT and the Los Angeles Times front ebullient reactions-- from
the stock market, the bond market, and economists cheering in the bleachers--
to the Labor Department's announcement of February's strong job growth and low
inflation. The Post tucks the story inside. The Dow Jones average hit
new highs yesterday with a 2.8% rise to 9,736 points, and bond and interest
rates dipped in deference to the good news. The LAT notes that even
manufacturing, the one sector to suffer job losses, has become bifurcated
between commodities-based industries, which are vulnerable to overseas
recession, and consumer products, which are less so. The NYT story
offers a more measured tone, with now-familiar caveats about unsustainable
pace. It also backgrounds the jobs report with helpful descriptions of its
methodology. (Example: the Labor Department's job growth stats are based on the
relatively small and volatile 'household' survey, which polls Americans on how
many members of their household are working, instead of wage reports from
employers. The latter are considered broader and more reliable).

            The WP reports that a U.S. appeals court has struck down the ability
of rape and domestic violence victims to sue their attackers under federal
civil rights laws, a power first granted by the 1994 Violence Against Women
Act. Federal courts are desirable venues for victims because of their high
damage awards and relatively lax statutes of limitations, but the court found
the victims' claims outside the constitutional scope of its jurisdiction. The
account doesn't remind readers that even at the time of the bill's passing, the
provision was generally considered a socially sympathetic but legally
overambitious expansion of federal court power.

            In the latest report of IRS mishaps, the LA Times fronts the agency's
sheepish acknowledgment that it has been treating 630,000 taxpayers to special
natural-disaster-area privileges, even though most haven't been beset by any
natural catastrophes at all. The poorly written rules give interest-free loans
on late taxes to any and all residents of areas deemed disaster areas, instead
of those actually impacted by the event.

            Finally, the WP explains how the House Ethics Committee ruled that
swanky Club seats in Washington's new sports arena are actually-- whaddya
know!-- inexpensive enough to be considered 'nominal' gifts from lobbyists to
House members and staff. The seats usually retail for $98 a pop, but if the
Hill types refrain from reading the free programs and parking in the
complimentary garage, the Ethics Committee will consider the seats worth a much
more acceptable $49.50.

         
      
   
