
   
   
      
         
            Sovereign of the Sleaze

            The Los
Angeles Times lead predicts the U.S. economy will falter in 1999. The
top national story at the Washington Post says that Senate Republicans differ on how
to conduct the impeachment trial of President Clinton. The New York Times
leads with big business' drive to obtain credit for cuts in waste gas
emissions.

            An ursine LAT lead says the economy is headed for big trouble in
1999. Reasons include: 1) political uncertainty in Washington, 2) a record-high
stock market, 3) economic instability in Latin America, and 4) a squeeze on
corporate profits. Seems like a safe prediction for a paper to make: if the
LAT is correct, they can scream "I told you so," but if another year
passes with no economic downturn will readers be reminded of this lead
story?

            The WP lead reports that the GOP is split on how to proceed with
impeachment hearings. The two main factions are Trent Lott's bipartisans, who
favor a streamlined approach, and a conservative group that wants a full Senate
trial with witnesses and detailed testimony. Lott's approach calls for an early
vote on whether Clinton's crimes merit removal from office. If less than
two-thirds think they do, the Senate would close the impeachment trial and
begin considering censure. Conservative senators and House prosecutors feel
that a full-scale trial is the only way for the Senate to make a valid judgment
and perform its Constitutional duty. The WP sees the intra-party rift as
"a crucial test of [Lott's] own and possibly his party's political future."

            The NYT lead reports that, with Senate approval of a global-warming
treaty pending, major corporations are spearheading legislation that would
ensure they receive credit for cutbacks they have made in gas emissions over
the last few years. The Times thinks that passage of such legislation
would soften Senate resistance to the treaty and help align industrial and
environmental goals.

            The second of two environmental stories on the NYT front blows the
whistle on Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., which got caught dumping oil in
international water, lied to cover it up, paid a fine, apologized, and then got
caught dumping oil again. The article chronicles RCC's elaborate attempts to
escape punishment, employing no less than two former U.S. Attorneys General in
its lobbying campaign. Because the company still refuses to turn over results
of its internal investigation, a federal investigation into Royal Caribbean's
systematic pollution and falsification of records is ongoing.

            As always, the year's final NYT Magazine --"The Lives They Lived"--
is devoted to the "old friends" who have died in the previous 12 months. The 40
profiles include the obvious choices--Frank Sinatra, Dr. Spock, Roy Rogers--but
there are also stories about Otto Bettmann, who began his photo archive with
two suitcases of photographs carted out of Nazi Germany; Martha Gellhorn, who
covered wars from Spain in the 1930s to Patagonia in the 1980s; and the
inventors of the Cuisinart, the La-Z-Boy, and bubble gum. All of the obits
speak fondly of their subjects, save one: Former Alabama Gov. George Wallace is
castigated for both his racism and his superficial renunciation of it. Wallace,
the profile argues, claimed to have repudiated racism but used issues such as
crime and welfare as veils for old-school segregationist politics. The most
lives seem to have been lived by Eldridge Cleaver, who spent his years as a
convicted criminal, a Muslim, a Black Panther, a presidential candidate, a
Moonie, a Mormon, and a conservative Republican.

         
      
   
