
   
   
      
         
            Trial By Ice

            The Washington Post jilts impeachment to lead with local
weather--a massive ice storm that knocked out power throughout the capital
area. But electricity still crackled through the Senate chambers; lead stories
at the New York Times and the Los Angeles
Times (and the off-lead of the WP ) report that House Republicans
told the Senate that Monica Lewinsky's testimony was more credible than
President Clinton's, and turned up the pressure for calling witnesses.

            House prosecutors produced no breakthroughs Friday as they slowly pounded in
their case. The NYT notes high-up that Rep. Bill McCollum, Friday's main
speaker, was the first to break out sexually explicit terminology. McCollum
also challenged the Senate to call Monica Lewinsky, Bettie Currie, Vernon
Jordan, and even the President as witnesses. Tellingly, speculation is shifting
from whether there will be witnesses to who they will be. Clinton is
certainly on the wish-list of some House Republicans.

            Diversion from the eight-hour slog, gladly noted by all the papers, was
senator Tom Harkin's late-afternoon objection to the House's repeated
references to the senators as "jurors." The Senate is not a mute jury,
maintained Harkin--it can set rules and make motions too. Chief Justice William
Rehnquist agreed and set the House scrambling for linguistic innovation.
Harkin's point, say the papers, was highly symbolic: The Democrats stress that
the Senate is not merely making an innocent or guilty verdict, but also passing
judgment on the import of the crime.

            The majors' editorial pages keep pounding the House. An NYT editorial perseveres in its "irrelevancy" campaign
against Clinton's removal and shudders, "It is hard to imagine how the
appearance of Ms. Lewinsky or Ms. Currie could galvanize the Senate to convict
Clinton." A WP editorial moans that the "mind-numbing" House
speeches "do more to inure the viewer to the president's offensive conduct than
all the tortured arguments his various lawyers can muster." Both the NYT
and the WP opine that the House has yet to prove that Clinton's conduct
is sufficiently egregious to warrant his removal.

            All papers front the latest on Brazil's economic roller-coaster: The
Brazilian stock market leaped 33 percent Friday as the government decided to
let its currency, the real, drop to market level (the real obliged, plummeting
nine percent more). Wall Street rejoiced at Brazil's perceived courage--the
real decision being an abrupt about-face by Brazil's central bank--and the Dow
jumped 219 points.

            The first casualties from the international monitoring mission in Kosovo get
inside coverage all around. A British monitor was shot in the shoulder (and his
Serbian translator wounded) Friday by unidentified gunmen who deliberately
fired on the monitors' vehicle. Separately, Serbian forces reportedly killed 15
ethnic-Albanian rebels. Both incidents, the papers note, underscore the extreme
volatility of the Kosovo situation.

            Everybody flags a truly bizarre impeachment spin-off: the firing of the editor of the Journal of the American Medical
Association , Dr. George Lundberg. Lundberg's high crime (or
misdemeanor)? Publishing a paper based on a college student survey about
whether "oral sex" constitutes "having sex." (59% voted no.) The timing of
course is no coincidence--Dr. Lundberg, who adores media attention, had hoped
to impact the impeachment debate. With the publicity about his demise, he
really has a chance--that January 20, 1999 issue may become the most-read
JAMA ever.

         
      
   
