
   
   
      
         
            The Other L-Word

            Are libertarians on a roll?
If you begin with the recent election to Congress of Ron Paul, a former
Libertarian presidential candidate; note the emergence of cyberlibertarians as
a political constituency; factor in the collapse of communism; and quote Bill
Clinton's admission that "the era of big government is over," you have what
sounds like a compelling case. There are other signs as well: the rise of the
Cato Institute as one of the leading Washington think tanks; and the general
accrual of credibility to what, 20 years ago, was a fringe-y movement of Ayn
Rand devotees and risqué Republicans.

            Yet,
there is an equally strong argument to be made that the United States is only
moving toward libertarian-style minimalist government in the same way that you
get closer to Paris when you drive east to the supermarket. Libertarian
presidential candidate Harry Browne got less than 500,000 votes in 1996. This
was an increase over 1992 but only a slight improvement upon the Libertarian
vote in 1988, and a far weaker performance than in 1980. Meanwhile, leaders of
the Christian right, whose aims are antithetical to those of libertarians, make
the plausible claim that it is they who are winning converts and influence by
the day. And if Clinton now knows to eschew "big government," members of the
Republican Congress elected in 1994 have also learned their lesson about
attempting to make government truly smaller.

            The appearance of these two books counts as an entry in the
plus side of the ledger. Each attempts to make libertarianism more respectable
and popular. They are pitched, however, at different audiences. Charles Murray
is a conservative trying to persuade other conservatives that the absence of
restraint will in fact make people more moral. He rather reluctantly defends
the legalization of drugs, prostitution, and pornography, and concedes that
government has to play some more-than-minimal role. David Boaz, an official at
the Cato Institute, sees libertarianism as neither conservative nor liberal,
and aims to convert everyone. But while he is more ecumenical, Boaz is far more
extreme. If you insist on keeping national parks or old-age pensions, he has
some advice on the least bad way to run these things--but, given his druthers,
he wouldn't run them at all.

            
Murray's more laconic account is based upon a
classical liberal argument: Force is bad; cooperation is good; government is
force; ergo, the only legitimate functions of government are to enforce
voluntary agreements, and to prevent force and fraud. Murray accepts, though,
that there also exist limited "public goods." The two he names are
environmental protection and education. These exceptions to the rule of the
minimal state are probably necessary to make libertarianism palatable to
mainstream conservatives. The problem is that they require an admission--which
Murray never makes directly--that decisions made by a democratic government
within the boundaries of a constitution are not merely "force" but also
"cooperation," albeit with a certain degree of legitimate coercion.

            In an
attempt to distinguish those public purposes that are tolerable from those that
aren't, Murray posits that, to be valid, public goods either have to be
"nonexclusive"--interventions from which everyone benefits--or else must arise
to counter "externalities," costs passed on to others that, in practical terms,
cannot be compensated, as in the case of the chemical incinerator that pollutes
the air. What this scheme leaves unclear is why education and the environment
are valid public goods while other efforts he opposes--insuring elderly people
against poverty, say, or providing national health insurance--are not.
Education and the environment are not purely nonexclusive goods. Some people
who either don't have children or who don't like to visit national parks--or
both--will be taxed to pay for them. And if the standard of nonexclusivity is
not absolute, then programs Murray rejects, such as welfare and Medicare, can
reasonably qualify. Anyone may fall upon hard times, and most people anticipate
being around long enough to benefit from nationalized health care for the
elderly.

            Murray's next strategy is to try a series of more pragmatic
arguments against government action. To show how little sense regulations make,
he proposes a thought experiment. Why not give consumers a choice, he asks,
about whether to use regulated or unregulated products (unregulated products,
he stipulates, would have to be labeled as such). This merely demonstrates that
Murray has failed to understand his own argument about externalities as a basis
for public goods. The point of regulation is not merely to protect consumers,
but to protect innocent third parties. Of course consumers would be better off
if the government gave them the right to buy appliances built by polluting
factories and low-cost child labor. (In fact, consumers already can, so long as
the pollution and child labor are foreign and not domestic.) These regulations
exist for the benefit of those who live downstream from the factory and the
children who would otherwise be working inside it.

            Or, to
take an example of regulation employed by Murray, consider the 55-mile-per-hour
speed limit. Murray says there is no reason to keep people from harming
themselves. But speed limits don't just prevent people who willingly take the
risk of driving faster and more dangerously from hurting themselves. They
improve the odds for the children in the back seat, and for the safe driver in
the opposite lane, whom the reckless driver might plow into. With this example,
Murray undercuts himself in another way. He says regulation only gets more
onerous over time. But the national speed limit is an example of precisely the
opposite point. In most states you can now drive 65 or 70 on freeways. Like
many conservatives, Murray high-dudgeons himself into the Jeane Kirkpatrick
position of ascribing historical inevitability to a trend that is actually in
the midst of reversal.

            
Murray involves himself in more serious
contradictions by drawing in arguments from his earlier books, each of which
presents a different case against public action to fight poverty. In Losing
Ground (1984), the work that made him famous, he contended that government
anti-poverty programs had done much to create the underclass. In The Bell
Curve (1994), he said that some people--namely blacks--were genetically
inferior, a condition that government could do nothing about. In What It
Means to Be a Libertarian , he says government intervention is morally
wrong.

            He means these arguments to
be mutually reinforcing: Government social programs don't work; they can't work
on account of human nature; and if by chance they do work, they're morally
unjustified anyhow. But this triple argument in the triple alternative actually
obliterates itself. In The Bell Curve , Murray contends that government
can't really help people. In the version of that argument given in What It
Means , he asserts that "most government interventions are ineffectual"
because "modern society has the inertia of a ponderous freight train." But if
government can't reroute the freight train in a better direction, it's hard to
see how it can derail it. The metaphor undermines the Losing Ground
Murray, the guy who writes that "[u]ntil the government began masking the
social costs created by large numbers of fatherless children, civilized
communities everywhere stigmatized illegitimacy." The "futility"
thesis--government can't help--and the "perversity" thesis--government makes
problems worse instead of better--are at odds. If government can't do anything,
how can it do so strongly the opposite of what it intends?

            Dimly
aware of this problem, Murray brings in a more sweeping illegitimacy
thesis--government is unjustified--to trump all the others. But this exposes
his underlying bias, which casts doubt on the critiques of government in both
Losing Ground and The Bell Curve . The three Murrays play a kind
of fugue throughout this book. In fact, there seems to be a fourth Murray
struggling to get out. This is the Charles Murray who says late in the book
that he half-supports the idea of a negative income tax--a guaranteed income
for everyone. This would seem to violate all the aforementioned principles. It
would create a powerful incentive (of the kind attacked in Losing
Ground ) for people not to work; it would be an attempt to help people who
The Bell Curve says can't be helped anyway; and it would certainly
violate What It Means to Be a Libertarian 's admonition against forcing
people to pay for dubious public goods. What Murray likes about the idea is
that it would finally discharge society's obligation to members of the
underclass. They might not be better off, but they would have to quit
bellyaching. Combined with a new, heartfelt attack on civil-rights laws (Murray
says bad, prejudicial discrimination is inseparable from good, economically
sensible discrimination), this passage leaves one with the sense that in
declaring himself a libertarian, Murray has not yet removed the final veil.

            David Boaz has written a more stimulating, more consistent,
and more dogmatic book. After a long history of libertarian ideas, he proposes
a version of Murray's basic argument, which he calls the "nonagression
axiom"--no one can use force against anyone else. That's it. Unlike Murray,
Boaz draws no exception for public goods. He does not pander to political
reality by accepting large expenditures for national defense, environmental
regulation, or publicly funded education. He does not believe in national parks
("private stewards" will exercise "proper stewardship"). Nor does he believe in
military conscription in wartime ("[t]he libertarian believes that people will
voluntarily defend a country worth defending").

            Though
this version of libertarianism seems to flirt with anarchism, Boaz isn't
worried about disarray. In the absence of malign government intervention, there
will emerge what he calls "spontaneous order." Boaz's model for this is the
Internet. He neglects, of course, the fact that the Internet began life as a
federal defense project. But the real question Boaz begs is why the laws he
thinks are necessary for society to function, including fair chunks of the U.S.
Constitution, count as "spontaneous" and good while everything else is defined
as coercion. Capitalism may arise spontaneously, but the Bill of Rights is as
much a man-made construct as the food-stamp program.

            
In the end, it is futile to argue with this
view. Boaz has worked out every possible detail of his libertarian heaven in an
utterly comprehensive and slightly mad way. He takes pains to say he is not
offering a plan for a perfect society, merely a "framework for utopia" (the
phrase is Robert Nozick's). But his heart is clearly with the ancient Chinese
philosopher Lao-tzu, who wrote: "Without law or compulsion, men would dwell in
harmony."

            Murray, too, is afflicted
with millenarianism. "That America is not the land of universal plenty it
should have become is for many libertarians, including me, the source of our
deepest anger about what big government has done to this country," he writes at
one point. He offers instead "a society that is prosperous and virtuous, but
one that is exciting and fun as well." I was reminded of the famous passage
where Marx writes that in the Communist future, every worker will spend part of
his day fishing, part writing poetry, and only part working at his lathe. Marx
believed that the state would wither away. Libertarians believe men must wither
it. But really, their utopias are not so different. They share a wishful vision
of human perfectibility dressed up as an idea of justice.

         
      
   
