
   
   
      
         
            Keystone Nazis

            The first question that has
to be asked about the German resistance is: Did it exist? A good case can be
made that it did not. To frame the question less contentiously: Did the
scattered theologians, bureaucrats, army officers, and (in one case) ordinary
housewives who defied Hitler act more as isolated individuals than as a
concerted movement? On the large stage of history, do these brave individuals
shrink to statistical insignificance? And is the so-called resistance movement
therefore a kind of optical illusion, generated by a need to find some shred of
goodness or worth in Germany under the Nazis? It has to be said that books
about the resistance seem to greatly outnumber the resisters themselves. The
stack before me now includes Theodore S. Hamerow's On the Road to the Wolf's
Lair: German Resistance to Hitler (1997); Joachim Fest's Plotting
Hitler's Death (1996); Nathan Stoltzfus' Resistance of the Heart:
Intermarriage and the Rosenstrasse Protest in Nazi Germany (1996); and
Peter Hoffmann's Stauffenberg: A Family History, 1905-1944 (1995).

            
Certainly, these books are not mythographies. They are sober, sometimes
skeptical historical accounts. Fest surveys resistance to Hitler from 1933 to
1945, paying particular attention to the military plot, whose deficiencies he
chronicles mercilessly. Hamerow examines the motives of the resisters, both
civilian and military; he shows them weaving sinuously between self-interest
and idealism. Stoltzfus, writing of the 2,000 Berlin women who marched down
Rosenstrasse in 1943 to protest the incarceration of their Jewish husbands,
sees that his case is something less than a study in pure virtue: Germans cared
nothing for Jews unless self-interest intervened. And yet--with one
exception--I came away feeling these authors had exaggerated the significance
of their subject. The exception is Hoffmann's book on Claus von Stauffenberg,
who nearly killed Hitler with a bomb on July 20, 1944. Stauffenberg was a very
strange man who has to be considered as a phenomenon unto himself (and will be,
next week in Slate).

            Fest, the author of perhaps the best Hitler biography,
begins his book with a chapter titled "The Resistance That Never Was," which
covers the 1933-37 period. His stage-setting narrative is a conventional one:
Hitler cements his hold on Germany through a combination of rhetoric, political
stratagems, and force. Fest states that the army was the only organization able
to keep its structure intact, and therefore the only one in a position to mount
a concerted resistance. He omits, however, certain successful--and
un-military--protests in those years against Hitler's policies. The nation more
or less collectively decried Hitler's plan to kill off the mentally and
physically disabled. There were also protests against domestic austerities
during the armaments buildup of 1935-36. As the historian Ian Kershaw has
demonstrated, this kind of pinpoint, smaller-scale resistance was common in
Nazi Germany. No general resistance emerged because very few Germans were
generally unhappy with Hitler's regime.

            As Fest
describes it, the military's first plot against Hitler came in the tense weeks
before the conclusion of the 1938 Munich agreement. Hitler seemed determined to
lead Germany into a war for which military leaders felt neither ready nor
eager. Had he marched toward Prague at that time, they would have arrested
him--or assassinated him outright. The broader circle of
conspirators--centering on Gen. Ludwig Beck, who had resigned as army chief of
staff in protest of Hitler's war plans--agreed to the idea of seizing and
imprisoning Hitler. It was even proposed that he be declared insane by a panel
of psychiatrists. An "inner" circle believed that Hitler should be summarily
shot. This interesting debate became moot once Hitler abruptly changed his mind
and accepted Chamberlain's peace offer at Munich. The conspiracy fell apart
because it depended too much on Hitler's own plans.

            
After a long period of
disillusionment--uncomfortably mixed with exhilaration at the success of the
blitzkrieg--and as soon as Hitler decreed the invasion of the Soviet Union, the
officers began to plot again. In March of 1943, Henning von Tresckow concealed
a bomb in two bottles of Cointreau and had them carried onto Hitler's plane.
The bottles mysteriously failed to explode. Later that month, one of Tresckow's
associates had a bomb wired to his body, and followed Hitler through an
exhibition of military trophies; Hitler mysteriously exited through a side
door. Another attempt fell through when a scheduled presentation of military
uniforms never took place. In March of 1944, Eberhard von Breitenbuch announced
that he would shoot Hitler in the mouth at a briefing. He was pulled away from
the Führer at the last minute because of a change in agenda. The last
and most nearly effective of the plots was Stauffenberg's, which hinged not
only on the bomb he brought into Hitler's "Wolf's Lair" headquarters in East
Prussia, but also on coordinated strikes against the Nazi power structure in
Berlin and all across Europe.

            The
military conspirators tended to defeat themselves at every turn. To begin with,
there was a high ratio of memorandum-writing to action. Much thought was given
to a new constitution, Germany's proper postwar borders, and other untimely
meditations. (Reading Fest's book, I was often reminded of the scene in
Monty Python's Life of Brian in which anti-Roman conspirators of the
People's Front of Judaea respond to a new crisis by shouting out, "Right! This
calls for immediate discussion!") As Fest notes, the plans were always
contingent; they were also needlessly intricate. One bomb plot fell apart when
a newfangled detonating mechanism proved too complicated for anyone in the high
command to understand.

            Should the plotters receive credit for their intentions,
rather than their actions? Hamerow takes up this question. He asks whether the
resisters were driven by genuine dislike of Hitler and his ideas, or whether
they decided that Hitler was superfluous only after his string of victories
turned into a string of defeats. Hamerow comes up with a mass of contradictory
evidence. Some conspirators, certainly, were cold-blooded pragmatists; others
were disaffected front-line officers who had suffered on the Eastern front.
More than a few were Christian and monarchist conservatives who deplored
Hitler's tendency toward self-deification. Almost all were devoted to the
traditions of the German military and infuriated by Hitler's peremptory
directives from on high.

            Sometimes,
there was also a moral strain to their deliberations. Several of these men
seemed to sense the full dimensions of the Holocaust. Axel von dem Bussche
reeled in shock from a mass execution of Jews in the Ukraine; Peter Yorck von
Wartenburg stated at his treason trial in 1944 that the escalation of
anti-Semitism into genocide was the single cause of his "inner break" with
Nazism (a claim that gained him nothing before a Nazi court); and Tresckow
understood the genocidal implications of the orders accompanying plans for the
Russian invasion. Hamerow quotes a moving statement by Tresckow: "If God once
promised Abraham that he would destroy Sodom if only 10 righteous men lived
there, then I hope that because of us God will also not destroy Germany."
Departing dramatically from the cautious analysis that guides the main body of
his book, Hamerow names Yorck and Tresckow in just such a circle of the
righteous, "for whose sake God would spare Germany."

            
Hamerow is in dubious pursuit of a select
circle of absolutely "good Germans," and his emphasis on intentions over
outcomes leads to strange choices. His pantheon also includes Helmut von
Moltke, one of the leaders of the Kreisau Circle, a religious-philosophical
group that spent most of its time imagining an ideal future German society. But
Moltke was firmly opposed to the use of force; when he was put on trial with
the other conspirators after the 1944 plot, he was impressed--almost
heartened--that the judge gave him a death sentence simply for thinking about
Germany without Hitler. (It testified, he thought, to the power of the mind!)
Meanwhile, Hamerow "demotes" Stauffenberg on the grounds that his brother
Berthold failed to dissociate himself completely from anti-Semitic thinking at
his trial. To consider Moltke more "righteous" than Stauffenberg--the one who
actually did something--borders on the perverse.

            History
sometimes tells simple stories. The fact that none of the various attempts,
plans, and general conspiratorial notions to assassinate Hitler succeeded--and
that all but Stauffenberg's never seemed plausible--speaks for itself. Hitler
was an easy target; he liked to show himself in public and did not always
travel in conditions of airtight security. The resistance literature often
comments on Hitler's "amazing luck," or his "uncanny" ability to sense danger;
but the failures of the resistance might be better ascribed to the calculated
unluck of the resisters, their own ability to sense danger and step away from
it, and their overall minuscule number. Hitler's death by his own hand cannot
be counted as one of history's accidents. Germany could not imagine any other
death for him.

            

               (Next
week : The mysterious motives of Hitler's would-be assassin.)

         
      
   
