
   
   
      
         
            Queen Katharine

            The saga that unfolds in
Personal History , Katharine Graham's 625-page autobiography, is worthy
of a Joseph Campbell exegesis: A young Wall Street king, Eugene Meyer, marries
his aggressive queen, Agnes, and they spawn a royal family of four princesses
and a prince. Dominated by their overbearing literary mother and ignored by
their dismissive multimillionaire father, these virtual orphans are raised by
governesses and servants. Frumpy Princess Katharine shivers with
inadequacy.

            But wait! Charismatic Philip
appears from the South (by way of Harvard Law) to rescue the grown-up
Katharine, enchant the queen, and seduce King Eugene with his magic. (Actually,
the old monarch falls for Phil's flattery, which fools other powerful elders
such as Justice Felix Frankfurter, for whom Phil clerks.) Phil marries
Katharine, and the king gives them the ink-stained duchy of the Washington
Post . The young couple bear progeny, and the duchy grows mighty--mighty
enough for Prince Phil to anoint a king himself (LBJ).

            Darkness
descends: Worn out by his labors on Wall Street, the Federal Reserve Board, the
Washington Post , and the World Bank, King Eugene dies. Phil, who
dominates Katharine as her mother did, goes mad over the course of six years
and then kills himself. The cruel queen's lights finally expire. Only then does
the fairy tale begin. The self-doubting Katharine raises the queen's tiara to
her head, slays Nixon the Awful, holds court in Georgetown and around the
world, buries the Washington Star , and builds an empire as she prepares
her son, Prince Donald, for the throne.

            The story is irresistible, as is the telling. Just when
you're ready to credit the copy to Knopf editor Robert Gottlieb, Graham quotes
an old letter of hers, a sharp critique of the Post that she, aged 17,
sent her parents in 1934, the year after her father bought the paper. The woman
can write.

            Most autobiographies are more
about concealing than telling, but Graham ropes off relatively little. Her
children's personal lives are deliberately excised from the book; the cowardly
episode in which she and Ben Bradlee misused their inordinate power to scuttle
a wretchedly flawed book about her ( Katharine the Great by Deborah
Davis, published in 1979) is not mentioned; and she only hints at her post-Phil
romantic life. Adlai Stevenson? Robert McNamara? Henry Kissinger? Ted Heath? An
Italian stallion? Warren Buffett? Watch Graham wink.

            Oddly,
Personal History largely echoes Carol Felsenthal's unauthorized
biography, Power, Privilege, and the Post: The Katharine Graham
Story-- oddly, because its publication in 1993 incensed the Graham family.
Graham's daughter Lally Weymouth compared Felsenthal to Joe McCarthy in the
Post op-ed pages, and son Donald Graham excoriated the author on the
New York Times 
               Book Review letters page. (The Post , to its
credit, published a rave by Ronald Steel.) The Grahams were enraged by
Felsenthal's cold and detailed charting of the psychotic free fall of
Katharine's husband, New Deal/New Frontier bright-light Phil Graham. Felsenthal
and Katharine both report that Phil assumed Agnes' role as bully and emotional
abuser, but only the biographer writes that as Phil lost his mind, he taunted
his half-Jewish wife with anti-Semitic slurs.

            
Graham's aptly named book crosscuts between the
engrossing social history of her life and times--populated by the likes of
Marie Curie, Edward Steichen, Auguste Rodin, Thomas Mann, Bernard Baruch,
Walter Lippmann, FDR, Truman Capote, LBJ, Jessica Mitford, Scotty Reston,
Emperor Hirohito, Bill and Babe Paley, and Richard Nixon--and her agonizing
personal history. Graham's portrait of her mother, the social-climbing,
booze-hounding, domineering Agnes, makes a persuasive case for matricide.
"[M]otherhood was not exactly Mother's first priority," she writes. Or again,
"Mother set impossibly high standards for us." At the same time, Graham
complains, she was taught little about "the practical aspects of life," like
"how to dress, sew, cook, shop, and, rather more important, relate to people of
any kind, let alone young men."

            Married
to Phil, Katharine comes to "enjoy the role of doormat wife." When the Graham
children arrive, she becomes a self-described "drudge" who has "no idea how to
organize a meal." Just when you think that the ugly duckling has snorkeled to
the bottom of the Marianas Trench of her lowest self-esteem, she dives still
deeper: "I ignored the fact that [Phil] was frequently using [his] wit at my
expense. [He] was often critical or cutting in his remarks when things weren't
just right--either about the house or my clothes, for example, which left lots
of room for disparaging remarks."

            Depleted of self-confidence? Not quite. Graham constantly
discovers new reserves of emptiness. Seated next to President Kennedy at a
party, she panics that she'll bore him to death. (She does fine.) Society
people intimidate her--"Despite my own background and actually having been born
there, I always felt like a country girl in New York"--no matter that her
parents had introduced her to high society while she was still in diapers, and
that she had frolicked with the Paleys, the Whitneys, and the Mellons as an
adult. The business world spooks her, too. Following Phil's death, she assumes
the Washington Post Co. helm with trepidation because she is "uneducated in
even the basics of the working world."

            Can't
cook, can't sew, can't run a household, can't stand up to her imperious mom and
husband, can't make small talk with celebrities or notables, can't run a
Fortune 500 company. Kay, honey, what did you learn to do in your first
46 years on the planet?

            
All modesty is false, and Graham's extravagant
humility is no exception. If you apologize for your shortcomings, you can count
on harvesting sympathy. If you apologize for your nonexistent shortcomings, you
harvest sympathy and blind folks to your genuine shortcomings. Graham
plays both games, perhaps because there's truth, of a sort, to her claims of
inadequacy. At critical points in her life, she chose brilliant and charismatic
men to marry (Phil, president of the Harvard Law Review ), hire
(Bradlee--well, Bradlee is Bradlee), or go into business with (Buffett, the
modern Midas). Against this backdrop of stars, any mortal would quake. But her
"I am inept" self-portrait is still hard to swallow. Before Phil died, she ran
two households and birthed four kids, rubbed political shoulders with everyone
from FDR to JFK, contributed to Democratic campaigns, worked the back rooms at
a slew of national political conventions between 1948 and 1960, and sat in on
negotiations as Phil purchased the Washington Times 
               Herald ,
television stations, and Newsweek .

            Even
Graham's earliest confessions of incompetence are refuted by her father's
transparent scheme to groom her for some top slot at the Post . After she
graduates from the University of Chicago, he arranges a job for her as a
reporter at the San Francisco News , and afterward hires her as a
Post editorial writer. Perhaps Eugene Meyer was a
19 th -century chauvinist with no intention of letting his most
talented child run a newspaper. But if he sinned against his daughter and her
gender by giving his Wunderkind son-in-law the controlling interest in
the Post (no man should have to work for his wife, the old man said),
then Graham surely sinned against her eldest child, journalist Lally, for
handing the keys to the Washington Post Co. to the younger Donald. Ownership
has its privileges.

            Personal History's false modesty begins to evaporate after
Phil's suicide in 1963. Seizing control of the Post , Katharine swats the
newspaper jackals who want to steal it: Sam Newhouse, the Los Angeles
Times , and Roy Thomson. She orders the top eye-shade to run the company as
a partnership with her, just as he did with Phil, even though she doesn't
really grasp business. She does understand editorial, though, and better than
Phil did. (He was more interested in becoming a major Washington dude, writing
speeches for LBJ, running COMSAT for Kennedy, and joining the board of the RAND
Corp.)

            Impressed
by Bradlee's remark that he'd "give his left one" to edit the Post , she
imposes him on the paper over the objections of the paper's then-editors. And
she teams with Buffett to take the Washington Post Co. public, which makes
everyone involved nasty rich. She triples the editorial budget between 1966 and
1969, allowing Bradlee to make the Post great. She hires and fires top
executives as wickedly as any male CEO. She publishes the Pentagon Papers at
great peril to the company and stares down Richard Nixon over Watergate when he
threatens to revoke the company's lucrative broadcast licenses. She battles and
beats the thugs in the pressmen's union who think they, not she, own the
Post .

            
Most folks associate the risk-taking cockiness
and gaiety of the Katharine-Ben-era Post with Bradlee. But, as anyone
who has seen Graham run a stockholders' meeting knows, she is an agile,
arrogant, and gracious beast, and the paper is as much a product of her
personality, talents, and priorities as it is of his. I refer doubters to the
Post as published by her son and his hand-picked editor, Leonard Downie
Jr. It's as humdrum and safe as they are.

            Truth be told, the ugly
duckling never needed Bradlee's left one to transform herself into a
carnivorous swan.

         
      
   
