
   
   
      
         
            Luce Canon

            Pick Clare Boothe Luce as
the answer to a game of Twenty Questions, and you'll probably stump your
interlocutors. Luce's fame was a floaty, ineffable thing, not easy to get at
with "yes" or "no" inquiries. Was she a playwright? In 1936, Luce wrote The
Women , an unapologetically catty satire of female competition that achieved
a lasting notoriety and a venom so pure it was almost guileless. But though she
turned out a couple of plays after that, they never achieved the same kind of
critical or commercial success. Even The Women lives on primarily in
George Cukor's film version, where the preposterous hats those society dames
wear are half the joke. Was she a journalist? In the early 1930s, she served
briefly as the managing editor of Vanity Fair , then a deco dream of a
magazine gleaming with smart chat. When World War II broke out, she filed
dispatches from Europe for Life , the picture magazine launched by her
husband, Henry, based on an idea she'd whispered in his ear. But reporting soon
palled. Was she a politician? As a Republican congresswoman from Connecticut
and later, as Eisenhower's ambassador to Italy, she brought a jaunty
Realpolitik to the anti-Communist cause. But she didn't say much about
the Soviet threat that wasn't already being said, to a wider audience, in her
husband's other weekly magazine, Time .

            What made
Clare Boothe Luce famous had nothing to do--directly, at least--with the
lasting value of any of these accomplishments. What made her famous is that she
did all these things in one lifetime, like a paper doll that comes with
different costumes for different vocations (the girl about town, the war
correspondent, the ambassador); that she did them all and was beautiful; that
she did them all in a perfumed cloud of scandal and glamour, trailed by many
lovers and by gossip that she herself stoked with her acerbic tongue and her
thirst for celebrity.

            In a way Luce is the ideal subject for this particular
moment in the art of biography. The relative slightness of her work is part of
the attraction. It forms the latticework through which we can peer at the
risqué private life, the slender pretext for voyeurism's pleasures. Well into
this century, biography was the art of inspiring readers with the spectacle of
an exemplary life, or of offering insights into an exemplary body of work. This
narrowed the range of subjects to the conventionally eminent, mainly men.
Now--thanks to feminism, a general skepticism about the great man theory of
history, and an even more general interest in the details of sexually
adventurous lives--biographers are more likely to focus on women, less likely
to care about their canonical status. Bohemian types whose lives beckon with an
erotic shimmer while their artistic output goes unread--Vita Sackville-West,
Mabel Dodge Luhan--are in. So are clever and seductive limelight seekers like
Luce. The life's work matters less than the lifestyle. And, frankly, it helps
to have slept around.

            As it
happens, this premium on the juicy stuff has emerged in unlikely tandem with a
new professionalization of the biographer's trade. Biographies these days are
likely to be heavy and clanking with scholarly apparatus--exhaustively
researched, loaded with random information about far-flung progenitors, and
long. And so arrives a peculiar hybrid, the dishy biography that is also a
formidable work of research. Three hundred pages into Sylvia Jukes Morris'
Rage for Fame and mostly enjoying myself, I was astonished to flip to
the last page (473) and discover that this was only Volume 1. I'd been dumped
unceremoniously in 1942, having just seen Clare--by now I was certainly on
first-name terms with her--off to Washington for her first term in Congress.
Like one of her hapless boyfriends, I'd been left without so much as a
forwarding address. And in churlish retrospect, I began to wonder how much we
really needed to be told that Clare's first pet was a fluffy chick named Pip
that lived "only a short time."

            
That said, this is a biography that nicely
captures the schemes and dreams of an ambitious young woman in the pre-feminist
era. Luce's early years mark her as a classic American upstart. Born in 1903 to
parents who never married (her father, William Boothe, was already married to
someone else), Clare was the repository of her socially frustrated mother's
yearnings for a brilliant destiny. Her parents were poor, and her mother, Ann
Snyder, obsessed with trading first on her own beauty and then on Clare's for a
life of satin sheets and annual sailings on the Conte di Savoia . Neither
was especially nice about it. After Ann left William (whose once-promising
career as a salesman had devolved into an impecunious one as a roving
violinist), she hooked up with a wealthy Jewish tire tycoon named Joel Jacobs.
He kept her and her two children in grand style, even after she married a third
man. But none of that prevented Ann from rejecting a New York hotel because it
was "a dirty place full of Jews" (as Clare later put it), or from explaining to
Clare that she could never marry Jacobs because "I don't want my children to
have a Jewish father."

            As a
teen-ager, Clare herself was given to pronouncements like: "Matrimony! It
should be spelled matter o' money." At 20, she made good on her pun when, with
her mother's active encouragement, she married 43-year-old George Brokaw, who
was very, very rich and not terribly bright. He wrote her love letters in baby
talk, and when he got drunk--which was often--he serenaded his elegant young
wife with Princeton glee-club songs rendered on the banjo. "Don't worry," her
mother soothed. "He'll fall down those marble stairs soon enough." But after
six long years of marriage and one child, he wasn't yet in "dying condition,"
Clare complained, "and I am not going to waste my life waiting for him to get
in it." The divorce left her a wealthy young woman indeed.

            In a double-barreled biography this big, you're bound to
get some extraneous details. But in general, Sylvia Jukes Morris has an
excellent eye for the telling anecdote, and with the help of Luce's tattletale
diaries, she has unearthed one after another. The stories she tells about
Luce's magazine career make up a kind of profile in chutzpah, and are
particularly fun to read. When Clare applied for her first magazine
job--writing picture captions for Vogue --and heard nothing from the
editors, Morris writes, "she put on a gray dress with white collar and cuffs,
went back to the Graybar Building, and persuaded an assistant that she was a
new employee. She took a seat at an empty desk in the editorial department and
waited for some work to arrive. After a while it did." When the editor in chief
returned from her vacation "and found Clare in place, looking both businesslike
and elegant, she assumed Condé [Nast] had hired her. He, in turn, thought she
had." As a junior editor at Vanity Fair , Clare started an affair with
the managing editor, Donald Freeman, who was brainy, homely, and enthralled by
her. By the time he died, in a car accident that may have been an act of
suicide provoked by Clare's indifference, she'd learned enough from him to step
into his job with assurance and fill it with panache.

            What
Rage for Fame makes abundantly clear is how essential the patronage of
powerful suitors and would-be suitors was for Luce, and probably for other
career women of her generation as well. A female editor or correspondent was
still something of a novelty act in the '30s and '40s, a luxury that male
employers could forgo without compunction or a lawsuit. It was harder to forgo
the beautiful ones--elegant, blond Clare, for instance, with her hard-won
hauteur and Lilly Daché hats and petal-white skin. But if beauty was a
handmaiden to ambition, motherhood was not. Luce packed her young daughter off
to distant boarding schools and summer camps every chance she got. "It's a
beautiful, well-constructed façade, but without central heating," as one of
Clare's escorts said of her.

            
Maybe the best way to portray a character like
Clare Boothe Luce would be to transport her to fiction. There, you could leave
behind the old expectations of biography--grand deeds, historical
importance--and bring an ironist's sensibility to her inner life. You could
imagine, for example, Edith Wharton writing of Boothe, as she did of Lily Bart,
that to Miss Boothe, "acquiescence in dinginess was evidence of stupidity; and
there were moments when, in the consciousness of her own power to look and be
so exactly what the occasion required, she almost felt that other girls were
plain or inferior from choice." But we have no Edith Wharton, and this is the
age of Real Lives. Rage for Fame will have to do.

         
      
   
