
   
   
      
         
            Judicial Restraint

            For the voyeur--especially
the prissy, law-abiding voyeur such as me--few literary genres satisfy as much
as the prison memoir. Some of this interest must undoubtedly be attributed to
sweaty Chained Heat -style sex fantasies. But mostly the fascination
stems from a kind of arm's-length sadism. What happens to someone stretched to
the psychological limit? What happens when you go to hell?

            As a
consequence, I was really looking forward to Sol Wachtler's memoirs. If anyone
could describe the sickening plunge from respectability to degradation (and if
anyone could learn something from the experience), surely it would be Wachtler,
who fell as far and fast as anyone can. In November 1992, he was New York
state's chief judge and a rising star in the Republican party, famed for his
monstrous ego, his political ambition, and his jousts with Gov. Mario Cuomo.
Then he was arrested for stalking his former mistress, Joy Silverman, and
charged with extortion, interstate racketeering, and blackmail, among other
crimes. Wachtler had written her harassing letters in the guise of a fictional
alter ego, and mailed a condom to her young daughter. The judge claimed mental
incapacitation: Jilted by Silverman, he'd succumbed to a manic depression that
was exacerbated by an addiction to prescription amphetamines. Wachtler pled
guilty to sending threats through the mail. In September 1993--less than a year
after he'd presided over New York's Court of Appeals--the 63-year-old
first-time offender began serving an 11-month term in federal prison. Now he
has published the story of his time inside, After the Madness: A Judge's Own
Prison Memoir . It is quite an accomplishment: Wachtler has managed to write
an uninteresting book about prison life.

            The best modern prison memoirs-- The Autobiography of
Malcolm X , Jack Henry Abbott's In the Belly of the Beast , Eldridge
Cleaver's Soul on Ice , and Nien Cheng's Life and Death in
Shanghai --are stories about an agony that yields redemption. Each book
tells roughly the same tale: A corrupt society imprisons the narrator for a
minor offense (marijuana possession in Cleaver's case, juvenile delinquency in
Abbott's, capitalist roadism in Cheng's). The narrators defy the prison
authorities. The authorities visit every horror upon the narrators--sexual
assault, beatings, isolation, psychological torture--at which point the
narrators harden. They find a code to live by--Islam for Malcolm, black power
for Cleaver, a freaky Nietzscheanism for Abbott. They become awesome,
terrifying, . What happens when you go to hell? You become stronger than the
devil himself.

            
               After
the Madness , however, has little such passion; in that, it is true to its
title. It's a memoir that carries almost no emotional punch. Wachtler is
neither hero nor villain; he's not even a compelling character. His description
of prison life overflows with cliché. The food is inedible, the noise is
unbearable, the stench is unimaginable, the "bend and spread 'em" searches are
unendurable. He supplies the requisite glut of cockroaches and the necessary
quota of vicious guards. Wachtler spends pages and pages excusing his
behavior--he was depressed, he was addicted, he never intended to harm anyone,
etc.--but even here his tone is oddly flat. (To his credit, Wachtler does not
ignore the rich ironies of his situation. After the Madness is sprinkled
with his awkward encounters. On one occasion he meets a fellow con whose appeal
he denied. On another, Wachtler, wearing his stained, tattered prison uniform,
is paid a visit by Supreme Court Justice Harry Blackmun.)

            Perhaps the blame for After the Madness belongs to
the legal profession. It may be a problem of judicial restraint. Great prison
writing is mimetic. It reads like going to prison feels--suffocating and alien
and frightening. Consider this passage from In the Belly of the Beast , a
farrago of paranoia and violence:

            The first prisoner--a
middle-aged convict--who tried to fuck me, I drew my knife on. I forced him to
his knees, and with my knife at his throat, made him perform fellatio on my
flaccid penis in front of three of his partners.

            This is the way it is
done. If you are a man, you must either kill or turn the tables on anyone who
propositions you with threats of force.

            Compare
this vivid lunacy to a passage from After the Madness :

            One would assume that now
that my depression, manic behavior, and causal toxicity (caused by the drugs I
was taking) have been evaluated and confirmed by the government's own medical
experts here at Butner [prison], there would be some understanding by the
public--not forgiveness, but some understanding. That will not happen. There
will always be those who will refuse to accept the fact that a person can
function in what appears to be a normal fashion in his or her job, and still
suffer from a mental disorder.

            
               After
the Madness reads like going to court feels.

            At the level of policy, Wachtler has written a fine book, a
worthy dissertation on the American penal system. He is much more heartfelt
about prison reform than about Wachtler reform. He spends a month in the hole,
then chastises his fellow judges for not considering solitary confinement a
"cruel and unusual" punishment. He befriends a cocaine user doing hard time,
then sermonizes about the idiocies of mandatory minimum sentences. His
blockmate confesses to robbery: Wachtler takes the occasion to celebrate the
Miranda warning. His tales work by accretion: After 353 pages and 11 months in
prison, Wachtler has made a persuasive case for penal reform: to free
nonviolent criminals, scrap drug laws, fund prison education and training
programs, and more. The old joke is true: "What do you call a Republican who's
been to jail? A Democrat."

            After I finished this worthy
and dull book, a distressing thought came to me: Its banality might be the
fault neither of the judge nor of the legal profession. Maybe Wachtler writes
clichés because prison has become cliché. A generation ago, even 15 years ago,
jail was as alien as Mars. A month in the hole, a cockroach infestation, the
stench of mystery meat--these were topics that would revolt broad-minded
readers. Who knew that fellow citizens--even the scummy ones--endured such
horrors?

            The bleakest lesson of
After the Madness is perhaps that prison has lost its capacity to shock.
More than a million Americans are in jail today--five times as many as in 1970.
In some communities (though not the rich Long Island ones where judges live), a
prison term has become almost a rite of passage, something that young men do.
We are inundated with prison pop culture--with directors, documentarians, TV
producers, and writers who have gone up the river and returned with tales of
rapes and "cavity searches" and "shanks" and "pigs." A generation ago, Abbott's
book was hailed as a landmark, a visionary exposé. Today, such a book--not that
Wachtler has written one--would be greeted with a shrug.

         
      
   
