
   
   
      
         
            The Rules

            George Washington was
virtuous, but was virtuousness altogether a good thing? This entirely
reasonable question turns out to be extremely old. Stendhal posed it in the
1830s in his novel Lucien Leuwen , in which the wealthy young Parisian
hero contemplates fleeing the corruptions of monarchical old France for a new
start in virtuous republican America. But would Stendhal's hero be able to
stand the virtuous republicans? He considers paying a visit on George
Washington himself--America's greatest man--at home on his farm. But would he
find Washington's conversation bright and sparkling?

            "Washington would have bored
me to death," Stendhal's hero concludes. (American readers are aghast.) "I
would prefer by a hundred times the elegant manners of a corrupt heart."

            Now comes
the Library of America, with a handsome new edition (published on elegant paper
with a lustrous black cover) of the writings of Washington himself, more than a
thousand pages of letters and documents of every sort, which allows us to judge
for ourselves. The book makes a strange impression. The Library of America, in
its admirable effort to present America's literature and classic political
documents in pristine form, has adopted the rather extreme policy of publishing
its volumes without any sort of introductory guide, which is probably just as
well in the case of literary authors whose work is easily approached.

            Some authors require an introduction, though--political
writers, especially. The Library of America produced a fat 1,500-page volume of
Jefferson some years ago, but Jefferson's writings turned out to be a shapeless
heap of private letters and peculiar jottings intermixed with an occasional
manifesto of immortal grandeur--and to make your way through them unaided was
nearly impossible. Likewise with the new Washington volume. Washington was not
a book writer, or any kind of writer at all, professionally speaking, but took
quill in hand merely to address particular situations as they arose. His
Writings , as a result, offer a puzzling mass of personal letters,
military records, presidential orations, ringing statements, and random
insignificant scribblings, all of them put into chronological order by the
Library of America--which is to say into very little order at all, except that
of chance.

            Still, the
patriotic reader plunges in--and instantly discovers, in the volume's first
entry, a document of capital importance in re the insidious, Gallically
anti-American accusation offered by Stendhal's novel. The opening document,
dating from 1747, when Washington was 15, is a numbered catechism of dos and
don'ts called "Rules of Civility & Decent Behavior in Company and
Conversation." Whether this document belongs in a collection of Washington's
writings seems a little dubious, given that (as the assiduous reader will
discover with a glance at the note on page 1,094 by the volume's editor, John
Rhodehamel) Washington did not actually write these Rules but merely copied
them from an English translation of a French-language Jesuit text from the
16 th century.

            
The Rules contain 110 numbered passages
offering such worthy bits of advice as this, from No. 12, "[B]edew no mans face
with your Spittle, by approaching too near him when you Speak," or this, from
No. 16, "Do not Puff up the Cheeks, Loll not out the tongue, rub the Hands, or
beard, thrust out the lips, or bite them or keep the Lips too open or too
Close." No. 90 says, "Being Set at meat Scratch not neither Spit Cough or blow
your Nose except there's a Necessity for it." And, at once, from the opening
document of Washington's Writings , the suspicion arises that the Father
of Our Country was, in truth, a hideous Bore.

            Alas! But
what makes the unhappy discovery truly appalling is the further incredible
discovery that Washington's earnest and humorless Rules are considered by
experts to be the key to his entire career, and therefore, in some respect, a
key to America's two centuries of national success. Last year a conservative
writer named Richard Brookhiser published a biography, titled Founding
Father: Rediscovering George Washington , which made the point that
Washington, by keeping in mind his carefully inscribed numbered Rules
throughout his momentous life, conducted himself correctly in all the Little
Ways (no bedewing of others with Spittle, Hats properly Doffed, and so forth),
which led to right conduct in the Big Ways, too, thus to political and military
triumph.

            Supremely convinced of this point, Brookhiser has gone
ahead and brought out his own little edition of Washington's rules under the
title Rules of Civility: The 110 Precepts That Guided Our First President in
War and Peace , slightly altered to eliminate the 18 th -century
idiosyncrasies (a pity) and emended with small commentaries by Brookhiser
himself, some of them pertaining to events in Washington's life, others
solemnly applying of Washington's rules to circumstances of today.

            Yet, even
Brookhiser, for all his sober devotion to civility as the key to everything,
cannot escape noticing something ridiculous, therefore comic, in Washington's
rules. And so, bravely embracing what he cannot deny, Brookhiser, in his
edition of the rules, throws in some jocularity of his own, with the sure
lightness of touch you would expect from an author who has based his biography
of Washington on a guide to etiquette. Washington's Rule No. 2 proclaims (in
the Library of America's superior 18 th -century version), "When in
Company, put not your Hands to any Part of the Body not usually Discovered." To
which Brookhiser gruesomely adds, in his own edition, "A rule often flouted
by rap singers and pitchers ." Washington's Rule No. 4 says, "In the
Presence of Others Sing not to yourself with a humming Noise, nor Drum with
your Fingers or Feet." To which Brookhiser adds, "Don't carry a boom box
either ." And the embarrassments pile up, one upon the other, and the
patriotic reader wilts in his chair, and Washington ends up too ludicrous for
words.

            
At least the Library of America's
Writings contains an endless supply of additional material. There are
military entries full of wampum and warpaths (during the French and Indian War)
and complaints to Congress (during the Revolutionary War), which are
interesting to read, even if Washington--unlike Grant and Sherman from the
Civil War--was not much of a military writer. There is a long amiable letter to
the young Lafayette in 1779, in which Washington, in a giddy mood, drifts into
a reverie about competing for Lafayette's young wife with Lafayette himself--a
funny bit of teasing, followed abruptly by a rueful reassurance, worthy of
Stendhal himself, that "amidst all the wonders recorded in holy writ no
instance can be produced where a Woman from real inclination has
preferred an old man." It is interesting to see how warm he grew toward
Alexander Hamilton (he signed his letters "I am Your Affectionate"), and how
awkward and self-conscious toward Jefferson, whose allies were berating
Washington "in such exaggerated and indecent terms as could scarcely be applied
to a Nero; a notorious defaulter; or even to a common pick-pocket."

            
Naturally, the Library of America edition also contains, hidden here and there
in impossible-to-find locations, a number of solemn and stirring documents of
state--for instance, the reply, genuinely dear to my own multiculturally
American Jewish heart, that Washington made, as president, to a letter from the
Hebrew Congregation of Newport, R.I. The congregation had written to
congratulate him about something or other (unspecified by the notes), and
Washington replied:

            
               The Citizens of the
United States of America have a right to applaud themselves for having given to
mankind examples of an enlarged and liberal policy: a policy worthy of
imitation. All possess alike liberty of conscience and immunities of
citizenship. It is now no more that toleration is spoken of, as if it was by
the indulgence of one class of people that another enjoyed the exercise of
their inherent natural rights. For happily the Government of the United States,
which gives to bigotry no sanction, to persecution no assistance, requires only
that they who live under its protection should demean themselves as good
citizens, in giving in on all occasions their effectual support. ...
            

            
               May the children of the
Stock of Abraham, who dwell in this land, continue to merit and enjoy the good
will of the other Inhabitants; while every one shall sit in safety under his
own vine and figtree, and there shall be none to make him afraid.
            

            The letter is wonderfully
gracious--and yet, the graciousness owes everything to Washington's feelings
about republican revolution, and nothing at all to what could be learned from a
16 th -century Jesuit manual of courtly behavior.

         
      
   
