
   
   
      
         
            Sisters Under the Mink

            Has anyone noticed the
spooky resemblance between these two memoirs? Both were written by actresses
famous for playing ethereal, damaged, or somehow incomplete souls. Both
actresses chronicle restless, unstable childhoods, capped, in each case, by a
quick rise to fame. Both regretfully conclude that they were unprepared for
this early acclaim, and that missing out on the trial and error of adolescence
caused them permanent damage. Considering how successful these women have been,
each of them spends surprisingly little time talking about her work and quite a
lot discussing her ill-chosen romantic adventures. The great love of each
woman's life was a difficult genius known for his neurotic, darkly comic
musings on the battle of the sexes. In Bloom's case, it was the novelist Philip
Roth. In Farrow's, of course, it was Woody Allen. In both cases, the affair was
a long, ugly, and finally public catastrophe.

            Which
leads us to another intriguing similarity between Leaving a Doll's House
and What Falls Away : Both have met with awkward, squeamish reviews.
Critics have asked tough questions about the writers' judgment and motives: How
could these women just sit by and let this happen? Why should we believe either
one when she says that her book is an attempt to understand what happened, and
not a bid for revenge? In The New Yorker , novelist Daphne Merkin
complained that Bloom asks for more sympathy than she deserves. In a pitiless
review in a recent New York Times Book Review , novelist Kathryn Harrison
wrote that Farrow exaggerates the emotional damage wrought by an early bout
with polio, unfairly vilifies Allen, and tries to "solicit sympathy in the
court of public opinion." Merkin doubts Bloom's claim that she was helpless:
"One can discern, through the pious gloss Bloom puts on the events of her life,
the shrewd maneuverings of a stage brat." Harrison accuses Farrow of exploiting
her celebrity and touting her famous friends ("the glitterati chorus"), and
says that the account of her battle with Allen "will satisfy a Peeping Fan
readership."

            Why the discomfort? One suspects, in part, a generational
explanation. Feminists today--or at least, feminists within the small circle of
women assigned to write about women for the elite media, many of them a decade
or two younger than Bloom and Farrow--are more upbeat than they used to be, but
also more arrogant and hardhearted. They have a "buck-up" attitude. They want
women to stop harping about men and start taking care of their own lives. Most
of all, they think that women control what they do with their bodies. As long
as they consent to something, they can't be victims. This last idea is, in
fact, rather weirdly prominent in the work of both Merkin and Harrison. A few
months before she reviewed Bloom's book, Merkin wrote a long personal essay for
The New Yorker about how much she likes to be spanked. Harrison's review
of Farrow precedes by a few weeks her much-gossiped-about new memoir, The
Kiss , about her consensual love affair with her father.

            Or maybe
the reaction points to a new, jaded distrust of celebrity. The days when we
felt sorry for the famous are over--nowadays, we dislike stars who plead
confusion, insecurity, and no common sense. While this sounds reasonable
enough, it overlooks the most gruesome similarity of all: that in the case of
Bloom and of Farrow both, it is crippling passivity that brought them to the
public eye in the first place and crippling passivity that kept them there.

            
Early on, both Farrow and Bloom demonstrated a
flair for acting--and an eerie inertness in their relations with other human
beings. Bloom started appearing on stage at 15. But for all her worldly
ambition, she writes, "to become an actress as young as I did was to enter a
cloister of my own making. ... Woefully, painfully ignorant of the most basic
facts of life, I was always ill at ease in the company of men." Farrow's entry
into the cloister was even less thought out. She was born into it. Her father
was a Hollywood director--another difficult genius, and a violent alcoholic to
boot--and her mother was the Irish beauty Maureen O'Sullivan. Dead earnest even
as a child, Farrow planned to escape the narrow, competitive world of acting,
to become a Carmelite nun or a pediatrician in Africa, until her father's death
forced her to start earning money. Thereafter she never left the fishbowl, and
when she says she never enjoyed it, you believe her. She bounced from one
famous husband (Frank Sinatra, who made her sit around while he drank until
dawn with the Rat Pack) to another (André Previn, who made her schedule her
work around his).

            Neither
actress knew what she wanted, and each was rewarded for her ignorance. When
Claire Bloom was 19, Charlie Chaplin recognized that her preposterous
inexperience and eagerness to please made her the perfect actress to star
opposite him in Limelight as Theresa, "an ideal of pre-Victorian
self-immolation." Farrow says that after Roman Polanski cast her in the
career-making role of the young, pregnant woman in Rosemary's Baby , he
took advantage of her lack of an instinct for self-preservation and filmed a
scene of her threading dangerously through oncoming traffic. ("There are 127
varieties of nuts," he marveled approvingly. "Mia's 116 of them.")

            In their love lives, each actress served as Miracle-Gro to
an especially prized kind of male creativity. Roth coolly plumbed his
relationship with Bloom for material. At one point, he even planned to name a
character in his novel Deception --a hideous, dowdy actress and an
"ever-spouting fountain of tears"--Claire. (She found out, and made him change
it.) Allen, of course, made repeated cinematic use of Farrow's skinny, creepy
beauty, and her pained, abstracted stare. (She accurately describes herself as
"eyes perched on a stalk.")

            To be
fair, Roth emerges as the tamer monster. But here, too, the analogies are
uncanny. Each courtship begins with the great man sending charming but oddly
formal notes to his beloved or having his secretary call to determine the time,
place, and sometimes the precise length of their meeting. Both Roth and Allen
hold forth on the subject of their favorite artists (for Roth, Céline and
Kafka; for Allen, the old jazz greats Sidney Bechet and Jelly Roll Morton), but
are less interested in the women's recommendations. Both loathe their lovers'
children and strive to avoid them. Each acts as if everything is all right,
then lets loose with crushing invective. Roth resents having to go to the
opera, having to make arrangements for Bloom's mother's funeral, and (less
unreasonably) having to deal with Bloom's nervousness in the face of illness.
Allen throws a tantrum when he and Farrow are walking together on the Upper
East Side and Farrow points to a house and asks if it belongs to William F.
Buckley. Her sin: She was forgetting that he had pointed out Buckley's house to
her the year before. There were explosions, too, writes Farrow, "when I didn't
know the name of a certain kind of pasta; and again when I was off in my
estimate of the weather by only four degrees."

            
To put up with any one of these things, let
alone all of them, requires an almost monstrous lust for effacement--a taste
for masochism . These women are character studies in the most terrifying
sort of selflessness, the kind that results from the failure to develop a self.
Their celebrity didn't shield them from the consequences of their passivity. In
fact, we have watched them be passive on screen for years, and we have
applauded. The Passive Woman has long been one of the most cherished staples of
our culture, high and low. Who better to play her on screen?

            Not that any of this
justifies the truly rotten choices both Bloom and Farrow have made. And you
can't help but be glad that women these days are at least being told to take
care of themselves. But it is curious that these actresses should be attacked
instead of encouraged in their efforts to change. (Or maybe it isn't so
curious: Philip Weiss tellingly led his attack on Farrow in the New York
Observer last week with a little temper tantrum at his mom.) Leaving a
Doll's House and What Falls Away seem less like vindictive,
manipulative performances than like baby steps in the right direction. They're
every bit as awkward as their critics accuse them of being. It's unnerving to
hear the muse speak at last, as if a character had escaped from fiction to tell
her story for the first time. Her voice is unsteady, and her conclusions
sometimes seem canned, evasive, not yet complete. Bloom glides over her
motives. Farrow is humorless and steeped in a bottomless melancholy. Still,
better late than never. The Passive Woman deserves a little more of our
support. It'll be a good thing for all of us if she finally gets into the habit
of speaking for herself.

         
      
   
