
   
   
      
         
            Trouble in Paradise

            Division runs like a seam
through the biography of the Nobel Prize-winning Caribbean-born poet Derek
Walcott--his task has been to make it more boon than burden. He and his twin
brother, Roderick, were born in 1930 in St. Lucia, a small link in the Antilles
island chain, then part of the British West Indies. Walcott's was a British
education. The paucity of books in his native St. Lucia led, paradoxically, to
an excellent literary education grounded in the heavily accented rhythms of
Shakespeare, the Anglican hymnal, and the King James Bible.

            Even as
he pursued a college education, Walcott absorbed the parallel oral culture of
the Caribbean, particularly audible in his plays, some of which adopt his
native Creole dialect. His early poems register both geographical distances and
the divisions within himself. In Crusoe's Island (1965), he is both
Robinson Crusoe and "Friday's progeny,/ The brood of Crusoe's slave." His more
recent poetry, especially the epic Omeros of 1990, wavers between an
exile's nostalgia and a cosmopolitan's at-homeness in the world.

            
The title of The Bounty , Walcott's first
book of poems since Omeros , is a tangle of associations. Walcott is,
first of all, acknowledging his 1992 Nobel Prize in literature, which (quoting
the Irish Nobel Laureate W.B. Yeats) he calls " 'the bounty of Sweden.' " The
prize paid for Walcott's retreat on St. Lucia: "this house facing white combers
that stands/ for hot, rutted lanes far from the disease of power." Second,
Walcott is playing off the celluloid The Bounty of Fletcher Christian
and the "white God ... Captain Bligh," which rhymes in his mind with the ebb
and flow of Caribbean tyranny and freedom: "The ribbed body with its cargo/
stalls in its doldrums, the God-captain is cast adrift/ by a mutinous
Christian." Finally--a major theme of this slim book--there is the recurring
light of each Antillean day: "Bounty!/ In the bells of tree-frogs with their
steady clamour/ in the indigo dark before dawn, the fading morse/ of fireflies
and crickets, then light on the beetle's armour."

            Despite
its upbeat title, The Bounty is a book of elegies, a response to the
"many deaths, nothing short of a massacre"--including the deaths of his mother
and his close friend, the poet Joseph Brodsky--that Walcott has endured during
his seventh decade. As he improvises on themes from the Western elegiac
tradition, in which spring consoles for the losses of winter, Walcott finds
that certain notes don't sound in the tropics, where there is "no climate, no
calendar except for this bountiful day." And he is surprised, as elegists
always are, "that earth rejoices/ in the middle of our agony."

            If Omeros , like its Homeric model, was a poem about
fathers, The Bounty is Walcott's mother book, an attempt "to draw the
veiled figure/ of Mamma entering the standard elegiac." The seven-part title
poem is both an elegy for her and a poem about her island, Walcott's
"mother-country." Its opening lines attempt to pry the beauty of the Antilles
loose from advertising brochures, that false paradise in which, as Walcott
wrote in his Nobel lecture, "the Caribbean is a blue pool into which the
republic dangles the extended foot of Florida":

            Between the vision of
the Tourist Board and the trueParadise lies the desert where Isaiah's
elationsforce a rose from the sand. The thirty-third canto

            cores the dawn clouds
with concentric radiance,the breadfruit opens its palms in praise of the
bounty, bois-pain , tree of bread, slave food, the bliss of John
Clare,

            torn, wandering Tom,
stoat-stroker in his county ...

            In
those seven lines, freighted with the layered voice of European culture,
Dante's vision of paradise is invoked both explicitly, in the "concentric
radiance" of the last canto of his Paradiso , and implicitly, in his
braided terza rima (three-line stanzas, rhyming--loosely here--aba, bcb, etc.).
That paradise is linked, in turn, with Isaiah's prophecy of the imminent
appearance of God in the desert, a promise confirmed, in the Christian view, by
Jesus' birth.

            
But Walcott also wants an outsider's view on
this exalted material, and he finds it in the 19 th -century English
peasant-poet John Clare, whom he makes into a stand-in for himself. Walcott
twins Clare--who was driven mad by social injustice and consoled by the
smallest beings in nature--with mad Tom, Edgar's disguise in King Lear ,
who, like Clare, wanders the English countryside praising frogs and gnats: "I
am moved like you, mad Tom, by a line of ants;/ I behold their industry and
they are giants." This couplet sends us back to an already famous passage in
Omeros , in which women loading coal are compared to a line of ants--and
so on.

            In the
rest of The Bounty , Walcott relinquishes such allusive density for the
simple, history-erasing realities of life in the Antilles islands: the mango
trees that "serenely rust when they are in flower," the firefly that "keeps
striking matches." This culture-nature split corresponds, in Walcott's personal
mythology, with a split in himself: his European education and Caribbean
childhood; his two homes, in Boston and St. Lucia; the two races, white and
black, of his ancestry; and "the two languages I know--one so rich/ in its
imperial intimacies, its echo of privilege,/ the other like the orange words of
a hillside in drought--/ but my love of both wide as the Atlantic is
large."

            
There's a risk of sentimentality in Walcott's
praise of the Caribbean. A little pun in his Nobel lecture appears to gloss
over, and even celebrate, the privations of underdevelopment: "In the Antilles
poverty is poetry with a 'v,' une vie , a condition of life as well as of
imagination." (Easy for him to say, with that Nobel-bought bungalow!) And
again: "Visual surprise is natural in the Caribbean; it comes with the
landscape, and faced with its beauty, the sigh of History dissolves." Well,
maybe the sigh , but not the fact of history, as Walcott knows quite
well.

            Such
remarks, in any case, are part of Walcott's own emerging self-definition as a
writer. In recent years he has increasingly aligned himself not with British or
American poetry but with a multilingual and multiracial Antillean literature
that includes such writers as Jean Rhys, Lafcadio Hearn, Saint-John Perse
(another Nobel winner), V.S. Naipaul, and C.L.R. James. These writers, in
Walcott's view, have managed to see the islands as they are--in all their
"visual surprise"--and not as some fragment or falling-off from European
achievements. Walcott's faith, as expressed in The Bounty , is finally a
painter's faith, that the poet's job is "to write of the light's bounty on
familiar things."

            
Walcott trained to be a painter--like his
schoolteacher father, who died when Walcott was a baby--and The Bounty
is his most painterly book, in method and theme. If The Bounty is low on
autobiographical detail, or the dailiness of this poet's life and travels, it
is rich in acts of looking. Walcott's keen eye is drawn repeatedly to the
complementary blues and oranges of his native landscape: "there, against the
indigo-blue Santa Cruz/ mountains, the immortelle ignites its branches with
orange/ blossoms, however briefly, while the incredible blue is/ as indifferent
as ever."

            
               The Bounty is studded
with the names of painters, especially those with a link to the Caribbean.
Willows in Amsterdam bud "like crowds in Pissarro along a wet boulevard's
branches." "Manet in Martinique" evokes ghosts of French culture inhabiting the
island. Pissarro, though Walcott doesn't mention it, was a native of the small
Jewish community in St. Thomas, in the Virgin Islands, while the 17-year-old
Manet traveled the Caribbean as a sailor in training. One of the strongest
poems in the book, the that begins "I cannot remember the name of that seacoast
city," evokes Monet as Walcott reconstitutes, with the help of one of his own
watercolors, a dimly remembered stippled seascape in northern France.

            Wistful, wry, at times
valedictory (the Monet poem playfully offers the poet's own epitaph), The
Bounty is one of Walcott's most inviting volumes, incorporating some of his
best work since The Star-Apple Kingdom of 1979. In his pleasure in the
sheer variousness of paradises found and lost, Walcott glories in what the poet
Gerard Manley Hopkins called "dappled things."

         
      
   
