
   
   
      
         
            Sex Without Apologies

            She's back. Naomi Wolf, for
better or worse this decade's representative feminist voice, has written a
third book arguing that women should ... well, after all this time, it's still
not clear what we're supposed to do. In The Beauty Myth , Wolf argued
that cosmetics companies, plastic surgeons, and the appearance-obsessed media
were cheating women out of feminist gains. In Fire With Fire , she argued
that women were cheating themselves by blaming all their problems on men. But
her suggestions for fixing these crises have never gone very deep. Her point,
that women should stop letting men set the agenda and start attending to our
own desires, sounds reasonable, even obvious. But it's also vague. And it
doesn't help that her prose races along like a press release from Utopia.

            Wolf's
new book, like her pet theme of "desire," is extremely hard to pin down and,
once in a while, even embarrassing. It's a high-concept package, a blend of
memoir (Wolf recalls learning about sex as a child growing up in San
Francisco's racy hippie district, Haight-Ashbury) and reporting (she gets
childhood friends to cough up their key moments). There are also some scattered
minihistories of female desire among Taoists and among the Zunis of New Mexico,
which are provocative (a 19 th -century Zuni ceremony celebrating the
superiority of the vulva required men to don huge wooden penises) but feel as
if they were cribbed in a 45-minute visit to the library. And she sprinkles in
half a dozen policy ideas. Wolf seems to think that everyone would get along
better if we all went away on retreat.

            So why is this book interesting? It does contain some
elegantly rendered anecdotes, and several small but shrewd insights. But,
mostly, it's a window on a problem in current feminism. Wolf's fixation on
desire isn't so much an idea as a good intention, an attempt to make feminism
feel less like a complaint--to give women equal rights not just to a job but to
ecstasy. But desire is a tricky, multifaceted thing. It can refer to a purely
physical arousal, or to a heartfelt experience of love. It can also refer to a
more idle, juvenile form of daydreaming--to the heated but generic longing a
pop star evokes, for instance, when he wails, "I want you."

            Wolf mixes
up all these types of desire but, too often, her recollections fall under the
heady province of idle, juvenile Desire No. 3. She lovingly recalls sleepover
parties where she and her friends inspected each other's budding chests, and
dances where she rubbed up against a boy's crotch. Her own education appears to
have been gradual, even Pollyanna-ishly prudent: She and her sweet, square
boyfriend dutifully visited the birth-control clinic three weeks before the
non-earthshaking surrender of her virginity. The sky isn't always sunny: Wolf
gets groped by a menacing stranger, and a jealous boyfriend hits her. Otherwise
there's little that hasn't already been covered by Judy Blume.

            For someone writing on desire, Wolf, curiously, has a good
deal of trouble describing the actual experience of letting loose. In the
passage that follows, she recalls the summer she was 13, living on a kibbutz,
dying to sneak off and make out with a forbidden Irish boy named Devin. It's a
good example of her smooth, graceful prose--and also of her shocking tendency
to break life down into abstract terms:

            If to my trip counselors I
was a miscegenating rebel, and if to Ofra's uncle, whose censure I still
remembered, I was a godforsaken secular Jew, and if to Devin's mates I was that
locker-room joke, the lubricious JAP, and if in the eyes of the Muslim men
observing us while they played sheshhesh in the market cafes I was a
representative of dissolute America, the country of women who are beyond
whoredom, then the weight of these clashing systems of control and expectation
around female sexuality was just too much. In my mind, under the burden of all
those dictates competing to stereotype rather than support me, the legitimacy
of the notion of such control simply collapsed.

            To cut to
the chase--she kissed him. But this stuff about "clashing systems of control"
doesn't sound like the thoughts of a 13-year-old, and the reader begins to feel
tricked. One minute Wolf is supposed to be revealing her most intimate
experiences, and the next minute she's writing in a humorless, self-regarding
academese. There's a kind of intellectual greed going on here, almost a sense
of entitlement. Wolf seems to think that because her goal is worthy,
methodologically speaking, anything goes.

            It's important to be clear. I'm not arguing that Wolf is
incoherent because her approach is feminine and therefore soft and gooey. In
fact, if she would just pick an approach, any approach, it would be a relief.
Nor am I arguing that she exaggerates the problems girls face as they grow up.
As a critic Wolf usually hits the target, or at least gets near it.

            She's
right, for example, that sex education now is a bad compromise between
puritanical shame and a cold, clinical detachment. Most girls get some sort of
instruction, but dangerous concepts like pleasure and love are scrupulously
avoided; we're taught to think of ourselves as scary coils of tubing that are
hard to keep clean, and which periodically leak. Wolf the complaining
propagandist is flaky, but not unsound.

            
It's Wolf the thinker who's wobbly. She erases
distinctions--besides apples and oranges, she's mixing peaches, pickles, and
prunes. One of her more comical tics is to repeat a concept over and over,
uncritically, until it takes on an almost physical presence, like a parody of a
Platonic ideal. In The Beauty Myth , Wolf grouped all our expectations
and prejudices surrounding women's chest-size under a single heading: "The
Official Breast." I couldn't help imagining a life-size dancing mascot. In
Promiscuities , the mantra is "The Slut." This is Wolf's term for that
girl in the eighth grade who sprouted breasts early, fooled around with too
many boys, and got slammed with a bad reputation. According to Wolf she
embodies the nascent sexuality that pubescent girls are trained to fear and
loathe, so we turn her into a scapegoat. It's a reasonable if not original
observation, based on a friend of Wolf's who got pregnant and eventually
dropped out of school. But Wolf builds it up into a timeless international
archetype. Soon she's writing "A Short History of the Slut." (It's short
indeed, going from Mesopotamia to medieval Burgundy to Nicole Simpson in 10
pages.) And in the next chapter we're asked to take it as an established fact
that all women, everywhere, since the beginning of time, have lived in fear of
entering "The Slut's Dominion." What's worse, Wolf flip-flops in her opinion of
The Slut every few pages. On the one hand, she's the pitiful victim of our
hypocrisy and our unnecessary shame. On the other hand, we're also supposed to
envy her, because she violates the restraints we've imposed on ourselves.

            In the end, what Wolf really
seems to be saying is that sex is perfectly wholesome--it's our uptightness and
moralizing that are corrupt. She's right, of course. And yet, after a while,
all this going on about how girls are not allowed to feel desire begins to feel
like a kind of nostalgic fantasy. "As adult women, those of us who are
heterosexual sometimes have a sense of a lost Eden," she writes at one point.
And later, à la Rousseau, "As my understanding of the kinds of scripts about
sexuality available to women bore down on me, the forest would function the way
that fantasies of wilderness functioned for the urbanized eighteenth-century
European mind: I would find myself making a mental reference to the forest when
I searched for a symbol for female lust." This isn't much more than pining--a
longing for longing. I suppose it's only fair that girls win equal rights to
good old, solipsistic Desire No. 3. But the victory feels pretty hollow.

             

         
      
   
