
   
   
      
         
            How the West Won

            Titles can be dangerous.
John Lewis Gaddis, the most eminent of America's Cold War
historians, has taken a risk by naming his book We Now Know . For, the
big surprise of the opening of so many of the Soviet, Chinese, and Eastern
European archives is that we have learned so little that seriously alters the
known contours of the 45-year confrontation.

            True, much has been
confirmed by the ongoing opening of the archives and the sterling work
of the special Cold War research project at the Woodrow Wilson Center in
Washington, D.C., on whose delvings Gaddis leans heavily. To wit, Joseph
Stalin's hopes that the Communist Party would come to power, more or less
legally, in the western chunks of Germany can now be reliably dated back to
June 1945. We can establish that but for Stalin's veto in December 1945, the
Soviet Union might well have ratified the Bretton Woods postwar financial
system. Stalin's role in egging on the North Koreans to invade the South in
1950 is now clear, and so is the secret U.S.-Soviet accord that kept quiet the
air battles between U.S. and Soviet fighter pilots over Korea, including the
U.S. bombing of an air base on Soviet soil.

            None of
this, however, changes the old consensus that the grand strategy of the Cold
War was set, at the latest, by 1950. By then, the NATO alliance was in place to
contain the Soviet Union on its western front. The Korean War established a
similar containment on the eastern front, where the Pentagon was building
Japan's ports, railways, and Toyota assembly lines and performing the same
miracle that Marshall Plan funds were achieving in Europe. When the Western
nations fought, they either lost (Britain and France at Suez; France in
Algeria; France and, later, the United States in Vietnam) or were held to a
bloody draw (the United States and the Soviet Union in Korea). But, by avoiding
direct war, and by learning to avoid entanglement in local struggles, the West
eventually won the peace. The West prevailed because nuclear weapons imposed a
brittle truce, shifting the conflict to the economic rivalry in which the
West's greater resources and adaptability could produce both guns and butter,
both family cars and aircraft carriers.

            It is within this generally agreed-upon context that all
the historians' Cold War debates take place--and Gaddis' thoughtful but often
long-winded book broadly accepts this framework. But here comes the surprise.
In the past, Gaddis picked a careful course between the anti-Communists who
always blamed Moscow and the revisionists who thought the United States' hunger
for markets and raw materials was at least as responsible for the Cold War. Now
Gaddis has finally taken sides. On the politically (if not historically)
pivotal issue of who was to blame, his conclusion is "authoritarianism in
general, and Stalin in particular."

            Having
identified the Evil in particular, Gaddis widens his argument to identify the
Evil in general: the Soviet system. To prove his point, he cites figures
suggesting that as many as 2 million German women had been raped by the
conquering Red Army between 1945 and 1946. The point is worth making, even
though such awful spoils of war hardly address the moral argument of good and
evil in the Cold War itself. And even though it was widely known that many of
these women's husbands and brothers in Wehrmacht uniform had fled to be
taken prisoner by the Allies, abandoning the women to pay for the dreadfulness
the menfolk had inflicted on the eastern front.

            
The moral superiority of the West has always
been difficult to argue. Its advocates must grapple with the ugly facts of
racial segregation in the United States; of the latter's hardheaded if
spasmodic support of its allies' futile efforts to cling to their colonial
empires; and of the West's readiness to support loathsome regimes in the name
of the greater cause. The U.S. adventure in Vietnam, that most tragic of the
West's Third World campaigns, falls outside Gaddis' sadly truncated survey,
which ends with the Cuban missile crisis. So Gaddis does not really tackle the
most egregious moral disaster for the West.

            Nor were
the West's leaders too nice in their discriminations. Gaddis cites a 1951 cable
from Dean Acheson to his diplomats in Hanoi that bluntly states the case for
Realpolitik : "Question whether Ho [Chi Minh] as much nationalist as
Commie is irrelevant, all Stalinists in colonial areas are nationalists. With
achievement of natl. aims (i.e. independence) their objective necessarily
becomes subordination of state to Commie purposes." Normally the most
clearheaded of cold warriors, Acheson must have been dozing when he wrote that.
Or, at least, he was conveniently forgetting that he had argued to supply $150
million in civilian aid and $60 million in arms to Marshal Tito's regime in
Yugoslavia, which, while nominally Communist, had hardly been subordinated to
"Commie purposes." Tito and Yugoslavia get disappointingly short shrift in
Gaddis' analysis, as does Stalin's still mysterious decision to pull out of the
Soviet-administered sector of northern Iran. These are areas where the Soviet
Foreign Ministry and party archives have so far yielded little that is
illuminating, and the Soviet military and intelligence archives are still
tightly controlled where they have been opened at all. Where Gaddis does look
at the breach between Tito and Stalin, it is to buttress his case that as
democrats, the Americans were far more relaxed about managing alliance politics
than Stalin was.

            "Tito's complaints about the Soviet-Yugoslav relationship,"
Gaddis points out, "were no more serious than those that arose routinely
between London, Paris, and Washington" over such questions as the treatment of
Germany. But Tito and Stalin were not interested in keeping their disputes in
hand. Stalin wanted outright subservience; Tito, unique in having liberated his
country with his own partisan resources, was far too prickly to knuckle under.
In contrast, Gaddis writes, "American officials saw nothing strange in
combining executive leadership with a careful acknowledgment of individual
sovereignties. ... Truman and Eisenhower handled NATO much as they did the
Congress: by cutting deals instead of imposing wills." Gaddis claims, in
essence, that this managerial style went beyond the difference between Western
allies and Soviet satellites, even beyond the distinction between the United
States' soft empire of consenting partners and Stalin's hard empire of secret
police and satrapies. In the end, he says, even the steeliest of U.S. military
authoritarians were products of a more benign political heritage than the
Soviet-sponsored regimes were: "The Truman and Eisenhower administrations ran
the alliance much as [Gens.] Clay and MacArthur had run occupied Germany and
Japan: in ways that reflected democratic culture."

            
The French and British governments would not
unreservedly agree. However foolish their 1956 conspiracy with Israel to
recapture the Suez Canal, the U.S. decision first to vote with the Soviets to
condemn them at the United Nations and then to apply what Gaddis calls
"crushing economic pressure" on their currencies was hardly a collegial way to
run the alliance. France responded to this highhandedness by embarking on a
crash program to develop its own nuclear force, and by evicting NATO forces
from French soil. And, Gaddis concludes, "[T]he Americans lost influence in the
Middle East as a result of Suez, while the Russians gained it."

            If Gaddis
wants to blame Stalin and authoritarian rule for the Cold War, he must explain
why the confrontation lingered on so long after the old brute's death in 1953.
Gaddis' answer, of course, is that the game was under way by then: The heirs of
Truman and Stalin were condemned to play by Cold War rules. But this undermines
his entire case about Stalin's unique responsibility. For, Truman and Stalin
brought their own historic baggage to the task of creating a new world order
after 1945. They were locked into a Europe divided by military deployments; an
Asia in turmoil after Japan's defeat and Mao's triumph; and a rivalry between
capitalist and Communist systems that long predated both men.

            There is no doubt that Stalin was a brute. We knew that
while the Cold War still raged. It took a little more courage for a Western
historian to say that then than it does to say it now, with the long
confrontation finally over. But does Stalin's guilt automatically establish
U.S. innocence in other areas of the Cold War? Obviously not--it would be hard
to fault Stalin for the destruction of the Vietnamese city of Hue 15 years
after his death. However unsatisfactory and over-argued the revisionist case,
it did make one serious point: that the United States had clear national and
economic interests and found the Cold War an unusually congenial way to pursue
them.

            Perhaps the most acute
epitaph of the Cold War was written at its birth, by Soviet Foreign Minister
Vyacheslav Molotov, who objected to U.S. demands for "an open door" for its
industrialists throughout Europe: "We would probably live to see the day when
in your own country, on switching on the radio, you would be hearing not so
much your own language as one American gramophone record after [another] ... on
going to the cinema, you would be seeing American films sold for foreign
consumption," Molotov argued. "Is it not clear that such unrestricted
applications of the principles of 'equal opportunity' would in practice mean
the veritable economic enslavement of the small states and their subjugation to
the rule and arbitrary will of strong and enriched foreign firms, banks, and
industrial corporations? Was this what we fought for when we battled the
fascist invaders?"

            Yes, Mr. Molotov. Given half
a chance, Hollywood movies and British pop songs and Mercedes limos and all the
glitzy glamour of rumbustious capitalism were exactly what people wanted. The
West prevailed because it was rich, rather than because it was good. It would
be nice to say that we were rich because we were good, but the randomness of
the market and the casual ethics of the hidden hand allow no such theocratic
conclusion.

         
      
   
