
   
   
      
         
            Hong Kong Phooey

            The Union Jack came down.
The band played "God Save the Queen" one last time--although, given the
occasion, the American lyrics ("My Country 'Tis of Thee") seemed more
appropriate. Prince Charles looked suitably dour, boarded Britannia , and
departed Hong Kong. He shall not return.

            No one
throws a ceremony like the British, but did the coverage of the July 1
"handover" have to be so breathless? Will the return of Hong Kong to China
really be remembered as one of the great events of the 20 th century?
A month later, the event already seems forgotten. The death of colonialism
should be ranked among humanity's greatest accomplishments of the waning
century, but the hard work was done at the end of World War II--an event that
seems secure in its place in the history books even though Peter Jennings
wasn't there to report it.

            In this atmosphere of hyperbole, Paul Theroux's Kowloon
Tong: A Novel of Hong Kong takes a refreshingly small-scale approach. The
novel is an unabashed attempt to capitalize on the hype surrounding the
handover, but it succeeds by steadfastly refusing to indulge in majesty.
Instead of princes and beefeaters, Theroux gives us a circumscribed tale about
the fleecing of a dysfunctional British family by an unscrupulous businessman
from mainland China. It is a tonic for the cloying coverage of the event
itself.

            I admit to
having been suspicious of Kowloon Tong , a novel prepared for an event
rather than responding to it. The publishing world is fond of anniversaries,
but the notion of creating a novel to commemorate an event before it happens
seems especially fishy. Great novels are topical only in a subtler and grander
sense. Imagine if Herman Melville's seafaring adventure of 1851 had focused on
the first America's Cup race that year, or if F. Scott Fitzgerald had
implicated Gatsby in the Teapot Dome scandal.

            
To my surprise, however, Kowloon Tong
works because the match of author and subject is so good. Though born in
America, Theroux is a passionate dissector of the British character, having
spent 20 years living in London. Theroux finds the British most hilarious when
indulging in the rituals of empire ("dark comedy and absurdity," he calls it).
He also delights in exploring the limits of the British stiff upper lip,
relishing opportunities to see what indignities a subject of the queen can
suffer and still say "mustn't grumble." And while Theroux has never been noted
for his celebration of the milk of human kindness--at his worst, he is so
unrelentingly peeved with others that one wonders why he bothered to write
about them--he does have an eye for the differences among people and among
peoples, and a shrewd understanding of the irrational annoyance those
differences provoke.

            The Hong
Kong handover creates the ideal subject for Theroux. Clashes of race and
politics are exacerbated by the emotional intensity of a deadline that everyone
thinks historical, though for different reasons. Theroux's own sympathy lies
with those who fled Communist China but are being denied a chance to rule
themselves in Hong Kong. (In case his fiction leaves any ambiguity, Theroux
spelled out his support for the Hong Kong democrats in a recent New
Yorker article.)

            It is impossible not to see Kowloon Tong as an
allegory. The book focuses on Neville "Bunt" Mullard and his mother, Betty, the
owners of a stitching plant, on the eve of the handover. Bunt's brand of
capitalism is played by the outdated rules of imperialism. He spends his days
in Hong Kong's "blue" hotels, making daily, deliberately mysterious appearances
on the factory floor in order to encourage productivity. Bunt is unprepared for
the ruthless capitalism of Mr. Hung, a People's Liberation Army officer who
appears in Bunt's club to make him an offer for the factory he simply cannot
refuse. Bunt, struck by a belated attachment to his native Hong Kong, falls in
love with an employee named Mei-ping. When Bunt and Mei-ping begin to raise
uncomfortable questions about Hung's connection to a murder, Hung decides he
must drive Bunt from the colony altogether .
            

            As Theroux
describes Bunt's speculations about Hung's guilt, he succumbs to the urge to
preach: "The evidence was not in the room, the evidence was missing--that stark
neatness was the proof that a bloody crime had been committed. The same was
true of China. The look of the apartment was the spare look of China, a place
that had been scoured and simplified by chaos--upheaval, terror, mass murder,
war. Hong Kong had a peaceable clutter, just an accumulation of worn or
out-of-date things, like a massive attic." Happily, however, labored metaphors
like this are few, and the politics serve more as a backdrop than as a
message.

            
In fact, Theroux's sympathy for the Hong Kong
Chinese is what gives Kowloon Tong a moral center often absent from his
work. Mei-ping, Bunt's employee and lover, suffers at the hands of both the
outgoing British masters and incoming Chinese; without her, Hung's takeover of
Imperial Stitching might have seemed a victimless crime. The otherwise
repellent Bunt is redeemed by his somewhat ridiculous infatuation with
Mei-ping, and the at times heavy-handed tale of the factory sale gives way to a
more interesting story, a love triangle of sorts among Bunt, Mei-ping, and
Bunt's mother, Betty.

            Bunt and Betty are a
memorable pair. Bunt is named for an elder brother who died in infancy, and
both Betty and Bunt seem to feel that he is only a stand-in for his
predecessor. At 43, Bunt remains a toddler in his mother's eyes, and he too is
disturbingly comfortable in the relationship. Each evening, Betty waits up for
her son, aware of his vain attempts to create a secret life for himself with
Hong Kong's prostitutes. "When he was late and his mother stood waiting in the
doorway, she always seemed to swell, filling the doorframe, to obstruct and
delay him, so that she could bulk against his approaching face and scold him.
... She had the pathetic aggression of a wife or mother--to Bunt there was no
difference."

            It soon becomes clear that
it is not Hung's connivance that's driving Bunt out of the factory and into
exile, but Betty's will. She hears the sum offered for the factory and refuses
to allow Bunt's concern about the future of the business or his burgeoning
romance with Mei-ping to stand in the way of her plan to return to England and
live in comfortable solitude with him. This chilling story of a mother's
crushing love for a son will haunt me long after I've forgotten the details of
the handover ceremony.

         
      
   
