
   
   
      
         
            Mad as Hell

             

            Antonin Artaud suffered his
first depressive breakdown at 16; at 21, he was diagnosed with hereditary
syphilis (his parents, in addition, were first cousins). He was treated with
laudanum, which initiated a lifelong drug addiction. Although in nearly
constant physical pain--he had contracted meningitis when he was five, and the
headaches continued for the rest of his life--and mental anguish, he functioned
reasonably well until the age of 41, when a number of psychotic incidents
caused him to be confined in a psychiatric hospital. He suffered from what was
described as "incurable paranoid delirium," and left that asylum only to enter
another. In all, he spent roughly 15 of his 52 years in institutions of one
sort or another.

            For all that, he was
extraordinarily productive. His collected writings fill 26 volumes in the
French edition. He was trained as an actor, and went on to direct, found his
own theater, and write a set of visionary theoretical essays, collected as
The Theater of Cruelty , that have continued to influence theatrical
practitioners to this day. He also acted in films; his performances are few but
indelible, from his matinee-idol turn as the empathetic monk in Carl Theodor
Dreyer's The Passion of Joan of Arc (1928) to his part as Marat in Abel
Gance's Napoleon (1927), in which, at one point, he breaks off a
discussion by getting down on all fours and barking like a dog. He was an early
member of the surrealists and director of the group's Central Research Bureau.
He was drummed out by André Breton after two years--nearly all members were
expelled sooner or later--but Breton eventually repented, calling him a "man of
prodigies" and perhaps the truest surrealist of all.

            Artaud's
work in his many fields is consistent and interwoven, but it is not easy to
define. It is, above all, a monument to frustration, one long scream of protest
at the inadequacy of language, of human society, of the body and the mind.
Artaud was a revolutionary who was fighting for the overthrow of the
constraints that define consciousness. It is as if he could just make out the
penumbra of some spiritual essence on the far edge of his perception, and was
maddened by his inability to seize it. He described all his work as
"documents"--that is, not the poems, essays, polemics they seem to be, and
certainly not "art," but mere records of his flailing attempts to reach the
elusive substance of Truth.

            The drawings currently on exhibit at the Museum of Modern
Art he likewise qualified as "documents." These drawings--there are roughly 70
items--are products of the last decade or so of his life (he died in 1948), are
not well known, and have never before been shown in this country. They are
singular and powerful works; gathered together, they possess a clobbering
force. They seem to come out of nowhere while prefiguring all sorts of later
tendencies in art. It seems absurd to think that the evolution they present
covers only 10 or 11 years, rather than an entire career, but then, Artaud
hardly thought in terms of a "career."

            The
earliest works are described as "spells." These are blessings and curses he
wrote on charred or otherwise manipulated bits of paper and sent to friends,
enemies, and a few public figures (Hitler, for one) in the late 1930s, in the
wake of a disastrous trip he took to Ireland, wielding a cane that he believed
was the staff of Saint Patrick, from which he returned in a straitjacket.
(These spells are nowhere translated or transcribed, and the handwriting is
often indecipherable. One of the few I could make out, addressed to the actor
Roger Blin, reads, in part: "All those who have acted to prevent me from taking
HEROIN all those who have laid a finger on Anne Manson [a friend] on account of
that Sunday [illegible] May 1939, I will [illegible] them alive on a square in
PARIS and I will cause them to be perforated and burn their marrow.")

            
Artaud began drawing in earnest around 1944. By
1945, he was making large tableaux of what he called hieroglyphics: fields of
human figures, symbolic objects, and words, many of them in invented languages.
Some of these drawings, in precise pencil with hints of color, have a
diagrammatic quality that seems oddly evocative of Saul Steinberg's work;
indeed, divorced from context, some might at first be mistaken as whimsical.
There are multiple breasts, various penile objects, including cousins of Dalí's
penis-on-crutch, and details that might derive from alchemical symbology.

            In 1946,
the pencil work became heavier and more insistent, the colors more assertive,
the nightmare aspects harder to miss. A work entitled The 
               Theater

               of 
               Cruelty , for example, shows a number of women apparently
encased in glass coffins; an exceedingly cryptic stew of geometric and
biomorphic elements is called The 
               Sexual 
               Awkwardness

               of 
               God . In May 1946, he produced his first self-portrait. It is
so heavily scored that it looks nearly sculptural, and it is covered with dots
that look like smallpox--an essay in the catalogue cites Freud, by way of
Gilles Deleuze, on the "schizophrenic aptitude for perceiving the surface and
skin as if it were pierced with an infinite number of little holes." A
Blue 
               Head made around the same time is even scarier, caught in
midscream, all covered with those diseased dots, with occluded eyes and a
banana neck. It is, convincingly, a face from hell.

            In 1947, Artaud moved from the psychiatric hospital at
Rodez to a sort of halfway house at Ivry-sur-Seine, where he had more mobility
and was able to receive visitors. These he drew, in a series of penetrating and
quite varied portraits. Rolande Prevel, for example, is given almost a Matisse
treatment, Colette Thomas is rendered with a delicacy that amounts to
tenderness, while Jacques Prevel seems to have been sawn in two and restitched
any old way, Mania Oïfer turned into an owl, Arthur Adamov fashioned from flung
mud, with a penis for a nose. (Adamov was the author of Ping 
               Pong
and other plays; the other portrait subjects are mostly unknown to me.) Artaud
was clearly an excellent draftsman but, as he notes, "you must look at [the
drawings] and see what's inside ." He also writes that "the human face is
an empty force, a field of death," and that the alignment of form and content
has never been farther off than in the contrast between facial features and
what lies beneath them. His portraits are so uncompromising they make Picasso's
or Giacometti's look polite.

            By the end, just before his
death from rectal cancer (a grimly appropriate fate for the author of "The
Search for Fecality," in which he asks: "Is god a being? If he is he is one of
shit"--shit being, in Artaud's view, of human essence and the sole alternative
to the void), he was beginning to draw complex, heavily laden constructions
that look like architecture made from heads--in the very last drawing they are
stacked, as in so many totem poles. They are anything but morbid, though; they
possess a vivid, throbbing life. These drawings appear to synthesize all the
preoccupations of the phases of his previous three years; they fluidly combine
the diagrammatic, the near-lyrical, and the excruciating. Here again, Artaud's
ferocity, anguish, and hallucinatory paranoia are matched and joined by his
intelligence and paradoxical control.

            Artaud may have been mad, but
his art is hardly confined to madness. The portraits, in which he used calm
observation and academic skill to depict external reality while representing
the interior through distortion and paper-tearing physical force, are more
troubling than many of the interestingly science-fictional renderings of his
visions, for example. His work can no more be dispatched into some rubric like
"outsider art" than that of Blake or Hölderlin. Artaud's art is insidious; its
penetration of what we know is so acute, its lucidity so much the equal of its
delusion, that deciding where the one leaves off and the other begins can seem
merely a measure of our own delusions.

             

         
      
   
