
   
   
      
         
            Bohemian Rhapsody

            Prague is the capital of the
Czech Republic, but is it the capital, in addition, of something purely
abstract, a quality of mind perhaps--something that might fascinate a puzzled
world? Every great city is constructed around a principle all its own--a
principle of brute strength in one case, of sensuous delicacy in another, of
majesty somewhere else, and mad chaos elsewhere. In Prague, the principle
appears to be metaphysical. The entire town seems to have been laid out
according to the cosmologies of the Greek myths. Crowds of humble mortals
stride the pavements down below while, three or four stories above, on the
façades of buildings, a very different crowd of carved stone beings, the
Olympian gods and goddesses, throng the upper air, in clear illustration of the
dualistic character of all existence: mortals below, immortals above, flesh
here, stone there; the ever-changing, the everlasting.

            The
Olympian sculpted beings come in fantastic varieties. You see winged nymphs and
angels, arrow-bearing cupids, fabulously sensual and muscular naked women and
men, enslaved Titans bearing the weight of entire lofty buildings on their
sinewy backs, bearded philosophers, heroic Communist proletarians, and famous
statesmen. On a narrow street in the old Jewish quarter you gaze upward at the
cornices and see, of all creatures, the Three Musketeers, direct from the pages
of Alexandre Dumas. Just when you were expecting Maimonides! Around the corner,
on the roof of a theater, a chariot and team of wild horses are frozen in
eternal petrifaction on the brink of hurtling suicidally off the roof, quite as
if the immortals, too, have their traffic problems. But what is the meaning of
this strange dualism in Prague? Are we to conclude that it is a city of
mysteries that will never be fathomed--a city of mysticism and the occult? Or
is Prague the capital of reason and lucidity, of light and simplicity--the
urban counterpart to the ancient Greek philosophers?

            The mystic interpretation--Prague as the city of Kabbalists
and demons, of Rabbi Loew and his clay android, the Golem--arose in the late
19 th century. It was a bit of late Romanticism, which flourished in
English literature, then in German cinema, and reached an apogee of acceptance
in 1973 in a stylish volume by Angelo Maria Ripellino called, after a phrase by
André Breton, Magic Prague . But the mystic interpretation is exactly
what Peter Demetz, a professor of German at Yale, wishes to counter in his own
Prague in Black and Gold: Scenes From the Life of a European City .
Demetz's Prague is the city of the late-16 th century Emperor Rudolf
II (a scientific-minded man, though he did go mad at the end) and the
19 th century logician Bernard Bolzano. And it is the city of
Czechoslovakia's first president, Tomá

         
      
   
