
   
   
      
         
            Love Bomb

            
               (Part 2
of a two-part article. For Part 1, click here. )

            Claus Schenk Graf von
Stauffenberg, who set off the bomb that nearly killed Adolf Hitler on July 20,
1944, was one of the most spectacularly odd figures to flash across the world
stage. Under his military exterior he was a pure aesthete, a devotee of
esoteric literature and musty medieval romanticism, a kind of tactical
symbolist. If the German resistance to Hitler amounts to nothing more than a
myth, as the books I reviewed last week in Slate suggested, Stauffenberg was aiming at
myth and nothing less. He knew by July 1944 that his conspiracy had little
chance of success, but he drove ahead regardless. He was determined to commit
an act that might start a rumor of residual goodness in Germany. Even more, he
wanted to save the old German myths from Hitler's corrupting touch. It was an
unreal, crazy, but terribly earnest mission.

            Peter
Hoffmann has written good general histories of the resistance, but his
Stauffenberg takes a new tack. Decades of exhaustive research are
telescoped into a swift biographical narrative, at times matter-of-fact and at
times unexpectedly passionate. It is the first book to do justice to the
strangeness of Stauffenberg's world. The family had lived in the southwest
German province of Swabia for centuries, and believed itself to be descended
from the Hohenstaufen dynasty, whose lineage included the Holy Roman emperors
Frederick Barbarossa and Frederick II. More recently, the family had served the
eccentric kings of Bavaria. Claus' older brothers, Berthold and Alexander, were
twins; Claus, too, had a twin, who died in infancy. "For a time he often
brought his mother flowers for his brother's grave," Hoffmann writes in one of
his surprising sentimental touches. The Countess Stauffenberg moved in various
artistic circles, befriending Rainer Maria Rilke, among others; it was through
her connections that her sons met the poet Stefan George.

            George, who lived from 1868 to 1933, is ranked high among
German lyric poets for his elegant Symbolist visions. The teen-age Stauffenberg
brothers were the most ardent disciples of his last years. The poet took them
in first of all because he liked to have handsome youngsters around him.
(Eyebrow-raising photographs in Hoffmann's book show boys posing in George's
home in medieval costumes.) But George was also fascinated by the Stauffenberg
lineage, particularly the Hohenstaufen connection. Frederick II, the
alternately splendid and frightening 13 th century monarch who earned
the nickname stupor mundi , was, for him, the model of an enlightened
authoritarian. George thought the Empire lingered in modern times as a "secret
Germany"; the Stauffenberg brothers providentially appeared as a band of boy
princes who could take command. Claus was told that the emperor himself may
have awakened in him, after centuries of sleep beneath a Swabian mountain.

            All this
smacks of Hitlerism, of course. George did share Hitler's contempt for
democracy and devotion to German myth. He also bandied about anti-Semitic
phrases, despite the constant presence of Jews in his circle. But his worldview
departed from Hitler's in several respects. For one, he was steeped in foreign
influences. He translated English, Spanish, and French poetry, with the French
Symbolists his principal poetic model. His love of the Romance languages
incited a highly subversive orthographic innovation: the elimination of capital
letters on German nouns. And, for all his elitism and secretiveness, George had
a most un-Hitlerlike strain of gentleness. Like Wagner (and like Thomas Mann in
his conservative phase), he saw authoritarian rulers ushering in a kingdom of
"ardor and love."

            
George died too soon for his real attitude
toward the Nazis to become clear. (As Hoffmann notes, disciples would later
spend much energy trying to expunge tentatively pro-Hitler remarks from the
George oeuvre .) Stauffenberg, following the lead of the Master, showed
vague enthusiasm toward Nazism early on. While training for a career as an
officer in the late 1920s, he displayed fashionable contempt for the Weimar
Republic. In 1934, he posed for a model of a massive storm-trooper monument
sculpted by his friend Frank Mehnert, also a George disciple. He refused,
however, to don a Nazi uniform, and struck an attitude that was deemed
insufficiently fascist by the monument committee. He criticized the vulgarity
of the Nazi leadership but never exhibited any deeper opposition to its ideals.
Hoffmann writes that some relatives expressed surprise after the coup attempt
of 1944: "Many had thought of him as the only real National Socialist in the
family."

            What
caused Stauffenberg to turn so suddenly against Hitler in 1943 and 1944?
Standard theories about German officers and their disillusionment with the
regime seem inadequate. As a member of George's secret "state," Stauffenberg
went only so far in his devotion to the military; he was not acting simply to
save the institution from Hitler's murderous ineptitude. Perhaps what enticed
him was a sense that George's ideals could flower in the ruins of Hitler's
Germany, and that he himself might become the prophesied savior. Stauffenberg
was a shadow-Hitler in some ways: His youthful love of architecture, music, and
stage design coincides precisely with Hitler's cherished dreams. In a school
essay, Stauffenberg wrote of Speer-like architectural ambitions: "Every
building will, so to speak, represent a temple dedicated to the German nation
and fatherland." One observer noted in him "a streak of demonic will to power
and a belief that he was born to take charge."

            Weighing against these authoritarian traits are
descriptions of the man's essential sensitivity to others. His military career
shows him repeatedly choosing human values over material gains. His specialty
lay in the supply of troops on the front and, as the Russian invasion unfolded,
he grew horrified by Hitler's willingness to cut off entire divisions on a
whim. He was also angered by the army's policy toward Russian civilians. At a
time when Slavs were being massacred by the thousands, he engaged in an
ideologically incorrect effort to assemble troops of Russian volunteers and
give them equal status with Germans. When his division was pinned down by a
fighter-bomber attack in Africa in 1943, he sustained incredible wounds--the
loss of an eye, a hand, and two more fingers--directing the evacuation.

            More
problematically, Hoffmann presents Stauffenberg as one of the few Germans who
came to the defense of the Jews. According to many witnesses, the chief
conspirator repeatedly named the mass murder of Jews on the Eastern front as
the regime's ultimate crime. But the question of his real feeling toward Jews
is shadowed by Berthold Stauffenberg's testimony at his treason trial in 1944,
to the effect that the brothers subscribed generally to the Nazi "racial
principle" and abhorred only the violence of its application. Hoffmann sought
out Jewish schoolmates from Claus' youth and asked if they had perceived
anti-Semitic attitudes in him. They remembered him as an unusually friendly and
generous gentile. The ambiguity of Stauffenberg's attitude toward Jews can be
sensed in this inscrutable sentence from a resistance manifesto: "We want a New
Order which makes all Germans supporters of the state and guarantees them law
and justice, but we scorn the lie of equality and we bow before the hierarchies
established by nature."

            
Stauffenberg stormed into a small, chaotic
resistance movement and gave it at least the appearance of purpose. He set up
an intricate plan for military rebellion across the Reich and took it upon
himself to bring a bomb into Hitler's "Wolf's Lair" compound in East Prussia.
Despite his injuries, he also insisted on arming the bomb himself. He was
interrupted by a phone call and succeeded in activating only one of two
packages of explosives; had he left the second package in the briefcase, it too
would have exploded, greatly increasing the force of the bomb and killing
everyone in the room. He brought the weakened bomb into Hitler's briefing room
and nudged it as close to the target as he could, then left on a mumbled
excuse, drove off the compound, and flew to Berlin. He struggled for several
hours to keep the rebellion together, but innumerable weak links were revealed
in his improvised chain of command. Since he had probably resigned himself to
failure from the beginning, he kept up a confident exterior to the end. As he
faced a firing squad at the end of the day, he shouted out a phrase that was
variously reported as "Long live holy Germany!" or "Long live hallowed
Germany!" ( heiliges or geheiligtes 
               Deutschland ). One
George scholar claims that the true message, understandably misunderstood, was
"secret Germany" ( das geheime 
               Deutschland ).

            Conventional history can do
nothing with Count Stauffenberg--this military aesthete who confused himself
with a Holy Roman emperor and found reality in the musings of a visionary
pederast. History wants movements, tendencies, collective motion; Stauffenberg
is merely Stauffenbergian. Nor is he of any use as an instructional
hero--neither a democrat nor a capitalist, he gives little comfort to modern
Germany. But he did disprove, for an unimportant but magnificent moment, W. H.
Auden's dictum that poetry makes nothing happen.

         
      
   
