
   
   
      
         
            Can We Really Feed the World?

            Africa's hungry children are
both pathetically weak and astonishingly powerful. Alone on the parched plains
of Somalia or the Sudan, they lack the strength to lift even a kernel of
precious grain. But one blink of a starving boy's hollow eyes, captured on
videotape and broadcast to North America and Western Europe, can galvanize the
emotions, finances, and armies of the greatest nations on earth.

            In
Michael Maren's view, this is not only a paradox but a perversity. Far from
demonstrating the good will of Western governments and charitable
organizations, the last decade's missions of mercy to places such as Somalia,
Ethiopia, Liberia, and Rwanda have compounded the crises there. Maren--a former
Peace Corps volunteer and U.S. Agency for International Development worker, and
a freelance journalist in Africa--has seen Western aid programs up close. He
has come to view aid and charity "as an industry, as religion, as a
self-serving system that sacrifices its own practitioners and intended
beneficiaries in order that it may survive and grow." Sometimes, Maren contends
in The Road to Hell , aid can be "positively evil."

            Maren may seem hardhearted, but he has a point. While a few
of the West's massive relief operations--Bosnia, Somalia, Rwanda--have ended
short-term suffering, many more have failed to root out the violence and
corruption that gave rise to famine and anarchy in the first place. If
international humanitarianism is to preserve its legitimacy, both governments
and private humanitarian organizations must confront critiques such as
Maren's.

            Maren views
humanitarian intervention as an instance of what economists call "moral
hazard." The classic example of moral hazard comes from insurance: Because you
have it, you feel protected against your own mistakes and behave in a riskier
manner, increasing the chances that you will suffer a loss. Fire insurance
increases the chance your house will burn down; for those inclined toward
fraud, it even raises the incentive to burn the house down. In the sphere of international aid, it is pretty clear that
the infusion of Western food and cash has often undermined the determination
and capacity of developing states to pull themselves up by their own
bootstraps. Maren reports the lament of his friend Chris Cassidy, a CARE worker
who nearly went mad trying to teach Somali refugees to adopt irrigated
cash-crop farming: "How the hell am I going to convince these people to get out
there and dig if they get more food than they can eat free from CARE?"

            Western
help also cushions venal Third World governments from the consequences of their
own actions--or enables them to pursue destructive policies. In the mid-1980s,
Maren reports, CARE continued to supply food to Somalia despite mounting
evidence that donated goods were being appropriated to further then-President
Muhammad Siyad Barre's takeover of parts of neighboring Ethiopia. Meanwhile,
ostensibly destitute Somali refugees led lucrative secret careers as
black-market merchants of relief supplies. Siyad Barre's military misadventures
generated tens of thousands of refugees, destroyed previously self-sufficient
nomadic cultures, and got the Somali economy hooked on cheap foreign grain and
foreign currency. Maren shows how this previously underreported history set the
stage for the 1992 famine and the subsequent ill-fated American military
intervention.

            Withering as Maren's anecdotal indictment is, he doesn't
clinch the case for abolishing international assistance entirely. The
appropriate response to his horror stories is, "Yes, but." Yes,
arson-for-profit plagues the hazard-insurance business, but we still need
insurance. Yes, domestic welfare programs are riddled with perverse incentives,
but we still need a social safety net. Yes, international aid is frequently
both corrupt and corrupting, but surely, well-designed aid programs or foreign
intervention can ameliorate or prevent some humanitarian disasters.

            Of course, that means
coming up with guidelines that preserve the moral purpose of humanitarian aid
and intervention while addressing Maren's critique. In The Ethics and
Politics of Humanitarian Intervention , the eminent Stanley Hoffmann,
professor of French civilization at Harvard, takes on this task. Hoffmann tries
to define the components of what we consider "good causes" and then to set up
"a hierarchy of concerns" to deal with the often contradictory demands of
trying to honor "sovereignty, self-determination, democratic government, and
individual rights." What he comes up with is specific and nuanced in its
prescriptions, but not altogether satisfying. Hoffman places sovereignty first. For him, it's OK to link
economic assistance to the democratic inclinations of a recipient government.
Aid to a democratic government facing a rebellion is also acceptable. So is
counterintervention to help such a government repulse foreign invasion. But
when it comes to unilateral intervention, Hoffmann is skittish. A powerful
nation should intervene on its own, he says, "only if licensed by the UN" or a
relevant regional organization, and then only after noncoercive remedies have
been exhausted.

            This near-doctrinal
aversion to unilateral intervention is puzzling. It fetishizes the national
sovereignty of half-baked multiethnic congeries (such as Somalia,
ex-Yugoslavia, and Liberia) whose collapse into tribal warfare suggests they
may not really be organic "nations" after all. It also fails to recognize that sometimes, the only
effective option is the swift, quasi-imperial intervention of a powerful
outsider. As James Sterba points out in another essay in the book, Hoffmann's
criteria would rule out much of a role for leadership by the United States (or,
for that matter, France). Wouldn't we all have been better off, Sterba asks, if
the United States, on its own, had dispatched a few warships to stop the
Serbian barrage of Dubrovnik before it spiraled into the all-out war in Bosnia?
And, I might add, hasn't the United States' noninterference in its colonial
stepchild Liberia served mainly to prolong that country's agony? Hoffmann, in a
counterresponse to Sterba, concedes the point. But as a result, sovereignty no
longer stands as Hoffmann's chief organizing principle, and his final list of
policy "maxims" reads less like an antidote to the current confusion than an
eloquent recapitulation of it.

            Maren also
has trouble fitting sovereignty into his analysis. On the one hand, he is
particularly good at documenting the phenomenon of the aid worker who mutters
scornfully about his household servants. In almost every frustrated development
professional, good intentions mutate into unbounded, quasiracial contempt. Some
of those who "do development" tend to blur the distinction between assisting
the African poor and dominating them. "It was difficult to sit back and watch
the village leaders taking money from the farmers who worked so hard to pay
their children's school fees," Maren writes of his Peace Corps stint in Kenya.
"Yet the only thing I could have done would have been to get involved
politically, to take power, to lead, ultimately to rule." He suggests the
consequences of that impulse are always dangerous. Just look at what happened
to the U.S. military when it briefly succumbed to the temptation in Somalia. On
the other hand, he writes at another point, "Humanitarianism is political. It
takes commitment. And it comes with risks." But this formulation would suggest
that U.S. intervention in Somalia was not too aggressive but too
timid.Maybe what humanitarian intervention
requires is a stronger element of, shall we say, behavior modification--"tough
love" sent abroad. All financial assistance to the developing world should be
contingent not only on economic reform in recipient countries but on political
freedom as well. When military intervention proves unavoidable, we should be
less fastidious about national sovereignty, and all the more determined to set
right the underlying political conditions that led to disaster.

            If
American troops, on their arrival in Somalia--their moment of greatest
strength--had arrested warlords and destroyed their heaviest weapons, the
United States might not have been drawn into bigger factional problems later
on. The overly respectful way the United States and its allies handled the
tribal warlords in Africa sent an enormously harmful signal to the authentic
democrats in Yugoslavia and Liberia. This kid-gloves treatment reflects our
ostensible reluctance to involve ourselves in costly overseas conflicts, and
our ostensible respect for the national sovereignty of the foreign countries.
But once we're in, we're in. Better, perhaps, to sort things out thoroughly in
the short run, and to prevent even greater devastation for all concerned down
the road--even if that means suffering a few casualties, or opening ourselves
up to the charge of imperialism.NomadNet, a page on "Somalia, Peacekeeping, Relief & Economic
Development Issues" run by Michael Maren, has been shut down, but its archives
are still open. (The Development and Foreign Aid section includes a piece by Maren
titled "The Food-Aid Racket".) Among other destinations, NomadNet will link you
to the Journal of
Humanitarian Assistance, published at Cambridge University. The Virtual
Library on International Development is another source for material on
these issues. To approach humanitarian aid from the perspective of a few of its
providers, try the U.S.
Agency for International Development's home page, CARE's site, or ReliefNet, "a non-profit
organization dedicated to helping humanitarian organizations raise global
awareness and encourage support for relief efforts via the Internet." The
International Centre for
Humanitarian Reporting notes that the media often only report on the
"crisis of the moment," and aims to "encourage better reporting of
humanitarian, development and related issues." Meanwhile, a site established
for the WorldAid '96 Global Expo and Conference on Emergency Relief,
which took place last fall, gives you a firsthand glimpse of the frequently
crass world of the relief business (note the long list of commercial exhibitors
in attendance).

         
      
   
