
   
   
      
         
            Valley Boys

            Every so often, friends in
the computer industry will develop an unrealistically charitable view of their
place in the world. "I'm not here to get rich," they pronounce. "I'm here to
change the world!" Easy to say, when you happen to be getting rich. Why don't
they work in pure research? "Research is an ivory tower," they respond.
"Shipping products is the way you change the world." And so they find
themselves in the cozy position of believing they're beyond materialism while
they cruise around in their Ferraris.

            The
characters in Po Bronson's novel The First $20 Million Is Always the
Hardest have it much harder. The fictional nonprofit research laboratory La
Honda provides an opportunity to work with the best people in the field,
designing products for other companies to sell. They may be changing the world,
but they're also underpaid. They have their reasons for being there: For
marketer Andy Caspar, La Honda is an opportunity to leave struggling chip maker
Omega Logic and prove he's one of the "Ironmen" who make the technologies that
drive the information age. For chip designer Francis Benoit, it's, er, a way to
leverage corporate resources without corporate interference. For La Honda
director Hank Menzinger, it's a way to change the world without doing the
actual work himself. For Omega Logic CEO Lloyd Acheson, uh ... actually it's
hard to figure out why his company would fund an external research laboratory
instead of having its own. La Honda is an unlikely beast, and pretty quickly
into this book it starts to smell a whole lot like a plot device. Only in such
a place would the motives of the engineers, designers, reporters, and
businessmen in this novel combine in the convenient way they do. Fortunately,
about halfway through, Caspar and two engineers leave to form a start-up, and
La Honda's strange odor fades into the background.

            They're starting a company to make a $300 "VWPC"--the
Volkswagen (people's car) of Personal Computers. They can do so only if they
ignore the conventional wisdom that every new computer must be faster than the
last and do more. What's better, their simplified software will run on any
computer, uniting the world in a new technological brotherhood. Needless to
say, these mavericks have an uphill battle to sell their idea.

            Where
$20 Million succeeds is as a character study. According to the book
jacket, Bronson has written about Silicon Valley for Wired , the New
York Times Magazine , and Forbes ASAP , and he has clearly understood
something about the psychology of the place. The misanthropic engineers, the
monotonic human-resource drones, the evangelistic marketers, even the
nontechnical but talented girlfriend all strike painfully home. I know these
people. They are my friends, my co-workers--my wife. We see nerds at work,
nerds at play (which is to say, at work), nerds in love, and of course some
nerd humor. "If Microsoft made cars ... we'd all have to switch to Microsoft
gas," says Caspar. (Have him killed.)

            
So long as Bronson stays inside their heads, I
accept everything that happens, even when the technology and events veer away
from a world I recognize. It's only when the plot forces him to hide the cards
of certain players, which it does periodically, that my disbelief is
unsuspended. When we can see into their heads, Benoit and Acheson are avowed
enemies. The next thing we know, they are teaming up to steal the VWPC from
Caspar and company, and we can't really see how or why this might have
happened. Suddenly they are characters in a novel, not in my life.

            The lack
of a profit motive is what really jars. Even when our start-up friends go out
on their own, they are doing it because it's the only way to get things done.
They hardly seem to care about the money. They give away rights for a song.
They are totally focused on delivering technology to the masses. I concede that
this is admirable, but everyone I know who has gone the start-up route has been
pretty certain that they were also in it for the financial upside. It's almost
as if Bronson had started believing all the "I'm not in this to get rich"
speeches he must have heard as a reporter.

            Otherwise, this book is pretty convincing, and one of the
reasons it is, even (or especially) to those in the know, is that its plot is
essentially a novelization of real-life technology and events. The fictional
VWPC and its enabling software "Hypnotizer" look a great deal like the
real-life Network Computer and Java. If you don't already know, Java is a
programming language well suited to the Internet. Using Java, you can create
programs that are downloaded directly off the Internet and run on almost any
computer. In theory, this makes it possible to create a simple computer that
runs directly off the network and doesn't even need a hard drive.

            The soap
opera that begat Java deserved to be written as a novel. Sun Microsystems
engineers working on a set-top box for interactive television devised a new
language. They were ignored for over a year, until someone finally realized
this was the perfect language for the World Wide Web. Sun's marketers and top
management fought it out with the engineers for control of the language, and
won. Java is now Sun's core technology asset, and most of its designers have
left the company.

            
This user-friendly computer is not, however,
the magic bullet that both Sun and Bronson make it out to be. The
lowest-common-denominator approach its creators take to solving the problems of
today's heterogeneous computer systems is highly controversial, and not just
because Microsoft and Intel (who have the most to lose if the Java approach
wins out) say so. Java works because it lets everyone run the same program, but
it is not clear that everyone wants to run the same program. For
example, Microsoft has had a difficult time producing Macintosh versions of its
products. Why? Because Macintosh users want Macintosh programs, not warmed-over
Windows programs. Java threatens us with a world where every program feels
warmed-over in the same way--functional, but not optimal.

            
               $20 Million would be
a good read even if you know nothing about computers, but it's an even better
read if you do, since it delves intriguingly in and out of the psychoses and
oddball situations rife in this industry. Just don't ask any hard questions of
the book, because it won't answer them.

         
      
   
