
   
   
      
         
            The Mirror Stage

            The suspicion about
psychoanalysts that is currently fashionable creates an interesting dilemma for
their biographers. The biographer of a great analyst is always tempted to prove
something, to second-guess the dubious reader. Since psychoanalysis as a
treatment is itself about the possibility and, indeed, the value of
biographical truth--psychoanalysis as the biography that is supposed to improve
the biography--we are likely to want something specific from this callow new
genre. We want to know whether these people should have been trusted, and why
and if we should go on trusting their so-called followers. In other words,
biographies of psychoanalysts make us wonder what it is that makes a person
trustworthy to us, and what, if anything, this has to do with the significance
we give to their lives.

            By the
conventional standards of psychoanalytic orthodoxy, Jacques Lacan (1900-1981)
was a heretic. His notoriety was based on his shortening of the psychoanalytic
session--sometimes to five minutes. His fame was based on his radical revisions
of Freud and his insistence on the ways in which language and sexuality disrupt
a life. Toward the end of his life, historian of psychoanalysis Elisabeth
Roudinesco tells us, Lacan "usually saw his tailor, his pedicurist, and his
barber while conducting his analyses." So what?

            There is a tension in any biography between what the
subject wanted to be--who he or she was always wanting to become--and what the
biographer wants the subject to be. In this sober, incisive, and riveting book,
a well-documented history rather than a novelistic evocation of the man
himself, Roudinesco cannot conceal her dismay that Lacan was not better
behaved, more temperate in his appetites, less baroque in his provocations. She
wants him to be more poignant and less boastful.

            It was, of
course, about excesses--of desire, of meaning, of emptiness--that Lacan wrote
so eloquently. For Lacan, a person was by definition in excess of himself. He
believed there was something fundamentally unintelligible about the vagaries of
a life. But Roudinesco neither takes pleasure in nor makes intriguing sense of
the fact that Lacan's theories "denounced the omnipotence of the ego in
general, though he himself asserted the supremacy of his own." Lacan's writings
are clearly, among other things, the confessions of a self-justifying
megalomaniac--unusual in itself, because such people don't tend to explain
themselves. But by the same token these are also the most inexhaustibly
interesting and stylish psychoanalytic writings since Freud's. The Lacan
characterized in this book as flamboyantly voracious for the Freudian
triumvirate of women, money, and power is, as Roudinesco suggests, a Balzacian
hero: a triumph of appetite over class. This is a story of a man with an
amazing talent for finding what and whom he needed to make himself what he
wanted to be, the greatest analyst since Freud.

            
As always, from the evidence available, there
is no obvious reason why this particular family should have produced that
particular psychoanalyst. Lacan's father owned a very successful vinegar
distillery; the family were respectable bourgeois Roman Catholics. Lacan's
adored youngest brother became a priest, and his sister spent most of her
married life in Indochina--so clearly some distance was needed from what was
otherwise a typical French family of a certain type. Very early, as one might
have expected, Lacan wanted to be top of the class, though in fact he wasn't an
especially talented boy. He had a precocious intellectual curiosity. He tended
to read, as Roudinesco remarks, rather than play Cowboys and Indians with the
other boys.

            Of
course, Lacan's life here is being read retrospectively, partly through the
prism of his writings, whereas he was living it prospectively (we have to
remember, given that Lacan's work was the theorizing of life stories, that he
himself never knew what was going to happen next). If one of the dominant
motifs of Lacan's early life is his contempt for his father, as it is in this
account, then it can seem virtually inevitable that his early work was about
the terrible cultural consequences of the "weakening of the father imago"
(there were no strong fathers anymore), and that much of his later work should
be obsessed by what he called "the-name-of-the-father" and the symbolic
significance of the phallus. But psychoanalysis--and Lacan was particularly
shrewd about this--has always been essentially a critique of straightforwardly
casual accounts of how people become who they are. Indeed, what distinguishes
psychoanalysis is that it can show us the ways in which a life is not
merely the effect of its causes (biology, parents, etc.).

            As Lacan progresses through psychiatry, World War II (as a
doctor in France), surrealism, psychoanalysis, structuralism--Lacan's life was
apparently a magnet for everything intellectually interesting happening in
France: He was, for example, Picasso's personal doctor--he seems to have had a
knack for finding useful fathers. His friendships with the likes of writer and
critic Georges Bataille, philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty, anthropologist
Claude Lévi-Strauss, and linguist Roman Jakobson were formative in ways that he
either fails to note or misleadingly acknowledges. Here Roudinesco is rather
limitingly censorious, wanting Lacan to pay his debts rather than being amazed
by what he could make of what he found in the work of these remarkable people.
Lacan was apparently always dismayed by how little his mentors were influenced
by him. In this book, it is Lacan's craving for recognition--his almost demonic
hunger to be unforgettable--that drives him; and that, every so often, is
gently pathologized by Roudinesco.

            Roudinesco alludes to many
mistresses, though always discreetly, in the abstract. Lacan's private life,
however, was really a tale of two families. A first marriage, in his 20s, to
Malou, the sister of a close friend, with whom he has three children; and then
a second marriage to Sylvie, Bataille's ex-wife, with whom he has his adored
daughter and acolyte Judith. The children of the first marriage are told
nothing of the second marriage until they are young adults. So Lacan leads a
bizarre double life. One of the most chilling scenes in the book is when Lacan,
Sylvie, and Judith stop at a traffic light in Paris and see two of Lacan's
other children. They approach the car, and Lacan drives off. Confronted with
some of the most callous follies of this extraordinary life, the "so what?"
question becomes more and more pressing.

            "An act always misunderstands
itself," Lacan wrote. Indeed, all Lacan's writing is an elaborate meditation on
the ways in which--and the structures by which--we can never be transparent to
ourselves. Lacan's life was a struggle against the institutionalization of
knowledge, and he flourished by creating havoc, both publicly (in a famous
break with the International Psychoanalytic Institute) and privately (among
some of his colleagues). He wanted psychoanalysis to be a science of
self-deception, a proof against the old pieties. It would be strange to wish
that he were more lovable, or honest, or familiar. His life is exemplary in the
modern sense, not as a picture of virtue, or even as a struggle to live out
some kind of personal truth, but rather as a question: How complicated can we
allow people to be before we stop trusting them?

         
      
   
