
   
   
      
         
            Jesus Wept

            Some years ago, I attempted
to write a work of nonfiction that reconstructed the life of the historical
Jesus. I knew that it was an impossible task--and for that reason worth
attempting, since human curiosity can never satisfy itself about the identity
and character of a man whose destiny it was to be hailed, three centuries after
his birth, as Light of Light, God of God, Very God of Very God.

            
Discussing the purely technical problem of how such a book could be written,
the British novelist Peter Ackroyd asked me why I did not make mine a work of
fiction. As the discussion wore on during a long evening, we decided that it
would make a better novel if the traditional claims of theology--from virginal
Conception to Resurrection, with all the miracles between--turned out to be
true. Then, with a great deal of laughter, we recollected that four such books
had already been written, attributed to the writers known as Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John.

            Norman Mailer has now made that attempt. Fortuitously, he
has followed the plan Ackroyd and I considered, namely, writing a book that
accepts the traditional story of Jesus Christ that we were told in our Sunday
schools. This is no Last Temptation . There are no troubling scenes of
lust with Mary Magdalene or, as in a notorious poem that was condemned for
blasphemy in England some years ago, with the Roman soldiery. The only new
difficulty that Mailer has made for himself is that he has decided to tell the
story in the first person. This is the autobiography of Jesus, written we know
not where, but in some eternal realm where he has been dwelling since his
ascension. Like a Chekhovian character, frustrated by his own redundancy and by
an unexplained absence of sympathy with his closest relation, Jesus records:
"My Father ... does not often speak to me. Nonetheless, I honor Him. He sends
forth as much love as He can offer, but His love is not without limit."

            At the
beginning of the book, it would seem as if Jesus/Mailer, like Mikhail Bulgakov
in The Master and Margarita , was going to make witty play of the
evangelists' incomprehension of his message. But in spite of telling us that
the Gospel of Luke is highly unreliable, Jesus accepts the basic evangelical
accounts of his own life, death, and teaching. It is obvious that, in the
heavenly places, he has not had access to any of the modern works of
scholarship that have urged caution on those who accept too readily the Gospel
accounts of his trial.

            
Jesus claims to have been an Essene, a member
of that strict Jewish sect whose puritanical customs and views of life it has
been the delight of modern fantasists to reconstruct. Like the Gospel writers,
Jesus almost exonerates Pontius Pilate from any guilt in his death. He either
has not read--or disbelieves--those modern scholars who believe that, far from
being an enemy of the Pharisees, the historical Jesus was likely to have been
their ally, if not a Pharisee himself. Pilate, who was in real life so cruel
that the Roman authorities had to remove him from the procuratorship of Judea,
is, in Jesus' account of things, the detached Gentile observer who believes
that the "King of the Jews" has done no wrong, and should be released. (The
real Pilate crucified 2,000 Pharisees in a single day.) Here, in Jesus'
account, we read of the Pharisees improbably collaborating with the Romans and
urging them to kill Jesus. It remains the Jews, in the accounts of
Jesus/Mailer, who are guilty of crucifying the innocent Galilean prophet--a
fiction that has had an incomparably damaging historical effect, and which is
both the origin and supposed justification of European anti-Semitism.

            But this
Jesus has strange memory lapses. He was told as a child, for instance, about
the annunciation of the Angel Gabriel to his Virgin Mother, but then he forgot
about it until he was 30, concentrating instead on the carpentry details that
form the least arresting part of his narrative.

            Reading these pages, one can see why Jesus has never chosen
to write a book before, since whenever he adds to the words of Matthew, Mark,
Luke, or John, the results are less than happy. John's Pilate epigrammatically
offers the cynical question, "What is truth?" Jesus' Pilate is a windbag who
adds: "Where there is truth, there will be no peace. Where peace abides, you
will find no truth." (What does this mean? If Jesus had ever read the
uneventful lives of men like Immanuel Kant or Ludwig Wittgenstein, he might
have decided that peace was a precondition for the pursuit of truth.)

            But then,
the sad evidence presented by these pages is that Jesus is not merely rather
stupid, but also a very bad writer. "They drove a spike into each of my wrists
and another spike through each of my feet. I did not cry out. But I saw the
heavens divide. Within my skull, light glared at me until I knew the colors of
the rainbow: my soul was luminous with pain." Perhaps it sounds better in the
Aramaic in which Jesus originally wrote it, but one can't help fearing, when he
sees his words in print, that Jesus will think this sounds like a sadomasochist
on acid.

            
His story ends rather lamely for one who has
been through so much. "There are many churches in my name and in the name of my
apostles. The greatest and holiest is named after Peter; it is a place of great
splendor in Rome. Nowhere can be found more gold." Again, Jesus should have
employed a researcher to tell him that, while the Vatican is not short of gold,
it can hardly rival the Federal Reserve. Jesus is wistful, more than angry, at
the continued success of the devil, but he modestly hopes that he is himself
still of some use to the poor old human race. "It is even by way of my blessing
that the Lord sends what love He can muster down to that creature who is man
and that other creature who is woman, and I try to remain the source of that
love that is tender."

            If only there were creative
writing schools in Heaven, or failing that, editors, we could hope that Jesus
would learn how to improve on awful sentences like that. No doubt he will do
better in his next book. Perhaps the most surprising revelations are left to
the end when, in a passage of acknowledgements, Jesus reveals that he has a
wife called Norris and a literary agent called Andrew Wylie. Maybe he should
get some publisher to sign him up to write the life of Norman Mailer.

         
      
   
