
   
   
      
         
            Innocence Lost

            Philip Roth's American
Pastoral arrived in the bookstores a few weeks ago, and I have been hearing
about it ever since. A friend regales me over lunch with Philip Roth's inflamed
passion against American innocence. Someone else telephones to discuss the
radicalism of the 1960s, generational warfare, and the intricacies of
black-Jewish relations in industrial New Jersey, as depicted by Philip Roth. A
mailman stops me in the street--I'm not making this up--to expound his own
deduction from Philip Roth's tale of family calamity, to wit, that without a
clear sense of God, modern Americans are doomed to lose their bearings and
society will go to hell. The mailman, it's true, has not yet read the novel,
only the reviews, and our lively conversation (many skyward hand gestures)
veers in theological directions alien to American Pastoral . But I cite
the theological detour to show what is going on these days every time I pick up
the phone or loll about on the springtime sidewalk.

            The novel
itself, Roth's fulmination against American innocence, is mostly a portrait of
a single personage, a New Jersey ladies'-glove manufacturer named Seymour
Levov, "the Swede"--a husband and father of exasperating conventionality,
serene, handsome, athletic, bland, shallow, a man who seems to have been
extracted, as if by a blender, from the onion-and-garlic world of the immigrant
Jews, until every last hint of taste and texture have finally disappeared. And
on this perfectly nice and liberal-minded businessman, Roth, in his malicious
rage, has bestowed a monster of a daughter, a stuttering left-wing bomb thrower
and murderous lunatic destined to ruin her daddy's family and his life--just to
show what comes of so much cheer and post-ethnic American optimism.

            The Swede is a great character. I can't say that I entirely
understand him, his placidity and easy manner--but then, nobody understands
him. Is he mad--to be so passive and smiley in our world of tragedy and
foreboding? Or merely stupid? Not even the world-famous novelist Nathan
Zuckerman, Roth's narrator, can figure it out. About the Swede, Roth's
Zuckerman writes, "Something had turned him into a human platitude." But the
motive factor remains elusive. "All that rose to the surface was more surface."
It was clever of Roth to come up with such a personality and to send him
wandering around the New Jersey wilds. But the peculiar virtue of this
characterless character is that he requires Roth to write about him in an
ever-shifting series of tones, each more precise than the last, in an effort to
define what cannot be defined.

            There are
passages where Roth, describing the rural New Jersey landscape from within the
Swede's benign imagination, produces a fine, sugary lyricism that is not more
than 5 percent ironic--a lyricism of white pasture fences and rolling hay
fields and the Swede pretending to be Johnny Appleseed, tossing his imaginary
seed. Then again, there are passages of dark fury--the outraged indignation of
the Swede's wised-up brother, Jerry the Miami heart surgeon, who can't stand
the innocence any longer, and whose drumbeat imprecations achieve a kind of
poetry:

            What
are you? Do you know? What you are is you're always trying to smooth things
over. What you are is always trying to be moderate. What you are is never
telling the truth if you think it's going to hurt someone's feelings. ... The
one who abides everything patiently. The one with the ultimate decorum. ...
Decorum. Decorum is what you spit in the face of. Well, your daughter
spit in it for you, didn't she?

            Or this, even louder (an ability to turn up the volume is
one of Roth's special strengths), again in Jerry's voice:

            You think you know what a
man is? You have no idea what a man is. You think you know what a
daughter is? You have no idea what a daughter is. You think you know
what this country is? You have no idea what this country is. You have a
false image of everything . All you know is what a fucking glove is. This
country is frightening .

            I could
cite a dozen other tones--of pleading impatience, of emotional exhaustion, of
inveigling desperation, and so forth--every possible reaction to the Swede and
his predicament. I wonder if Roth himself appreciates how lively and persuasive
these tones are, how vividly they conjure up the Swede's reality. In any case,
as if still unsatisfied, around these tones Roth has orchestrated a still
vaster range of side topics--ethnic sociology (Jews, blacks, Irish, WASPs,
intermarriage), industrial history (glove-making craftsmanship and its decline,
recounted at length), political debate (the crimes of Presidents Johnson and
Nixon, the migraine rhetoric of Angela Davis), and more, some of it rendered
with exquisite precision, which is fun to read.

            The details do pile up, though, until you begin to think
about the research that Roth must have undertaken, which is always a bad sign.
Then he compounds his error by investing these background details with
portentous meanings about America and its history, and he compounds the
compound by overheating the plot (you will have to discover the details for
yourself). By the end, he is delivering verdicts like this: "The outlaws are
everywhere. They're inside the gates." Or: He tells us that "the real subject"
is one of "wantonness and betrayal and deception, of treachery and disunity
among neighbors and friends, the subject of cruelty. The mockery of human
integrity, every ethical obligation destroyed."

            So here is a novel that is
not only about the '60s but exudes a distinctly '60s fume of windy prophetic
curse-hurling. A good idea, all puffed up, which is a bad idea. The result is
fascinating without being exactly moving. A terrific book, halfway undermined.
But I don't want to make too much of my complaints, given that, in my little
circle of friends, no error or misjudgment on Roth's part appears to have
inhibited anyone's desire to subject American Pastoral to analytic
vivisection. Mayhem, family collapse, the occasional terrorist bomb, mad
government policies, human platitudes--in this pleasant springtime of 1997,
these, as Roth renders them, do seem to be everyone's favorite topics of
conversation.

         
      
   
