
   
   
      
         
            A Modern Woman

            Hermione Lee's biography of
Virginia Woolf is a revelation. Not that Lee offers any startling new gossip.
On the contrary: The facts that she juggles have sat in the public domain for
years, and the story has been worn to threads by frequent telling. Woolf was
born Virginia Stephen in 1882, the freakishly talented, spectacularly
cheekboned youngest daughter of Leslie Stephen, a successful but depressive
London intellectual, and Julia Duckworth, a stoic beauty who brought to the
marriage children of her own. Virginia's early years were drenched in book
chat, but otherwise not so different from other crowded, stifling Victorian
youths: The children had a swarm of spinster aunts, curious animal-inspired
nicknames like "Ape" and "Marmot," and not a moment of privacy.

            Then disaster struck,
struck, and struck again. First, Virginia's mysterious and saintly mother broke
under the strain of Victorian women's work--nursing invalids, running a staff
of servants--though the immediate cause of death was rheumatic fever. Then, her
father in his grief selfishly leaned on Virginia's half-sister, Stella, for
support and, after a period of exhausted servitude, she died too. Virginia
spent her teens getting over a nervous breakdown (the recovery was delayed by
her half-brother, George, who chased her around the house and fondled her).
When her father followed Julia and Stella to the grave, Virginia and her
sister, Vanessa, and their brothers, Thoby and Adrian, left their posh family
home for the decrepit neighborhood of Bloomsbury. They invited Thoby's smart,
ambitious Cambridge cronies Lytton Strachey, Clive Bell, and John Maynard
Keynes over for unchaperoned partying. Soon they began to talk about and
experiment with sex, straight and otherwise (except, perhaps, Virginia, whose
libido at this stage was, according to Lee, dribbled away on childish crushes
on maternal women). Most of all, Virginia wrote, supporting herself with a
brutal workload of reviews, dreaming of delicate but radical new ways to tell a
story.

            This is
Woolf's back story, as it were, the preface to her bohemian celebrity during
the 1920s. Even in the bare-bones narration, it's fertile. Almost too fertile,
in fact--as open to selective interpretation as a Rorschach test. Depending on
whom you consult, following her apprenticeship in suffering Woolf became the
woman who wrote To The Lighthouse and The Waves , a
stream-of-consciousness pioneer and a cool, ethereal priestess of high
modernism. Or the rage-filled victim of abuse and feminist crusader of A
Room of One's Own . Or, to her detractors, a frivolous gossip. Luckily for
us, Lee isn't especially invested in any of these eye-catching slants. She
accepts that all these versions of Woolf are more or less fair. And she
believes that Woolf's writing reflects a lifetime spent contemplating her
strange tangle of traits.

            For lack of a better word, this is the most lifelike
biography I've ever read. Lee counts on our basic familiarity with Woolf's
story, and this frees her up to tease it into all kinds of subtle themes in
much the same way you or I might retrospectively organize our lives under such
motley headings as "Life Under Reagan" or "The Period When I Was Especially
Close to Jim." A visceral early chapter on the houses of Woolf's childhood
tells us what sensory data the little girl would have absorbed: the constant
smell of cigars, the pale yellow shade covering the window that overlooked the
sea. Later chapters calmly walk us through some of the more hotly debated
Woolfian themes, matching each exactly to its place in Woolf's life. Female
friendships supplied critical nurturing, Lee says, and the famous affair with
Vita Sackville-West was a thrill, but Woolf never saw herself as a strict
"Sapphist." As for her husband, Leonard, he earned Virginia's complete loyalty
by stoically caring for her during her breakdowns, but he comes across as
stiff, humorless, and inclined to unconsciously pull male rank.

            Maybe it's
the unusual non-mustiness of Lee's approach, but I was struck by the number of
current concerns that Woolf's life anticipates. Living at the mercy of her
quixotic brain chemistry, she took notes on her moods, observing when her head
felt "cool and quiet" or "sizzling." She was precociously attuned to the
interplay of mind and body, far more so than her peers. One also wonders
whether, if Woolf were alive today, she would join the hordes of writers
abandoning fiction for the memoir. Probably not: Her ambition, love of
make-believe, and need to experiment would have driven her back to the novel.
Yet she felt the impulse to tell her story directly. Lee guesses that it was
because Woolf predicted in advance the ridicule of her male friends (and
literary competitors) that she kept herself from doing so. Here is her
despairing diary entry after she visited a memoir club and read a chapter
aloud: "I couldn't help figuring a kind of uncomfortable boredom on the part of
the males; to whose genial cheerful sense my revelations were at once mawkish
and distasteful. What ever possessed me to lay bare my soul!"

            
Lee demonstrates brilliantly the centrality of
this issue of male censorship, real and perceived, to Woolf's writing. Growing
up in her father's shadow, Woolf felt perfectly comfortable writing like a smug
Victorian patriarch. But she understood that a tone of cool authoritativeness
left no room for her childhood catastrophes, her anger at getting a girl's
paltry education, her palpable delight in reading. To discuss such experiences
she needed a less omniscient voice, a new style--one that in its fragmentation
would become a hallmark of modernism. But she was afraid to go too far, to
alienate all the "genial cheerful" men whose standards she continued to
internalize. As a result, Woolf constantly seesaws in her writing between
revealing and concealing. To be perfectly honest, I think the tension hurt her
fiction. I've always admired her novels, but found the experience of reading
them frustratingly indirect, circular, dissociative. Now I begin to understand
why.

            On the
other hand, Woolf's back-and-forth led to insights that escaped the male
modernists. Lee argues that Woolf's essays are badly undervalued today, and
she's right. "Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Brown," the defense of modernism she
delivered before a puzzled Cambridge audience in 1924, seems, in retrospect,
wiser and more realistic than just about everything else on the subject. In
that essay Woolf explained that she and Joyce and Eliot and the rest had no
choice but to abandon baggy old Victorianism. Why? Because, as she famously
proposed, "on or about December, 1910, human character changed," and it was the
writer's duty to explain this change to readers. Note the humble attention to
human character and readers, not just to high art and artists. Woolf stood up
for her peers, but she also understood if people found her overweeningly
concerned with style, or found Eliot obscure, or Joyce obscene, "a pimply
undergraduate." She knew that modernism was a work in progress, not a new
system to be defended to the death.

            In Lee's hands, Woolf's feminism becomes more radical and
more flexible than one might think. She was no dogmatist. She even thought
"feminist" was a "dead and corrupt word" now that women had the right to earn a
living. But later in life she argued that it was not enough for women to get
rooms of their own in which to become towering, dominant writers like men. She
challenged the ugly human desire to be towering and dominant. She went, as
always, to the question of human character, wondering if there might be a moral
advantage in the centuries women had spent as anonymous people of no status.
She played with the notion of a Society of Outsiders "without office, meetings,
leaders, or any hierarchy, without so much as a form to be filled up, or a
secretary to be paid."

            Woolf's supple "outsiderism"
might seem to have worn pretty well. But in the partisan 1930s, it was
dismissed as dotty and vague. She sank into depression. It didn't help that
fiction writing was becoming harder, and that war was approaching. Given that
Woolf's mind was beginning to cloud over again, Lee thinks that her decision to
kill herself by walking into the Ouse, one day in the 1940s, was, in its way, a
brave one. But it cast a shadow over her life. It made her story too readily
available to people who wanted to see her as a victim, or a crusader, or a
martyr to art. What Lee's biography reveals is much more interesting. Woolf
devoted herself to literature and believed in the rights of women, but both
these passions were part of a humbler--and therefore grander--pursuit. Getting
down to "the essential thing" is how she put it when talking about literature.
"Freedom from unreal loyalties" is the striking phrase in her late feminist
essay Three Guineas . In either case, the goal was to see life a little
more clearly.

         
      
   
