
   
   
      
         
            The Anti-Economist

            When Robert Kuttner's last
book, The End of Laissez Faire , was published in 1991, it set a new
standard in writing about economics for the general reader. It was so bad, and
bad in so many ways, that it demanded a kind of respect. To mention only its
most salient defect, here was a book announcing the failure of market economics
at a time when anybody with the slightest curiosity about the world was
transfixed by the sudden collapse of the main alternative to it: socialist
central planning. Kuttner didn't so much as blink. He briefly noted the
interesting events in Eastern Europe and observed, in passing, that they
confirmed his thesis. Then, with no more time for distractions, he resumed his
trudge through various learned sources (mainly works by John Kenneth
Galbraith), denouncing "free markets" this way and that.

            Give the
man his due: Few writers have the dedication and single-mindedness to work so
hard and see so little. But are these qualities now on the wane? Kuttner's new
book, Everything for Sale , suggests they might be.

            Note the subtitle, "The Virtues and Limits of Markets." Is
there something to be said for markets after all? Not too much, it turns out.
Of the book's 400-odd pages, at most 20 are about the virtues. And when Kuttner
recognizes them, it's usually with reluctance. "Consumption is doubtless
pleasurable," he concedes, doubtfully, "and nobody minds a high material
standard of living." No indeed. Even in areas where Kuttner thinks markets are
all right, he's sensitive to the drawbacks. Supermarkets work well on the
whole, he reckons, but what a burden on the economy that there should be so
many different kinds of breakfast cereal: "At my local supermarket, I counted
more than 150 brands." Kuttner is also stern about cat food--although, in this
case, he provides no data on the number of brands.

            
Nonetheless, Kuttner does appear to be inching to the right. He admits as much
in his introduction: "In exploring different real-world markets, I come away
with increased respect for the power of markets and the complexity of the
story, yet with renewed conviction that the good society requires a mixed
economy." Kuttner tirelessly proclaims his devotion to the "mixed economy," as
though this sets him apart. But almost all economists take the case for a mixed
economy for granted. Where Kuttner breaks with them is in judging the parts
that government and market should have in the mix.

            
Kuttner's essential argument has been the same
for many years. Faith in the virtues of markets rests on a theory whose
assumptions are not just untenable but patently absurd: People are rational and
perfectly informed, firms are too small to move prices single-handedly and seek
only to maximize profits, and so on--an error that, for some reason, economists
have failed to spot. It follows that markets do not work as well as they're
supposed to, and that governments must play a large and active role in the
economy. The properly functioning market economy exists only in the pages of
economics textbooks. In the real world, a heavy dose of government is
needed.

            What is
wrong with this? To begin with, the purported contrast between the blinkered
maxims of economic theory and the penetrating insights of Kuttner's common
sense is a fraud. Economists spend much of their time working out the
implications of "market failure" caused by departures from the assumptions of
the standard laissez-faire model. The textbooks are laden with theoretical
opportunities for efficiency-promoting interventions by government: taxes,
public spending, tariffs, regulation--you name it.

            Just as Kuttner misrepresents what most economists think,
so he exaggerates what governments in the real world can achieve. In theory,
governments may be selfless, competent, and adequately informed. In practice,
they aren't.

            In much of
his book, Kuttner implicitly weighs imperfect markets against perfect
governments, thus evading the issue. He does not entirely ignore the branch of
economics (public-choice theory) that is most concerned with analyzing
government failure. He caricatures it briefly, calls it "banal" and
"tautological," and cites its influence on mainstream economics as further
evidence of the corruption of the academy. Be that as it may, the real choice
is not between imperfect markets and perfect governments, but between markets
that fail and governments that fail.

            
Kuttner would say that a good deal of his book
is addressed to this question. Certainly, many pages are devoted to case
studies of various kinds of regulation and deregulation: telecommunications,
airlines, finance, health and safety, and more. As the cases pile up, a pattern
recurs: The standard method of study, as Kuttner writes, "usually finds that
the cost of regulation outweighs the benefit." Does Kuttner therefore revise
his view that more regulation is usually better than less? Not at all. These
findings only strengthen his conviction that economics is bunk. Again and
again, he deems the beneficial effects of heavy regulation to be self-evident.
Studies that come to the opposite conclusion only demonstrate the bankruptcy of
"ghoulish" techniques such as cost-benefit analysis and provide more proof in
general of the poverty of economics.

            The core
of the book, then, is Kuttner's prejudice against economics. He is not an
economics writer; he is an anti-economics writer. That would be all right if he
could offer some other coherent way to think about these issues, or even if his
critique were arresting or persuasive. But he offers no alternative apart from
his own privileged sense of what is obvious, and his attacks on economic method
are mostly ill-informed or self-contradictory.

            When he attempts to lampoon what he sees as a silly
orthodoxy, he often just gets it wrong. Satirizing the efficiency of financial
markets, he writes: "The market, again by definition, had to be right. If loans
to ski resorts, fast-food chains, and the Bolivian government paid a slightly
higher return than loans to a local small business or housing complex, then
they had to be the more deserving use of capital." As any semiconscious
economics student could tell you, a higher rate would not signal that the loan
in question is more deserving than another, but rather, the opposite: that
investors are being compensated for extra risk, leaving the marginal lender
indifferent among the alternatives.

            No doubt, to Kuttner, that
account is just as stupid as the one he mocks. But if he expects to have any
credibility, he should understand the difference between the two versions.
Kuttner plainly sees himself as a heretic. But a heretic comprehends the ideas
he is attacking. Someone who writes book after book to refute what he doesn't
understand is just a crank.

         
      
   
