
   
   
      
         
            All Work, No Play

            "What tedious work it is,"
confessed a spinster aunt tending to her fatherless nieces and nephews in 1860.
"The same things over and over. It requires a load of patience and I am
principled against showing any impatience to little folks lest it should lessen
my influence." This mid-19 th century godsend--whose letter is quoted
in At Odds: Women and the Family in America From the Revolution to the
Present , by Carl Degler--was an unusual recruit to the enterprise of child
rearing: She neither romanticized her mission nor vented her frustration on her
charges.

            What
clear-eyed calm! Such sanity has been rare in discussions of child rearing in
the "century of the child," as the 20 th was christened at its start
by historians and social reformers. During the Progressive era, experts
extolled parenthood as an ennobling profession set apart from the workaday
grind. By the postwar years, child rearing was being touted as enriching fun.
At least nowadays parents are allowed to complain about the burdens their
children impose. But somewhere along the way, they've--we've--also lost all
patience for kids. This is the disconcerting news delivered by Arlie Russell
Hochschild in her important new book, a sequel to her best-selling The
Second Shift: Working Parents and the Revolution at Home (1989).

            In that book, Hochschild explored the dilemmas faced by
two-career marriages, in which, she found, women still shouldered the bulk of
the child care and housework. The Time 
               Bind charts the
transformation of the workplace in the intervening period, and looks at how
parents and their children are coping now. More provisions have become
available for part-time and flexible employment in successful American
companies. Does that mean that stressed-out mothers and fathers are finding
better ways to balance their home and work lives? The answer, Hochschild says,
is no. Parents are working ever longer hours, and are startlingly frank about
why: Staying home with the kids is "tedious work," especially when you could be
out earning money in a self-esteem-enhancing workplace.

            
Hochschild's subtitle-- When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes
Work --telegraphs her basic argument. "A cultural reversal of workplace and
home" has taken place. In an increasingly work-obsessed society, life on the
job has been "feminized," thanks to efforts to engineer a homelike, caring
culture for employees, complete with solicitous "climate surveys" and
stress-reduction workshops. The home front, meanwhile, has been "masculinized."
It runs like the soulless assembly line of old. Ruthless efficiency,
compartmentalized schedules, too little autonomy, too much anomie: No wonder
parents would rather stay late at the office.

            Hochschild's own work has the air of being effortlessly
well timed. Here, as she did in The Second Shift , she's grabbed a social
problem out of the air that ordinary people groan about a great deal and
scholars and cultural critics generalize about equally ineffectually. She gives
the problem a local habitation--Amerco, a (pseudonymous) Fortune 500 company
rated one of the 10 most "family friendly" corporations in America. Between
1990 and 1993, Hochschild interviewed senior managers, middle managers, and
clerical and factory workers. She shadowed six families as they did, and
didn't, participate in the company's "Work-Life Balance Program," which offers
various child-care options and arrangements for working more flexible or
shorter workdays. She followed the parents home from work, met their children,
became attuned to the tone of their anxieties. And she spoke with the
consultants, child-care providers, and psychologists new to the payroll of a
business that had lately converted to the "Total Quality" philosophy. That
system, the creation of the management guru W. Edwards Deming, replaces overtly
bureaucratic control with self-managing work teams and an emphasis on a "common
vision."

            Employees at every level of Amerco fit Hochschild's profile
of distracted parenthood. Vicki King, a manager who strongly endorses the
company's family friendly policies, works inflexibly long hours herself and
juggles her kids' lives like a bustling administrator. She looks back on her
maternity leave without any nostalgia: "Gee, guys, that was six weeks I didn't
have anybody to talk to. My friends are at work. The things that interest me
are at work." The work needn't be fascinating to exert its pull. Mario, a
workaholic whose low-level job is stacking and loading boxes, loves his kids
but can't wait for his shift with them to end: "It's very stressful mentally,
and I get sick of hearing myself scream." Meanwhile, Mario's wife, Deb, refuses
to cut down on her work at the factory because she knows it means Mario will
cut back on the home front.

            Deb is
blunt about why she likes the status quo, despite the stress of arranging child
care: "At work I can do more of what I want. At home, I have to do what the
kids want." You can almost hear her stamping her tiny foot. These Amerco
parents can sound like, well, children. Indeed, Hochschild calls attention to a
psychological reversal accompanying the cultural reversal: We used to feel
immature at work and independent at home. Now it's the other way around.

            
According to Hochschild, Total Quality
"presumes the worker is a capable adult, not a wayward child." Deming's
emphasis on worker autonomy and a joint "conversation" about the company's
goals revises the much stricter model of "scientific management" championed by
Frederick W. Taylor at the turn of the century, in which the workers were
expected to be obedient drones. Hochschild's radical proposal is that
home is where Taylorism now reigns. Home is where parents feel
infantilized, trapped on a treadmill of efficiency. They've "outsourced"
functions that used to be part of their responsibility (baby sitters, tutors,
camps), creating a fragmented regimen. The fast-paced pressure of their
overscheduled lives has produced a balkiness in their hurried children--and in
their own harried selves--that they feel helpless to deal with.

            But is
the Total Quality workplace really as homelike as Hochschild claims? And is the
Taylorized home front quite the downsized operation she describes? Her own
evidence of parents "fleeing a world of unresolved quarrels and unwashed
laundry for the reliable orderliness, harmony, and managed cheer of work"
points to a diagnosis that is, if anything, more disconcerting. Perhaps parents
are eager to go to work not because it gives them autonomy but because it lets
them be safely and comfortably childlike. At home, they face the daunting
challenge of being superadults. Hochschild acutely observes that "what Benjamin
Spock did for child rearing, Total Quality is doing for work." But Spock was
not, pace his critics, a permissive advocate of giving the child real
power or of giving parents an easy break. He envisioned the parent as the
"friendly boss," vigilantly and solicitously manipulating a naturally docile
child.

            At work, Deb and Mario don't really get to do what they
want, only to enjoy what they have to do. They have been given satisfyingly
discrete tasks, for which they are rewarded with boosts to their self-esteem.
Their needs are defined and ministered to; support is constantly made available
in the form of organized workshops and counseling sessions. The goal is not
independent self-reliance, but a more internalized sense of dependence on the
company.

            At home,
Deb and Mario and the rest of us--whether Amerco employees or Slate
free-lancers with children, like me--don't exactly fit the model of mere
repetitive-motion machines. We're more like Total Quality bosses, and we're
just what many new-style CEOs are: overwhelmed by a vast therapeutic mandate to
keep control while dispersing power and to ensure not just the health but the
happiness, not just the productivity but the loyalty, of our charges. What's
striking, as Sharon Hays recently pointed out in The Cultural Contradictions
of Motherhood (1996), is how tenaciously we cling to "intensive
motherhood," as she calls this ambitious mission, despite its increasing
impracticality and despite how guilty it can make us feel.

            
The truth is that home hasn't suddenly become
work. It has always been work--endless work, and such close restraint. "The
same things over and over." No "recognition ceremonies" for tasks well done,
few clear-cut goals or tidy limits to responsibility. Professionalizing and
romanticizing that work, as experts and parents have tried to do throughout the
century, has not made child-rearing more spiritually satisfying or relaxing. It
has made it more anxiety-inducing.

            Hochschild wants to say that
we can reclaim safe haven in our family life from a market-dominated world, but
her idea of a solution ends up sounding like the ultimate triumph of the
commodified mentality. In vacuous Demingese, she announces that we need to
learn from "public debate about the need for 'emotional investment' in family
life in an era of familial divestiture and deregulation." Actually, Taylorism
might be more in order. More fathers need to buckle down on the home front,
which would improve the attitude and motivation of mothers too. And parents of
both sexes should remember that growing children are the fastest-paced
Americans of them all. Surely that is, paradoxically, the most persuasive
reason to slow down a bit at work and hang out more at home. The kids will be
gone in no time.

         
      
   
