
   
   
      
         
            I Was Wrong

            Nathan Glazer, the Harvard
social scientist and core member of the group known as the New York
Intellectuals, appears to be haunted by second thoughts. This may be a sign of
irresolution. In a review of Glazer's latest book, We Are All
Multiculturalists Now , in the Weekly Standard , Dinesh D'Souza
accuses the author of "cowardice," of mollycoddling the multicultural left in
order to make life in Cambridge tolerable. It's true that Glazer is not the
combative soul that, say, Norman Podhoretz or Irving Kristol is. Glazer is a
gentleman, always ready to concede, at least rhetorically, the sincerity of his
opponent's feelings. (He wrote a nice review of my book, City on a Hill ,
in the New Republic .) But Glazer is also too honest to disguise his own
misgivings, and his new book, painful and awkward and sometimes confused, is
the record of a reality--the reality of race and racial identity--that has
resisted the categories he has tried to impose on it throughout his career.

            Like the
rest of the crowd that gathered around the fabled Alcove 1 in the City College
cafeteria in the '30s, Glazer started out as a Trotskyist. His radicalism,
however, did not last long. In the afterglow of the war and the recovery from
the Depression, Glazer and most of the other New York Intellectuals came to see
America as a great success story. At the heart of their optimistic liberalism
was the recognition that the country had opened itself to impoverished Jewish
immigrants like themselves, and that the immigrants had in turn embraced the
democratic values, the secular rituals, and the faith in individual achievement
that made them Americans. "The complete identification of the overwhelming
majority of persons in each group of Americans in spite of discrimination is
assured," Glazer wrote in a 1954 article in Commentary , one of the
favorite journalistic forums of the ex-radicals.

            Glazer expanded on this theme in his best-known work,
Beyond the Melting Pot: The Negroes, Puerto Ricans, Jews, Italians, and
Irish of New York City , published in 1963 and co-authored by Daniel Patrick
Moynihan. The book's central point was that, contrary to both the fears and the
faith of the '50s, mass culture was not eradicating ancient distinctions of
religion and ethnicity. Its unspoken premise was that every ethnic group until
then had found its own distinctive path to success. Blacks had, in effect,
recently arrived at the head of the line; they had problems, but so had the
Irish and the Italians. "New York will very likely in the end be an integrated
area," Glazer wrote.

            Then the world turned upside
down. There were riots, and the brutal reception of Moynihan's report on the
black family, and the Ocean Hill-Brownsville teachers' wars, and open
admissions at City College. In the foreword to the 1970 edition of the book,
the authors admitted they had assumed that blacks would behave as, and see
themselves as, one ethnic group among many. They hadn't imagined that blacks
would want to be treated as something wholly new, a "racial" group. The authors
wrote that they were "saddened and frightened" by the implications of this
choice, and they blamed the white intelligentsia for legitimizing it.

            It was
race, along with revolt on campus, that pushed Glazer and his crowd to the
right. In 1975, Glazer published Affirmative Discrimination: Ethnic
Inequality and Public Policy , a book in which he attacked affirmative
action and decisively broke with contemporary liberalism. Affirmative action,
with its promise of government intervention to overcome the effects of
discrimination, represented a willful refusal by blacks to accept "the main
pattern of American history," the pattern of ever-expanding inclusiveness. But
when the book was reissued in 1987, Glazer wrote an introduction full of rueful
reflections. It was becoming clear, he wrote, that blacks weren't being
assimilated as others had been. Perhaps affirmative action wasn't so very
willful after all. "The underlying force that keeps the system of numerical
quotas and goals strong is the actual condition of blacks," he wrote. Glazer
didn't think affirmative action was the answer, but he cautioned against an
"all-out assault" on the policy.

            
We Are All Multiculturalists Now should be read
as a book-length postscript, an agonized reconsideration. Glazer is the last
person one would expect to applaud the kind of ethnic chauvinism and
myth-mongering that often go under the name of multiculturalism, and he
doesn't. "I feel warmly attached to the old America that was acclaimed in
school textbooks," he writes. But Glazer concludes that his side has
lost--hence the title. He cites the ubiquity of the multicultural curriculum in
the schools and the blithe acceptance of it even by teachers and administrators
with no ethnic or ideological ax to grind. Multiculturalism, he finds, though
with only the most anecdotal evidence, has been institutionalized. Glazer
appears to be conceding that the postwar liberal faith was misguided, and that
the pluralistic community he envisioned in Beyond the Melting Pot has
not--and perhaps will not--come to pass.

            But
that's not quite so. Glazer observes that while the multicultural curriculum is
being propagated in the name of the new wave of immigrants, the immigrants
themselves want to succeed on more or less the same terms as the European
newcomers of 75 years ago. We Are All Multiculturalists Now has a hidden
subject; it almost seems hidden from Glazer himself. Toward the end of this
short book, Glazer observes that it is blacks, not immigrants, who have pushed
hardest for the multicultural curriculum. And when Glazer asks why this is so,
he finds not the obscurantism of black academics like Leonard Jeffries or Asa
Hilliard, but the hard fact of black experience, and "the fundamental refusal
of other Americans to accept blacks, despite their eagerness, as suitable
candidates for assimilation."

            This is, for Glazer, an almost subversive conclusion.
Conservatives, including Glazer himself, have routinely called on blacks to
behave like immigrants. Now he is saying that blacks want to follow the ethnic
pattern, but can't--and that multiculturalism is the result of that
frustration. It is this recognition that accounts for the strange air of
passivity and gloom that dominates the book. Glazer has reached a cul-de-sac.
He's no more comfortable condemning multiculturalism than he is condemning
affirmative action, though he believes in neither. He is forced to say,
instead, that multiculturalism isn't the end of the world. That's certainly
true, and it's a useful corrective to all the apocalyptic literature on the
subject. But it puts Glazer in the bizarre position of accepting the teaching
of self-esteem-enhancing myths, such as the claim that the Iroquois federation
significantly influenced the framers of the Constitution. Glazer is right to
think that even a steady diet of ethnic special pleading won't lead to
Balkanization and intergroup warfare; but he's also right to wonder if he takes
"too extreme an outcome ... as a test against which to estimate" the likely
effects of multiculturalism. Multiculturalism is guilty of plenty of midsize
wrongs, including bilingual instruction, which often keeps Spanish-speaking
students locked in their own form of isolation, and the reduction of history to
therapy, as Arthur Schlesinger put it.

            But Glazer's underlying point
is that abolishing the multicultural curriculum, even were it possible,
wouldn't do much to diminish racial isolation; the dynamic works the other way
around. This is not, for Glazer, a "problem" with a "solution." It is a
tragedy. Glazer is still the neoconservative who wrote The Limits of Social
Policy . He doesn't believe that any large-scale policy can increase
residential or educational integration, or raise the low level of racial
intermarriage. He doesn't believe that racism is the cause of black isolation,
so he doesn't suggest that enlightenment is the answer. It's not easy to argue
with either of these propositions. But Glazer's own logic leaves him with
nothing to offer--except the admittedly specious comforts of multiculturalism.
We Are All Multiculturalists Now is thus the opposite of Beyond the
Melting Pot --a putatively neutral book with a profoundly discouraging
subtext. And in the arc that connects the two one can read the downfall of what
was once a sustaining faith.

         
      
   
