
   
   
      
         
            Crime and Truth

            Akhil Reed Amar, a professor
of law at Yale, is the acknowledged "dean" of the so-called "truth school" of
criminal-justice reform. This school, which is growing in influence among
academics, judges, and legislators, maintains that the object of criminal
trials must be the truth. To reach this goal, its advocates argue, the barriers
that stand in the way of convicting the truly guilty should be lowered. This
can be done by reinterpreting the relevant sections of the Constitution in
accordance with their original historical meaning. Among the barriers targeted
by the truth school are the Fourth Amendment's exclusionary rule--which forbids
the introduction into trial of evidence obtained in violation of that
amendment--and the Fifth Amendment's prohibition on eliciting the truth from
criminal defendants by compelling them to testify.

            On an abstract level, Amar's
argument is hard to disagree with. Who can be against the truth? The problem is
in the details. In this provocative and often brilliant book, Amar shows us
what his Truth School would look like. It is a beautiful blueprint, but the
plans would not pass a safety inspection in the real world of cops, robbers,
prosecutors, defense attorneys, and judges.

            Amar
offers several radical recommendations. Besides his proposals to abolish
virtually all exclusionary rules and require criminal defendants to testify
against themselves in pretrial depositions, he would limit search warrants to
the point of virtual disuse and, with them, the requirement of probable cause.
He would instead substitute a blanket rule decreeing that all searches that are
not "unreasonable"--an issue to be decided on an ad hoc basis by
juries--satisfy the Fourth Amendment standard.

            In fairness, Amar would attribute these views not to
himself but to the framers of our Bill of Rights. Historians differ, however,
as to the original meaning of the Fourth and Fifth amendments. Not only can the
devil cite scripture, but special pleaders can find in the open-textured words
and often ambiguous history of these hastily drafted amendments almost anything
they want to claim is the right (or left) approach. It is unlikely that Amar's
prescription for a wholesale reinterpretation of established doctrine will soon
prevail. Nonetheless, his writings are too influential to be ignored, even if
the provocative issues he raises are more usefully (and honestly) argued on the
level of the policies they point to than on the level of what the Constitution
dictates.

            What are
the policy implications of Amar's proposals to change our current
interpretations of the Fourth and Fifth amendments to bring them more in line
with the "search for truth"? These proposals should be evaluated on two bases:
Will they, in fact, produce more truth? And if so, will they undercut other
values more important than truth?

            
On the first question, Amar tries to have it
both ways. He rightfully criticizes the current exclusionary rule for not
serving as an effective to police misconduct. His "better way" is to let
citizens sue the government for making mistakes in its quest for evidence. But
if this kind of tort remedy were to work effectively, it would, of necessity,
deter some searches that are today conducted by errant cops who do not fear the
occasional exclusion of illegally obtained evidence. The upshot might be fewer
questionable searches, less evidence, and hence, less truth. Amar gives no
reason to believe his way will be more selective in searching for "true" rather
than "false" evidence. It may prove to be a more effective deterrent to
unreasonable searches, but unless reasonableness is tautologically defined to
include only searches that turn up evidence of guilt, the more effective the
deterrent, the less truth it is likely to uncover.

            Amar
advocates that all criminal defendants be compelled to give pretrial
depositions, but his book is vague about whether these depositions would
substitute for or supplement police interrogation. In a recent public debate
with this reviewer, however, Amar stated clearly that he would accept the
trade-off and give up police interrogation for compelled pretrial depositions.
Such a trade-off would diminish considerably the ability of the police to get
at the truth, since jailhouse interrogation in the absence of a lawyer is more
likely to "break" a guilty defendant than a courtroom deposition conducted with
the assistance of counsel is. That is why I believe that few police
officers--or prosecutors--would accept a blanket prohibition on police
interrogation in exchange for compelled pretrial depositions. They might accept
it for white-collar cases, since white-collar defendants almost never submit to
police interrogations. But "street" criminal defendants do, and many waive
their Miranda rights and confess or provide leads. Thus Amar's better way of
getting confessions might also produce less truth than the current approach
does.

            On the question of whether the proposals of the truth
school will denigrate other values more important than truth, we have a long
history from which to learn. If truth were the only goal of the criminal trial,
that goal would not be difficult to reach. First, we would reintroduce the
techniques of the Inquisition, the Star Chamber, and the Stalinist secret
police. They knew how to get at the truth without any interference from civil
libertarians seeking to burden their single-minded pursuits with such as
privacy, bodily integrity, fairness, and civility. Throughout our history,
those who have sought the Holy Grail of truth have shown impatience with
process. The first victim in the search for truth has too often been
liberty.

            Second, if our only goal were
to maximize truth, we would lower the burden of proof in criminal cases from
"beyond a reasonable doubt" to "a preponderance of the evidence." Why would
anyone seeking more truth prefer "10 guilty go free" to "one innocent ...
wrongly convicted"? Indeed, under our present rule a jury is told that if it
believes that a defendant "probably" did it, it must acquit him, because
"probably" is not enough. A system that sought a greater quantity of truth
would instruct the fact finder to accept a disputed fact if it were more likely
than not that the fact was true.

            Third, we
would never allocate fact finding to 12 randomly selected individuals whose
major qualification is that they know nothing about the matter in dispute. Nor
would we allocate it to judges, who are also not scientific experts. We would
have relevant professionals--scientists, accountants, engineers, forensic
specialists--decide all criminal cases. We would employ the methodologies of
science, not democracy, to arrive at justice.

            
The point is that we all agree--certainly Amar,
who loves juries and supports a high burden of proof, agrees--that our
democratic system of fact finding is already a compromise between the search
for truth and the search for fairness. The real question is how to strike an
appropriate balance among the often conflicting values of truth on the one hand
and considerations such as privacy and equality on the other.

            It is precisely on this
difficult issue that Amar is at his weakest. His absence of hands-on experience
with our current criminal-justice system--his lack of feel for how it actually
works--puts him at a perceptible disadvantage when seeking to strike this
exquisitely delicate balance. Nonetheless, his book is a valuable contribution
to the debate, because it gives those with experience an abstract
architectural plan against which to evaluate today's imperfect reality of
criminal justice.

         
      
   
