
   
   
      
         
            Case Study

            I was terrible at math when
I was young (if anything, I'm worse now), but that didn't stop me from reading
everything nontechnical I could get my hands on concerning topology, which my
dictionary defines as "a branch of mathematics that deals with the properties
of a geometric figure which do not vary when the figure is transformed in
certain ways." However arcane, it was the most anecdotally fascinating area of
math: Moebius strips; Klein bottles; the four-color map problem; the protean
qualities of the torus, or doughnut. That I couldn't have begun to understand
the theory didn't trouble me, although I did feel that I was misappropriating
something haughtily above my station. I would focus on a single mind-bending
element--for example, that the Klein bottle's neck (roughly speaking) folds
back into its body, making inner and outer a single surface and the whole a
two-dimensional object however much airspace it might occupy--and send myself
on a little psychedelic journey contemplating the paradox.

            Much the
same applies to neurology, Oliver Sacks' area of specialization. Scientifically
challenged readers can be entranced by the dérèglement de tous les sens
charge obtainable from his descriptions of anomalies of memory and perception;
lack of knowledge of the exact workings of the cerebral cortex is hardly a
deterrent. Sacks' accounts of aphasia or amnesia or autism or Tourette's
syndrome provide a certain believe-it-or-not quotient for the lay reader; they
also have the force of parables. His best-known book, The Man Who Mistook
His Wife for a Hat (1985), is less a freak show than a gallery in which we
can see ourselves reflected variously, with one element out of whack,
fun-house-mirror style. The views are frequently precipitous, causing the
reader to reflect upon those delicate and unaccountable features of the brain,
ordinarily taken for granted, with appropriate wonder.

            The lure of the case study as a literary genre has been
insufficiently examined. It can take a number of forms: the prurient (as in
much of Freud's), the haunting (ditto), the sordid-poetic (Kraft-Ebbing, for
example), the pregnant-random (as in much of criminology). The closer--and most
eminent--predecessor to Sacks' own approach was the Russian psychologist A.R.
Luria, whose The Mind of a Mnemonist (1968) and The Man With a
Shattered World (1972) are book-length case studies of novelistic richness.
The mnemonist, S., is a touching character whose "disorder" is the most poetic
imaginable even as it brings him torment. He cannot forget anything, and if he
needs to put something out of mind, he has to take a mental walk down his
mental road and dig a mental hole in which to bury it; he is also afflicted (if
"afflicted" is the word) with synesthesia, as well as with an uncertain grasp
of self. Luria's observations are clinical, but they exude a tangible warmth.
He--and consequently, his reader--cannot consider S. without entering his
consciousness, identifying with him.

            The same
can be said of Sacks, who clearly loves his subjects. In An Anthropologist
on Mars (1995), Sacks deepens his focus ( The Man Who Mistook
comprised more than 24 cases, An Anthropologist only seven), entering
the world of his subjects, seeing their daily lives, traveling with them (most
of his earlier cases were observed in hospital settings), and consequently his
accounts become the more affecting even as they involve more hard science. But
the lay reader can bypass the technical data embedded in the story of the
painter who became totally colorblind following an accident (and a possible
stroke), and ponder instead the near-mystical shift that occurred in someone
formerly dependent on color who came to forget what color was, and to value his
achromatopic perception without regret or sense of handicap. The surgeon with
Tourette's, the blind man who regained his sight to his dismay, the subjects
variously marooned in the hippie subculture of 1969 or in a Tuscan village of
the 1930s, the remarkably gifted autists--all are admirable, all are moving,
all are acutely recognizable in human terms. The reader might be forgiven for
wondering if he or she might not possess a touch of autism or Tourette's. This
is not the same thing as leafing through the Merck Manual and imagining
that one possesses every symptom; rather, it is a measure of Sacks' imaginative
capacity for feeling empathy, and for transmitting the same. We come to see
that the varieties of human behavior are not fenced off into plots. My tics and
mnemonic quirks--or yours--may not constitute a syndrome, but we are not so
vastly removed from Sacks' subjects, either.

            
The Island of the Colorblind is a quite
different kind of book, even if it could be superficially described as
consisting of two case studies. The cases in question both occur in Micronesia:
a concentration of congenital achromatopsia on Pingelap, one of the Caroline
Islands; and the occurrence among a stratum of the population of Guam of a
disease called lytico-bodig, which can take forms resembling Parkinson's
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ("Lou Gehrig's disease"), or Alzheimer's
disease--or two or all three in combination. While these ailments and those
affected by them are described by Sacks with his habitual sympathy and
imagination, the real subject of the book is Micronesia itself, and in
particular its flora.

            Sacks'
writing has many charms, among them an avuncular presence, an unaffected
storyteller's voice not often found in popularized science writing these days.
In this book Sacks makes it clear how much this owes to the works he read as a
child, how the passion, clarity, and warmth of Victorian botanists and
zoologists--Darwin above all--formed his imagination. For him, botany was the
road not taken, and here he indulges his continuing interest. But it is not his
ostensible subject, so he relegates much of what he has to say about
plants--among other things--to frequent, lengthy, and digressive notes. These
appear in the back of the volume, making it necessary to read the thing with
two bookmarks. While this might sound unwieldy, it soon establishes its own
rhythm.

            In any case, the diseases in question and the flora in the
margins are intrinsically connected, the tissue being the nature of the islands
themselves. The congenital colorblindness of Pingelap is a direct result of the
place's isolation and its vulnerability to natural cataclysm--it was a storm
that decimated the island's population and enforced inbreeding, causing a
recessive gene to flourish. The origins of lytico-bodig on Guam are still
mysterious (as is the fact that, apparently, no one born after 1950 or so has
been afflicted); there are many theories afloat, one of them involving the
culinary use of the fruit of the cycad, a genus of fernlike shrub that is among
the oldest forms of life on the planet.

            Sacks' informed curiosity
about the causes of the disease (which might hold a clue to the unsolved
mysteries surrounding its Western relatives) is hardly separable from his
affection for the plant. At one point, he is so taken by a large cycad cone
that, "intrigued by the almost-animal warmth of the cone, I hugged it,
impulsively, and almost vanished in a large cloud of pollen." This is comical,
and he knows it, but it is also characteristic of the love and wonder he feels
for the myriad adaptations of life, especially its most wayward forms.

            
               The Island of the
Colorblind is an odd book, part case study, part travelogue, part weave of
digressions, but this oddness is a measure of the personality that unifies it.
It also reflects the fact that the islands are the subject here, in both the
literary and the clinical sense of the word, and that disease, flora, and
topography are all essential and inseparable constituents of their dossier.
Sacks allows the reader to browse at will among the curio-filled cabinets of
his mind. This openness is what makes him such a sympathetic observer of
others, and also what can best persuade the apprehensive lay reader that
science expresses the very highest imagination.

         
      
   
