
   
   
      
         
            Psycho Dramas

            To my mind, Whittaker
Chambers is the most formidable and fascinating of all the Cold Warriors.
"Their panic is my peace," Chambers wrote, speaking through the persona of "The
Devil" (a Communist with his eye on America) in a bizarre, compelling essay for
Life magazine in 1948. Some thought Chambers was the devil. As an
ex-Soviet spy and the man who kicked off the internal Cold War by naming a
group of high government officials as fellow spies, he was certainly the
instigator of a national panic. He remains the American right's best evidence
that a first-rate intellect (and he was that) could see the world in the
black-and-white terms the right has long favored. His torrential, lurid
masterpiece Witness , a best seller in 1952 and still Ronald Reagan's
favorite book in the 1980s, ranks as one of the great American
autobiographies.

            He was
born Vivian Jay Chambers in 1901 to an unhappy, impoverished, middle-class
family on Long Island. As a young man, the brilliant and tormented Chambers, a
Columbia University dropout, consorted with married women, was caught stealing
dozens of books from the New York Public Library, and bummed his way to New
Orleans (he would later identify with Beat writers Jack Kerouac and Allen
Ginsberg). Vacillating between wildly opposed political views, he fervidly
supported Calvin Coolidge in the early 1920s, only to join the Communist Party
in 1925. He spent 13 years as a party member, serving under various aliases as
a courier in a Soviet spy ring infiltrating the U.S. government. Horrified by
Stalin's purges, increasingly convinced that the Communists were literally the
party of Satan and that "man without mysticism is a monster," in 1938 he broke
with the party. He soon announced himself a radical Christian and a right-wing
Republican, becoming in the 1940s a top editor and writer at Time
magazine. In 1948, in a case that played itself out on television (a first) and
in the national headlines, he successfully brought explicit charges of perjury,
and implicit charges of Soviet espionage, against Alger Hiss, who was head of
the Carnegie Endowment.

            Chambers, in other words, is one of the most controversial
Americans of the last half-century, his life a story rife with histrionic
tableaux, profound ideological warfare, and high-level scandal. Sam Tanenhaus,
a free-lance journalist, has written the first serious biography of him. Yet
Tanenhaus' book, while well-researched and lucid, hardly does justice to its
subject. Tanenhaus submits Chambers to a genteel alchemy in which the
wonderfully low is transmuted to the dismally high, and vitality is traded for
status.

            There is much that is
tantalizingly unclear about the Chambers-Hiss case, mysteries I would have
expected a biographer of Chambers to elucidate. We know little about Chambers'
years of homosexual activity, which terminated, he assured the FBI, with his
break from the party. I wanted to learn more about his marriage and his
relations with his imperious mother Laha (with whom he continued to spend much
of his time after his marriage); with his unhappy, aloof, bisexual father Jay;
and with his alcoholic brother, Richard, who committed suicide in 1926 after
begging Whittaker to join him.

            We need to
learn more about Hiss, too. What about his less-than-manly side?
Chambers referred to a "mince" in his walk, and Richard Nixon, a staunch
Chambers ally, always believed the two men had been lovers. Hiss' family
background was as lurid as Chambers'. His mother was cold and controlling; his
father and sister both committed suicide (in 1907 and 1929, respectively); his
beloved brother died of alcoholism in 1926, just as Hiss was beginning his
superbly calculated rise out of the family muck to suave and well-tailored
eminence in Roosevelt's State Department.

            
For light on the psychological aspects of the
Chambers-Hiss story, the best sources remain Allen Weinstein's authoritative
Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers Case (1978) and Chambers himself, who, in
Witness , is far more revealing about himself than Tanenhaus chooses to
be. But I had also hoped that a biographer of Chambers would analyze the
historical controversies over the Cold War to which Chambers' views are
central. One can believe, as I do, Chambers' testimony against Hiss without
accepting his interpretation of the Soviet-American confrontation. Tanenhaus,
however, though he points to some of Chambers' blind spots and ideological
excesses, does not doubt the Soviets' more or less total culpability for the
long disaster we call the Cold War. In his telling, as in Chambers', Roosevelt,
Truman, and American liberals in general "willfully" refused to mount a
full-scale espionage operation against the Russians in the war years (when the
two nations were allies). None of the important revisionist work by historians
such as William Appleman Williams and others--work that poses a powerful
challenge to such assumptions--is cited in Tanenhaus' footnotes or
bibliography.

            If
Chambers is to be believed, he and Hiss met in the early-mid-1930s. They became
intimate friends as they collaborated in stealing government documents and
transmitting them to their Soviet bosses. At their last meeting, as Chambers
was preparing to flee the party, he begged Hiss to join him, but the supercool
Hiss seemed to admire just what horrified Chambers in Soviet behavior--Stalin
"played for keeps," as he put it--and his wife, Priscilla, termed Chambers'
agonized apostasy "mental masturbation."

            By all accounts, the two men did not meet again until 1948,
when Chambers denounced Hiss, among others, to the FBI and the House
Un-American Activities Committee. Most of those Chambers and others named
initially took the Fifth Amendment before HUAC (though they confessed to the
FBI shortly after). Some were murdered or committed suicide in mysterious
circumstances early in the investigations. Henry Dexter White, once a top
adviser to FDR and then head of the International Monetary Fund, succumbed to a
heart attack in August 1948. Only Hiss, against the advice of his friends,
chose to defy Chambers and HUAC, insisting that he had never even met Chambers,
much less been a Communist or a Soviet spy.

            From the
start, Hiss, impeccably groomed and eerily calm ("It might be someone else who
was on trial," one journalist marveled), relied on his patrician credentials.
By now, he had admitted to knowing Chambers, but merely as one "George
Crosley," a "deadbeat" he'd been kind to in passing a decade earlier. How could
the testimony of a man like Chambers, Hiss asked with icy contempt, visibly
unkempt, overweight, and "forbiddingly drab" (in Lionel Trilling's phrase),
with no style and little personal status, a man who had lived, in Hiss' words,
"in the sewers, plotting against his native land," possibly outweigh the simple
facts of Hiss' career as Harvard graduate, trusted aide to FDR at Yalta, and
one of the architects of the United Nations? It was a drama of politics and
class, the "liberal" aristocracy of the New Deal pitted against the ill-bred
ugly upstarts of right-wing reaction, a prelude and cue to the McCarthy
era.

            
Most of all, it was a competition in
truth-telling (or falsifying), a Cold War duel in credibility occurring amid a
mounting pileup of classified information, exposés, and oxymoronic jargon that
would eventually donate euphemistic doublespeak terms like "dual hegemony,"
"limited nuclear war," and the slogan "win the peace" to the American language.
Chambers was eager to take a lie-detector test, on television (his lawyers
dissuaded him). Hiss never volunteered to take one, but he pointed out to HUAC
that it was "inconceivable" that he, a highly public figure, could have fooled
for so long the journalists and statesmen who saw "my every facial expression,"
"heard the tones in which I spoke," and "knew my every act." It was, as
Chambers saw it, a crisis of faith. Whom, and what, could you believe?

            During
the HUAC hearings, Congressman Edward Hébert commented, "Whichever one of you
is lying is the greatest actor that America has ever produced." Or as one
headline succinctly put it, "Who's the Psycho Now?" If a "psychopath," a term
that enjoyed its greatest vogue in the Cold War years, is someone who meets no
inner resistance in the act of uttering and maintaining what the world holds to
be untruth, the honors must go to Hiss. The evidence that has accumulated over
the years, mostly from Soviet archives, has overwhelmingly favored Chambers'
version of the facts. Tellingly, Hiss thought the Mafia men he met in prison
the "healthiest" people there, because they "had no sense of guilt." But
Chambers had his own secrets and hidden motives--his pathological drive toward
martyrdom, his homosexuality (the sin of sins in the Cold War era, routinely
treated as a synonym for treason), and his undoubted obsession with Hiss. He,
too, "began to play the part assigned to me," he writes in Witness .

            Strangely, Tanenhaus chooses to withhold all information
about Hiss until he gets to the 1948 Chambers-Hiss confrontation. He omits
altogether the story of Chambers' friendship with Hiss, though he never doubts
its authenticity. He identifies unavoidable references to Hiss only in
footnotes, and finally presents their relationship in a brief flashback in the
course of detailing the trials. By this awkward, deflationary reordering and
compression, Tanenhaus clearly means to assert Chambers' importance independent
of Hiss, to give him the dignity that comes with autonomy. But this is to
desert, even betray, his subject. It was Chambers' peculiar fate, and choice,
to live a life that was inseparable from another's. The two men have been
joined forever in an intimacy deeper and more complex than that of blood or
sex.

            Chambers
developed increasing reservations in his later years about the direction the
American right was taking, distancing himself first from Joe McCarthy, then
from Richard Nixon, and even from William Buckley Jr.'s National Review .
But Chambers' importance lies, finally, not in his politics but in his romantic
penchant for the extremes of the psychic and political undergrounds. With his
susceptibility to ridicule and parody, his air of furtive portentousness, his
apocalyptic Manichaean vision of purity overtaken by disease, his dazzling
displays of the uncanny intuitive skills that sometimes accompany obsession, he
was a pulp-fiction Dostoyevsky, an author he admired above all others.

            
Though he would have considered himself a
champion of high art, melodrama was Chambers' medium. The roles he picked for
himself were Dostoyevskian ones--the doppelgänger, playing unheeded guilty
conscience to a modern Mephistopheles; the high-pitched prophet, trying to
break what he saw as the "invincible ignorance" of a nation blinded to the
"crisis of history" by its prosperity and misguided generous-mindedness. For
Hegel, history was a slaughter bench; for Chambers, it had become an emergency
room. He has not been adequately served by a biographer unwilling or unable to
understand the nightmare of Cold War epistemology, the place where politics and
pathology become indistinguishable.

         
      
   
