
   
   
      
         
            Redundancy

            The appearance of a new
Muriel Spark novel is like a birth in one of those large artistic families that
run to genius and oddness: the Brontës, the Redgraves, the Beach Boys, the
Jackson brood. Reality and Dreams shares its build and many of its
features and gestures with such brilliant blood relations as Memento
Mori , The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie , and A Far Cry from
Kensington , Spark's flawless explorations of mortality, hero worship, and
literary politics, respectively.

            Of
course, not every member of a distinguished family is equally appealing.
Branwell Brontë drank and raved. Similarly, Reality and Dreams is not
Spark's most pleasant novel. Its hero, Tom Richards, is a filmmaker with a
passion for controlling things. He has trouble distinguishing between his
fictions and his real life, doing his best to manipulate both, and he's hard to
warm to.

            Spark brings complicated families to mind partly because of
the familial structure she gives her novels. She favors a huge cast bound
sometimes by blood and marriage, sometimes by more casual connections, such as
geography or religious beliefs. As in a real family, some characters struggle
for ascendance, while one or two Prospero figures believe they can yank the
others around. So Tom Richards is something of a Spark type. Also as in real
life, these Prosperos are not always right about how much they can control.
When Reality and Dreams opens, Tom has just fallen from a high place--a
crane where he liked to sit and "shout orders through the amplifier and like
God watch the team down there group and re-group as bidden. Especially those
two top stars and the upstart minor stars, with far too much money, thinking
they could direct the film better themselves."

            Confined to his bed with a
broken hip and 12 broken ribs, Tom frets about his interrupted movie and
receives visits from his family. There's his wife, Claire, wealthy and
generous; his daughter by Claire, self-righteous Marigold, whom he calls "an
unfrocked priest of a woman"; his beautiful daughter by his first marriage,
Cora; and various spouses and lovers, past, present, and future, his and
theirs.

            The
characters squabble like siblings, jealous regardless of whether they have
cause to be. Perhaps rightly, few of them believe there's enough money,
security, fame, power, and love to go around. The menace of deprivation haunts
the book like a bourgeois anxiety dream. Character after character, although
well-connected, well-educated, and well-to-do, is laid off work, or "made
redundant." The characters respond tellingly, either gloating, helping, or
scheming. When Cora's husband, Johnny, gets the ax, Tom ruminates, "I am glad
... that Johnny has been made redundant. I am glad with the gladness of the
lover of truth: the man has always been superfluous." Later, Johnny comes to
see him: "Tom said, 'If you think I am a stone that you shouldn't leave
unturned, you are wasting your time.' "

            
Reality and Dreams has a typical Spark plot,
artificial and suspenseful as a mystery thriller, full of clues and malice, yet
elusively allegorical. Its apparent center is Marigold's mysterious
disappearance on Page 85, almost exactly halfway through the book, after Tom
has recovered from his fall and finished his movie. Is Marigold dead, or just
trying to get attention? Leave it to a Spark character to try to seize center
stage by vanishing. Marigold's parents, who never noticed her much except to
deplore her, are forced to think about her, and her father discovers that she
has "[s]triking looks, not good-looking in fact plain ugly. But striking."

            But in Spark's world,
appearances (and disappearances) are deceiving. Sometimes what seems to be
central is really peripheral, and a throwaway plot point turns out to be the
story's symbolic heart. As the book opens, Tom is working on a movie about a
rich man who sees a girl flipping burgers at a campsite and decides to leave
her a vast fortune. It's based on his own experience, a moment when he caught
sight of such a girl and had an impulse to give her all his money (or rather,
all his wife's money, since the family money actually belongs to Claire). The
focus of his movie, however, winds up being not the hamburger girl, but the
benefactor's girlfriend, who is played by Rose, a star with huge box-office
draw.

            When Tom begins an affair
with Rose, the actress who plays the hamburger girl becomes jealous. "I was
deliberately photographed in half-profile all the time, so I wouldn't be
recognised. The light always, always, blotted me half out," she complains to
Claire.

            "You were
meant to be half blotted out," Claire tells her.

            Memento Mori was about death; Reality and Dreams is
about a sort of half death: being made redundant, being half blotted out. Spark
was in her prime when she wrote Memento Mori . As she draws closer to
mortality (may it be many novels away!), she has taken up the question from the
perspective of the artist. Is it possible, she asks, to become famous while
disappearing? What happens to an artist whose characters refuse to cooperate?
Just who is in charge, anyway? And (as Tom wonders in the book's opening line)
are we all characters in one of God's dreams?

            We know,
of course, whose dreams Tom is a character in. By putting the question in his
mouth, Spark is implicitly comparing herself to God. Similarly, her title
teases her readers, inviting us to draw parallels between her personal history
and the story she tells in the novel, though she declines to supply the
necessary details about her life. ( Curriculum Vitae , the memoir she
published a few years ago, politely fends off the curious.) Such
self-referential questions can be pointless and irritating, and books that
dwell on them generally belong in a category that one friend of mine calls "art
about art supplies." Unfortunately, Reality and Dreams doesn't transcend
this category. The main characters are too mean to care about, and it's painful
to watch everyone pick on Marigold--even her author--whether or not she
deserves it. Still, for barbed wisdom, surprises, and technique, there's no one
like Spark. If she wants to write a sketch of her pencil box, I for one will
gladly read it.

         
      
   
