
   
   
      
         
            Judge Dread

            There are two kinds of law,
wrote Thomas Paine in 1805: "Legislative law is the law of the land,
enacted by our own legislators, chosen by the people for that purpose.
Lawyers 
               law is a mass of opinions and decisions which courts and
lawyers have instituted themselves." Paine liked the first kind of law better.
So does Antonin Scalia. As the most intellectually consistent and stylistically
gifted member of the Supreme Court, Scalia has never hidden his enthusiasm for
the American tradition of mistrusting courts and lawyers. The basics of his
judicial philosophy are now usefully collated in this volume, which consists of
an essay by the associate justice, followed first by responses from Gordon
Wood, Laurence Tribe, Mary Ann Glendon, and Ronald Dworkin, and then by a reply
from Scalia.

            According
to Scalia, the problem begins in law school, where tomorrow's judges digest a
steady diet of fusty 19 th -century English appellate decisions, and
taste--for the first time--the joys of reasoning by analogy and precedent. A
few of these students befriend their senators, or find some other way to become
federal judges; by that time, they have internalized what Scalia calls the
"common-law attitude," and they become a dangerous lot. Faced with an ambiguous
statute or regulation, these judges, reared on the common law, too often treat
the enacted text as just one more precedent to circumvent. In other words, they
hijack the democratic process.

            Scalia offers two antidotes to this epidemic of judicial
lawmaking: textualism and originalism. "Textualism" is just what it sounds
like. As Scalia puts it, "The text is the law, and it is the text that must be
observed." The only democratically binding feature of a statute is its literal
language, because that language alone has been ratified by both houses of
Congress and the president in accordance with the Constitution. "Originalism,"
as Scalia defines it, is a species of textualism particularly relevant to
constitutional interpretation. Its adherents tether their interpretations to
plain meanings as they were understood when the text was first penned.
Originalists believe, as Scalia puts it, that a constitution's "whole purpose
is to prevent change--to embed certain rights in such a manner that future
generations cannot take them away."

            None of
this is new to anyone who has paid attention to Scalia's opinions and other
writings over the past decade. Yet, in A Matter of Interpretation , his
reprise of the traditional jeremiad against judicial usurpation concludes with
a twist. The specter raised by common-law judging, Scalia says, is not the
unelected judge determined to impose the values of an elite few upon the
masses, but that old Tocquevillian villain, the tyranny of the majority.
Scalia's argument goes like this: As judges persist in bending the law, the
majority of the moment will begin to insist ever more stridently on judges of
its particular ideological stripe. Once on the bench, these judicial
politicians (emboldened by their anything-goes common-law attitudes) will set
about encoding the popular will into law, to the detriment of unpopular
minorities.

            
As law Professor Mary Ann Glendon points out in
her response, this is an odd coda, especially given the majoritarian premises
of Scalia's philosophy. (Glendon shares Scalia's distrust of undisciplined
judges, but hers is the more traditional anxiety, rooted in a fear of elites.)
At the end of the book, Scalia, defending his prediction that judges will carry
democracy too far, contends that the individual rights favored by judges tend
to be the same ones championed by popular majorities. Here is Scalia's list:
women's rights, racial-minority rights, homosexual rights, abortion rights, and
"rights against political favoritism." Scalia's notion of what constitutes a
popular cause does seem questionable--racial-minority and gay rights are not
nearly as universally supported as Scalia seems to think they are. His
nightmare scenario is also far-fetched: Life-tenured judges are dubious
vehicles for implementing a popular will that changes from moment to moment.
Besides, judges can't be relied on: Supreme Court justices, for instance, are
famous for disappointing their appointers.

            Scalia's
prescriptions have long drawn fire from legal academics. Some of their
criticisms are repeated here by legal academics Laurence Tribe and Ronald
Dworkin: Scalia's originalism is too glib, because it doesn't distinguish
between what the Constitution says and what its framers expected it to
do ; too malleable, because it merely substitutes the guesswork of
historians for the musings of moral philosophers; too value-laden, because it
imputes an anti-evolutionary purpose to the Constitution. And so on.

            Yet, Scalia is refreshingly right in several particulars.
He justifiably laments the virtual disregard of statutory interpretation in
law-school curricula, where the hoary common-law case-study method still
predominates despite the fact that most law nowadays takes the form of statutes
and regulations.

            Scalia
also rightly rejects the use of "legislative history" (committee reports and
floor debates) as a guide to divining lawmakers' intent. Committee reports are
worthless, not only because they lack a democratic pedigree, but because they
are infinitely pliable. (Scalia quotes Judge Harold Leventhal's quip that using
legislative history is like looking over the heads at a cocktail party until
you spot your friends.) And Scalia is right to object to the caricature of the
textualist/originalist judge as wooden and unimaginative--nontextualists, after
all, can be plenty wooden and unimaginative themselves.

            
Admitted nontextualists, incidentally, are
becoming harder and harder to find. Scalia's "plain language" approach has
certainly become more popular among his bench mates. The simplest proof of this
is the remarkable increase in citations to dictionaries in Supreme Court
opinions. A recent study found that dictionary definitions were 14 times more
likely to appear in the court's decisions five years after Scalia's swearing-in
than they were five years before it. (The originalists, of course, like to dust
off old dictionaries--Dr. Johnson's 1785 edition for the Bill of Rights,
for instance.) This lexicographical trend won't cure the textualists'
reputation for stiltedness; reading some of these opinions is like listening to
the high-school valedictorian who inevitably begins, "I didn't know what to say
today, so I looked up the word 'commencement.' "

            Even
devotees of the "Living Constitution" like Tribe now declare their fidelity to
text. It's surprising that Tribe's essay doesn't discuss his textualist
argument for the unconstitutionality of Colorado's Amendment 2, which forbade
cities to enact anti-discrimination ordinances based on sexual orientation.
Citing almost no cases, Tribe told the Supreme Court that the Colorado
initiative violated the letter of the Equal Protection Clause because it denied
gays alone the protection of the anti-discrimination laws. Not an airtight
argument (all anti-discrimination laws pick and choose among protected
classes), but a cleverly textualist one--and one that seems to have helped
convince a majority of the court to strike down the amendment, despite a lack
of helpful precedent. (Scalia offered a different textualist reading of the
Equal Protection Clause, grounding his arch dissent firmly in
majoritarianism--"The Court has mistaken a Kulturkampf for a fit of
spite.")

            So how often are judges actually as willful as Scalia
claims they are? It still sometimes happens. Last spring, the 9 th
U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals found in the Due Process Clause a constitutional
right to physician-assisted suicide by relying on Plato, Montaigne, Thomas
More, and the Roper poll. Its decision, which Tribe defended before the court
earlier this month, is almost certain to be reversed, probably on textualist
grounds. Most of the current textual infidelity, though, occurs because the
doctrine of stare decisis --which dictates adherence to precedent--forces
today's judges to live with adventurous Supreme Court decisions from earlier in
the century. Not surprisingly, Scalia is no big fan of stare decisis : In
his dissents, he often calls upon the court to scour away layers of encrusted
precedent in order to get at the original meaning of the underlying text.

            How judges interpret statutes
and constitutions is, according to Scalia, "a question utterly central to the
existence of democratic government." That's hard to dispute. Yet, as Wood--a
historian of early America--shows in his essay, it's also a question we've been
asking since the colonial era, fitting the answer to the needs of the moment.
The revolution of 1776, for instance, was fueled in part by the colonists'
resentment of the overweening powers of royal judges. As early as the 1780s,
however, the pendulum had swung back, and many Americans looked to the courts
to check the excesses of their legislators. To Scalia, however, the idea that
judicial power responds to the demands of the time merely proves that "there
have always been willful judges who bend the law to their wishes."

            Seen from a historian's
perspective, Scalia's view of the debate over the judiciary does look a bit
Manichaean. But it would be a mistake to dismiss him for that reason. Scalia's
arguments have shaped the debate in our time; he has gone a long way toward
changing how judges interpret the letter of the law. Not all the way--he has
not yet succeeded in building a durable majority on the court. Does this mean
that unpopular individual rights are in peril? More likely, it simply goes to
show--as do the exchanges in this stimulating book--that there is more than one
way to read a text.

         
      
   
