
   
   
      
         
            Z.

            For honesty's sake, any
early criticism of Thomas Pynchon's new novel, Mason & Dixon , ought
to be labeled "provisional" or "tentative." The text of the book was released
two weeks ago as of this writing. And because it will take any normal human
being at least that long to read the galleys (773 pages), let alone reflect
upon their contents, it's a fair bet that anyone who reviews the novel has 1)
merely skimmed it, meaning his impressions are superficial; 2) actually read
every page, but only by foregoing food and rest, meaning his impressions are
warped by stress; or 3) not read the book at all, meaning his impressions are
just as worthy as those of the thousands of other literate folk who will buy
Pynchon's novel on reputation, read the jacket copy, put it down, and pronounce
it either another masterpiece or a disappointing falling off, though somewhat
better than Vineland , his previous book. Indeed, I have already heard
the latter view bandied about at New York cocktail parties

            Here is
my own preliminary view, based on 400 pages read, 200 skimmed, and 100
foregone: Maybe, just maybe, minimalist fiction wasn't such a bad thing after
all.

            As I said, it should take any normal human being at least
two weeks to get through Mason & Dixon --but that begs the question
of whether Pynchon's writings are intended for normal human beings. I don't
think they are. They partake of what the Elizabethans called "euphuism"--the
pursuit of linguistic complexity for its own sake. As such, they're intended
for literary monastics, for the tenured priesthood of paid interpreters that
sprang up in colleges after World War II with the help of massive public
funding from schemes such as the GI Bill and Pell grants. This professional
audience for difficult "texts" created the demand that Pynchon first filled
with V. and Gravity's Rainbow , the semiotic monoliths whose mix
of scientific imagery, Cold War absurdity, and Joycean allusion provided a kind
of full-employment program for a generation of rising postdocs. In academia,
Pynchon found his patrons. In Pynchon, academia found its paychecks.

            The
problem is that Pynchon is performing for a court that no longer exists. The
boom in subsidized deconstruction is over. (What's Mason & Dixon

               about ? I'll get to that.) Think about what's happened to the novel since
the fat, fecund days of Gravity's Rainbow . It's grown thin and literal
and modest, so much so that the typical first novel isn't called a first novel
anymore; it's called a memoir, just one step from journalism, and it's
immunized from conventional criticism by its traumatized sincerity. Even the
bright young men who imitate Pynchon by fortifying their fashionably fractured
stories with math and science, myth and metafiction, can't really hold a candle
to the master. They write Italian compared with Pynchon's Latin--perhaps
because they no longer have a church behind them, merely chains of secular
superstores.

            
Which brings me to the new novel itself.
Written in 18 th century English ("magical" is spelled "magickal,"
for example, and the predominant punctuation marks are the dash and the
apostrophe), it tells the picaresque tale of two astronomers best known for
surveying the Mason-Dixon line, which separates Pennsylvania from Maryland and
the American cultural North from the cultural South. We meet the pair as
they're setting off from England for southern Africa, where they hope to
observe the transit of Venus for purposes of mapping the Earth's longitude.
You'll learn a lot about shipping in this novel, and the main thing you'll
learn is how important it was to find a reliable way of measuring longitude.
National fortunes depended on the feat, making it the Age of Reason's
equivalent to finding the Holy Grail.

            As Mason
and Dixon travel, they have adventures. Rollicking, bawdy adventures. They
drink. Carouse. While staying in Cape Town with a family of Dutch colonists,
Dixon is set upon by its three young daughters, whose mission is to arouse him
to the point where he'll want to mate with their black slave, thereby producing
a light-skinned offspring. When the pair land in colonial America, they hook up
with Benjamin Franklin, finding not a parsimonious Puritan but a turned-on,
pre-psychedelic party animal. Franklin wears tinted glasses, consorts with
prostitutes, and stages late-night proto-raves at pubs, wowing the crowds with
electrical experiments and machine-made music. "The moment you've all been
waiting for ... the Saloon or the Orchid Tavern is pleas'd to Present, the
fam'd Leyden-Jar Danse Macabre! with that Euclid of the Electrick,
Philadelphia's own Poor Richard , in the part of Death."

            Next, it's on to Virginia to see George Washington. He
greets the travelers by lighting up a hemp pipe and getting them roundly
stoned. To curb the men's munchies, Martha serves muffins and doughnuts. The
comedy of anachronism is Pynchon's favorite kind, and here, as elsewhere in his
work, it isn't very funny. Pynchon the verbal technician is genius, but Pynchon
the humorist is lame indeed and reminds one of a brainy college sophomore who
studies joke books to make himself amusing. Worse, he's very big on language
humor, on purposely mismatching tone and topic and veering abruptly between
high-flown rhetoric and scatological bluntness. Again, not funny. The man who
once represented the future of literature--and, to some, still does--is bogged
down in Ivy League revue-style japery circa 1958. A farting priest who's quick
with learned puns is his idea of hilarity.

            As Washington and the
surveyors pass the pipe, intrigues and conspiracies involving all sorts of
secret factions--Jesuits, Masons, British trading companies--are hinted at.
Everyone has a vital interest, it seems, in Mason and Dixon's wilderness
survey, and it becomes clear that the pair are really pawns in some obscure
sociocultural power struggle that may involve as-yet-unknown advanced
communication technologies. When Washington reveals that French explorers have
buried mysterious metal plates up and down the frontier, die-hard Pynchon fans
will lick their chops. Playful, ingenious revisions of orthodox history based
on complex, covert affiliations and strange secret weapons are the master's
trademark. At bottom, Pynchon writes mystery novels--symphonic, polymathic
detective stories that resolve themselves not in simple sums but in hip new
intellectual logarithms. And he pays his readers the ultimate compliment of
writing as though he knows they're capable of getting his erudite cosmic
jokes.

            That's the rub, and that's
why I'm not a fan: Pynchon is a writer you have to "get," and I find no
activity less inspiring than Rubik's Cube-ing through a clue-strewn supertext
in search of a paradoxical Eureka! The low part of the higher mind that
Pynchon so pyrotechnically appeals to (the same part that responds to Escher
drawings, PDQ Bach, and perspective-switching holograms) is not a part of
myself I'm in touch with, nor do I particularly long to be. I admire
Pynchon; I'm wowed by him at times; but the truth is I'm happy leaving him to
the experts whose academic labs gave birth to him. They're the ones whose love
he seems to want, the ones who seem best equipped to give it to him. May their
funding never quite dry up.

         
      
   
