
   
   
      
         
            STOP the World, I Want to Get Off

            I'll bet that very few
people who begin William Greider's new 528-page book will read every word of
it. Like his 799-page tome on the Federal Reserve, Secrets of the Temple
(1987), it would have been vastly improved by being cut, perhaps in half.
Entire arguments and quotations are repeated from chapter to chapter. Most of
the chapters include a tedious travelogue. Here, for example, is Greider's
description of Mexico City: "Its European grace notes, the broad boulevards and
castles inherited from colonial eras, were splashed with wild, magical colors
that could only be described as 'Mexican.' "

            But I
would also bet that anyone who gets through this book (except, perhaps, for a
few economists and Treasury officials) will feel a pang of regret for not
taking Pat Buchanan or Ross Perot more seriously last year. Not that the author
is a Buchananite or a Perotista; a former Washington Post editor and
currently a political writer for Rolling Stone , Greider is liberal and
cosmopolitan. But in One World, Ready or Not , Greider explains why
Americans should feel anxious about their place in the new world economy--an
anxiety that Buchanan and Perot addressed, however imperfectly, and that Dole,
Clinton, and many of America's opinion makers ignored. I may be prejudiced
because I share Greider's political point of view, but I think this is the best
book to date on the perils of the new world economic order. It does for the
post-Bretton Woods world of currency swaps, runaway shops, and technology
transfers what his earlier book did for the Fed. It makes a daunting subject
somewhat comprehensible--and harrowing.

            The book contains a core argument about industry and labor,
which I believe to be true. Greider contends that in many key
industries--including autos, textiles, steel, ships, aircraft, chemicals,
computers, and drugs--the world's companies are capable of producing far more
than the world's consumers can buy. Such overcapacity in autos, for instance,
runs as high as 25 percent, and will probably rise as each country tries to
develop its own automaking industry. And the overcapacity problem is getting
worse, for a couple of reasons. Advances in technology allow industries to
produce more goods with fewer people (in effect, creating more supply but less
demand). Meanwhile, Japan, China, and other Asian nations have adopted
mercantilist trade strategies: that is, they have sought, through barriers or
government subsidies, to guarantee surpluses. By definition, such a strategy
expands the supply of goods without proportionately boosting demand.

            
Overcapacity reduces the incentive for businesses to invest and leads to slower
world growth, as supply continually threatens to outrun demand. Put this
together with the new mobility of capital--the ability of companies to move
their manufacturing facilities wherever the costs are lowest--and you have the
ingredients for an international race to the bottom in wages and social
benefits, as companies seek to cut costs in the face of this overcapacity and
heightened competition for markets.

            
In the United States, the quest to lower costs
encourages corporate managers to destroy unions. It's the class war all over
again, Greider notes, only worse. "In historical terms," he writes,
"revolutionary capitalism has circled back to its original fight with socialism
a century ago and reopened the ideological argument, but from a much stronger
political position. Labor and the left are in retreat almost everywhere;
commerce and finance predominate in politics and have adapted centralized
government to their own uses."

            Greider
also undertakes an ambitious analysis of global finance. In this area, I am
less confident of my own knowledge--and therefore, of his conclusions. But his
arguments are provocative and address seeming anomalies that conventional
theorists have failed to address, let alone explain. For instance, Greider
argues that the unexpected rise in interest rates in 1994-- after the
Clinton administration had reduced the deficit--was the result of an entirely
separate drama played out among private bondholders, who wildly overinvested
the previous year. In explaining why economic growth has lagged over the last
two decades, Greider singles out the deregulation of finance by both national
and international bodies. The ensuing volatility of currency-exchange rates, he
argues, has made businesses' projections of profits from trade increasingly
unreliable, thereby discouraging productive investments and growth.

            Greider also argues that deregulation helped make the value
of advanced nations' financial assets grow faster than their actual economies.
From 1980 to 1992, Greider notes, financial assets from advanced nations have
expanded at 6 percent a year, about twice as fast as the economies themselves
were growing. That has led to a worldwide situation comparable to Japan's
bubble economy, where, with assets systematically overvalued, a crash became
inevitable. But while Japan's Ministry of Finance has ably managed that
country's crisis, there is no comparable global body to police the world
system.

            In
Secrets of the Temple , Greider warned that central banks had taken over
U.S. economic policies. He now acknowledges that power has shifted to the
global market and its private players, who, like George Soros, possess the
power to overturn government currency decisions. According to Greider, in 1983
the five major central banks of the world held $139 billion in foreign exchange
reserves, compared with $39 billion a day that was traded, on average, in
foreign-exchange markets. In 1992, the central banks had $278 billion in
reserves, but the private market was trading $623 billion a day. As the power
of traders and private bankers has grown, government economic policy has become
hostage to the financiers' and speculators' fears that economic growth will
spur inflation, which will reduce the value of their holdings. So governments
follow the financiers' prescriptions for curbing inflation--slower growth
through a balanced budget and higher interest rates. They end up doing all they
can to eliminate the one instrument--rapid economic growth--by which they might
close the gap between finance and industry. "This commitment to slow growth,"
writes Greider, "does protect the value of money and financial assets, but it
is like a noose thrown around the advanced economies, sure to deepen their
imbalances in production and employment."

            
The upshot of all this, Greider worries, might
be a repeat of the 1920s. During that decade, industry and finance were also
strangely out of step with each other, and nations also faced a conflict
between popular welfare and the imperatives of the market. For Greider, the
rise of Buchanan in the United States and right-wing nationalism in Europe is a
foretaste of a 21 st -century fascism. As an alternative, he suggests
a "moderate" middle ground between the rentier capitalism's status quo
of balanced budgets and wage and benefit cuts on the one hand and a "hard,
reactionary politics that can shut down the system" on the other. The latter
would probably call for shutting off immigration, erecting permanent,
high-tariff walls, and "solving" the problem of unemployment by stigmatizing
the least employable. Between these extremes lie Greider's own solutions, which
he summarizes thus:

            Restore
national controls over global capital. Tax wealth more, labor less. Stimulate
global growth by boosting consumer demand from the bottom up. Compel trading
nations to accept more balanced trade relations and absorb more surplus
production. Forgive the debtors, especially the hopeless cases among the very
poorest nations. Reorganize monetary policy to confront the realities of a
globalized money supply, both to achieve greater stability and open the way to
greater growth. Defend labor rights in all markets--prohibit the ancient abuses
renewed in the "dark Satanic mills."

            Some of his more specific suggestions strike me as less
than helpful. Greider wants to "change the tax incentives and subsidies for
private enterprise by rewarding firms that fostered greater employment and
penalizing those that did the opposite." That would, in effect, penalize
companies for efficiency and productivity. But other suggestions make sense. He
wants the United States to join with other financial centers in adopting a
"transactions tax" on currency exchanges to stanch speculation and inhibit wide
swings in currency values. (Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers once
endorsed this idea.) He wants the United States to adopt an "emergency tariff"
of between 10 percent and 15 percent on imports to force other countries to
abandon their mercantile trading strategies. And he wants the World Trade
Organization to adopt binding standards for international labor rights to slow
the race to the bottom.

            Unfortunately, even these
suggestions are unlikely to be adopted. The same trends in the world economy
that cry out for reform are themselves weakening the hand of the reformers. For
instance, as the mobility of capital reduces the power of unions, the chance
for including labor rights in the world trade treaty known as GATT--the General
Agreement on Trade and Tariffs--grows remote. As American multinationals ship
their production overseas, the likelihood of getting business to support an
import tariff (which would now tax their 
               own imports) becomes
equally small.

            But does that mean that we
face a repeat of the dark years of soup kitchens and brownshirts leading up to
world war? Greider suggests we could "replay the terrible conflicts of the
twentieth century." I find that a little extreme--or, at least, difficult to
foresee. Yet Greider's less bold (but still frightful) assertion that "the
global system ... will probably experience a series of terrible
events--wrenching calamities that are economic or social or environmental in
nature" seems well within the realm of plausibility.

         
      
   
