
   
   
      
         
            Magnum Farce

            For the past week, I've been
driving people nuts with my Clint Eastwood impression. I don't do an especially
good one, but then, Eastwood is not especially difficult to do. You lower your
voice, pull it back into your throat so that it's breathy, verging on a rasp
and yet smooth, almost plangent, then expel the line from The Outlaw

               Josey Wales (1976) addressed to the bounty hunter who insists that he's
only trying to make a living, "Dyin' ain't much of a livin', boy." It's a
bedroom voice, menacing but seductive, with over-deliberate diction that
implies, "I'm so powerful, so coiled, so masculine that I have to modulate my
tone--or else." Eastwood's most famous Dirty Harryisms--"Ask yourself, 'Do I
feel lucky?' Well, do ya, punk ?" and "Go ahead, make my day"--are
purring come-ons: The bad guy is practically compelled to submit to this tall,
handsome killer with his long Magnum pistol. Submit, in many cases, by going
for his gun and getting blown into orgasmic nonexistence.

            Eastwood
has one of the great movie voices of our era, but it's also kind of ridiculous.
Probably no star could get away with it if he weren't such an image of cool, as
beautiful and remote and self-contained as Garbo or Chet Baker. What has
enraptured so many critics, among them Richard Schickel in Clint Eastwood: A
Biography , is that the actor-director has learned to play with his own
inexpressiveness--to make a joke of his frigid machismo without (and here's
where the supreme balancing act comes in) travestying it. Eastwood, in this
view, contains within himself both the myth and the anti-myth. I think that
he's a fine, lightweight comic presence at times (his scowl is a psychotic
version of a comedian's classic slow burn), but Schickel goes further. He calls
Eastwood "one of the great ironists of the age" and a "postmodern" hero:
"Clint's gift," he writes, forever on a first-name basis with his subject, "is
to let us see the dark comedy in the American male's contorting, distorting
attempts to achieve his masteries of the moment while at the same time not
entirely discrediting the tradition that makes him bid that effort."

            Whew: That's some gift. Schickel is alternately sycophantic
(toward Eastwood) and pugilistic (toward any critic who has ever had unkind
words for the actor--particularly Pauline Kael, who did seem to have a mission
to make the tall man's Magnum shrivel). The book has the breathless indulgence
of a campaign biography ("Clint's lack of selfishness, his predilection for
throwing scenes to other actors--partly out of generosity, partly out of a
serene confidence in the force of his own presence ... "). In the end, Schickel
seems happiest simply basking in the star's aura, preferring the company of
Eastwood "in the fading light of certain wintry afternoons" to trudging around
and interviewing anyone with a different version of events or a contrasting
point of view.

            That
doesn't surprise me, since contrasting points of view don't make it into
Eastwood's movies, either, which is why I have some trouble accepting this
notion of the actor-director as an "ironist." In the Dirty Harry movies or the
rabidly right-wing 1986 Heartbreak 
               Ridge (which ends with a
potency-reclaiming invasion of Grenada), there's little irony in Eastwood's
superiority to the succession of louts, prisses, and psychopaths whom his
character inevitably clobbers or blows away, or in the fact that he is of
greater stature than the actors with whom he surrounds himself. Eastwood might
acknowledge the faint absurdity of these heroes, but none is ever ultimately
proved wrong. Even the hell-bound William Munny in the compelling
Unforgiven (1992)--who does, admittedly, shoot a rather nice young
cowboy in the gut, but instantly regrets it--ends up killing the sort of people
who, when all is said and done, need killing.

            When Schickel stops duking it out with Eastwood's
antagonists, his analyses can be trenchant. He's especially evocative on the
three "spaghetti Westerns" that Eastwood made with Sergio Leone, for whom the
actor forged his amusingly taciturn on-screen persona. Leone, Schickel writes,
developed a style that alternated cunningly between extreme wide shots and
extreme close-ups partly in an effort to monumentalize Eastwood's face; the
director's mise en scène became "a landscape of masks." But then it's
back to the issue of "irony," and Schickel's evasions can make your jaw drop.
The rousing Dirty Harry (1971) is inarguably a template for the modern,
right-wing vigilante picture, replete with digs at Miranda rights, due process,
and the burgeoning civil-liberties movement. Yet here is Schickel, quoting
Eastwood's insistence that the film has no larger political agenda: "It's just
the story of one particular police officer in a frustrating situation on one
particular case." (And Willie Horton is just some guy.) The author concludes,
"It is as a rule absurd, and utterly unrealistic, to see ideological motives,
let alone ideological malevolence" in action pictures; he is conveniently
omitting any reference here to Eastwood's pal John Milius, the gleeful
liberal-basher who scripted many of the banner lines in Dirty Harry and
Magnum Force (1973). Of The Enforcer (1976) , Schickel
notes, "Certainly today, attitudes having radically changed, Clint would
retract [the movie's] casual contempt for homosexuals, admittedly a feature of
his early action films." That would be mighty white of him! And for this
biographer, "one of the most tasteful campaigns in the history of modern
American politics"--Eastwood's run, as a property-rights Republican, for mayor
of Carmel, Calif.--was one in which the star likened a civic ordinance that
would ban second kitchens to "Adolf Hitler knocking on your door."

            OK, so Eastwood's not a rocket scientist. But Schickel does
seem to see him as some sort of Delphic oracle, and his attempts to translate
the man's monosyllabic pronouncements make for hilarity: " 'Women,' Clint says,
a sort of sad befuddlement in his tone, 'always want to know what you're
thinking.' " Schickel enlarges: "It is a mystery to him, this desire to
penetrate the deepest reserves of his privacy. It is equally a mystery to him
why anyone would think that bringing things up out of this murk and discussing
them would profit either party. At our cores, he believes, for whatever reason,
we are what we are, and there is nothing much to be done about that--beyond
simply accepting the hard facts of personality."

            "We are
what we are, and there is nothing much to be done about that" doesn't make for
a very interesting aesthetic, and Eastwood's dry, dodgy movies (Schickel touts
"their directness of address, their plainspoken psychological realism") bear
the stamp of this shrunken worldview. A psychiatrist could make the case that
the star's legendary promiscuity, with its attendant insulation and fear of
commitment, has artistic consequences. Compare Eastwood with Charlie Parker,
for instance, whom Eastwood idolizes and about whom he made the reverent biopic
Bird (1988). The English writer Daniel O'Brien, in his modest, more
objective new book, Clint Eastwood Film-Maker , suggests that Eastwood
wouldn't actually put up with Parker for a second: The saxophonist's unruly
passion, his commitment to his art, is the antithesis of Eastwood's manly,
frugal, shoot-it-and-move-on way of working. But Schickel is starry-eyed. He
compares the films (and Eastwood's masculine posing) to the modern-jazz manner,
"a powerful desire--almost amounting to a morality--not to woo the audience ...
a profound desire not to make what he does look costly to him, emotionally or
intellectually."

            
One could argue that Eastwood has merely masked
his inadequacies as artistic choices. But I wouldn't want to go too far. I
frequently enjoy his movies, and there's no arguing with the fact that his
stardom has endured for more than three decades. There might be a kind of
genius here, but it's the genius of a seducer, not an artist. Eastwood makes
use of the traditional tools--his size, his handsomeness, the aura of mystery
he so manifestly cultivates. But the seduction also occurs in unexpected ways.
Reading the book, I found myself conscious of, and moved by, the ways in which
Schickel has been drawn in by Eastwood, compelled to fill all kinds of sad,
moody spaces. The author doesn't simply idolize his subject, he feels he needs
to cover for Eastwood's failures and rationalizations the way one might for an
absent or inadequate father. Above all, he wants us to see the star as
misunderstood, under unfair attack from all sides--the women who demand
something more than his sexual favors, the liberal media with its shrill
feminists and snobby elitists.

            In an age
when Ronald Reagan has slipped into the haze of Alzheimer's disease, when Susan
Faludi writes movingly of males clinging to stereotypical notions of machismo
as they're laid off their factory jobs and symbolically robbed of potency, it
can put a lump in your throat to watch Schickel building--like the hero in
Field of Dreams --a shrine to the Dad whom so many elements of the
culture have come to undervalue. Eastwood's decision to play dumb, in films
like The Gauntlet (1977) and Bronco 
               Billy (1980), was a
shrewd one. It allows Schickel to write lines like, "A rude beast has been
perceived slouching toward the Bethlehem of the New Masculinity, waiting to be
reborn in more cuddlesome form."

            It also, to be fair, means that Eastwood can go where the
Sylvester Stallones and Arnold Schwarzeneggers and Steven Seagals daren't. His
performance as Frank Horrigan, an aging Secret Service agent, in In The Line
of Fire (1993), was the most affecting he has ever given--a fallen
stereotype, a glimpse of the human caught in the pose. But does the film
subvert Eastwood's on-screen persona, as Schickel argues it does? How? He bests
the bureaucratic fools. He outwits the psychotic assassin. He beds the young,
beautiful woman. Do Eastwood's other movies really subvert the whole action
genre? Compared with Charles Bronson's, maybe. Munny's assertion, in
Unforgiven , that "it's a hell of a thing, killing a man. You take away
everything he's got and everything he's ever gonna have," was hailed by some
critics as a brave line for Eastwood to utter, given that he has dispatched so
many anonymous thugs so offhandedly for so many years. Brave, but hypocritical.
Eastwood did more to make killing casual than anyone in mainstream cinema. He
paved the way for the Bronsons and Chuck Norrises and Seagals and Jean-Claude
Van Dammes and all the other righteous slayers of post-midnight
cable-movie-channel programming. Will history judge the hero of Richard
Schickel's Boswellian tome as "ironic" and "postmodern"? Or as an enlightened
Neanderthal, profitably pretending to evolve?

         
      
   
