
   
   
      
         
            The Prosecution Never Rests

            There is no such thing as
eternal life in politics--unless, that is, one is lucky enough to secure
appointment as an independent counsel. In that case, a lawyer is free to
investigate more or less whatever catches his fancy, for as long as he likes,
spending as much of the public's money as he deems necessary. The passing of a
petty scandal, the resignation of a target, even a change in administrations is
no obstacle, as we know from the many barnacle-encrusted investigators still
hanging on. Kenneth Starr, who has been poking into Whitewater for three years,
is the least of them. One special prosecutor is still deciding whether to
prosecute Henry Cisneros, the former housing secretary, for understating
payments to an ex-mistress. Another has spent four years trying to nail
long-departed Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy for accepting free football
tickets from a poultry company. There's even a counsel, holed up somewhere in
Washington, who is still on the verge of cracking the Department of Housing and
Urban Development scandal, which dates from two administrations and more than
10 years ago.

            
Independent counsels go on forever because they can--no one has the power to
fire them--and because they have strong incentives to do so. An ordinary
prosecutor may decide to forgo charges so that he can devote his energies to a
case that is more important and easier to win. But, for the independent
counsel, there is no other case. Were he to announce that his scandal didn't
justify criminal proceedings after all, he would be declaring himself a failure
who had wasted the public's time and money. After he returned to his law
practice in the sticks, no one would ever hear from him again. Much better to
keep digging, declare that indictments are just around the corner, and hold off
on releasing that final report just a few months longer.

            In retrospect, it seems obvious that combining these
structural pressures with the lugubrious personality of Lawrence Walsh was a
recipe for zombification. Coming out of semiretirement in Oklahoma City, Judge
Walsh was 75 years old when he was handed responsibility for bringing to
justice the perpetrators in the Iran-Contra scandal. For an ambitious man who
had been frustrated in his career, the appointment was a heaven-sent extra
chance, and it appeared at first to be a bit of brilliant casting. In his
three-piece suits and high, starched collars, Walsh looked like a
19 th century Presbyterian minister, radiating an unflinching,
humorless rectitude. He was the perfect foil for Marine cowboy Oliver North.
The problem is that the image was too close to reality. Walsh was a maddening
plodder and a stickler for detail, with no ability to play politics or work the
media. Faced with a public-relations challenge that might have daunted the most
seasoned Washington operator, he responded the only way he knew how, by
trudging onward. Like a pit bull on Prozac, he clung to the trousers long after
the leg was gone.

            The leaden
account Walsh has produced more than a decade later reflects in microcosm most
of the foibles that afflicted his investigation. As a piece of writing, it is
repetitive, unfocused, and confusing. It feels like it goes on for seven years.
There are no surprises and no original ideas. Walsh's theory of the Iran-Contra
scandal--that some members of the Reagan administration tried to do an end run
around the Constitution--is not very novel. But rather than presenting his case
to the reader, Walsh remains obsessed with the minutiae of what went wrong when
he tried to make his case in court. Matters of subdoctoral interest, such as
his office's battle for Iranian arms dealer Albert Hakim's Swiss-bank-account
records, fill chapter upon chapter. In his litigious thickets, Walsh loses
sight of the question of why anyone should still care.

            
Walsh quite rightly points out that his
investigation was undermined at the outset by the congressional Iran-Contra
committee's decision to grant immunity to Oliver North and White House National
Security Adviser John Poindexter who, along with the conveniently deceased CIA
Director William Casey, appear to have been the chief conspirators in the plot.
Despite the extraordinary efforts of Walsh and his staff to insulate themselves
from the immunized testimony, the unavoidable tainting of the prosecution's
case provided a basis for the U.S. Court of Appeals to throw out North's and
Poindexter's convictions. Walsh's first mistake, which he acknowledges, was not
pitching a fit to try to prevent Congress from granting immunity to the chief
protagonists. His second mistake, which he does not acknowledge, was failing to
admit defeat after the grants of immunity predictably ruined his case. Once the
North and Poindexter convictions were thrown out, there was little point in his
trying to lock up other officials whose behavior, while far from exemplary, was
neither venal nor as outrageous as that of the ringleaders going free.

            It is at
the point when the initial convictions were reversed, around 1990, that Walsh
seems to lose touch with his judiciousness, if not his deliberateness. Instead
of conceding, he redoubles his efforts. As he keeps missing his targets, he
takes aim at less and less compelling ones, desperate to convict someone,
anyone, of something. In 1991--five years after the scandal broke--he
contemplates charging former Secretary of State George Shultz with lying to
Congress. This was simply foolish. Shultz, who opposed the original
arms-for-hostages deal, was the closest thing to a conscience inside the Reagan
administration's foreign-policy team. Belatedly persuaded that he can't convict
Shultz, Walsh decides to go after former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger
instead for concealing the existence of some of his personal notes. But
Weinberger, like Shultz, was far from a black hat in the affair; he too had
opposed the arms-for-hostages deal. Indicting him was an exercise in
prosecutorial pique, doomed to fail. After the 1992 election, when the
lame-duck George Bush pardons Weinberger, Walsh is truly overtaken by rage, and
considers going after the ex-president himself for obstructing justice. By the
end of his book, Walsh has unwittingly painted himself as Ahab without a whale,
flailing after targets large and small in his attempt to vindicate his
effort.

            Of course, Walsh never went after the biggest fish of
all--Ronald Reagan. Though he was still thinking about indicting Reagan in late
1992, Walsh never found effective proof that Reagan was lying when he testified
that he hadn't known about the diversion of profits to the Contras. Walsh's
theory--again, not a novel one--is that the president's aides successfully
constructed a "firewall" to prevent Reagan from being implicated in the
scandal. If this conspiracy worked the way that Walsh thinks it did, it has yet
to crack. Walsh contends that Reagan must have known about the diversion
because he chose to persist with the policy of arms for hostages, even though
most of the American hostages in Lebanon were not released in exchange for the
missiles that were shipped to Iran. This is a pretty slim reed to hang Reagan
on; he was clearly obsessed with the hostages, and clung to any hope of setting
them free. And indeed, three of seven were released in apparent conjunction
with the arms sales, which does not constitute an overwhelming failure, however
wrongheaded the arms-for-hostages policy may have been.

            With hindsight, the whole
issue of what Reagan "knew" seems more a metaphysical question than a legal
one. Though Reagan may well have been informed of the diversion at some point,
he was probably sufficiently gaga by 1987 and 1988 that he did not really hold
the information in his head in any meaningful way. Interviewed on videotape as
a defense witness in the 1990 Poindexter trial, Reagan presented a sorry
spectacle, unable to recall his own foreign policy beyond generalities. Walsh
doesn't seem to grasp that Reagan is losing it. He clings to the maddening
inconsistencies in the former president's answers as if they actually meant
something. In 1992, Walsh flies to Los Angeles to grill him one more time.
Reagan points at sights outside the window and tries to remember irrelevant
anecdotes about Mikhail Gorbachev and Margaret Thatcher. This is the only
poignant moment in the book; Reagan has evidently let go. Perhaps now that he's
set his frustrations down in a book, Lawrence Walsh will be able to do the
same.

         
      
   
