
   
   
      
         
            Presidents Just Wanna Have Funds

            
               USA
Today leads with a look at the new federal and state tax breaks coming
in with 1998. The Washington Post leads with President Clinton's decision to
shut down his legal defense fund. The New York Times
goes with the ban on smoking in bars that California puts in place tomorrow,
mentioning the possible advent there of "smoke-ins" and "smoke-easy's." The
Los
Angeles Times leads with word that a task force appointed by Gov. Pete
Wilson will call for increased state oversight of HMOs to make them more
patient-oriented.

            The WP reveals that Clinton's decision to shut down his defense fund was
prompted by controversy over the fund's implication in shady DNC fund-raising
practices and by dwindling contributions.

            The Clintons, says the paper, now have nearly $3 million in legal bills. And
the real story, which the Post buries deep and leaves out of the
headline, is that they are actively looking for a better way to raise the cash.
The NYT , in its front-page coverage, does more justice to this
angle, mentioning it in the headline and in the story lead. Yesterday, the
WP reports, Clinton said he'd asked the White House counsel to study the
ethical and legal requirements governing future fund-raising efforts. (Thereby
exemplifying one dubious but legal cost-saving device he's making good use of:
getting taxpayers to pay for research into what is essentially his private
legal problem.) Sources tell the paper the Clintons have approved a new vehicle
that, it is hoped, will avoid the restrictions that kept the old trust from
soliciting money for their use--by having it "independently" set up by some
third party. (Isn't it amazing how this triangulation can be discussed so
openly and still be legal?)

            The WP and USAT (in its off-lead) say the lapsed defense fund
had not been used to pay for any legal expenses arising from the Paula Jones
case. The NYT says it had been used for some.

            The LAT front reports that California's Latinos' longstanding
reluctance to vote--a trend that has consistently kept them politically
under-represented there--appears to be changing.

            The Wall Street Journal passes along word that millionaires
continue to proliferate. According to the latest available tax stats, in 1995
there were 87,000 seven-figure earners in the U.S., an increase of 24 percent
over 1994.

            Both the NYT and WP run stories on a development sure to be cited in
this country by libertarians chafing against proposed Internet regulation:
China's imposition today of stiff fines and prison sentences for distribution
or consumption via the Net of "harmful information," defined as that which
"defames government agencies," "impedes public order," or "damages state
interests." Both providers and consumers can be held in violation.

            Just in time, the WP seems to have come up with the Most Amazing
Headline of 1997. Amazing because true: "D.C. Woman Who Killed Daughter Is Awarded Custody of Young
Son." The woman, despite having been convicted of smothering her daughter
in 1992 to stop her from crying, and who is still in prison after violating her
sentence of probation (!) by engaging in credit card fraud, was nonetheless
awarded custody by a judge citing the need of a child for his biological mother
and his belief that because the boy is black, he'd be better off with his black
mother than with the white woman who filed papers to adopt him. Dear Reader,
this is why judicial recall procedures were invented.
            

            Maureen Dowd adieus '97 with an interesting jeremiad against the 90s version
of vice. She notes that there now seems to be much more emphasis on say, being
seen drinking martinis and smoking cigars than in actually enjoying the
activities themselves. "Once," she notes, "martinis and cigars were stylish
vices. Now they're vice-ish styles." And Dowd repeats a friend's observation:
"The only reason they light up a cigar is because their mouths are too small to
light up a Porsche."

            But Dowd must have had a little trouble making her word count: she hits
Nexis (aka "Columnist Helper") pretty hard, filling out her wicked but simple
point with quotes from Alexander Woolcott, P.G. Wodehouse, Paul Gigot and Mary
McGrory.

            Back to that NYT California cigarette ban story: The Times
headline writers missed a big chance: "Smoke Bar Bars Bar Smoke."

         
      
   
