
   
   
      
         
            Winnie the Poo

            The New York
Times 's national lead is an interview with President Clinton that
focuses mainly on tax policy and campaign finance. (The NYT 's metro
edition leads with a court's decision to uphold Gov. Pataki's right to remove a
prosecutor who wouldn't seek the death penalty.) USA Today
leads with a Social Security internal audit revealing that too many workers at
the agency have too much access to Americans' personal records, opening the
door to theft and misuse. The Washington Post goes with a sharp decline in the U.S.
abortion rate. And the Los Angeles Times leads with the agreement by
European health ministers to phase in a total ban on tobacco advertising and
sports-event sponsorship.

            In the NYT interview, President Clinton says that he's weighing a tax cut but
warned against spending a budget surplus that doesn't exist yet. Clinton also
says he would judge any proposed tax cut by whether it was fair to average
taxpayers, good for the economy, and conducive to a simpler tax code.

            The president also tells the Times that he is prepared to flout
Senate Republicans by making a recess appointment of Bill Lann Lee to Justice's
top civil rights post. And he also addressed Janet Reno's decision to curtail
the investigation into his campaign fund-raising. "She did what she had to do
based on her reading of the law. And everybody knows that she is an
indpendent-minded person." (Just not an independent counsel-minded person.)

            Al Gore also sits down with a Times reporter today, but his interview is all access, no content. Gore refuses to concede any
mistakes in either his campaign activities or in his defense of them. He says
it's unfair to dwell on the months of controversy. "A snapshot," he bromides,
"does not have as much accuracy as a moving picture." (Hey, as Jay or Dave
would surely say, with Gore, a moving picture is a snapshot.)

            The Post abortion story (played inside by the NYT ) reports
that despite a rate drop of 20 percent since 1980, abortion remains a common
American experience--about half of all American women eventually get one.

            The NYT , WP , and LAT all give prominent front-page play
to Winnie Mandela's testimony yesterday in South Africa before Desmond Tutu's
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. Complete with big pictures: the WP
and LAT run a shot of her embracing the mother of a boy she is widely
believed to have had killed, while the NYT shows the former
liberationist reformer decked out in all the major jewelry groups, including
gold-inlaid designer glasses. The NYT headline is "Winnie Mandela Is
Defiant, Calling Accusations 'Lunacy'." The WP reporting agrees, saying that Mandela spent the day denying
even the most minor allegations against her and offered no reconciliation until
Tutu begged her to do so. Finally then, Mandela said things went horribly
wrong, but she gave utterly no explanation of that remark. The LAT
apparently was at a different hearing. It emphasizes that last bit of vacuity
above all else.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that when President Clinton
recently visited players before a Washington-Seattle NBA game, Supersonic Greg Anthony drew cheers from teammates by
asking when the capital gains tax cut takes effect.

            The WP reports that a coalition of consumer and health groups handed
out sarcastic awards to nine U.S. companies yesterday for bad ads they'd made. Included was one to Anheuser-Busch
whose "Buy the Beer, Get the Gear" campaign required drinking 27,000 bottles
(or cans) of beer in six months to win a pool table.

            
               And that makes them horses' asses. The NYT reports that
recently after a Newsday columnist criticized a multi-part series his
paper did, the writers of the series sent him a pig's head in a box.

         
      
   
