
   
   
      
         
            Terrorists with Real Convictions

            Arab terrorism dominates the front pages. The Washington Post and
New York Times lead with the conviction of the chief planner and the
bomb van driver in the World Trade Center bombing case. (The Los Angeles
Times puts the story on the front, but below the fold.) The USA
Today lead about this story emphasizes the concerns of U.S. officials that
the verdict could lead to more terrorism against Americans, especially in light
of yesterday's murders in Pakistan. The LAT leads with an exclusive:
that a "rogue operation" of officials within the ATF accelerated the approval
of import permits for 150,000 modified assault weapons so that the guns could
be sold legally, despite the officials' full awareness of President Clinton's
clear intent to keep such guns out of the country. The paper says that the
White House is "livid" about this and that one White House official was so
irate "he put his hands around the neck of an ATF agent." (Given all the
reporting of his famous temper, don't you think that's Clinton?)

            The USAT lead states that the judge in the CIA murders trial has
ordered the jury sequestered while it completes the case's penalty phase. The
WP has this in a separate front-page story that includes this added
detail: the jurors, after voting to convict in the case, sent the judge a note
inquiring about dangers to them, and the judge then ordered the jurors' names
sealed.

            The NYT has its first mention of the Pakistan shootings on today's
front. Despite recently instituting later deadlines, the Times couldn't get the
story into yesterday's paper (unlike USAT and the WP ).

            The Wall Street Journal runs a front-page feature about how, after
years of depending on the American defense umbrella, many Asian nations are now
rearming themselves--at nearly double 1990 spending rates. The main reason,
says the Journal, is that they aren't convinced that the 100,000 U.S. troops in
the region will stay put and are plenty worried about China's military
build-up. The upshot, says the paper, is that Asia "is likely to become a much
more dangerous place."

            The WP editorial page doesn't think much of the travel sanctions the
U.N. passed against Iraq: "No more shopping at Harrods for Deputy Prime
Minister Tariq Aziz-that'll show 'em."

            In contrast to the quadraphonic media coverage when the FBI launched its
investigation of the TWA Flight 800 crash, when the agency announced yesterday
that its inquiry was over because there was no crime, the volume was pretty
low. The LAT 's is the only major front to carry the news--and on the
bottom at that.

            Could there be serious security leaks at some of the primo op-ed desks?
Today the NYT runs a piece on the discovery of tapes of George
Washington, while the WP runs an Art Buchwald effort on the discovery of
tapes of Abraham Lincoln.

            The WP reports that a small pilot study suggests that an experimental
oral contraceptive for men might work. Of course, a question remains for women
that no amount of science will ever overcome: "Can you believe the guy when he
says he took it?"

         
      
   
