
   
   
      
         
            Hip Journalism

            The Dow's bounce back above 8000 leads at USA Today . At
the Washington Post , it's the global warming summit in
Kyoto. The New York Times
goes with the Federal Trade Commission's 4-0 decision to abandon a plan to
weaken the meaning of the "Made in USA" label. And the Los Angeles
Times leads with California's endorsement of throwback math standards
for public school students that emphasize--get this--correct answers and lots
of practice and discourage reliance on calculators.

            The NYT lead reports that the FTC had been considering dropping the
threshold for "Made in USA" from the current interpretation of 98 percent of an
item's value down to as low as 75 percent. Big businesses that import a lot of
components, explains the paper, would have benefited at the expense of smaller
companies that do not. (The automobile, textile, wool and fur industries are
subject to separate requirements and are not covered by the decision.) The
Times says the FTC switch is, like the stalling of fast track, a big
victory for, and the result of political pressure from, organized labor. The
Wall Street Journal , which flags the story in its
front-page news box, explains that companies can still continue to make
qualified U.S.-origin claims, such as "80% Made in USA." (Question for William
Safire: Isn't "80% Made in USA" like "80% Born in USA"? Either it's made here
or not, right?)

            The headline writers at the WP couldn't have been too disappointed
about the dissension in Kyoto. This way, they got to write "U.S. Greeted Coolly
at Climate Summit." The paper reports that at the opening session, the U.S.
delegate reiterated the Clinton administration's position of getting back to
1990 greenhouse gas levels by 2010 and called the more stringent proposals
favored by European countries unrealistic or ineffective. In part as a response
to worldwide criticism of this position, says the Post , President
Clinton announced, after months of refusing to have a high-level presence at
the meetings, that he is sending Al Gore to Kyoto to help forge an
international greenhouse gas agreement. The thumbnail explanation of global
warming the Post provides in its lead coverage is odd: the only
dangerous effect of warming it mentions by name is the possible spread of
malaria to colder climates, nothing about another Ice Age.

            On its front above the fold, the LAT reports that a survey of 347
cities by the U.S. Conference of Mayors indicates that the recent increased
imposition of anti-truancy and juvenile curfew statutes correlates with a drop
in the juvenile crime rate. The story goes on to mention that the Los Angeles
Police Department credits L.A.'s 1996 anti-truancy law with a 20 to 45 percent
drop in daytime burglaries, shoplifting and car break-ins (unfortunately, no
word from the LAT about why the wide stat parameters here).

            The above story sits without comment right next to one slugged "Student
Opens Fire on Prayer Group, Kills 2."

            But at least the LAT puts that school shooting on the front page. (As
does USAT . The NYT front has a picture only.) The WP does
not--but it does run a column one top front story, accompanied by not one, but
three pictures, about the Washington Redskins quarterback breaking his hip.
(Breaking news?)

            James Glassman's WP column quotes this take from computer scientist
David Gelertner on the government's goal of wiring the nation's schoolrooms to
the Internet: "Children need Internet access the way they need subsidized bus
service to the nearest mall."

            
               News you can lose . The WP runs the following correction: "A
Sunday Arts story incorrectly reported that Pietro di Cristoforo di Pietro
Vannucci, the Renaissance painter known as Perugino ("the one from Perugia"),
was born in Perugia. He was born 27 miles away in Castello della Pieve, now
called Citta della Pieve, a town that was under the suzerainty of Perugia."

         
      
   
