
   
   
      
         
            Really Juvenile Reynolds

            
               USA
Today and the Washington Post lead with revelations from newly disclosed
R.J. Reynolds internal documents that seem to show that the company has
persistently attempted to market cigarettes to teens. This is also the top
national story at the Los Angeles Times . The New York Times
leads with the U.N. Security Council's vote telling Iraq to honor previous
promises to allow U.N. inspectors complete access to suspected weapons
sites.

            The new tobacco documents (many of them marked "Secret"), released as part
of a lawsuit settlement, show a company strategy of attracting teenagers
through advertising and various youth-oriented promotions such as, according to
USAT , "NASCAR sponsorship," "inner city activities," and "T-shirts and
other paraphernalia." And says USAT , the documents show that RJR's
introduction of "Joe Camel" fits in to this strategy.

            The dailies point out that since, in 1994, the then-CEO of RJR testified
before Congress that the company does not market to children, these new
documents have prompted congressional interest in perjury charges. They also
report that former FDA head David Kessler says the new material is "a smoking
gun" that shows why Congress shouldn't approve the proposed national tobacco
settlement.

            The company responded by repeating its denial of youth targeting and stating
that the documents are being taken out of context, telling the WP , "Our
documents reflect the social attitudes of the times in which they were
created."

            The Wall Street Journal , which flags the story in its
front-page news box, passes along another RJR defense: that one document that
seemed to be suggesting pitching product to 13-year-olds contained a
typographical error and was really about 18-year-olds. However, according to
the Post , some documents refer to 12-year-olds.

            The WP really goes to town on the RJR story, backing up its lead with
two more stories inside--one on how the revelations will play politically and
the other a collection of extensive selections from the RJR documents. The
NYT plays the story inside.

            The NYT lead passes along a CBS News report that arms inspectors have
photographic evidence of Iraqi biological weapon experiments on human beings.
The paper also states that China was wavering on the Security Council action,
but was finally brought along by the decision to "deplore" Iraq's behavior
rather than "condemn" it. (No telling how many votes could have been garnered
if they'd gone with "not really thrilled.")

            The WSJ says that Hallmark Cards is coming out with a sympathy card
for relatives of those who've committed suicide.

            The NYT reports that on educational grounds Georgia Gov. Zell Miller
proposed as part of his state budget spending $105,000 to make classical music
available to every child born in the state. During his budget address Tuesday,
he played a bit of "Ode to Joy," and then asked lawmakers, "Now, don't you feel
smarter already?"

            Social scientist James Q. Wilson, in a
Times op-ed piece, makes the following argument for the sanity of
Ted Kacszynski: "There is nothing in the [Unabomber] manifesto that looks at
all like the work of a madman. The language is clear, precise and calm. The
argument is subtle and carefully developed, lacking anything even faintly
resembling the wild claims or irrational speculation that a lunatic might
produce." Wilson also observes that besides the Unabomber's manifesto, his
"skill in manufacturing bombs and the clever ways in which he concealed his
identity suggest to me that he was clearly sane." Of course, the legal
usefulness of these observations is somewhat dubious, because this attempt to
show that Theodore Kacszynski is fit to stand trial depends on the assumption
that he is the Unabomber, which in turn requires a trial first, which first
requires showing that he is fit to stand trial, and so on.

            With NBC's deal to retain "ER" at a cost of $13 million an episode getting
front-page coverage at the NYT , LAT , and the WSJ , maybe
the next big domestic policy issue will be controlling television health
care costs.

         
      
   
