
   
   
      
         
            Au My!

            The au pair reversal of fortune leads USA
Today --and takes lot of prime front-page space elsewhere. MCI's
decision to accept WorldCom's merger bid leads at the Wall Street Journal , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles
Times . The New York Times
goes with President Clinton's retreat on fast track.

            The USAT front features, besides the lead, a big picture of a smiling
Louise Woodward and a cover story on the discretionary powers of judges. The
WP front runs the same picture and another of Brits cheering the news.
The NYT runs an almost-cherubic picture of Woodward in court and an
editorial praising the judge's action, under the headline "Justice Restored."
The LAT looks out of touch playing the story below the fold, below
Jeffrey Katzenberg's Disney settlement. (Wonder what his au pair pulls down a
week.)

            Both the NYT and the WP are struck by the difference between
Woodward's hysterical reaction to the original verdict and her poker-faced
demeanor yesterday. In general the discussion of the legalities is informative,
but there could have been a bit more in the coverage about the nature of the
"malice" that the judge found crucially missing. In the relevant legal sense,
it's not ill will, nor even necessarily an intention to do harm, and it doesn't
have to be expressed or a conscious state of mind. It's weaker: it's doing
something in disregard of the fact that it's likely to be harmful. The upshot
is that the absence of malice in the case is less obvious than ordinary
language would suggest.

            The NYT lead on the fast track fizzle calls it the most severe
legislative setback for Clinton since his national health care plan died, and
the paper reports that many on Capitol Hill are saying that it marks the
beginning of Clinton's lame-duck status. George Stephanopoulos says as much to
the WSJ : "The last three years are going to be largely a rhetorical
presidency....Legislatively, it's over."

            The coverage makes it clear that MCI's decision to accept WorldCom's $37
billion buyout offer--the largest in American history--is great news for
stockholders. But the papers don't effectively explain why they think this is
also potentially earth-shattering news for everyone else. For instance, the
LAT 's lead sentence in its MCI story states that the deal could
"redefine competition in the telecommunications industry," but never really
explains how this would be so. And some explanation is required, because to the
uninitiated, mergers mean less competition, not more.

            The NYT runs some excerpts from the Unabomber's diary. Here's one:
"Experiment 97. Dec. 11, 1985. I planted bomb disguised to look like scrap of
lumber behind Rentech Compute store in Sacramento.... The device was hidden
inside a hollow piece of wood, so that when the wood were to be grabbed or
picked up, the bolts in the trigger would come out. The device was deployed on
December 11th, 1985." That "deployment" was the murder of the man who picked up
the bomb.

            The NYT also has a stunning revelation about the way the Ivy League
used to do business. Last Friday, the President of Darmouth used the occasion
of dedicating a campus Jewish student center to haul out a 1934 letter between
an alumnus of the school and the director of admissions. The alum complained
that "the campus seems more Jewish each time I arrive in Hanover. And
unfortunately many of them (on quick judgment) seem to be the 'kike' type." And
the Dartmouth admissions man wrote back, "I am glad to have your comments on
the Jewish problem, and I shall appreciate your help along this line in the
future. If we go beyond the 5 percent or 6 percent in the Class of 1938, I
shall be grieved beyond words." In reacting to the revelation, Elie Wiesel
summons a simple fact that suggests how much times have changed: the current
presidents of Harvard, Yale, and Princeton are Jewish.

         
      
   
