
   
   
      
         
            Saddam Masochism

            The Washington Post , USA Today ,
and New York Times
all lead with the Iraq situation. The Los Angeles
Times goes with the latest changes in the operations of the Colombian
drug cartels, which nowadays do business with the Russian mafia, and avoid
giving a big cut to Mexican distributors by relying more on "mules" coming
directly to the U.S. and less on Mexican ships. This change is possible, says
the LAT , because the Colombian trade has shifted towards heroin, which
is nine times more valuable by weight than cocaine, and hence needn't be
shipped in the same quantities.

            
               USAT reports that the White House is seeking to broaden support for
military action against Iraq. The NYT emphasizes diplomacy too, stating
that Iraq on Sunday sent signals it did not want a military confrontation with
the U.S., and that the U.S. had persuaded Russia to have a go at pressing
Hussein diplomatically to back down. The Times refers to an official
Iraqi dispatch stating that Saddam is not seeking a confrontation with the U.S.
The paper also quotes a senior American official saying, "When we feel we've
exhausted all diplomatic options, you'll know it."

            Many of the same diplomatic details are mentioned in the WP story,
but it instead emphasizes the Clinton administration's making the case for
military action by graphically depicting the Iraqi threat, quoting senior
officials talking about the amount of anthrax and nerve gas Hussein has. The
USAT has some of this too, but puts it at the bottom and doesn't
headline it.

            Both the NYT and the LAT have the same front-page picture of
mega-hatted Madeleine Albright--who spent Sunday shuttling between Arab
countries trying to drum up anti-Hussein support. Apparently, now whenever
she's in the Middle East, she carries a complete anti-chemical, anti-biological
warfare system on top of her head.

            The LAT , NYT , and USAT each carry front-page stories
about just-released Chinese dissident Wei Jingshang, now hospitalized in
Detroit. But the WP puts the story inside.

            In the wake of a similar story last week in the LAT , the USAT
news section cover story details how local California officials are scheming to
legally sidestep Prop. 209. "We're going to stretch the envelope as far as we
can and chip away at 209," is the word in the story from Nate Miley, city
councilman and vice mayor of Oakland.

            A Wall Street Journal editorial makes the point that
the press consistently overlooks that some of the most thoughtful reassessments
of affirmative action come from blacks. The Journal notes, for instance,
that a data base search of newspaper coverage of the Bill Lann Lee nomination
fight reveals that not one article interviewed or even quoted Ward Conerly.

            Howard Kurtz, in his WP media column, reports that David Brock, the
darling of the rabid right when he went after Anita Hill in his first book, but
who then fell out of favor when he didn't do a similar number on Hillary
Clinton in his second one, has been fired from his staff writer job at the
American Spectator .

            The Sunday LAT had a piece that came as quite a shock to the huge
numbers of those who bought cell phones for their cars primarily as an
emergency communications device--in California at least, the phones aren't very
reliable at reaching anybody when you dial 911.

            And a full-page ad in the Sunday NYT introduced a truly frightening
phenomenon: The Ralph Lauren Barbie doll. "She's the most sophisticated Barbie
ever, a perfect model of Ralph Lauren style, with long brown hair, a crested
navy blazer, navy knit turtleneck bodysuit, grey flannel pleat-front pants and
lined camel-hair overcoat--plus the perfect accessories." What's next: Versace
Ken?

         
      
   
