
   
   
      
         
            Bush Beats Clinton

            
               USA
Today leads with the Clinton administration's stern words to Iraq. Both
the Los
Angeles Times and the New York Times
go with President Clinton's last-ditch attempt to generate support for the
fast-track trade authority bill. The Washington Post leads with the Democrats' attempt to
salvage the nomination of Bill Lann Lee for Justice's top civil rights
enforcement job.

            
               USAT reports that the administration warned Iraq on Thursday that it
could face military action or economic sanctions if it continues to keep U.N.
inspection teams out of its facilities. Secretary of Defense William Cohen is
quoted as saying "sufficient warnings have been given." And the paper reports
that an American aircraft carrier canceled a port call so as to be able to stay
within striking range of Iraq.

            The NYT describes Clinton's Thursday night television appeal for
support of the trade bill as "extraordinary." The paper reports that the vote
count was looking so unfavorable that the president cut short his trip to the
opening of the Bush presidential library in Texas--where he got a ringing
endorsement for the bill from George Bush--so he could return to work the
phones to lobby members of Congress. The LAT says the bill is hanging
"by a thread" on the eve of the House vote.

            According to the WP , the Clinton administration is also staring at
defeat with the Lee nomination. Lee has, says the paper, faced no serious
questions about his credentials, but in the past week has become a lightening
rod for congressional Republicans and conservative activists, who have taken to
portraying him as an unabashed advocate for race preferences

            The WP runs a front-page zinger detailing all the free travel
congress members and their spouses have been copping lately. These pieces have
long been a newspaper staple, but the news is that, in the Post 's words,
"In an era when congressional gift rules have all but eliminated the free
lunch, the free round of golf and the free night on the town, congressional
travel is the last great perk."

            It seems there's blowback from yesterday's NYT story stating that
most direct-mail retailers were about to collect sales tax. The Wall Street Journal reports that resistance to the idea on
the part of some vendors is so strong that any such agreement will be put off
at least until December, not announced today as the Times had reported.
Today's NYT says the deal fell apart because of widespread customer
complaints prompted by its story, and that L.L. Bean is among the
defectors.

            That Bush library opening was the occasion for four presidents, six first
ladies, and Wayne Newton to get together. The photo op gave the LAT , the
WP , and the NYT good shots for their fronts. The weirdest of
these being the NYT picture, which takes the warm fraternal fuzzies now
felt by Clinton and Bush to a new level of intimacy by depicting them as
power-suited Siamese twins. The NYT piece on the day keeps it light, but
the WP story keeps hitting current geopolitics, mentioning that as the
ceremonies were unfolding, "Saddam Hussein was again thumbing his nose at the
United States," and quoting Clinton's reference from the podium to "the
vigilance President Bush displayed in dealing with Iraq, [which] as we all
know, is required again today." The piece also mentions that Bush has endorsed
Clinton's stance on the current Iraq imbroglio.

            The Post mentions a letter of Lincolnesque proportions displayed at
the library that Bush wrote to his children during the run-up to Desert Storm.
"When the question is asked, `How many lives are you willing to sacrifice'--it
tears my heart," Bush wrote. "The answer, of course, is none--none at all." He
added, "Every human life is precious, the little Iraqi kids' too." If Bush had
been able to put himself across like that in public, Clinton might never have
become president.

            Very few journalists these days have been in the military, so they have a
consistent tendency to boot matters martial, and the NYT story on the
library opening provides an example. The Times refers to the exhibit of
"a World War II Avenger fighter plane" like the one Bush was shot down in. But
it's not a fighter. It's a torpedo bomber.

         
      
   
