
   
   
      
         
            Verdicting It Up

            The Terry Nichols verdict leads all around. USA Today
calls the conviction on conspiracy and manslaughter counts but acquittal on
1st-degree murder charges "a surprising compromise." The New York Times
calls the result "a nuanced verdict." The Los Angeles
Times and the Wall Street Journal emphasize that the decision
considerably lessens the likelihood that Nichols will be condemned to
death.

            
               USAT says that inside the courtroom, relatives of victims "appeared
crestfallen" at the news. The NYT finds them "stunned." The dailies are
relentless in their programmatic use of "balancing" language to describe family
reactions--"many" are angry, "some" are shocked, etc.--despite producing no
family members saying the verdicts are just. Instead, when it comes to
particulars, we have everybody quoting the comment of a woman whose Secret
Service agent husband was killed in the Oklahoma blast: "It was a slap in the
face."

            The reactions noted are often incisive as well as anguished. A woman who
lost two small grandsons tells the NYT , "Terry Nichols and Timothy
McVeigh conspired for seven months to blow up that building. That's not
involuntary manslaughter. That's first-degree murder." Similarly, a woman who
lost a daughter is quoted in USAT and the Washington Post saying, "He conspired to build the bomb;
what the hell did they think he was going to do with it!" In the WP and
NYT and USAT stories, the juxtaposition of these expressions of
dissatisfaction with President Clinton's remark that the verdicts "should offer
a measure of comfort" makes Clinton look particularly tin-eared.

            When the papers strive to make sense of the verdict, they tend to look that
way too. The Times says that the manslaughter verdicts mean that the
jury held that the deaths were foreseeable results of a lawful act. But what
was that lawful act? The NYT doesn't say. (Surely not helping to build a
bomb.) Similarly, the Times editorial on the Nichols decision ably frames the
puzzle: "At first blush it seems contradictory to find that Mr. Nichols was
guilty of conspiring in the bombing, a crime that seems to have required
premeditation, but then not to find him guilty of first-degree, or
premeditated, murder. Involuntary manslaughter usually involves recklessness
but not premeditation." But then the paper trots out a dubious answer: "Still,
that may be a reasonable decision in that Mr. Nichols may not have planned that
the bomb be set off with the purpose of killing these agents." But what
alternative purpose did he have? Not one word in all the coverage about
that.

            The WSJ comes closest here, venturing that the jury must have
accepted Nichols's defense that he had abandoned the plot before the explosion.
But neither the Journal nor the other papers pass along any information
that makes such a possibility plausible.

            The Post makes a rookie mistake in referring to the jury's "innocent"
verdicts. It's "Not Guilty," not "Innocent."

            The NYT front carries word of a clearer resolution to another
terrorism case: the conviction in France of Carlos "The Jackal"--once the
world's most feared terrorist--of three murders. The Post runs this on
p.8.

            The WSJ reports that Newt Gingrich, in an obvious bid to plug holes
in the C-SPAN spring schedule (that damned yellow bus has to go in the shop for
a tune-up sometime), is poised to launch investigations into White House and
DNC activities that could involve fully half of the House's committees.

            The WP states that the University of Iowa College of Medicine reports
that people who are blind, deaf or have other disabilities are 36 percent more
likely to be injured on the job. The paper also reports that today's issue of
JAMA contains the news that although more than 90 percent of infants don't get
anesthesia when they are circumcised, they should get it because "study of
infant heart rates and crying patterns during circumcision clearly showed there
was pain." So, to sum up today's scientific breakthroughs: a) If you're blind
avoid working in sawmills and b) Getting your brand-new knicky-knacks carved on
HURTS LIKE HELL!

         
      
   
