
   
   
      
         
            Iran: Ironic or Irenic?

            The Washington Post and New York Times
lead with a call by the president of Iran for a "dialogue" between his country
and the U.S. USA Today leads with a report indicating that homelessness
and hunger are on the rise. The Los Angeles
Times goes with a report
on a rift developing among anti-tobacco forces based on whether or not it's
okay to grant any sort of legal immunity to tobacco companies in return for
public health gains--just the sort of deal at the heart of the proposed
national tobacco settlement before Congress.

            The WP Iran lead reports that Iranian President Mohammed Khatemi made
the irenic remarks at a press conference, and described them as the most
conciliatory made by an Iranian leader toward the U.S. since the Islamic
revolution there in 1979. Khatemi said, "I declare my respects to the great
people of the United States." True, Khatemi also said that the U.S. mistakenly
believes it is the sole world power, trying to "impose its will on the whole
world at any cost," but the paper reports that a senior Clinton official
responded by saying the administration is ready to sit down and talk to the
Iranian government if Khatemi's remarks are "authoritative." The NYT lead covers pretty much the same ground except that it
mentions that Ali Khameni, not Khatemi, is Iran's supreme ruler. But even the
Times could have elaborated on this to help the reader try to decide
what Khatemi's statements are worth. The WP piece doesn't even mention
Khameni (although another Post front pager, on Iran's loosening of
domestic social restrictions, especially on women and intellectuals, does so in
the course of an informative paragraph on the Iranian power structure).

            Neither the WP nor the NYT mentions as a possible Khatemi
motivation the desire for eliminating obstacles to Caspian-Sea-based oil deals
involving U.S. petroleum companies, now hamstrung by anti-Iranian sanctions.
( USAT and the LAT also have front-page coverage of Khatemi's
remarks.)

            The USAT lead reports on a study just released by the U.S. Conference
of Mayors, which found that the demand for emergency food and housing increased
in 1997 for the 13th straight year. Cited as factors are: increased substance
abuse and mental illness, the high cost of housing, low-paying jobs and
reductions in federal welfare and food stamps. The WP carries this story
on page 17.

            The Wall Street Journal runs a front-page feature reporting
that China's leaders are responding to the general Asian
downturn by putting off opening up their financial and currency markets and
by overhauling the country's central bank. Plus, interest rates will probably
be cut by year's end.

            Harvard government professor Michael Sandel puts some NYT op-ed space
to good use today with some useful
homely examples suggesting what's wrong with the emissions credit system
the U.S. is advocating as a significant element in its greenhouse gas control
approach. Turning pollution into a commodity to be bought and sold, he argues,
removes the moral stigma that is properly associated with it. A fine means
something a fee does not. If, Sandel wonders, a busy contractor used the
handicapped parking near his work site and willingly paid the fine as a simple
cost of business, isn't he still doing something wrong ?

            The WP reports that according to Justice Department statistics,
the 74 executions carried out thus far this year in the
United States represent the highest number in any one year since capital
punishment was reinstated in 1976 and the most in four decades. Texas has had
the most dead men walking, Virginia placing a distance second. All the executed
were men convicted of murder: 44 whites, 24 blacks, and two "other." The
prisoners executed in 1996 had been on death row an average of 10 years and
five months. Polling indicates, says the Post , that the percentage of
those favoring the death penalty has nearly doubled in the past thirty years.
(This piece is by George Lardner Jr., whose daughter was murdered a few years
ago.)

            
               Say it ain't so. The NYT runs this headline: "Fraternity
Members Among Heaviest College Drinkers, Study Shows."

         
      
   
