
   
   
      
         
            Tooth(air)brush

            The New York Times and the Los Angeles
Times lead with news on the Asian financial crisis from the
Asian-Pacific economic summit. Having led with that story for the past two
days, USA
Today switches its lead to the corruption charges leveled at
ex-Teamsters boss Ron Carey. The Washington Post leads with continuing scandals in the D.C.
police department.

            All the papers give front-page play to the Asian economic crisis (and they
all call it a "crisis," except the LAT , which calls it "fiscal
turmoil.") The NYT has three stories: Their lead says Asian leaders at
the summit vow action to limit the scope of the crisis. A second front-page
story says the White House is concerned, but thinks it unlikely, that Japan's
economy could collapse the way Thailand's did. An analysis piece inside sees
the crisis as an affirmation of America's economic power (parroting a piece in
yesterday's WP ). The LAT has two front-pagers: The lead says
summit heads want to reassure global investors of Asia's stability; the other
story claims the public is pressuring Japan to rescue its ailing banks. The
WP front-pager reveals the plan for bailing out the troubled economies:
financial assistance from the International Monetary Fund, and possibly from
the U.S., too.

            The USAT lead tracks Ron Carey's mounting woes. A federally-appointed
board will bring corruption charges against Carey, and he may be banned from
the Teamsters for life. The WP , NYT , and Wall Street Journal all put the story on their front pages.
The charges stem from Carey's illegal diversion of "$885,000" from the union to
his election campaign, according to USAT (the NYT has "more than
$700,000"; the WP has "$735,000"; the WSJ goes with "more than
$750,000"). Carey has temporarily resigned the presidency to focus on his legal
problems.

            
               USAT 's off-lead is essentially a long quote from Defense Secretary
William Cohen on the prevalence of chemical weaponry in the world, and the
imminent dangers it could pose to America. The WP trumps with an op-ed
from Cohen himself.

            
               USAT and the NYT have front-page stories on a revised
estimation of the global AIDS epidemic. Experts had "grossly underestimated"
the number of worldwide cases, which they now number at 30.6 million, not the
previously thought 22.6 million. (The overwhelming majority of cases are in
sub-Saharan Africa.) The WP puts the story on page A6, but is the only
paper to offer this grabber of a stat: 1 out of every 100 people on Earth (of
reproductive age) is HIV positive.

            The NYT catches Newsweek in a bit of hypocrisy. Three years
ago, Newsweek cried foul when Time electronically darkened a
photo of O.J. Simpson on its cover. This week, Newsweek doctors its
cover photo of septuplet mom Bobbi McCaughey: It fixes her teeth. Time 's
concurrent cover, untouched, clearly shows McCaughey's (authentic) imperfect
choppers; Newsweek 's cover shows straight and pearly whites. To view the
two cover images, see 
                  Slate
               's "In Other Magazines"
column.

            Today's Papers will take off tomorrow in observance of the holiday. This
column gives thanks for each and every one of its readers, and wishes each and
every one of you a wonderful Thanksgiving.

         
      
   
