
   
   
      
         
            Freeh at Last

            At the Washington Post and USA Today the
lead is Janet Reno and Louis Freeh's joint appearance before a congressional
committee. The Los Angeles Times leads with the news that California air
quality officials are considering imposing stricter smog rules on pick-up
trucks and minivans. And the New York Times
goes with the South Korean government's call for the U.S. and Japan to quickly
pony up some cash that has been promised in the recently concluded bailout only
as a last resort (yet another case of the Times leading with a financial
story nobody else even puts on the front page). Within hours, Clinton
administration officials rejected any early injection of U.S. funds. There was
no immediate reaction from Japan. There's politics on both sides of the matter,
says the Times : Korean politicians want up-front money to soften what
are widely viewed in their country as the bailout's regulatory intrusions,
while the Clinton administration has tried to make the U.S. contribution to the
deal--estimated to be potentially $5 billion--more palatable by suggesting
there's a chance it would never actually be needed.

            
               USAT stresses the "unified front" put on by Reno and Freeh on the
Hill (as does the LAT in its front pager), while the WP
emphasizes Freeh's testimony that he continues to support an independent
counsel taking over Justice's ongoing investigation of Clinton campaign
fund-raising. The Post notes that while Reno has spent a lot of time in
front of congressional mikes, yesterday's appearance marked Freeh's first
extensive public comments concerning the investigation and his disagreement
with Reno about how to pursue it. He is quoted describing that disagreement as
"the biggest open secret in Washington" because of leaks to
news organizations. Probably so, but Freeh had as much motive as anyone to do
the leaking: publicizing the dispute served to demonstrate his political
independence from Clinton, something Reno has been pilloried repeatedly for not
demonstrating (see, for instance, today's
Maureen Dowd column).

            The context for the LAT lead is that the boom in light trucks and sport utility
vehicles has accelerated pollution because they aren't subject to the same
emission and fuel economy controls as passenger cars. An editorial in the
NYT points out that even though these heavier vehicles are only half as
numerous as cars, they already produce as much carbon dioxide, and by 2010 if
the rules aren't changed, they may produce up to 75 percent of all smog coming
from personal vehicles.

            Although even the United Farm Workers considers the strike against table
grapes to be "dormant," until last Thursday it was still going strong, reports
the Wall Street Journal , at Harvard. That's when the
results of a campus-wide referendum were announced: 54% percent pro-grape, 46%
anti. There will be grapes on campus tables for brunch this Sunday. Some
anti-grape students are planning a no-grape eating table.

            The Journal 's "Tax Report" brings word that some rock stars have been tangling
with the IRS over the deductibility of clothes worn on stage during
performances. Apparently, Stevie Nicks of Fleetwood Mac told the government
that her flowing on-stage get-ups are not suitable for ordinary wear, and that
much of it is discarded after shows because it can't be re-used. The column
reports that a tentative settlement between Nicks and the feds is in the
works.

            The WP front page reports that Latrell Sprewell held a press conference yesterday. He
apologized, but his main goal was image repair: he was accompanied, says the
Post , by his agent, his accountant, his tax man, his teammates, the
president of the players' union, several other advisors, and....Johnnie
Cochran. Sprewell took no questions from the assembled press and did not
address any specifics of the two incidents in which he punched and choked his
coach. "We're not here today to discuss the facts," Cochran explained. No word
yet on the search for the real chokers.

         
      
   
