
   
   
      
         
            Jung for the First Time

            The Washington Post , New York Times ,
and Los
Angeles Times lead with the victory of long-time dissident Kim Dae Jung
in the South Korean presidential election. USA Today
leads with President Clinton's official announcement of the long-rumored
decision to keep U.S. troops in Bosnia indefinitely.

            The WP calls the Korean vote the most remarkable in the country's
history, pointing out that upon his inauguration, Kim, 73, will take over a
government that kidnapped and jailed him and repeatedly tried to kill him, once
by planning to toss him off a ship at sea. The LAT observes that in Korea, Kim has often been compared to
Andrei Sakharov, Lech Walesa, and Nelson Mandela. The Post notes that
the victory celebrations were particularly joyous in the city of Kwangju, where
in 1980, the government suppressed pro-democracy demonstrations, killing
hundreds, and blamed the episode on Kim, who was sentenced to death (he was
eventually given a medical release to the U.S.). And now, points out the
NYT , Kim will have the power to pardon the imprisoned Korean
ex-president convicted of ordering that massacre.

            The NYT stresses more than the other dailies that a big factor
in the election outcome was an electorate enraged by the country's financial
crisis and furious at economic mismanagement by the ruling party. The
Times adds to the picture of Kim as the ultimate outcast by relating
how, as recently as the mid-80s, the U.S. Embassy viewed him as too radical to
invite to the annual 4th of July party.

            The papers all note that upon his victory, Kim pledged to implement the
IMF-crafted economic bailout that was already agreed to by the current
government.

            The Clinton Bosnia announcement is also front-page news at the NYT ,
the WP , and the LAT . The coverage emphasizes President Clinton's
frank admission that he was wrong to have set a definite timetable for getting
troops out. Clinton stated that the military mission had enforced a fragile
peace but that it was still fragile and so, in the administration's exit
thinking, deadlines are out and "benchmarks" gauging Bosnia's progress are in.
The NYT notes that Clinton's off-the-cuff examples of
benchmarks did not include the return of refugees or the arrest of those
indicted as war criminals.

            The LAT front reports that in 1995, a Clinton national security
staffer named Sheila Heslin asked the CIA to provide intelligence
on several U.S. citizens despite a presidential order banning the agency from
doing so. The paper bases its story on CIA documents.

            The Wall Street Journal 's lead feature focuses on a group of
single mothers in a Maryland housing project who have been thrust by welfare
reform into the workplace for the very first time. The piece shows how the women have become rather harsh in
their attitudes towards welfare mothers. "It makes me mad," says one, "Taking
money out of my check and giving it to those ho's." The story also shows that
even a steady job doesn't automatically translate into financial security: One
woman in the story has only been able to save $100 after six months of
employment, but she did spring for some Donna Karan, a four-foot TV/VCR tower,
wall-to-wall carpet, and a stocked fish tank.

            According to USAT 's "Snapshot," 13.7 percent of all Americans ended
1996 with a total household income below the federal poverty level of $16,036
for a family of four.

            In a rarity for a front-section story, not to mention for the front page,
The NYT comes right out and says that Barbara Chase-Riboud, the woman
who accused "Steven Spielberg's studio," Dreamworks, (hey, what do Katzenberg
and Geffen have to do to get their names in the paper?) of stealing from her
work in making the movie "Amistad," is herself a plagiarist. The Times says that a novel she
wrote in 1986 contains entire passages from a scholarly book that preceded it
by 50 years.

            Remember "Lucille," B.B. King's guitar? Well, guess who has it now?
According to the NYT , the Pope. King handed it over during a papal
audience.

            
               No Freeh pizza. The WSJ reports that the most common fake name
given to pizza deliverers in Washington, D.C. is...Janet Reno.

         
      
   
