
   
   
      
         
            Ceding, Censoring, Consuming

            The New York Times and the Los Angeles
Times lead with the Israeli cabinet's approval of plans to withdraw
from the West Bank. The Washington Post leads with online firms' moves to filter
pornography on the Internet. The USA Today lead - "Shoppers hit malls, look for
bargains" - bespeaks a slow news day.

            The Israeli cabinet agreed in principle to cede more land to Palestinians.
The decision, however, appeased Prime Minister Netanyahu's right-wing backers:
It remained vague on how much territory to cede, and when to cede it. The
NYT piece frames this as do-nothing action, designed to temporarily
quiet demands coming simultaneously from the Israeli right-wing, Palestinians,
and the U.S. (which is pressing Netanyahu to cede land quickly). The LAT
quotes a Palestinian official terming this a "public relations trick." The
WP has a front-page "reefer" to a page A18 story, and the Wall Street Journal puts it in their World-Wide news box.
The USAT front ignores it.

            A front-page NYT story says the International Monetary Fund has
agreed to bail out the ailing South Korean economy. Details were not yet
available, but some reports put the amount at $55 billion, to come from the
IMF, the U.S., Japan, and the World Bank. This would make it the largest-ever
rescue, eclipsing the $48 billion bailout of Mexico three years ago.
USAT , the LAT , and the WSJ all run front-page reefers to
the story.

            The WP lead says several Internet firms today will announce actions
designed to preempt regulation. Companies like America Online and Disney will
fund education and filtering devices to help parents keep kids safe from Web
smut. Conservatives say filtering devices won't go far enough; Free-speech
advocates say they'll go too far.

            The USAT lead describes the early returns on holiday shopping as
"uncertain." Sales figures are not overwhelming, but analysts think shoppers
now hold off on buying until right before Christmas.

            A front-page WP story reports on newly released tapes of President
Nixon's White House conversations. The tapes show that Nixon hoped to sway
coverage on the television networks by threatening them with anti-trust
legislation. In one case, NBC re-aired the broadcast of Nixon-daughter Tricia's
wedding, after repeated demands from the White House. (This column assures you
it will not be swayed by threats of anti-trust legislation against Microsoft.
Also, Chelsea Clinton continues to thrive at Stanford.)

         
      
   
