
   
   
      
         
            Diaper Rashness

            The possibility that Iraq will back off its attempt to prevent or modify
weapons inspections leads USA Today , the New York Times ,
and the Los Angeles Times . The Washington Post leads with the news that President Clinton
will endorse a patient's rights bill.

            The Iraq story took a big turn late in the news cycle, when early this
morning a Geneva meeting of foreign ministers, including Madeleine Albright,
was told by a Russian diplomat that the Iraqis had relented. The papers report
Albright's reaction: "I will believe it when I see it." The NYT states
that if Saddam Hussein does indeed back down, it will represent an
important victory for American and Russian diplomacy. But only the LAT seems to notice what Hussein might have accomplished in
his three uninspected weeks: the production of "350 liters--about 92
gallons--of anthrax a week. That's enough to fill two missile warheads or four
bombs."

            The Post reports that Clinton intends to call on all U.S. health insurers to adopt
standards , endorsed yesterday by a presidential commission, for easier
patient access to treatment, better health care information flow and improved
appeals procedures. (The NYT broke the story of the commission's
recommendations several weeks ago.) The WP says Clinton's call is his
largest and most controversial foray into health care since the defeat of his
reform plan three years ago. And as with that plan, the paper notes, there will
be much discussion about the cost of these new rights.

            The live births of those septuplets in Iowa grabs a lot of front-page space.
And uncomplicated boosterism suffuses most of the coverage. The LAT
reports the event under the headline "Oh, Baby!" and displays
their names and birth weights inside drawings of baby booties. The WP
waits until the thirteenth paragraph of its story to mention the fertility drugs involved and that such
drugs are frowned upon by many doctors. USAT
waits more than twenty paragraphs before raising an eyebrow, with this
contrarian quote from an expert on multiple births: "People were not meant to
have litters." The . NYT flashes much more awareness than the others of the
ethical, medical and economic problems inherent in the births.

            The father's quote: "God gave us those kids and he wants us to raise them,"
makes everybody's story. Well no, it was actually science and a huge amount of
charity: The coverage mentions that forty specialists attended the births and
that the mother has been hospitalized for over a month. Only USAT notes
that the part of the bill not paid by insurance will be covered by a fund set
up by the parents' church, and that Iowa's governor has announced that the
state will build the family a new house.

            The Wall Street Journal runs a feature on the first-ever relieving for cause of a Trident
nuclear missile submarine skipper. (The WP ran the story several
weeks ago, but the tale bears repeating.) The skipper, a real-life Captain
Queeg, deserved to get bounced. He reamed out subordinates in public over such
trivialities as a missing dinner fork. More seriously, under his command,
botched communications led to the Navy's not knowing where his ICBM-laden sub
was for nine days.

            The WP brings closure on a 32-year-old college prank. It seems that one
morning in 1965, the University of Virginia awoke to discover a cow perched on
the dome of the school's Rotunda, fifty feet above the ground. The prankster
was never identified. Until now. The culprit, fearing unmasking by classmates,
stepped forward and paid $1,755 to the sheriff who investigated the incident.
He is Alfred R. Berkeley III, the president of the NASDAQ stock exchange.

         
      
   
