
   
   
      
         
            Herzo Good

            The First Family's visit to Bosnia-Herzogovina leads at the New York Times ,
Los
Angeles Times , and USA Today , and is the top national story at the
Washington Post .

            The Bosnia stories--all accompanied by big top-of-the page photos of the
president, the best one being the LAT 's shot of Bill, Hillary, and
Chelsea up close and personal with American soldiers--all point out that
Clinton's quick mission had the dual purpose of boosting the morale of U.S.
troops and urging Bosnians to work harder on their country's recovery. The
pitch to the Bosnians, both in private consultations with national leaders and
in a public speech in Sarajevo, included Clinton's insistence on the importance
of isolating and arresting indicted war criminals.

            The NYT , USAT , and the LAT all go front page with the
news that the FDA has approved prescription of an anti-baldness pill. This comes
after experiments showing that the substance either promoted hair growth or at
least stopped hair loss in 83 percent of the men who took it. The approval came
despite recognition that the pills carry a slight risk of impotence and reduced
sex drive. (That there is expected to be a strong market for the medication
despite these possible side-effects is yet more evidence of the growing
narcissism of the American man, who apparently is more interested in looking
sexy than being sexy.)

            
               USAT runs a front-page piece about the career-ending spinal injury
suffered by Detroit linebacker Reggie Brown in a game Sunday. The piece focuses
on the inspirational story of teammates and opponents praying for him on the
field while doctors worked on him feverishly, but treads lightly around the
NFL's dirty little not-so-secret: namely, that because of the incredible
increases in the size, strength, and speed of the players, serious spinal and
head injuries are becoming more common all the time. So much so that pro
football is now far more dangerous than those "ultimate fighting championships"
that are outlawed in all but a few states.

            Call it the integration of church and (solid-) state. The Wall Street Journal reports in a front-page feature on a
new trend: telecommunications companies paying churches for the right to put
wireless transmission equipment in their steeples. It's a match made in heaven:
The companies get a nifty end-run around local bans on new towers and the
churches get an income stream far more reliable than the collection plate.

            Yesterday's LAT front-page story about Bill Clinton's 1996
fund-raising juggernaut bears revisiting. Closer inspection of the illustration
accompanying the piece, purporting to be of Clinton's schedule for one week in
June 1996, reveals that it is deeply deceptive. Although as the fine print
says, it is compiled from official sources, it is not a photograph of
the president's daybook, but rather a representation of his schedule concocted
by the LAT 's editors made to look like one. And not a very accurate one
either: for instance, in a trick that's repeated throughout the graphic, the
fund-raising entries for Monday, June 17 form a solid block of type, but this
is a trompe l'oeil achieved only by leaving a bunch of hours out of the
"daybook"'s format. This sleight-of-hand is just as unacceptable as the similar
newsmagazine cover practices of sinisterizing OJ and beautifying Quint Mom, or
the bygone TV fad of "re-creation." One hopes that this newspaper variant can
also be shamed out of favor.

            The WP and LAT fronts report on that nearly $5
million verdict won by actress Hunter Tylo, who sued because she was hired to
play a seductress on 'Melrose Place' but was then fired by producer Aaron
Spelling's company when it was revealed she was pregnant. Spelling officials
had claimed that a visibly pregnant woman couldn't be credible in the sexy
role. The Post quotes Tylo's lawyer saying it was important for the jury
to see that Tylo, who was eight months into another pregnancy during the trial,
"looked unbelievably sexy and terrific" as she came to court in short, tight
skirts. Spelling's attorney says there will be an appeal. But the main way
Hollywood deals with onrushing bandwagons is to jump right on, so stay tuned in
the fall for the new voluptuous pregnant chick series, "Cervixens!"

         
      
   
