
   
   
      
         
            Pizza the Action

            Everybody's lead is Janet Reno's decision not to appoint an independent
counsel to investigate campaign fund-raising calls allegedly made by President
Clinton and Vice-President Gore. (Reno also decided there was no reason to have
an outside counsel see if ex-Energy Secretary Hazel O'Leary solicited a
charitable contribution in return for meeting with a Chinese trade delegation.)
Everybody has the news that Reno concluded that the only fund-raising calls
Clinton made were from the residential quarters of the White House, which is
okay legally, and concluded that Gore did not know that some of the money he
was soliciting would end being improperly placed in a DNC "hard money" account.
Everybody also reports that Reno stated that this doesn't mean that Justice is
through with the issue, saying that her decision "does not mean that a person
has been exonerated." Indeed, the Los Angeles
Times accompanies its Reno story with an off-lead piece reporting that
the DOJ continues to investigate the major fund-raisers on the other end of the
phone.

            The development is widely reported as good news for Clinton and great news
for Gore, who now has renewed hopes of heading into campaign 2000 sans scandal.
USA
Today and the others emphasize the hot, hot Republican reaction. Both
the New York Times
and Washington Post quote Rep. Dan Burton's comment that "The question is: Will the
American people have confidence that no cover-up is going on?..As a result of
today's announcement, the answer remains, 'no.'"

            Everybody makes a big deal about FBI Director Freeh's eleventh-hour memo to
Reno urging her to seek an outside counsel, citing inherent conflicts of
interest in her investigation. The NYT makes the biggest, using its
lead editorial to laud him, saying, "It was a momentous act of duty to lob
this hand grenade of truth into Ms. Reno's legal fantasy land." William Safire
uses his space to retail an Arlen Specter quip about the tension between the
FBI director and his boss: "The Department of Justice cannot survive half slave
and half Freeh."

            The NYT observes that Reno's decision probably saved both Clinton and
Gore hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees.

            The Wall Street Journal 's "Tax Report" contains at least a
partial explanation for why individual taxpayers feel more beleaguered than
ever. They're paying a lot more of the country's total tax bill than they used
to: total corporate taxes now represent only 12.5 percent of total federal tax
revenues, down from more than 20 percent in the 60s.

            The metro edition of the NYT reports on Tawana Brawley's speech at a Bed-Stuy church, her first
public appearance since she made her never-substantiated claims ten years ago
that four white men, including at least one law enforcement official, abducted
and raped her and left her smeared with excrement. According to the story,
Brawley's still in the never-substantiated business. In her twenty-minute
speech, with few details, she said that the CIA had followed her and that she
had once been stopped at gunpoint by law enforcement officers at Newark
airport.

            Although Brawley's charges drew plenty of national attention when she
originally made them, the national edition of the Times doesn't cover
her speech. The metro edition does, though, complete with front-page color
picture.

            
               Political Pizza Watch. The NYT reports that Al Gore's response
to the good news included going out for pizza (wonder if he called his order in). And the
paper also reports that last Thursday, in Moscow, Mikhail Gorbachev filmed a Pizza Hut commercial. Gorbachev defended the move thus:
"I thought it is a people's matter--food." The people may get the food, but
Gorby got nearly $1 million.

         
      
   
