
   
   
      
         
            Photo Opportunism

            
               USA
Today leads with Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin's warning to Congress
against counting on a federal budget surplus. The Washington Post leads with remarks by House Budget
Committee Chairman John Kasich and by House Ways and Means Committee Chairman
Bill Archer to the effect that expanding Medicare coverage to include younger
retirees would be a mistake. The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times go with the sudden threat to Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu's ruling coalition.

            The crux of the Israeli situation is that the Foreign Minister, David Levy,
resigned on Sunday because of dissatisfaction with Netanyahu's performance on
both the social welfare and Palestinian fronts. The NYT explains that
the move only leaves Netanyahu with a two-vote margin in Parliament. The
Times says that without Levy, Netanyahu is likely to grow more dependent
on right-wing parties, and thus to become more resistant to pro-Palestinian
concessions. USAT and the WP run the Israel story as their off-leads.

            In what is no doubt the payoff for concerted auto industry press lobbying,
the Wall Street Journal , NYT , and LAT each
run front-page stories about the Big Three's renewed interest in producing
less-guzzling, less-polluting cars. Readers are advised to clip and save these
for when the car companies howl the next time the federal government tries to
lower fuel economy and emission standards.

            In the NYT 's story about today's opening of the Unabomber trial (run
on the front in the national edition, inside in the metro edition), the point
is made that the case's story of "a brother fighting to save the life of the
brother he turned in" is "a tale of literary dimensions." But the Times
apparently doesn't feel such an observation can stand without expert testimony,
so it drags in Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist William Kennedy and a lit
professor to repeat it.

            The WP 's Al Kamen reports that the CIA recently overlooked scads of
Agency retirees it should have invited to its 50th anniversary gala. Why?
Because it couldn't find them. How many alumni spooks didn't get to come in
from the cold? As many as 30,000, says Kamen, but he's just guessing because
"the numbers are secret."

            A piece inside the NYT that wonders when the downsizing trend will hit higher ed reports that between
1984 and 1994, the cost of college tuition went up about 150 percent, outpacing
even medical care (111 percent).

            Sunday's LAT reports that over the weekend, some Latino workers in
L.A. started a hunger strike on the steps of City Hall. What's the latest
causa? A protest by gardeners over the city's imminent ban against
gasoline-powered leaf blowers. "Unfortunately, we feel a hunger strike is the
only way we can be heard," one of the strikers tells the LAT . Well no,
we still can't hear you because of the... goddam leaf blowers !

            Yesterday's NYT "Week in Review" included an overview of the last
meals requested by men executed in Texas. One man's wish was that his final
meal be given to a homeless person. Request denied.

            
               They're both clad only in bathing suits, alone on the beach. He clutches
her in to him with his hand on the small of her back while she's looking up at
him adoringly. The fade-out still from a new romantic movie? Or one of
those magazine ads for a Caribbean getaway? No, it's the President and First
Lady on the top front of the LAT . Nothing inherently wrong here, but
think about it....This isn't a candid shot: there isn't an inch out of focus or
a blurry branch being parted. And nary a toe being sucked anywhere. And do you
think the Secret Service would let a paparazzo get even telephoto close to the
First Couple in seclusion on their vacation? No, this is a genre that hasn't
been so blatant since JFK and Jackie: the romantic photo-op. And what's wrong
is that, like the paparazzi's click-clicking, it's the exposure of what should
be an intimate family moment purely for gain, in this case, political.
Inflicting privacy is as unseemly as invading privacy.

         
      
   
