
   
   
      
         
            InSecurities

            
               USA
Today leads with the collapse of a major Japanese brokerage. The
Washington Post leads with Iraq's designation of
certain areas as off-limits to U.N. inspectors. The New York Times leads with the White House's push for
insurance coverage for Americans aged 55-64. The Los Angeles
Times leads with a poll story: Most Southern Californians have
tremendous confidence in their state's economy.

            The USAT story says Yamaichi Securities Co., Japan's fourth-largest
brokerage, has closed down while in debt to the tune of $24 billion. The
collapse could have major negative impacts on Asian markets, though the Bank of
Japan is stepping in with financial backing to protect Yamaichi's
investors.

            Various papers took various angles on the story. The WP 's
above-the-fold article calls President Clinton "upbeat" on Asian economies, and
the paper front-pages the Yamaichi failure only in a small "reefer" to a page
A11 story. The LAT splits the difference with two side-by-side,
front-page stories: One covers the Yamaichi gloom, the other centers on
Clinton's "upbeat" assessment of Asian finance. The NYT 's front-page
analysis departs from the upbeat line, emphasizing Washington's wariness
despite its public show of confidence: the White House fears economic weakness
could lead to political fragility in the region. Both the NYT and the
LAT note that Yamaichi is the largest corporate failure in Japan since
World War II. The Wall Street Journal puts Yamaichi on the front page in its
"Business and Finance" news box.

            The WP lead follows Iraq's latest ploy in the continuing standoff:
U.N. inspectors are being denied access to "presidential" sites. Iraq says an
inspection of them would be akin to the U.N. searching the White House; the
U.N. says the sites are potential hiding places for illicit weaponry.
USAT also front-pages the item, and says Saddam's 47 palaces form the
bulk of the contested sites. The USAT article centers on Defense
Secretary William Cohen's "hard line" reaction--shunning leniency and demanding
that the palaces be opened. While the story is prominent and above the fold at
the WP and USAT , both the NYT and the LAT leave it
off their front pages altogether.

            A WSJ editorial takes its cue from the standoff, using it to decry
the weakening of the U.S. military. Since crushing Iraq in 1991, our armed
forces have been cut by a third and are less well trained. A new Gulf conflict
might prove far more costly, and our forces would be too small to fight a
simultaneous battle elsewhere in the world.

            The NYT lead says the White House will push for insurance coverage
directed at the three million uninsured Americans aged 55-64. Too young for
Medicare, not poor enough for Medicaid, and largely victims of corporate
downsizing, these "near elderly" are old enough to contract expensive,
age-related illnesses. Congressional Republicans will firmly resist any new
entitlements.

            Both USAT (on its front page) and the WP (on page A2) track a
new psychiatric disorder: Some bodybuilders develop a kind of reverse anorexia,
thinking themselves puny no matter how much they bulk up, and obsessing over
gaining and maintaining weight. (Now if we could just get fashion models hooked
on weightlifting...)

         
      
   
