
   
   
      
         
            Back to Basic

            
               USA
Today leads with the news that a special civilian commission appointed
by the DOD will release a report today reversing more than a decade of Pentagon
gender-integration policies by concluding that men and women should go through
basic training separately. The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times lead with the DOD's announcement that all U.S. military
forces (active and reserve) will be inoculated against the deadly biological
warfare agent anthrax. The lead national story at the Washington Post is President Clinton's appointment of Bill
Lann Lee to the Justice Department's top civil rights job.

            That DOD panel, says USAT , found that the military's present co-ed
training approach "is resulting in less discipline, less unit cohesion and more
distraction." The Secretary of Defense, William Cohen, can, says the paper,
implement the panel's recommendations without congressional approval. (The
story is also on the NYT front.)

            The NYT lead reports that the Pentagon anthrax inoculation
program will consist of a series of six shots to start with and then annual
boosters. It will, says the Times , begin next summer with the 100,000
troops in the Persian Gulf and in Korea. (Soldiers in the Gulf for Desert Storm
received the initial dosage only.) Completion of the program will take six
years and cost $130 million. The LAT also leads with this
story, and it's the second lead at USAT . The WP has the story
too--on p. 23.

            The anthrax stories all mention the official Pentagon explanation that such
countries as Iraq, Iran, and Libya have stockpiled anthrax weapons and that the
toxin is considered a rising terrorist threat. Yet none of them breathe a word
about the idea of inoculating the civilian population as well.

            Was Bill Clinton's interim (that is, with Congress adjourned) appointment of
Lee as acting DOJ civil rights boss a snub of the Senate, (which turned Lee
down)? That's a little hard to tell from the headlines. The WP runs
"President Bypasses Congress, Appoints Lee On Acting Basis," while the
NYT goes with "Clinton, Softening Slap At Senate, Names 'Acting' Civil
Rights Chief." The LAT runs "Clinton Defies GOP, Names Lee Rights
Chief."

            In reporting on a FBI sting that collared 16 computer brokers trafficking in
stolen IBM parts across five states, the Wall Street Journal reports that the theft of computer
hardware and software is hitting $8 billion annually.

            The NYT reports that the December issue of "Suicide and
Life-Threatening Behavior" (bitchin' swimsuit issue!) includes a study
purporting to show that in the major gambling cities of the U.S.--Atlantic
City, Las Vegas, and Reno--the suicide rates are up to four times higher than
in comparably sized cities where gambling is not legal.

            In case you're distracted this week by deep worries about who the lead
characters in "Love Story" were based on, relax, the NYT is on the case.
Last week's Time reported that after a long day on the road, Al Gore
sidled up to some reporters traveling with him on his plane and in the course
of the conversation allowed as to how in college, he was friends with novelist
Erich Segal, and in fact he and Tipper were the models for the doomed lovers in
Segal's "Love Story." Last Sunday's NYT reported that Segal denies this
(and denied it to Gore in a phone call). The author claims that he got some
character traits for the male lead from Gore, but others from Gore's roommate
(and eventual movie star) Tommy Lee Jones, and nothing at all for the female
lead from Tipper. Gore responded by saying he was misquoted, and a Gore
spokesperson said the conversation was off the record anyway (which reporters
who were there deny). Today, Frank
Rich's op-ed column tells us what this all means: that "disingenuousness,
not stiffness, is [Gore's] real character problem." Stay tuned for more
Times coverage--Maureen Dowd has reportedly also been investigating. Or
maybe she's pursuing something else, like the rumor that when Arthur C. Clarke
was writing 2001 he used Gore as the model for HAL.

         
      
   
