
   
   
      
         
            Message: Wee Care

            Everybody's big story is the inability of the Terry Nichols jury to decide
on his sentence, which under the federal rules, means he won't get the death
penalty. The judge will decide instead and the dailies say that he'll probably
go for life in prison. Nichols, the reader is reminded all around, still faces
hundreds of state murder charges that could result in the death penalty.

            The most striking part of this installment of the Nichols story is what
USA
Today calls the "sharply critical press conference" held by the jury
forewoman afterwards. She is quoted as saying that "the government dropped the
ball." USAT implies that what she meant by this was that "it was hard to
say from the evidence presented exactly what Terry Nichols' involvement was."
But the New York Times ,
Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times say the "dropping the ball" comment was about her belief that the
government had failed to search for other suspects

            The WP seems to reveal that this juror ended up with at least a touch
of militia-style animus against the feds when it quotes her
remark: "I think the government's attitude.is part of where all this comes from
in the first place..I think maybe it's time the government be more
respectful.and not with the attitude that we know and you don't, we have the
power and you don't." Indeed, in its lead paragraph, the LAT attributes
the sentencing outcome to a belief by many jurors that the FBI was arrogant and
sloppy.

            Continuing the time-honored tradition of drip-dripping the key elements of
the upcoming State of the Union speech ahead of time, all of the front pages
cover President Clinton's proposal of a nearly $22 billion package of grants
and tax breaks to help working families pay for child care. The plan would also
include tax credits for businesses that build or expand employee child care
facilities. Congressional rumblings are noted--both USAT and the
NYT report that House Ways and Means Chairman Bill Archer referred to
the plan as another of Clinton's "small ideas" that "taken together, return to
the era of big government"--but there is no mention of the federally subsidized
state-of-the-art workplace child-care center used by members of Congress.

            The news that the Department of Justice has brought its first criminal
charges in its investigation of the tobacco industry makes the fronts of
the LAT , the WP , and USAT , and is flagged in the
front-page news box of the Wall Street Journal . The NYT carries it inside. The
feds say that DNA Plant Technology Corp. conspired with a tobacco company
(officially unnamed, but widely reported to be Brown and Williamson) to develop
a high-nicotine tobacco. DNA has agreed to cooperate with the DOJ's ongoing
investigation. The USAT headline--"Biotech Firm to Aid Tobacco
Probe"--makes the whole thing sound like good citizenship rather than a plea
bargain.

            The NYT front-page story about the Paula Jones lawsuit starts right
off stating that Jones plans to be physically present when Bill Clinton is
questioned under oath by her lawyers at an upcoming deposition. But the piece
waits until the tenth paragraph to note that this was reported yesterday in the
Washington Times . (This story is also inside today's Post .)

            The WP runs an op-ed complaining that the U.S. is single-handedly
resisting a U.N. attempt to reduce the worldwide use of child soldiers. (More
than a quarter-million children are currently serving under arms, the piece
says.) It seems we are balking at accepting age 18 as the cut-off because the
Pentagon allows 17-year-olds to enlist with parental consent. But, counters the
op-ed, nearly all these soldiers reach 18 before being assigned to combat
positions.

            In his column today, William Safire goes off on an extended rant against all
the ways in which privacy is imperiled, from your dealings with banks and
employers and stores, to airline security and deadbeat dad tracking. It's
gratifying to see that some twenty-five years after leaving the Enemies List
White House, Safire has come to appreciate the awesome dangers of information
trafficking, but it's interesting that his proposed reforms still smack of the
Nixon M.O.: "Sign as little as possible" and "Above all--pay cash."

         
      
   
