
   
   
      
         
            Iraq and Roll Call

            The Washington Post leads with U.S./U.N. reactions to the
continuing Iraq stand-off. USA Today and the Los Angeles
Times lead with congressional fast-track maneuvering. And the New York Times
goes with the announcement of a Pentagon job cut.

            According to the WP , President Clinton is urging the U.N. to put
enough pressure on Iraq to compel Saddam Hussein to give internal access once
again to the U.N. weapons inspection teams. The Post says that Clinton
is especially focused on getting France, Russia and Arab states to stay firm.
Meanwhile, says the paper, Hussein made a statement on Iraqi television that
appeared to be bucking up his countrymen to continue the impasse.

            The WP says Clinton is proceeding on two fronts. One, he is making it
clear that military options are not off the table--"We will not," he said
yesterday, referring to Hussein's vow to shoot down U.S.-piloted U.N.
surveillance U-2s, "tolerate his efforts to murder our pilots." And two, trying
to ensure that the U.N. maintains a united front against Iraq.

            
               USAT and the LAT both report that the fast-track roll call
will probably take place early Monday morning, and that Clinton seemed unable
to persuade enough House Democrats to vote his way and so the emphasis has
turned towards the hunt for Republican votes. The LAT says Republican
leaders predict the bill will pass.

            You have to sympathize a bit with the situation the dailies are in with
fast-track. Fascinated by the bill's strange bedfellow coalition of supporters
and convinced that a dramatic vote was imminent, the papers started hitching
their leads to the vote in the middle of last week, which meant that as the
vote kept not materializing, the papers were stuck in bed with a story that
wouldn't undress and was ugly anyway. But the majors didn't help themselves out
much--they could have been doing much more substantive reporting from the
outset about what sorts of trade agreements fast-track authority was likely to
spawn. Why, for instance, is there no mention of NAFTA or GATT in these
stories? The whole episode is a good example of the press's weakness for
covering the how of a political story over the why or the what.

            The NYT lead says that Secretary of Defense Cohen announced his plan
to cut thousands of administrative jobs at the Pentagon under pressure from
Congress to reduce the Pentagon's own bureaucracy before ordering cuts in
troops or weapons. The paper reports Cohen's plan could save $6 billion a year.
(That's only a little more than a 2 percent cut.) The plan also includes
proposed base closings, which the Times notes, require congressional
approval and may not get it. And shades of the balanced budget deal, none of
the projected pain takes place until Clinton is out of office. The WP
runs substantially the same Cohen plan story on its front as well.

            The Wall Street Journal runs a front-page feature about a
federal affirmative action program for female highway contractors (the only one
that cites women as a disadvantaged class) and the backlash it has created
among black, male construction workers, who feel squeezed out of the trade by
it. Under the program, reports the Journal , women's share of federal
highway funds has tripled. But meanwhile, the share going to blacks, the
program's original beneficiaries, plummeted. "The white women--95% of them are
fronts," the WSJ quotes a black trucking business owner as saying. Now
there's a move afoot in Congress to end the program, which the paper reports,
might well mean a lot of female subcontractors will go bankrupt.

            The WP runs a front-page piece detailing how since returning to
office in 1995, Mayor Marion Barry has used more than $240,000 from a special
unaudited fund, generated by the D.C. hotel tax and political contributions,
for such goodies as a Waterford crystal wedding gift, a lavish staff Christmas
party and extensive travel abroad. The story runs under the headline: "Barry
Used Unaudited Funds For Gift, Parties and Travel." That's F6 on Post
keyboards.

         
      
   
