
   
   
      
         
            Burial Plot Thickens

            
               USA
Today leads with Janet Reno's refusal to hand over to a congressional
committee a memo FBI director Freeh had written her urging an independent
counsel for investigating allegations of Clinton campaign fund-raising
wrongdoing. The national edition of the New York Times leads with the report that Reno and
Freeh wrote a joint letter to the committee defending and explaining their
noncompliance. (The metro edition of the Times leads with a proposed
reduction in NYC bus and subway fares.) The Washington Post leads with Al Gore's vague speech at the
Kyoto global-warming conference and the lukewarm-to-hostile reaction it got.
Gore promised U.S. "flexibility" in arriving at a deal on such issues as how
much constraint will be required of developing nations like China. The Los Angeles
Times leads with the latest development in the mini-scandal concerning
the interment at Arlington of the late Clinton political donor and ambassador
M. Larry Lawrence: the decision of his widow to have her husband's body removed
from there.

            The LAT lead explains that the Lawrence disinterment comes in
response to a rising outcry over evidence that Lawrence didn't have a right to
an Arlington plot because he invented his story of being on a Merchant Marine
ship, the Horace Bushnell , that was torpedoed while ferrying emergency
supplies to the Russians during World War II. The paper points out that the
dust-up is a particular embarrassment for a president for whom military issues
have always been a matter of special sensitivity. (Can you say "the Col. Holmes
letter"?) The LAT reports that officials of Wilbur Wright Community
College in Chicago say that their records show Lawrence was enrolled there at
the time of the Bushnell sinking. The WP and NYT both also have
this detail in their pieces, which they run inside. Moreover, both these papers
somewhat out-report the LAT . The WP finds a Bushnell survivor who doesn't remember
Lawrence and the NYT finds the widow of one who is none too pleased about
the whole affair. Both papers are reporting that Lawrence's claim to have
graduated from the University of Arizona appears to be false. Plus, the
NYT reports that Lawrence would "struggle with his emotions" when he
would talk of his near sinking, which he did at his Senate confirmation
hearings.

            Both the USAT and NYT leads also cover the White House's
turn-over to Congress of a new batch of internal documents relating to
President Clinton's meetings with Democratic fund-raisers under investigation
in Justice and congressional probes. According to the Times , the
documents quote one presidential assistant observing that the Federal
Election Commission would not be able to finish its investigation of foreign
contributions to the Democrats until after the election and then quote Leon
Panetta, the White House Chief of Staff as saying, "This will certainly help
move campaign reform forward."

            The Wall Street Journal "Work Week" column reports on the
advent of Web sites that offer employees a chance to vent about their troubles
at work. One site
posts anecdotes sent in by readers about their bosses' antics and features a
satirical advice column. Another offers tips on how to relax before job interviews (have a
Tic Tac).

         
      
   
