
   
   
      
         
            The Check is in the Tail

            
               USA
Today leads with the chief U.N. weapons inspector's suspicions that
Iraq has been tampering with his surveillance cameras in his team's absence.
The Los
Angeles Times leads with the House's resounding passage of an IRS
reform bill. The Washington Post leads with the meaning of Tuesday's
elections. The New York Times
metro edition leads with the meaning of Rudy Giuliani's election, while the
paper's national lead is the soon-to-be-announced decision by major mail-order
companies to start collecting sales tax from their out-of-state customers.

            The upshot of the camera tampering, according to USAT , is that the
team leader can't verify that Iraq is not currently producing weapons of mass
destruction. The WP has this story on its front page too.

            The LAT IRS lead calls the reform bill's passage by a 426-4 margin a
"spectacular display of bipartisanship" created by last month's Senate hearings
on IRS mismanagement and taxpayer abuse. The paper points out that the bill,
which includes such taxpayer protections as shifting the burden of proof to the
government in tax disputes and the creation of a civilian oversight board, will
likely be even further strengthened by the Senate. IRS reform is on the
NYT front and in the "world-wide news" box on the Wall Street Journal front, but inside at the WP .

            A WSJ front-page piece makes the point that while political debate
about the IRS portrays it as abusing taxpayers, in the world of corporate
finance, it's the IRS that's the underdog, waging a constant war against a
stream of ingenious and complicated new tax dodges.

            The Post concludes that yesterday's Republican victories were mostly
due to lavish financing, widespread social conservatism among voters, and an
unwillingness, bred of the healthy economy, to dump incumbents. In light of all
this, says the paper, Democrats are viewing the goals of recapturing the House
and gaining parity in governorships as more difficult than ever. And according
to the WP , the lesson for the Republicans is keep talking about
taxes.

            The WP carries an AP story inside stating that the man who used the
Internet last spring to accuse the Navy of shooting down TWA Flight 800 is now
saying that action was "reckless and a mistake." Former JFK press secretary
Pierre Salinger, who championed the accusation, has quietly backed off too. He
says he still believes the government was behind the disaster, but he has told
the FBI that he is no longer actively investigating.

            The NYT runs a story inside reporting that a U.S. intelligence
official, "apparently a CIA officer," has left Austria after being caught
wiretapping the phone of a North Korean diplomat. The piece goes on to point
out that in the past three years, CIA officers have been caught spying in, and
kicked out of, at least four other countries: Germany, France, Italy and
India.

            The WP , USAT , the NYT , and the LAT all run
front-page stories about how an NIH panel has for the first time concluded that
acupuncture is an effective treatment for some kinds of pain and nausea and
shows promise as a treatment for a variety of other conditions. Health experts
say the decision will almost certainly lead to more patients opting for the
technique and more private and government insurance paying for them to do
so.

            The WP runs a story inside based on AP reports saying that employees
of a Little Rock junkyard have made an interesting discovery in the trunk of an
abandoned car: a 1982 Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan check for more than
$20,000 made out to Bill Clinton. The paper points out that last year Clinton
testified under oath in James McDougal's bank fraud trial that he had "never
borrowed money from Madison Guaranty." The Post reports that Ken Starr
has been investigating the check.

            Go figure: That mail-order sales tax agreement will apply to products sold
over cable TV and the Internet, but not to those sold via online information
providers like America Online.

         
      
   
