
   
   
      
         
            The Disney Exercise Program

            Yesterday, everybody had the same lead--today, nobody does. USA Today
leads with a major new comparative study of Americans' life spans. The New York Times
leads with South Korea's acceptance of the largest international economic
rescue ever, a $55 billion bailout engineered by the IMF. The Washington Post goes with Motorola's decision to make its
largest single capital investment ever, in the form of a new computer chip
plant near Richmond, Va. The Los Angeles Times lead is a survey suggesting that
42 percent of Californians with medical insurance had a problem with their
health plan, including hundreds of thousands who reported denials or delays in
getting treatment, which often made their medical conditions worse.

            
               USAT 's longevity study lead reveals that the gap between the longest
and shortest American lifespans--where life expectancy can vary by as much as
40 years from one county to another--is about as big as that found between the
nations with the longest and shortest lifespans. For instance, an Asian woman
living in Bergen County, NJ, can expect to live for 96 years, while the average
black man in Washington D.C., lives to age 58. The paper says the director of
the CDC finds the results incredible, adding that they will probably serve as a
blueprint for research into disease and urban violence.

            The WP runs a front-page piece driving home the study's applications
to the Washington/Virginia region, noting that it reveals that D.C. men have
nearly the shortest life span in the country, while men just across the Potomac
in suburban Virginia have nearly the longest--a difference of 14.5 years. Not
surprisingly, one expert quoted pins the difference on economic status--in
other words, that Motorola plant's only going to make things worse.

            The NYT explains in its lead that in return for the bailout money
from the IMF and such countries as the U.S. and Japan, Korea will have to cut
public spending, open its market up to more foreign goods and investors and put
growth constraints on its conglomerate industries. All of which, says the
Times , could be very good for the U.S. economy.

            120 nations (that's the NYT number; the LAT and USAT
say 125) gathered yesterday in Ottawa to sign a comprehensive land mine ban.
The U.S. was the most conspicuous non-signer. As you'd expect, the story is
front-page news at the NYT , LAT , and USAT . But the
WP puts it on p. 33.

            Both the NYT and WP give front-page coverage (with pictures)
to President Clinton's first town meeting on race, held in Akron, Ohio. And
both papers give a lot of ink to an exchange between Clinton and Abigail
Thernstrom, a conservative critic of affirmative action. Clinton, on his feet,
"towering" over the seated Thernstrom, asked her if she favored the U.S. Army
abolishing the affirmative action program that "produced" Colin Powell. The
NYT version makes it look like Thernstrom didn't respond very clearly.
The WP account says she replied, "The overwhelming majority of Americans
want American citizens to be treated as individuals."

            The Wall Street Journal "Business Bulletin" reports that
University Microfilms, long the nation's main repository for doctoral
dissertations, has now made them available on the Web. Which means, says the
Journal , you are but a few clicks away from reading the Ph.D. theses of
the likes of Bill Cosby, Dr. Ruth and the Unabomber. But not Alan
Greenspan's--he asked that his "Papers on Economic Theory and Policy" not be
made available.

            Back to that LAT lead about health plan problems: One Californian who
probably doesn't have these difficulties is Disney poohbah Michael Eisner, who,
says the LAT in a nearby front-pager, yesterday had the single biggest
executive payday in history when he exercised stock options bringing in $565
million. A little perspective on that sum: it could pay the salaries of every
member of Congress for about a decade.

         
      
   
