
   
   
      
         
            Cisneros and Aphrodite

            
               USA
Today and the Washington Post lead with a federal judge's order that
Microsoft must, at least temporarily, stop bundling its Internet browser with
its Windows operating system. This is also the top national story at the
Los
Angeles Times . The New York Times
goes instead with a look at the coming debate over the Kyoto greenhouse
protocol.

            
               USAT describes the federal court decision as "a major blow" to
Microsoft and "a big victory" for the Justice Department. The decision not only
applies to current versions of the software programs but could also hinder the
development and marketing of new versions set to roll out early next year. The
judge also made another ruling that gets less attention: he refused to order
Microsoft to stop asking business partners to sign "non-disclosure" provisions
that require notifying Microsoft when passing information along to the
government. His reason: there is no evidence that MS is using the provision to
prevent signatories from speaking to government investigators.

            The NYT lead reports that the White House said Thursday it
would not submit the proposed global warming treaty for Senate ratification
until developing countries agree to participate in its restrictions, something
these countries refused to do at Kyoto until they see developed countries like
the U.S. cut their own emissions first. Perceptions of the treaty's softness on
the third world, says the Times , have already prompted many Senators to
come out against it.

            In politics, what could be worse than having your cold, dead ass dug up from
Arlington Cemetery when it's discovered that your tombstone there is full of
lies? Well, maybe it's being indicted for lying along with your ex-mistress.
Anyway, the front pages at the NYT , the LAT and the WP
report that this is exactly what's befallen former Clinton HUD secretary Henry
Cisneros. The indictment charges that while Clinton was choosing his first
cabinet, Cisneros lied to FBI agents conducting the requisite routine
background investigation, saying that he had stopped paying money to an
ex-mistress. But the money, alleges the indictment, wasn't for support but for
silence and the payments continued. The papers all mention that some
ex-Cisneros employees are indicted too, but it's the NYT that makes it
clear why: the charge is that they also lied to investigators about the
financial arrangements with the woman, in hopes of securing HUD jobs for
themselves.

            For those who persist in arguing that our politicians need salary increases,
please note that according to the indictment, somehow Cisneros was able to
scrape together a quarter of a million dollars for his girlfriend.

            The Wall Street Journal runs an interesting front-pager on the
Asian economic turmoil's impact on U.S. businesses. The piece points out that
it depends on the business--the best situation is companies like
Hewlett-Packard and Seagate, who have a lot of production facilities in the
troubled countries, but sell mostly to other, healthier regions. The worst is
the reverse: companies like Applied Materials and LAM Research, which make
products in the U.S. and Europe for sale in Asia.

            
               USAT repeats Cindy Adams's account in the New York Post of her
and Hillary Clinton getting thrown out of the University Club in NYC. Adams
says it might have been because she was talking on a cell phone and because she
and the First Lady were spritzing each other with her new perfume. (How it must
have pained Adams's sense of journalistic integrity to have to mention the name
of that perfume in her column.) The NYT 's account doesn't mention the
phoning and the spritzing, which makes the whole episode utterly
incomprehensible.

            The WP 's Al Kamen reports that Al
Gore has sent a Christmas card to just about every Democrat in New Hampshire.
In case you were wondering if it was wise for Gore to spend all that money on
just one primary state, don't worry--the Democratic National Committee paid for
the leafleting. Isn't this exactly the sort of soft-money-for-hard-purposes
shenanigans that Gore's just dodged a bullet over?

            In a long WP profile of Geraldo Rivera , prompted by Rivera's
new lush contract with NBC News, which he hopes to use to ride back into teevee
news respectability, he's quoted saying, "I would debate with anyone, on any of
the meaningful issues of our day--with Peter Jennings, Charlie Rose, Bill
Moyers, all these people that you guys are always kissing their [expletive]. I
happen to be one of the most educated men in television. Not only am I lawyer,
but I have had two graduate fellowships!" Yeah, but Bill Moyers never did a
show where he had some of his butt cells transplanted into his face.

         
      
   
