
   
   
      
         
            More Swiss Cheesiness?

            A new game of chicken with Saddam over arms inspections leads at USA Today and
the Washington Post . At the New York Times
and the Los Angeles Times , it's signs that Indonesia is ready to
shoulder real economic reforms.

            Yesterday, Iraq halted the work of yet another U.N. weapons inspection team.
USAT and the WP both report that the official reasons are that
the team has too many Americans and that the team leader, former Marine Scott
Ritter, is a spy. USAT reports that on a 1995 Iraq visit, Ritter, a
seasoned inspector, discovered smuggled-in missile guidance equipment. The
Post adds the detail that Iraq's latest tantrum followed a day of
aggressive surprise inspections conducted by Ritter's team. The U.S. reaction
is to re-emphasize that Saddam must comply and that all diplomatic and military
options are on the table.

            Both the NYT and LAT emphasize that Indonesian president
Suharto has received more international attention, in the form of visits from
U.S. and IMF delegations and calls from numerous foreign leaders, than he has
in years, and that he seems to be responding with a real austerity pledge,
including the postponement of several major government investments in the
dubious projects of family members. The NYT reports on another public
buck-up: a group of Indonesian tycoons joined the nation's finance minister for
a televised purchase of the local currency.

            Although prior press reports have wondered if the 76-year-old Suharto's
failing health would impair his ability to lead his country out of the current
crisis, neither of today's Times stories emphasize this.

            According to the LAT front, a study coming out today from the Simon
Wiesenthal Center will charge that thousands of Jewish refugees were confined by the Swiss during
World War II in special camps, sometimes behind barbed wire and at gunpoint.
Often, says the paper, the Jews were forced to work for little or no pay, and
even forced to pay special taxes to defray the expenses of their
confinement.

            The Wall Street Journal quotes fresh government research
indicating that total U.S. health care expenditures rose but an
inflation-adjusted 1.9% in 1996, the slowest growth rate in nearly forty years.
The study cites the 90's explosive growth of managed care as a major factor.
But, the Journal points out, with spending in the public health care
sector (primarily Medicare and Medicaid) coming under firmer budgetary control,
the growth of private medical costs may be poised to rise above 5% per year for
the first time since the early 90s.

            The NYT front reports a major policy reversal on the part of the nation's leading AIDS
service agency. After years of actively opposing the reporting by New York's
doctors of HIV-positive people to state health departments, the Gay Men's
Health Crisis has just endorsed the practice. (But prefers tracking via a code
system to one using actual names.)

            Despite all the budget euphoria swirling about, business writer Allan Sloan
uses his WP column to point out a familiar but forgotten
fact: There is no surplus if you eschew "fedmath" and instead calculate assets
and liabilities the way a business does, i.e., not letting the government's
pension system, Social Security, be used to draw down the deficit. Figured this
way, states Sloan, the 1997 budget deficit was $103.9 billion.

            The NYT front reports on an unpredicted consequence of the Asian
economic crisis: the Asian arms race is cooling off because most of the region's
nations are suddenly unable to go through with planned weapons purchases. Just
last week, Indonesia announced that it would put off buying $1 billion in
Russian weapons, and Thailand and South Korea are delaying aircraft purchases.
Malaysia is unusual in that it is canceling outright a helicopter and jet deal,
but most of the other deals will probably only be delayed. Here's an idea: why
not require these countries to swear off such weapons deals as a condition of
receiving any IMF or U.S. bailout money?

            The WP reports that following a year of sensitive negotiations, the
German government has finally agreed to spend $110 million to compensate 18,000
Jewish victims of the Nazis who are living in Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union. While information is comparatively fresh and large numbers of the
survivors are still around, why not institute similar reparations to be paid by
Russia to victims of the Gulag? Again, why not make such payments a condition
of U.S. and international aid packages?

         
      
   
