
   
   
      
         
            Freeh-for-all

            
               USA
Today and the Los Angeles Times lead with new congressional pressure on
the Department of Justice regarding campaign fund-raising investigations. The
New York Times
leads with the changing role of the International Monetary Fund. And the
Washington Post leads with President Clinton's
appearance at a Washington, D.C. church during which he called for greater
independence for the District, remarks criticized by many local politicians for
not including a call for voting rights for the city.

            
               USAT reports that Rep. Dan Burton says that his investigating
committee may have to cite Janet Reno for contempt if she doesn't turn over a
memo written to her by FBI director Louis Freeh. In it, to no avail, Freeh
explained why she should appoint an independent counsel to look into Clinton
campaign fund-raising. And USAT and the LAT report that Sen.
Orrin Hatch plans on asking Freeh to open up his own investigation of these
matters independent of Reno's. Meanwhile, says USAT , Sen. Fred Thompson
will ask Justice to consider perjury charges against at least six witnesses who
testified at his fund-raising hearings this past summer. The WP also has
a front-page piece concerning these developments.

            The NYT lead points out that last week's IMF bailout package for
South Korea is the latest example of how the Fund is pushing deeper than ever into the day-to-day
operations of the economies it aids. Chastened by compliance difficulties
surrounding recent IMF loans to Russia and Indonesia, says the paper, for the
Korea bailout, Fund officials won concessions to many detailed provisions
covering the cronyish connections among the government and the country's major
industrial conglomerates.

            The Wall Street Journal 's lead feature notes that the latest global economic
developments challenge the widely-held view that an emphasis on short-term
performance weakens an economy. The piece claims that the U.S.'s strong growth
in the 1990s and the collapse of one long-term-oriented Asian financial system
(where, unlike here, banks and not financial markets are the primary source of
capital) after another show quite the contrary. Another WSJ front-page
piece notes that while the current economic differential between the U.S. and
the leading Asian economies will amp our trade deficit somewhat, few think the
Asian crisis will derail America's current economic expansion--because the
other major legs of the economy, like consumer confidence, business profits and
government expenditures, are robust.

            The NYT runs a front-page interview-based piece on President Clinton , the
follow-on to a presidential chat piece that ran yesterday. The Sunday effort
dwelt on the personal side of Clinton's life nowadays: his knee injury, his
hearing aids, his love of golf, his empty nest. Today's installment concerns
domestic policy, specifically the series of modest initiatives he has put
together since failing to sell wholesale health care reform. Among the
piecemeal efforts the Times lauds are insuring overnight hospital stays
for new mothers, school uniforms, cell phones for citizen neighborhood patrols,
keeping liquor ads off the airwaves, restricting tobacco sales, creating a
national registry for sex offenders, and suspending the driver's licenses of
deadbeat dads.

            Amid all the hand-wringing (especially on the sports pages) about whether
Latrell Sprewell has been dealt with too harshly comes the voice of reason in
the form of a letter to the NYT , which points out that if Sprewell
had a real job, he'd be looking at permanent unemployment and criminal
prosecution.

            Al Kamen's WP column looks into a complaint that California congressman
Bill Thomas was recently spotted driving like a jerk on Capitol Hill. In the
course of his investigation, Kamen learns that Thomas has a Porsche and a BMW,
which causes him to ask exactly the right question: "Just how big was that last
raise for Congress?"

         
      
   
