
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Newt Gingrich was
re-elected House speaker by a vote of 216-205. After days of arm-twisting
by GOP leaders, only nine Republicans chose not to support Gingrich. The media
played up the size of the dissenting faction anyway. Pundits agreed that the
GOP won the battle and lost the war: Gingrich's ethics case will drag on
through congressional hearings; the GOP will then force the House Ethics
Committee to close the case, enabling Democrats to cry "cover-up" for months
afterward; members will have to vote again on his punishment; he'll be
distracted, tarnished, and weakened; having lost prestige and twisted arms just
to get re-elected, he'll have no clout left to keep his troops in line; the
Republican policy agenda will languish; Gingrich will be forced to make
concessions to Clinton in order to pass legislation and repair his own image;
and, above all, Democrats will sing from Gingrich's rap sheet throughout the
coming hearings on Clinton's ethical troubles. White House aides
reportedly were delighted by the outcome. Commentators chuckled that the GOP
was replaying its '96 Dole catastrophe, clinging fast to a sinking ship.
(posted 1/9)
            

            A furor has erupted over
foreign diplomats' immunity from prosecution for crimes committed in the
United States. Georgia 's second-ranking diplomat in Washington, D.C.,
reportedly caused a series of car collisions that killed a 16-year-old girl;
police allege he was drunk and speeding, and that he ran a stop sign. In New
York, Russian and Belarussian diplomats reportedly resisted
police who were trying to ticket their car because it was parked at a fire
hydrant; police said the diplomats appeared to be drunk. New York Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani demanded their expulsion and denounced the Russians as scofflaws,
noting that their U.N. mission had accumulated 14,437 parking and traffic
citations in the first half of 1996. Russian and Belarussian authorities
ignored him and blamed the police. Under the international policy of diplomatic
immunity, the diplomats cannot be prosecuted in America unless their
governments waive immunity, which is highly unlikely. Pundits rushed to join
the outcry to modify this policy to allow the scoundrels to be brought to
justice. Acknowledgments of similar exploitation of immunity by American
diplomats abroad were buried near the bottom of most stories. (posted
1/9)
            

            
               The Advisory Council on
Social Security released its prescriptions for the trust fund's solvency
problems. Members agreed to hike payroll taxes, raise the retirement age, and
invest some money in stocks, but failed to agree on how far to privatize the
system . One faction favors letting individuals manage their own investment
accounts; another favors leaving the stock-picking to the government; a third
would set up individual accounts but would fund them separately through a
payroll tax hike. Conservatives hailed the rough consensus on stock investment
as a "paradigm shift," while critics warned of leeching by Wall Street brokers
and asked whether the government will bail out retirees who lose their savings
because of market volatility. Union leaders vowed to kill any privatization
scheme; politicians signaled they're not ready for full privatization but are
willing to experiment with stocks as long as the government picks the stocks.
Since the commission failed to reach a consensus that would give politicians
cover, politicians are calling for another commission. (posted 1/9)
            

            The Los Angeles
Dodgers are for sale. Analysts predicted that with its prestigious history
and associated properties, the team might fetch at least $350 million, twice
the previous record for a baseball franchise. Sports historians noted that the
O'Malley family , which owns the team, launched one revolution in sports
commercialization 40 years ago--when they uprooted the team from Brooklyn to
make more money in Los Angeles. Now they are completing another, as they become
the last of the old-time family owners to sell out to corporations or
baseball-ignorant moguls. "The time is approaching when a family cannot support
a major-league baseball team. It is the time of corporate ownership," said
owner Peter O'Malley. Among the leading potential buyers: Rupert Murdoch's
Fox Television , or a consortium headed by O.J. lawyer Robert
Shapiro , former baseball commissioner Peter Ueberroth , or various
Hollywood executives. The New York Times ' Dave Anderson recalled the
O'Malleys' betrayal of Brooklyn and scoffed that they were proving once again
that baseball is "a business, not a game." New York Gov. George Pataki urged
New York business leaders to bid for the team, but the early line is that this
would be a long shot. (posted 1/9)
            

            
               Eight letter bombs
disguised as Christmas cards and postmarked from Alexandria, Egypt, were mailed
to the Washington, D.C., bureau of an Arab newspaper ( Al Hayat ) and to
Leavenworth prison. All were discovered without injury. Although the Egyptian
government swears they couldn't have originated there, U.S. investigators think
they did and are warning everyone to beware of unexpected parcels from the
Middle East. Analysts suspect the culprit may be somebody offended by Al
Hayat 's eclectic articles and editorials--which is to say, just about
anyone. Early speculation focused on supporters of Mohammad Salameh, a
Leavenworth inmate involved in the World Trade Center bombing. The National
Press Building, which houses Al Hayat , was evacuated; the media
responded with outrage at this heinous act against the media. Middle Eastern
analysts and Al Hayat 's editor wondered why terrorists would target a
paper that has been so hospitable to the views of terrorists. The Washington
Post weighed in with articles on how easy it is to construct letter bombs
and ship them undetected through the U.S. mail. (posted 1/7)
            

            Celebrity rites of
passage: Dick Morris' wife announced she is divorcing him. Real-estate
mogul Harry Helmsley died, raising speculation that his wife, Leona Helmsley,
will lose control of his financial empire. Czech President Václav Havel married
a movie and stage actress. NBC reporter Andrea Mitchell agreed to marry Fed
Chairman Alan Greenspan . Col. Sanders' 94-year-old widow died, 17 years
after the colonel kicked the bucket. The British government announced that
Paul McCartney will be knighted. Prince Charles has reportedly installed
his lover, Camilla Parker Bowles, as mistress of his country manor. George
Stephanopoulos is said to be considering a role as campaign adviser to the
British Labor Party. Ivana Trump , upset with her "abysmally constructed"
yacht, is suing its Italian manufacturer for $35 million for emotional
distress. Ben & Jerry's has raised socially conscious eyebrows by hiring
its new CEO away from the U.S. Repeating Arms Co., which manufactures rifles.
Ben & Jerry's Chairman Ben Cohen points out that at least the new CEO
agrees with the company's stand against handguns. (posted 1/7)
            

            The two-year-old
Carolina Panthers and Jacksonville Jaguars are within one victory
apiece of meeting in the Super Bowl. Having already pushed aside the
once-feared San Francisco 49ers and Buffalo Bills, the two expansion teams
ousted the Dallas Cowboys and Denver Broncos in the weekend playoffs. Sports
columnists declared the old guard dead, lamenting the Broncos' traditional
season-ending choke and celebrating the demise of the Cowboys, widely
attributed to their dissolute lifestyle. Michael Irvin and Deion Sanders were
carted off the field with season-ending injuries. Cowboy-haters insinuated that
they deserved it. "The Wicked Witch is dead, baby," gloated Michael Wilbon of
the Washington Post . Established teams are now complaining that the
expansion teams' success proves they were given too many picks in the college
and expansion drafts. Sportswriters reply that these teams have had plenty of
similar chances, have blown them, and may be booted from their jobs now that
the Panthers and Jaguars have proven that it doesn't take years to build a
winner. (posted 1/7)
            

            Nature continued to punish
the Pacific Northwest. After two massive snowstorms, heavy rain and melting
snow have caused floods, mudslides, sinkholes , and at least 11 deaths.
While local newspaper coverage has generally been self-pitying, the comfortably
faraway New York Times responded with Schadenfreude , likening the
Northwest's woes to biblical plagues ("We finally got our natural disaster, as
if it were coming to us," conceded a Seattle coffee server) and reporting that
"some Northwesterners" confess to a "sheltered, even slightly wimpy quality in
their approach to the extremes of nature." (posted 1/4)
            

            The Democratic
campaign-finance scandal expanded while tightening around President
Clinton. Among the latest revelations: Democratic fund-raiser Charles Trie got
Clinton to meet with a rogue Chinese arms merchant at the White House. A Thai
businesswoman and several associates with investment interests in China met
with Clinton at the White House to discuss China policy, a day before she
forked over an illegal $85,000 check to the Democratic Party. A White House
aide, Doris Matsui, was included (illegally, if true) in an Asian-American
political fund-raising committee headed by John Huang. The new disclosures
emboldened major newspapers to sharpen their portrayal of Clinton as a central
participant in the sale of presidential access to foreign contributors. Pundits
agreed there is still no evidence of a policy quid pro quo, but the Los
Angeles Times pointedly compared Clinton's pre-election withholding of
information on the scandal to the Watergate cover-up that led to President
Nixon's resignation. William Safire suggested that the whole affair might
actually be a Communist Chinese espionage plot. (posted 1/4)
            

            An Israeli soldier with a
record of mental illness fired into an Arab marketplace in Hebron
without provocation, wounding seven civilians. The soldier was wrestled down by
a fellow officer and later explained that he wanted to thwart Israel's troop
withdrawal from Hebron. The attack did not provoke riots and further bloodshed,
in part because the soldier was a lousy shot and failed to kill anyone, and in
part because Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu expeditiously phoned
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to condemn the shooting. The short-term
question was how such a nut got drafted into the Israeli army; the long-term
question was whether the attack would convince Israelis that their own
right-wing settlers are a greater threat to peace and security than the
Palestinians are. (posted 1/4)
            

            Straws in the wind: To the
mystification of beach-goers, the U.S. government is proposing regulations to
protect sharks from depletion by fishermen. The Wall Street
Journal says marshmallows are the new rage in fancy restaurants.
Year-end figures show the murder rate continued falling in 1996; among
the factors cited are gun-control laws, more criminals locked away in prison,
and more cops on the beat. The New York Times reports that debutante
balls are coming back. A study finds promise in a new therapy for impotence: a
drug pellet that is inserted into the man's urethra. (Fewer than one in 40 men
in the study backed out due to the pain.) An official of the American Names
Society says parents have stopped naming their daughters "Hillary " since
1992. Sales of tobacco pipes are booming; the pipe industry hopes to capitalize
on--and supplant--cigar chic, but the Wall Street Journal says skeptics
still consider pipes "tweedy and prissy." (posted 1/4)
            

         
      
   
