
   
   
      
         
            

            The
balanced-budget constitutional amendment appears to be dead. Sen. Bob
Torricelli, D-N.J., who holds the swing vote, announced he had decided to vote
against the amendment because the Senate rejected changes he had proposed.
(2/26)
            

            Update
on the Democratic fund-raising scandal : 1) President Clinton's
handwritten note shows that he directly approved and encouraged a plan to
reward big Democratic donors with coffees, stays in the Lincoln bedroom, and
other White House perks. The initial media spin is that this was scandalously
legal. 2) The Washington 
               Post reported that the Democratic
National Committee received $15,000 from an Asian developer who serves in an
advisory capacity within the Chinese government. 3) The Los Angeles
Times reported that the DNC "sought specific sums" from donors in exchange
for coffees with President Clinton. 4) The Washington 
               Post
reported that DNC co-chairman Don Fowler called Cabinet members to relay
requests from donors. Fowler told the Post it was part of his job. 5)
The New York Times reported that federal prosecutors have evidence of
illegal donations to the DNC from a Venezuelan banking family. Update on the
investigation : Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott joined Sens. Daniel P.
Moynihan and Russell Feingold and former Sen. Bill Bradley, all Democrats, in
calling for an independent counsel. (2/26)
            

            A
leading abortion-rights advocate indicated that he and his pro-choice
colleagues have lied about the rarity of partial-birth abortions . Ron
Fitzsimmons, the director of a national coalition of abortion clinics, said
that contrary to assertions by President Clinton and abortion-rights activists,
the vast majority of patients who have the procedure (technically known as
intact dilation and evacuation) are healthy women with healthy fetuses that
have gestated at least 20 weeks. (2/26)
            

            
Multimillionaire wrestling enthusiast John E. du Pont was convicted of
murdering a wrestler at his estate a year ago. The compromise verdict--that du
Pont wasn't legally insane but was mentally ill--reduces his sentence from life
to between five and 40 years, the first part of which he will spend in a mental
hospital. The district attorney concluded that "the wealthiest murder defendant
in the history of the United States" (sorry, O.J.) has been brought to justice.
(2/26)
            

            

               Bombs and bomb scares dominated the news. In Jacksonville, Fla., an
Orthodox Jew has been charged with planting a bomb at a Conservative synagogue
less than 40 feet from where former Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres spoke a
few hours later. The bomb wasn't detected, but it failed to go off. The Army of
God, a fundamentalist anti-abortion group, has apparently claimed
responsibility for the bombings of an abortion clinic and a gay nightclub in
Atlanta. Investigators are looking into whether the bomb had something to do
with the club owner's brother, a nationally known practitioner of late-term
abortions. Meanwhile, the FBI canceled a nationwide "terrorist threat advisory"
after discovering that two men who were thought to be assembling a huge
fertilizer bomb were average guys working for an industrial cleaning firm.
(2/26)
            

            The
Clinton administration's reported intention to certify Mexico as an ally
in the drug wars is in trouble. Congressional opponents cite 1) the recent
arrest of Mexico's drug czar, Gen. Jésus Gutiérrez Rebollo, on charges of
dealing with narcotics kingpins, and 2) new testimony, from the longtime
secretary to one of Mexico's patriarchs, of narcotics dealings involving
high-level politicians. Supporters of recertification said Rebollo's arrest
demonstrated Mexico's resolve in the drug wars. But some U.S. officials argued
that Mexico had failed to notify the United States of the arrest for almost two
weeks, thereby jeopardizing U.S. agents and informers about whom the general
had been briefed. (2/26)
            

            A
Palestinian man, Ali Abu Kamal, shot seven people on the observation deck of
the Empire State Building , killing one. Abu Kamal then killed
himself. An anti-terrorism task force had been put on the case, but a note
written by the gunman seems to confirm police suspicions that he was deranged
and acted alone. (2/26)
            

            
Scientists have cloned an adult mammal . Researchers who performed the
experiment (on sheep) said their technique will allow the engineering of
animals to produce helpful drugs. Other scientists pointed out that the
technique can be applied to humans, that the United States has no laws against
it, and that such laws couldn't be enforced anyway, since the procedure can be
done in almost any lab anywhere in the world. While enthusiasts point to
hypothetical benefits (e.g., saving endangered species, replicating a dying
baby), media reaction has focused on ethical nightmares (e.g., breeding human
organ donors or supermen, replicating Hitler, resurrecting the dead). Moreover,
"there'd be no need for men," notes biologist Ursula Goodenough. A presidential
bioethics panel is expected to take up the question. (2/24)
            

            

               Albert Shanker , longtime president of the American Federation of
Teachers, died. Shanker crippled New York City's school system in the late
1960s with strikes against school decentralization. He later endorsed strong
standards for both teachers and students, which annoyed many teachers but made
him a hero to school reformers. But he'll be best remembered for a line in
Woody Allen's 1973 movie, Sleeper , about how civilization was destroyed
when "a man named Albert Shanker got the bomb." (2/24)
            

            
Whitewater independent counsel Kenneth Starr decided not to quit after
all. Reports attribute his decision not to become a dean at Pepperdine
University to angry objections from his staff and GOP leaders. Republicans say
Starr has proved his integrity by admitting his mistake. Pundits, however,
agree that the reversal fails to erase the widespread conclusion that he has
given up on indicting the Clintons--and that it only confirms his lack of
judgment, further weakening the investigation's credibility. Meanwhile, the
Arkansas Democrat-Gazette retracted its much-ballyhooed report that
Starr had held mock trials in which the Clintons were acquitted. And the Los
Angeles Times reported that Starr's report on Vince Foster's suicide will
debunk right-wing theories that Foster was killed. (2/24)
            

            

               Chinese President Jiang Zemin is attracting scrutiny now that his
mentor, Deng Xiaoping, is dead. Analysts consider Jiang a clumsy weakling
compared with Deng, and are debating whether 1) he will continue Deng's reforms
or return to authoritarianism and 2) he can consolidate power or will be
outmaneuvered by rivals. Most agree that he's a Clinton-style "weather vane,"
adapting his positions to the demands of contrary constituencies ranging from
the army to foreign investors to Western diplomats. (2/24)
            

            Former
heavyweight-boxing champ Riddick Bowe quit the Marines after a few days
of basic training. His manager explained that Bowe was scrapping his
much-publicized attempt to serve in the corps (his boyhood dream) because
Marine training turned out to be a lot harder than his boxing training regimen
(four hours of work interrupted by a nap), and Bowe didn't like being told what
to do. Commentators dismissed him as a pampered wimp who jerked around both the
military and the taxpayer. The Marines gained new respect for having broken
him. (2/24)
            

            
               Pat
Boone 's television show, GospelAmerica , was canceled after an uproar
over his dabbling in heavy metal. Boone, 62, had appeared onstage at the
American Music Awards in a bare-chested leather outfit to promote his new
album, in which he croons famous metal tunes. Boone claims that the album's
purpose is to attract metal enthusiasts to Jesus, and that his get-up was a
spoof of his old choirboy image. Nevertheless, outraged viewers complained to
the Christian television network that had been airing his show, causing its
cancellation. Callers to the network are being advised to pray for him.
(2/21)
            

            Lawrence Singleton, a
notorious rapist who hacked off his victim's forearms and then spent only
eight years in prison, has been arrested in the stabbing to death in Florida of
another woman. Outraged citizens and commentators are scorning the folly of
rehabilitation and demanding tougher sentencing laws for sex offenders. The
irony is that such laws are already in place, inspired in part by Singleton's
previous release, but they don't cover him retroactively. (2/21)
            

         
      
   
