
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The
Apostle
                (October Films). Actor-director-writer Robert Duvall's
film--about a Pentecostal preacher who beats his wife's lover into a coma--is
deemed "the best movie ever about a man of God" (David Denby, New York ).
The film's strength is said to be its uncompromising psychological complexity:
It shows the preacher as both very good and extremely evil, without lapsing
into moral condemnation. Unlike most films about evangelicalism, it is not a
condescending "put-down of redneck religion" (David Ansen, Newsweek ).
The most vigorous plaudits go to Duvall's performance; critics predict that it
will revive his career from a slump and win him an Oscar nomination. (The movie
is plugged here.)

            

               
                  Oscar and Lucinda
                (Fox Searchlight Pictures). Critics debate the
merits of Australian director Gillian Armstrong ( My Brilliant Career ,
Little Women ): Is she "one of the best filmmakers of her time" (Kevin
Thomas, the Los Angeles Times ) or a filmmaker with promise who
consistently disappoints? Many consider her adaptation of Peter Carey's Booker
Prize-winning novel--about a romance between two eccentric gamblers, played by
Ralph Fiennes and Cate Blanchett--to be disjointed. Others praise its depiction
of 19 th -century Australia, as well as Fiennes' performance. All
agree that Armstrong is a stylist, producing images "suitable for framing"
(Janet Maslin, the New York Times ). (Clips are available here.)

            
               
                  The
Boxer
                (Universal Pictures). Reviewers claim to be weary of Northern
Ireland political dramas but admire this one anyway. High praise goes to Daniel
Day-Lewis for his portrayal of a washed-up boxer and former IRA member just
released from prison. "His most substantial role in years" (Dennis Lim, the
Village Voice ). Critics are relieved that the film uses politics only as
a backdrop for a romance between Day-Lewis and a married woman (played by Emily
Watson). Dissenters find the film rife with political caricature and clichés:
"standard-issue IRA dramatics" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles Times ).
(See the official site.)

            

               Television
            

            

               
                  Seinfeld
                (NBC; Thursdays; 9 p.m. ET/PT). Critics laud Jerry
Seinfeld's decision to retire his sitcom after this season, "leaving at the top
of his game" (Albert Kim, Entertainment Weekly ). They say the show's
shtick--a comedy about self-involved people doing goofy things--had begun to
wear thin. Appreciations deem the nine-season-old show the best of its era and
a trenchant critique of late-20 th -century social mores.
"Television's first genuine comedy of manners since Leave It to Beaver ,"
says Time 's Bruce Handy. Prediction: Seinfeld 's departure will
end NBC's prime-time hegemony, with Fox filling the void. (NBC trumpets its prize show.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Truman Capote: In Which Various Friends, Enemies, Acquaintances, and
Detractors Recall His Turbulent Career
               , by George Plimpton (Nan A.
Talese/Doubleday). A gossipfest about the notorious novelist and gadabout. Most
critics take the opportunity to sum up Capote's career: They recall with regret
that Capote spent more time schmoozing than writing, and deem his work less
memorable than his social appearances, particularly at his fabled 1966 "Black
and White Ball" and on the Tonight Show . Critics also chide Plimpton for
rehashing, rather than investigating, old accusations, such as Capote's alleged
lying and drinking problems. The New York Times ' Christopher
Lehmann-Haupt calls the compilation "fluff," while the New York Review of
Books ' Elizabeth Hardwick thinks that its tone suits its subject.

            

               
                  Paradise
               , by Toni Morrison (Knopf). Reviews of Morrison's first
post-Nobel novel, a Faulknerish tale of an all-black town in Oklahoma, are
mixed. The New York Times Book Review 's Brooke Allen says it is "[p]roof
that Morrison continues to change and mature in surprising new directions."
The New 
               Yorker 's Louis Menand calls Paradise "the
strangest and most original book that Morrison has written," then criticizes it
for its lack of cohesion, its failed forays into magical realism, and its
willful allegorizing. In the New York Times , Michiko Kakutani calls it
"a heavy-handed, schematic piece of writing, thoroughly lacking in the
novelistic magic Ms. Morrison has wielded so effortlessly in the past." (Random
House posts a page on the book.)

            

               Music
            

            "Northern
Lights: The Music of Jean Sibelius" (Lincoln Center, New York City). A spate of
recent performances of the Finnish composer's work--at Lincoln Center, Carnegie
Hall, and the Brooklyn Philharmonic--sparks Sibelius (1865-1957) revisionism.
The old conventional wisdom: Sibelius was a vulgar nationalist (à la Wagner)
and a windy Romantic bore. Now, critics declare him a cerebral modernist who
eschewed convention: He used "a nineteenth-century vocabulary but speaks with a
twentieth-century voice" (Alex Ross, The New Yorker ). The revisionists
rate him one of the century's great composers.

            

               Update
            

            In a
cover story in the Weekly Standard , Andrew Ferguson takes the field of
evolutionary psychology to task by attacking its standard bearer, How the
Mind Works author Steven Pinker. According to Ferguson, Pinker's seeming
endorsement of infanticide in a recent New York Times Magazine article
exposes the ethical failings of the wildly popular new branch of science.
Ferguson, echoing a charge made by Washington Post columnist Michael
Kelly, says that Pinker wants us "to see [infanticide] not as a moral horror
but as a genetically encoded evolutionary adaptation, as unavoidable as depth
perception or opposable thumbs." (Pinker has denied the accusation, arguing
that he is trying to understand infanticidal behavior, not condoning it.)

            
               Recent
"Summary Judgment" columns
            

            Dec.
31:

            Winter
Movie Roundup

            Dec.
24:

            "The Year
in Review in Review"

            Dec.
17:

            

               Movie -- Titanic ;

            

               Movie -- Deconstructing Harry ;

            
               Movie -- Scream
2 ;

            
               Television -- Ally
McBeal (Fox);

            
               Art --"Gianni Versace"
(Metropolitan Museum of Art);

            
               Architecture --Museum
of Modern Art (New York City);

            

               Book -- Hogarth: A Life and a World , by Jenny Uglow.

            Dec.
10:

            

               Movie -- Amistad ;

            
               Movie -- Good Will
Hunting ;

            
               Television -- Breast
Men (HBO);

            
               Theater -- The Diary
of Anne Frank ;

            

               Opera -- Amistad ;

            

               Book -- A Certain Justice , by P.D. James.

            

               --Franklin Foer
            

         
      
   
