
   
   
      
         
            

            A civil
jury found O.J. Simpson liable in the wrongful-death and battery-related
charges brought against him by the Goldman and Brown families. The unanimous
verdict was less surprising than the whopping $8.5 million in compensatory
damages the jury ordered Simpson to pay Goldman's parents. Whereas the cynical
view of the criminal trial was that a black jury ignored its instructions by
acquitting Simpson in order to sock it to the Los Angeles police, the cynical
view of the civil trial is that a white jury ignored its instructions by
inflating the compensatory-damage figure in order to sock it to Simpson.
Reporters, however, scrupulously pointed out that a civil trial only requires
proof by a "preponderance of evidence" rather than proof "beyond a reasonable
doubt." But people who have always believed Simpson guilty took the civil
verdict as vindication of that belief. The spin on the trial is that O.J. did
himself in by contradicting photographic evidence and other witnesses'
testimony on the stand. Next comes a short hearing in which the jury will
decide the punitive damages. Commentators agree that while Simpson has several
good grounds for appeal, none of them is good enough. (2/5)
            

            
President Clinton delivered his State of the Union address. Pundits
found it long on grand exhortations but short on government action, confirming
Clinton's rightward drift. The New York Times ' R.W. Apple, speaking for
many, pointed out the incongruity of Clinton's call to action at a time when
America faces no great threat. (Thesis sound bite from the speech: "The enemy
of our time is inaction.") The two topics that caught the most attention were
Clinton's pleas for racial reconciliation and a crusade to raise educational
standards. The good news: Reviewers deemed it his best State of the Union
speech so far. The bad news: It was completely overshadowed by the O.J.
Simpson verdict , which came down simultaneously. Television networks forced
themselves to cover the speech, but raced to Los Angeles the second it was
over. Tom Brokaw accidentally referred to the deliverer of the Republican
response, (black) Rep. J.C. Watts of Oklahoma, as "O.J." Commentators wagered
that the racial division reflected in the two Simpson verdicts would overwhelm
Clinton's noble words to the contrary. (2/5)
            

            

               Morgan Stanley and Dean Witter announced that they will merge. The
combined entity, with more than $20 billion in equity and $270 billion in
assets under management, will be the biggest securities firm in history. The
idea is to combine the strategic savvy of an elite investment bank (Morgan
Stanley) with the huge small-investor clientele of a major brokerage house
(Dean Witter). The Wall Street Journal predicts a frenzy of copycat
marriages in the securities business. (2/5)
            

            Sarah
Ferguson, the Duchess of York , will be paid $1 million to promote Weight
Watchers products in America. Brits are outraged at Fergie for debasing her
royal title, particularly since she only married into it. Advertisers predict
the sponsorship agreement will be a smashing success: Brits scorn Fergie for
her adultery, kinky sexual practices, contempt for authority, and general
infamy, but Americans love her for precisely the same reasons. The New York
Times sees two trends in the deal: the prostitution of the royal family
("The next thing we'll see Queen Elizabeth doing commercials for Depends," says
an American ad man) and America's sick fondness for notorious sinners.
(2/5)
            

            Serbian
President Slobodan Milosevic agreed to recognize opposition victories in
last fall's local elections. His attempt to annul them had triggered an
uprising that increasingly threatens to force him from power. The pessimistic
view, based on Milosevic's history of deceit, is that he's only faking the
retreat because he's on the verge of losing control. The optimistic view is
that he's serious about it, for the same reason. (2/5)
            

            There
were new breaks in the Democratic campaign-finance scandal . The
Washington Post reported that a mob-connected stock swindler had been
invited to one of the infamous White House coffee klatches. Time
magazine reported that the new Democratic National Committee finance chairman
had lobbied for regulatory breaks for nursing homes while he was 1) a
nursing-home executive and 2) raising big money for the DNC. Newsweek
had it that former Chief of Staff Harold Ickes had asked for a $1.5 million
donation, part of which was to go to a tax-exempt organization (which, if true,
is the Gingrich Heresy). Meanwhile, the Justice Department has subpoenaed
records from Clinton, the DNC, and others in its investigation of possible
contributions by foreigners, which are generally illegal. (See "The Gist" from Feb. 1)
(2/3)
            

            The
Clinton administration leaked its new budget proposal . The key items are
tax cuts for education and for capital gains on the sale of a home.
Republicans congratulated Clinton for moving in their direction but chided him
for not going far enough. Chat-show pundits gagged on the talk of bipartisan
harmony and tried to egg the two sides into a fight, with little success.
(2/3)
            

            The
progress of Clinton's Cabinet nominations was a mixed story. Only two
nominees, Alexis Herman (Labor) and Anthony Lake (CIA), have been pulled over
for closer inspection. The latest word is that Herman will get through (having
mollified Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott), while Lake is in more serious
trouble. Lake has two problems: 1) his (inadvertent, he says) failure to sell
some energy stocks in 1993, when he became national security adviser; and 2)
Republican alarm that he might be a dangerous lefty, based on his 1970
resignation from the National Security Council over Nixon's invasion of
Cambodia, and on his more recent refusal to confirm that Alger Hiss was a staff
Soviet spy. (2/3)
            

            

               Welfare reform was the hot topic at the National Governors'
Association winter meeting. Several Republican governors supported
restoration of aid to legal immigrants (which was cut in the new welfare law).
Republican congressional leaders reportedly hit the roof over the governors'
defection and, under that pressure, they fudged their stand somewhat. But a
similar fuss is expected over a cap on Medicaid, which Clinton and Congress are
considering. As with welfare, the states will have to pick up part of the bill.
Conservative commentators complain that the Republican governors are chickening
out on the principle of returning authority to the states now that it's costing
them money. Liberals are gloating for the same reason. The popular bet now is
that the governors' refusal to let go of the federal teat will doom
ratification of the balanced-budget constitutional amendment. (2/3)
            

            The
Christian Coalition unveiled the "Samaritan Project," a
public/private package of proposals to aid inner-city blacks and Hispanics. The
proposals include abstinence education, school vouchers for poor kids,
faith-based drug-rehabilitation programs, and a $500 tax credit for anyone who
does 10 hours of volunteer work for the poor during the year. Analysts
construed the project as a coalition bid for mainstream credibility; the
Washington Post portrayed it as a halfhearted repackaging of the
coalition's standard fare. Although coalition Director Ralph Reed described the
project as a private alternative to government programs, reporters noted that
it depends on some $3 billion in government spending and lost revenue. Civil
libertarians denounced it as an improper church-state partnership, a sectarian
scheme to milk the taxpayer, and a feel-good diversion from the rest of the
coalition's agenda. (1/31)
            

            The
State Department reported that China's human-rights record worsened in
1996. The Beijing government has stifled every remaining dissident through
exile, imprisonment, or intimidation. The report also cites China's transparent
intentions to abolish Hong Kong's civil liberties when it assumes control of
the territory in July. Questioned about China at his press conference,
President Clinton admitted for the first time that his
"constructive-engagement" policy hasn't improved China's behavior, but he
maintained that it will in the future. Editorialists applauded his candor but
dismissed him as timid and naive. (1/31)
            

            The
first installment of the "Star Wars Trilogy Special Edition" opened in
theaters everywhere. The original Star Wars , sporting touched-up audio
and new visual effects, will soon be followed by The Empire Strikes Back
and The Return of the Jedi . Critics are bubbling with nostalgia for the
film's nostalgia. The fairy-tale version of the Star Wars legacy,
promulgated in most of this week's retrospectives/reviews, is that it
reacquainted America with the magic of myth, sacred lore, and the romantic
quest. The less reverent version is that it launched the era of gaudy action
movies and movie-based mass merchandising, and that its carefully scripted
revival--complete with licensing deals for tacos, toys, and Christmas
ornaments--does it perfect justice. (1/31)
            

            Straws
in the wind: The New York Times reports that Santeria , the West
Indian religion notorious for animal sacrifice, is gaining American adherents
and coming out of the closet. New studies show that 1) one in seven black
men can't vote because of a felony conviction; 2) cities in the North and
Midwest are more segregated than those in the South; and 3) Hispanics now have
a higher poverty rate than blacks. Government figures indicate that cigarette
consumption is holding steady and may be rising. Sales of Bruno Magli
shoes are up 30 percent this year. Scientist-temps are becoming more common
in laboratories, according to the Washington Post . Reports of
deformed frogs are spreading across America, Canada, and Japan; USA
Today warns that this may be an "early warning sign" of an emerging
environmental peril. Medical advocacy groups are pushing a home test for
colorectal cancer; it requires patients to collect six fecal samples and mail
them to a lab. The Wall Street Journal reports that despite the best
efforts of entrepreneurs, the cryonics industry remains lifeless. On the bright
side, the Journal reports that Twinkies are making a comeback. And
astrologer Jeane Dixon died of a heart attack Jan. 25, exactly as Slate
had predicted. (1/31)
            

            Stock-market index
funds made Page One news in the New York Times and Wall Street
Journal . Mutual-fund investors are increasingly shifting their investments
from traditional managed funds--which try to outsmart the whole market at
picking stocks--to index funds, which distribute their assets evenly and ride
the market's rising average. In recent years, the index strategy has triumphed
because 1) stock-picking managers charge more in fees than they've added in
above-average performance, and 2) fund managers often keep some money in
steadier cash and bonds to protect investors in the event of a market plunge.
The news accounts portrayed managed-fund managers as unproductive leeches in
comparison with index-fund mangers. (1/29)
            

         
      
   
