
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Early Christmas
shopping was up 20 percent from last year, sparking economic jubilation on
front pages across the country. "Crowded Stores Buoy Hopes of Retailers,"
crowed the Los Angeles Times . Not everyone was happy. "Seasonal products
and decorations ... are about to clog shop aisles and windows like bad
cholesterol," grumbled a USA Today editorial. On the opposite page, an
op-ed headline suggested, "Kwanzaa alternative to commercialism." (posted
12/3)
            

            Attorney General Janet
Reno rejected a Republican request for an independent counsel to
investigate Democratic fund raising. Reno said she had yet to find "specific,
credible evidence" implicating a high-ranking government official (i.e., higher
than John Huang)--the legal requirement for an outside counsel. Instead, she
created a Justice Department criminal task force to look into the matter.
Saturday's New York Times criticized Reno, but the Sunday-morning TV
pundits opined that the independent-counsel system had already been
irretrievably politicized. Republican senators called Reno's decision
"suspicious," but, cheered on by the Washington Post , vowed to get at
the facts through congressional hearings. Meanwhile, the Wall Street
Journal reported that in a 1993 letter, Indonesian magnate Mochtar Riady
urged Clinton to normalize relations with Vietnam. The early spin was that the
letter didn't prove a quid pro quo, but was yet another example of documents
sat on by the stonewalling Clinton White House. (posted 12/3)
            

            Serbian President
Slobodan Milosevic cracked down on political opponents after two weeks
of escalating public demonstrations. The protests were over Milosevic's
annulment of municipal elections that appeared to have been won by opposition
parties. Police arrested several protesters, and threatened the rest with
unspecified "consequences." The short-term betting favors Milosevic, on the
grounds that the working class is too distracted, ignorant, and cowardly to
join the opposition. The long-term betting favors a bloody ouster of Milosevic,
in the Serbian tradition. Idealists (e.g., Anthony Lewis in the New York
Times ) accused the Clinton administration of idly standing by while the
Communist tyrant oppresses his people. More skeptical news reports indicate
that the opposition leaders are no angels. Western diplomats are quoted
"privately" saying that Milosevic is easier to reform, because he's trying to
undo his reputation as a butcher. (posted 12/3)
            

            A panel of economists
appointed by Congress is expected to propose a new inflation index to replace
the Consumer Price Index . The new index will reduce the official
inflation rate, thereby trimming annual cost-of-living increases in Social
Security and other federal benefits. This increasingly looks like the way
Democrats and Republicans will agree to prune entitlements, while sharing the
cover of a technical correction. A "Week in Review" piece in the Sunday New
York Times observed that if the lower inflation numbers are applied to the
economic statistics of the past couple of decades, the perceived stagnation of
real wages turns out to have been a healthy increase. (posted 12/3)
            

            
               Deathwatch: Tiny
Tim perished, apparently from a heart attack. "He died singing 'Tiptoe
Thru' the Tulips,' " reported his widow. The New York Times remembered
him as "a romantic in pursuit of a beautiful dream," but noted that his career
tailspin had forced him to move back in with his mother. Abortion-clinic killer
John Salvi asphyxiated himself in prison; his parents and lawyers
portrayed him as the victim of an "inhuman" corrections system. Mother
Teresa suffered a near-fatal heart attack, checked into the hospital for
the fourth time this year, received an emergency angioplasty, staged a
surprising recovery (attributed by doctors to her "spiritual strength"),
suffered another setback, then improved slightly, but remained in critical
condition with chronic lung and kidney trouble. The Los Angeles Times
reported that her followers "were reconciled to the prospect of [her] death."
(posted 12/3)
            

            
               O.J. Simpson was
cross-examined in his civil trial. He failed to explain the cuts on his hand or
the blood in his Bronco, and said he had never struck or beaten Nicole Simpson.
He further suggested that Nicole might have caused the red marks on her face by
picking at pimples, and that she might have split her own lip by falling down.
News accounts agreed that Simpson's testimony contradicted Nicole's
diary, his own phone records, notes from his interview with a defense
consultant, and a photo of him wearing Bruno Magli shoes. (Simpson said the
photo was real but the shoes depicted in it were a "fraud.") The New York
Times called it "potentially the most damaging day yet of his civil trial."
(For Slate's take, see Harry
Shearer's latest dispatch from Camp O.J. by the Sea.) O.J. pundits
explained that plaintiffs' attorney Daniel Petrocelli had learned from
prosecutors' mistakes in the criminal trial and was correcting them, chiefly by
presenting his evidence more quickly and selectively. But the Los Angeles
Times ' Howard Rosenberg scoffed that pundits had also written off Simpson
in the early days of the criminal trial. Moreover, several legal experts called
the judge's leniency toward Petrocelli (e.g., allowing him to mention Simpson's
failure on a lie-detector test) good grounds for an appeal if Simpson loses.
(posted 11/26)
            

            In an interview with
Time , Hillary Rodham Clinton suggested that she would like a
"formal role " in guiding the implementation of the welfare
reforms President Clinton reluctantly signed into law earlier this year. She
stipulated that she wasn't proposing anything like her dominant role in the
1993-'94 health-care debate. Television networks and pundits pounced on the
story anyway. The three standard lines of analysis were: 1) The first lady
would try to tug her husband back to the perilous left; 2) The president and
his aides don't want her to take a public role, because she'll become a
lightning rod; and 3) Republicans are secretly rooting for her to take a public
role, for both the above reasons. (posted 11/26)
            

            Chinese President Jiang
Zemin met with President Clinton in the Philippines and agreed to visit
America, probably next year. It would be the first state visit since the 1989
Tiananmen Square massacre. Clinton aides touted the state-visit agreement as a
major step forward, and averred that their man had spoken firmly against
China's abuse of human rights. American reporters and analysts concluded, with
equal unanimity, that Clinton had accomplished nothing. Reaction was divided on
one point: Some accused Clinton of selling out human rights and nuclear-arms
reduction (China is a major nuclear proliferator) for free trade, while others
accused Clinton of selling out all three principles for a photo op.
Editorialists grumbled that Clinton had come off as a wimp and a patsy;
Sino-pundits called the shortsighted, conniving American president no match for
the farsighted, conniving Chinese. Meanwhile, in its latest attempt to prove
its critics right, China threatened trade sanctions against Disney on the
grounds that a movie being co-produced by a Disney subsidiary "is intended to
glorify the Dalai Lama, so it is an interference in China's internal affairs."
(posted 11/26)
            

            Three men hijacked
an Ethiopian 
               airliner and forced an emergency landing in the
ocean that killed nearly two-thirds of the 175 people on board. The story,
which played on American front pages for two days, featured several peculiar
angles. The hijackers used the plane's safety devices--an ax and a fire
extinguisher--as their principal weapons. They demanded that the plane be flown
from Africa to Australia, purportedly "to make history," and refused to believe
that there wasn't enough fuel on board to get there. Early reports said two of
the hijackers were in custody; later reports indicated that police had grabbed
the wrong guys. (posted 11/26)
            

            CIA officer Harold James
Nicholson was arrested and charged with spying for Russia . He allegedly
sold the identities and profiles of new agents for $120,000. Though the
highest-ranking CIA official ever accused of espionage, Nicholson appears to
have done less damage than Aldrich Ames. The CIA and FBI touted this arrest as
proof that they had fixed the bureaucratic bungling that had allowed Ames to go
undetected for six years. But editorialists said Nicholson had made the
investigators' job comically easy (he even climbed into a car with diplomatic
plates registered to the Russian Embassy) and, even so, hadn't been caught and
busted soon enough. Commentators also debated whether the mole's exposure
proved Russia was still a duplicitous enemy. The New York Times offered
moral indignation; the Washington 
               Post offered cynical
nonchalance. (posted 11/22)
            

            
               Texaco 's PR
troubles eased, while its legal peril deepened. The company settled a
racial-discrimination lawsuit for $176 million, including a raise for every
black employee. Reportedly the biggest payment made in such a case, it is
hardly a nick in Texaco's annual revenue of more than $30 billion. Black
commentators (e.g., DeWayne Wickham of USA Today ) praised Texaco's
chairman for acting quickly, called the boycott of independent Texaco gas
stations misguided, and argued that the crusade against corporate racism should
move on to more egregious culprits, such as Avis and Circuit City. Meanwhile,
though, the FBI filed charges against former Texaco executive Richard Lundwall,
in what many saw as a maneuver to pressure him for new leads in the
evidence-destruction criminal case against Texaco. One juicy discovery:
Lundwall apparently released the tapes of the now-infamous "jelly bean" meeting
to punish Texaco for downsizing him. (posted 11/22)
            

            The federal government
decided to allow car owners to disconnect their air bags, which,
according to government estimates, are killing one child per month and are on
track to kill one child per week as more and more cars feature them. (The
deaths are generally caused by the child's impact against the bag, or against
the seat on the rebound.) The decision was viewed as a vindication of
automakers, who warned of such injuries many years ago; the Wall Street
Journal touted the "humbling retreat" of former air-bag evangelist Joan
Claybrook. Auto-safety advocates and editorialists insisted that air bags save
many more people than they kill, and worried that the backlash will go too far.
Everyone agreed that the solution is technology: Automakers favor
slower-inflating air bags, while consumer advocates want new gizmos to detect
the size of each passenger and adjust the inflation speed accordingly.
(posted 11/22)
            

            
               Straws in the wind:
It's been a bad month for Communists , with election defeats in Bulgaria,
Lithuania, and Romania, on top of prior losses in Russia and the Czech
Republic. Several newspapers reported that marijuana is becoming more
potent and more widely available. USA Today says the telecommuting
revolution has fizzled, in part because office teamwork is becoming more
important. The New York Times reported that HMOs, rationing, and other
medical-insurance nightmares conjured up in 1994 by enemies of the
Clinton health-care plan are coming to pass anyway. A group of former
independent counsels (a k a special prosecutors), including Watergate's
Archibald Cox and Iran-Contra's Lawrence Walsh, agreed that independent
counsels are being appointed too indiscriminately. Nielsen ratings indicate
that young Americans are giving up television in favor of Web surfing
and other pastimes; the television networks are challenging Nielsen's data and
threatening to create a rival ratings service. (posted 11/26)
            

         
      
   
