
   
   
      
         
            

            
               (posted Friday, Sept.
27)
            

            

               Fighting between Palestinians and Israeli soldiers claimed more
than 50 lives and injured 1,000 in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The bloodshed
was triggered Tuesday, when the Israelis opened a tunnel entrance in
Jerusalem's Muslim quarter. Among the early story lines : The rioters
were sending Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu a message that he must negotiate
or pay a price; relations between the Israeli army and Palestinian police--who
fought alongside the rioters--have collapsed; Netanyahu was not a decisive
ideologue but a aimless dawdler; concessions to the Palestinians, said the
Likud government, would signal weakness and invite further attacks; and the
conflagration placed Egypt in a precarious position as it tried to facilitate
reconciliation amid Arab rage over Israel's actions. By Friday, the spin
shifted from chaos to order as NPR reported that both sides seemed "shocked" by
the violence and hoped "to pull back from the brink."

            The
Federal Reserve 's decision to not raise interest rates reflected both
campaign politics and internecine struggles at the Fed. Although the Fed rarely
changes rates during campaigns, the move was interpreted as benefiting Clinton
by denying Dole and Kemp an excuse to a) decry government constriction of the
economy; and b) blame Clinton for incipient inflation. Some speculated that the
Fed's regional bank presidents, who wanted a rate hike, had leaked their
preference to pressure Chairman Alan Greenspan; others worried that the leaker
might help friendly investors get a jump on imminent Fed actions. Either way,
Greenspan asked the FBI to investigate the breach of security.

            British
police raided five Irish Republican Army hideouts in London, killing one
suspected terrorist, arresting five others, and confiscating 10 tons of
explosives. The raids apparently thwarted a truck bombing akin to those that
killed two people and injured 200 earlier this year. The Los Angeles
Times reported that many observers had expected the IRA to commit such an
attack as a final gesture of defiance before slinking back to a cease-fire.
Prime Minister John Major said the discovery discredited the IRA's professions
of interest in a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

            The
United States was the subject as the United Nations opened its
51st General Assembly. America is delinquent on $1.64 billion in dues and has
angered other U.N. nations by promising to veto a second term for
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali. The Los Angeles Times noted
that U.S. opposition to Boutros-Ghali has only endeared him to other
governments. Editorialists warned that the United States is in no position to
demand reforms in the U.N. bureaucracy until it pays its dues. In a visit to
the United Nations, President Clinton and officials from the world's other
major nuclear powers signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. Clinton also
triangulated off the GOP, contrasting his warm feelings for the United Nations
with the anti-global hostility of Republican isolationists and opponents of the
treaty.

            

               Astronaut Shannon Lucid returned to earth after six months on the
Russian Mir space station, setting an American record and a world record for
women. Fire rescue workers expected to carry Lucid from the space shuttle,
since the weightlessness of space tends to confuse the body's sense of balance
and deplete blood, bone, and muscle strength. Instead, she stood up and walked
away, with some help. Her strength was credited to a rigorous workout regimen
on the space station. President Clinton called her "a terrific inspiration" for
"young girls who may have nontraditional aspirations."

            
               Bob
Dole left the campaign trail to cram for the October presidential debate.
Dole pal Tom Korologos explained that by "sitting on the beach," Dole "shows
confidence. ... If he thought it was over, he'd be frenetically running
around." Dole's rhetorical talents were so pitied that when Clinton spokesman
Mike McCurry tried to raise expectations for Dole's performance, he was accused
of cruelly mocking the senator. Meanwhile, Jesse Jackson joined the legal
challenge to the debate commission's exclusion of Ross Perot, calling its
behavior "awfully close to corruption." Perot and his followers continued to
blame and hound Dole for keeping Perot out the debates.

            
               Iran
re-emerged as a focus of American anxiety. The Wall Street Journal
disclosed that U.S. Navy commanders in the Persian Gulf are more worried about
Iran in the long term than Iraq: Iran's beefed-up navy is capable of cutting
off one-fifth of the world's oil supply, and its nuclear, biological, and
chemical weapons make it a threat even beyond the Gulf. The New York
Times reported that some of the 4,000 men sent to Bosnia by Iran and other
Muslim states to defend Muslims have remained, and that they have apparently
threatened NATO troops. Western officials link the forces to Iranian
intelligence, saying they've have been trained as terrorists. In other
southcentral Asian news, Islamic fundamentalists solidified control of
three-fourths of Afghanistan and seized Kabul.

            
               Boris
Yeltsin's health gave the world palpitations. First, Yeltsin's surgeon
suggested that the Russian president's heart had suffered so much damage that
it might not survive an urgently needed bypass operation. Then London's
Financial Times claimed that Yeltsin had suffered an almost totally
debilitating stroke. Other reports asserted that his kidneys and liver were
failing, perhaps due to steroids he had allegedly taken during his re-election
campaign. The Russian stock market plunged. Opposition parties called on
Yeltsin to resign. Would-be successors, led by national security chief
Alexander Lebed, rushed to position themselves for Yeltsin's job. Then a
Russian-American medical team led by renowned heart surgeon Michael DeBakey
examined Yeltsin, pronounced his condition "not bad at all," and predicted that
although his surgery would be delayed a few weeks, he would probably serve out
his term. Stocks recovered, and governments around the world breathed easier.
Russian citizens, long accustomed to evasive and deceptive reports on their
leaders' health, took the news of Yeltsin's illness with typical stoicism.
"Think of all the awful healthy leaders we could have," said one doctor.

            
               John F.
Kennedy Jr . married longtime girlfriend Carolyn Bessette, on a secluded
island off Georgia. Gossip columnists congratulated Bessette and consoled every
other woman in America. The Washington Post called it "one of the best
covert operations in a decade"; Kennedy didn't inform many of his friends and
relatives (his cousin, Rep. Patrick Kennedy, was among those not invited), and
the few who did attend (estimates ranged from 40 to fewer than a dozen) weren't
invited until four days in advance. A Post source indicated that Kennedy
had deceived colleagues at his magazine, George, about his travel plans.
Even the caterers had to sign confidentiality agreements. After years of being
hounded by paparazzi , the Kennedys and their guests reportedly exulted
in their escape. "We were so excited to have fooled everybody," said one
attendee.

            The House
divided a landmark immigration-reform measure into two bills, then
passed them both. The larger bill would fortify the Border Patrol, facilitate
deportations, and restrict the benefits available to illegal aliens; the
detached bill would let states exclude children of illegal aliens from public
schools. The second bill was dismissed as veto bait, but Republicans were
deemed to have scored a victory by detaching it and thereby removing Clinton's
excuse to veto the larger bill. Liberal interest groups and the White House
scrambled to find new objections to the larger bill: Among other things, they
warned that it threatens legal immigrants with deportation and diminishes their
safeguards against job discrimination. Bob Dole issued a letter pretending to
have spearheaded the GOP's separation of the two bills, but the Washington
Post disclosed that congressional Republicans had actually forced the idea
on Dole. A further Post article suggested that ultimately, the joke was
on the GOP: Its crackdown on legal immigrants is scaring them into becoming
American citizens, and they're overwhelmingly registering to vote as
Democrats.

            The
Seagram Co. expanded plans to advertise 
               liquor on
television, defying President Clinton's plea to honor the half-century-old
voluntary ban. Seagram's sympathizers pointed out that the product is legal,
and dismissed Clinton's warning as a political stunt designed to endear him to
parents. (Stations running the ads claimed that they wouldn't air them during
children's normal viewing hours.) The Wall Street Journal noted that
liquor-industry executives are disgruntled with the ban because it prevents
them from competing on the tube with beer companies.

            The
birth-control pill is reportedly making a comeback. A comprehensive
international review of 54 studies concluded that the pill doesn't heighten a
woman's long-term probability of getting breast cancer. Researchers also
discounted previous concerns that the pill contributed to cardiovascular
trouble, and touted studies indicating that it reduces the risk of ovarian and
endometrial cancer. Meanwhile, a new survey by a contraceptive pharmaceutical
company suggested that the pill has surpassed sterilization as the country's
most popular birth-control method. The breast-cancer scare was cited as an
apparent factor in the pill's previous decline in popularity.

            
               
                  The
First Wives Club
               , a revenge-comedy about three abandoned wives, grossed
more on its first weekend than any other women's film in history. Critics were
equivocal; the Washington Post 's Rita Kempley called it "stale feminist
fluff." Pundit Margaret Carlson of Time pronounced it "an antidote to
the zeitgeist of the '80s, when middle-aged tycoons and their acolytes could
suddenly drop an inconvenient first wife without social opprobrium," and
predicted the film would spark the kind of debate provoked by Thelma &
Louise . The Los Angeles Times envisioned a reversal of Hollywood's
bias toward male actors: "Could it be that being middle-aged and female has
become a Hollywood box-office asset?"

         
      
   
