
   
   
      
         
            Glass Houses

            According to the Business
Times of Singapore, there's a bond dealer at the New York firm of RBL who
keeps a hand-held urinal at his desk so he never misses a market turn. And
according to both the Independent and the Sunday Times of London,
the booming Monica Lewinsky novelty market includes 3,000 items, such as
"Monicondoms" (designed for oral sex), talking Lewinsky dolls, and Monica
birthday cards ("I'll blow out your candle!").

            Great
stories, both false--cribbed from articles by Stephen Glass in the New

               Republic . Glass was fired last week by TNR after a Forbes
reporter alerted TNR editor Charles Lane that an article about a
teen-age computer hacker ("Hack Heaven," May 18) was full of fabrications, and
Lane's own investigation confirmed that Glass had made things up wholesale in
many New 
               Republic pieces. (The details are in Forbes
Digital Tool.)

            Checking the Web and Lexis-Nexis for the people and
organizations mentioned in Glass' articles, you do not come up empty-handed.
Although there are often no references before Glass published his fantasies,
there are often references afterward . These are generally in British
publications--or publications in places to which Britain brought the benefits
of advanced civilization, such as hack journalism.

            Between
the Web, Nexis, and the good old telephone, it took little effort to discredit
such apparent Glass inventions as the National Memorabilia Convention,
Monicondoms, or the investment firm RBL. Other untraceable organizations,
publications, and individuals include Patriotic Profits, P.J. Hozell, Isaac
Tyo, Climate Lookout, Truth in Science, the Association for the Advancement of
Sound Water Policy, Jim Sackman, Back to Eden, Naked Truth , Ryan Hogin,
Andrew Zubitsky, the "Newt-O-Meter," the First Church of George Herbert Walker
Christ, the Committee for the Former President's Integrity, Steve Tellis, the
Tellis Times , and the Commission to Restore the Presidency to
Greatness.

            
Listed here, it all seems transparently bogus
or at least deeply suspicious. Yet I'm embarrassed to confess that every Glass
story passed my stink test when first published in the New Republic .
Now, plowing through the big Nexis dump, my hindsight is golden. Glass moved
monumental piles of bullshit past me, a vain skeptic. I shouldn't have believed
his story about the alleged sex orgy staged by of a bunch of pot-smoking young
Republicans at a D.C. convention. It's just too good to be true. And why
weren't my suspicions aroused after three New Republic pieces
discovering bizarre cults centered on implausible political figures? First, he
documented the adoration of Paul Tsongas by "Susan," an 80-year-old Chicago
widow with no last name. Then he discovered the First Church of George Herbert
Walker Christ. Finally, he stumbled upon an Alan Greenspan Shrine at an
investment firm.

            I can't
say why the New Republic failed to catch Glass before Forbes did.
Editor Lane declined to answer my questions. (The magazine's New York PR
officer called with the magazine's regrets.) Glass could not be reached for
comment. But I can speculate about my own failure to see what seems so clear in
hindsight.

            One explanation is that factoids such as the bondsman's
portable urinal, which seem starkly implausible when presented alone, are less
so when woven in with easier-to-believe fictions. Glass skillfully eases you in
by "reporting" that assistants serve bond dealers lunch at their desks and do
their Christmas shopping for them. Like the famous frog, you would jump out if
dropped in boiling water but cook to death in water that heated up
gradually.

            Another
partial explanation is that Glass built up credibility as each story was
published and went unchallenged. You figured that if RBL didn't have a bond
dealer with a urinal on his desk, someone from RBL would call the writer's
bluff. What you didn't figure is that Glass would make up RBL itself. The
principals in his stories didn't complain about the falsehoods for the simple
reason that they often didn't exist.

            
But the main reason Glass spoofed everybody's
radar is that his stories were, in the self-mocking journalists' phrase "too
good to check." As a reader, not his editor, it was not my job to check them.
But I didn't even bring my usual editor's skepticism to reading them, because I
wanted them to be true.

            The
Glassworks contain what editors crave--stories with energy and imagination and
originality. The filigree of detail dazzles. Some of his better pieces read
like textbook examples of New Journalism, fusing the world of fact with the
literary power of narrative. He doesn't just write about teen-age hackers, he
tracks a pimply member of the species down to his Bethesda home where a
software company is signing him to a contract. He interviews the adoring mom.
No wonder George , the New York Times 
               Magazine , Rolling
Stone , and Harper's failed to snoot out the stink factor and
assigned pieces to him. (
                  Slate
                published a piece co-authored by
Glass last year. See "Readme" for the editor's comment.)

            Colleagues describe Glass as an extraordinarily
hard-working and personable 25-year-old who gladly pulled all-nighters to
improve his pieces whenever his editors asked him to. He was completely open to
criticism. He regularly entertained the staff at editorial meetings with
previews of the dish to come in his next piece. It's a testimony to his energy
that when editors questioned his hacker piece, he erected a Web site to prove
the existence of a nonexistent software company. A layabout would simply have
written a true story. When you like somebody, you tend to trust him. (Let this
be a lesson to us all.)

            But where
were the New 
               Republic 's fact checkers? TNR does have a
fact checking department. It was established following New Republic
staffer Ruth Shalit's serial plagiarisms. The person in charge of setting it
up? Stephen Glass. That is ironic, of course, but the joke is not on the
New 
               Republic . It's on the conceit of fact checking in
general.

            
No publication is safe from a trusted reporter
who makes things up. And hindsight is easy. That said, a publication can make
scamming its readers more difficult than the New Republic made it for
Glass. Giving young reporters unimpeded access to anonymous quotations is like
handing a toddler a loaded gun. Years ago, a young free-lancer submitted a
story to me about Iran-Contra that was filled with anonymous sources. I asked
for their names. "Bob Woodward doesn't tell Ben Bradlee who his sources are!"
the writer objected. "Well, you're not Bob Woodward, and I'm not Ben Bradlee,"
I responded. As he coughed up his sources he sheared the sharper edges off his
story. I never used him again.

            The conventional wisdom in
Washington this week is that young writers such as Glass who crack up deserve
sympathy because the system pressures them into becoming stars before they are
journeymen. Please. This explanation exonerates dishonest writers while
providing protective cover for careless editors. If there's any moral to be
taken from this story, it should be "No more excuses."

            One final clue should have
alerted us--readers and editors--to Glass' deception: Life is not so good that
it places reporters at the center of action as frequently as it did the young
Glass. And he wrote so well. Anyone can doubt a bad writer. It's the good ones
who need watching.

         
      
   
