
   
   
      
         
            The Stock Market Chicken-Counting Orgy

            The Dow Jones industrial
average is up by almost half in the past year. The NASDAQ Composite Index and
the S&P 500 are up more than 40 percent. Thanks to the portfolio tracking
services on financial Web sites like Microsoft Investor, millions of middle-class investors are
aware of their rising net worth, to the dollar, on a daily or even hourly
basis. Troubadours of capitalism celebrate each new high as evidence of the
system's ability to create wealth.

            But in
what sense has the stock market boom created wealth? This is not a
philosophical question. It's a mathematical one. Nor is my point that a Dow
breaking 8,000 is necessarily a speculative bubble that will burst (though I
reserve the right to claim that was my point if it happens). But when we
imagine how we will spend our stock market wealth, we're engaged in an orgy of
pre-hatch chicken counting. Is there any way the "wealth" that people are
spending in their minds can be spent in reality--that is, converted into goods
and services?

            Here's the puzzle. The shares traded on the New York Stock
Exchange are worth a total of over $8 trillion. "Worth" in the sense that a)
this is the sum of the prices they're trading at, little bits at a time; and b)
this is the sum of the numbers their proud owners mentally fondle. Perhaps $2
trillion of that "worth" has been added in the past year. Meanwhile, though,
the entire U.S. economy produces goods and services of about $7 trillion a
year, and grew less than 4 percent in the past year. Four percent growth is, in
fact, very healthy. But it means that the increase in goods and services in the
economy was $280 billion, less than one-seventh of the increase in claims on
goods and services implied by the rise in prices on the New York Stock Exchange
alone. Add the other exchanges, the NASDAQ, real estate, and various other
investments, and the growth in the economy's capacity to produce real wealth
shrinks into insignificance compared with the increase in "wealth" as perceived
by the owners of these investments.

            
No one loves a share of stock for its own sake.
Even shares in a company as wonderful as, say, Microsoft are treasured only for
their trade-in value. So what would happen if everyone suddenly tried to trade
the "wealth" we've accumulated during the past year for real stuff--cars,
houses, vacations, new washing machines, whatever? Two things would happen:
Stock prices would plummet and the price of "real stuff" would rise. As a
result, much of our perceived wealth would melt away.

            Of course we're not all
going to cash in our stocks tomorrow. One thing sustaining current stock-price
levels is baby boomers socking money away for retirement. But many experts have
predicted that this pleasant dynamic will reverse itself when the boomer
generation starts withdrawing and spending its retirement nest eggs. Instead of
sustaining the market, the aging-boomer factor will be depressing it. The
result needn't be a crash. But some combination of stock-price stagnation or
decline and general price inflation will deny boomers the value they think
they're accumulating.

            (This is
another reason that the notion of solving the Social Security problem by
investing payments in the stock market is such folly. The infusion of these
extra billions will drive prices up when boomers are all buying, and the
subsequent withdrawal will drive prices down when boomers are all selling.)

            So the alleged wealth accumulated in the stock market can't
be realized all at once now, and probably can't be realized all at once decades
from now. Can it be realized gradually over the years, as people sell off a
little at a time? It's possible, but pretty unlikely. Stock prices represent
the discounted present value of a company's future earnings stream. In other
words: What you're willing to pay for a share of stock is, or ought to be,
equal to what you would pay today for the right to claim that share's fraction
of the company's profits from now on. If prospects for future earnings have
actually improved by 40 or 50 percent in the past year, the economy will
generate enough wealth to cover all the new chits in people's pockets.

            There are
two ways the present value of future earnings might have increased by 40 or 50
percent during a period when the economy's general productive capacity
increased by only 4 percent. One possibility is that companies were radically
undervalued a year ago. The other is that something happened in the past year
to improve general corporate prospects by 40 or 50 percent. In either case,
stock prices and profit potential are, in theory, now correctly aligned.

            
But do you know of any dazzling new insight
about the past, or revelation about the future, during the past year that would
justify a 40 percent upward valuation of all of corporate America? Well, Ben
Stein wrote in Slate a while back attributing the bull market to new understanding
about the lack of risk in equity investments. Slate's Paul Krugman notes that
the past year has brought good news about the economy's ability to tolerate low
unemployment without igniting inflation. "But this news," Krugman says, "makes
us 2 or 3 percent richer at most--nowhere near enough to justify the rise in
the Dow." What's more, if the past year's huge rise in stock prices reflects a
new but accurate optimism about future economic growth, this means the payoff
for that future growth is already in the past. In other words, future
stock-price increases will have to trail economic growth.

            A related
possibility: The increase in stockholder wealth could reflect a transfer from
those Americans who don't own stocks. Or from our own non-stock repositories of
future value--i.e., our labor. Could it be that the rise in stock values
reflects the ongoing shift, from labor to capital, of the return to production
in our economy? In other words, we're not producing 30 percent more, but more
of what we do produce goes to corporate profits and less to wages? Well,
Krugman maintains that no such shift is taking place. (Another economist,
Lawrence Mishel, takes issue with Krugman in the current issue of the American
Prospect .)

            Then there's what economists call the wealth effect. Even
if the impression that we're a lot richer than a year ago is a fantasy, the
very fact that millions believe it might help make it come true. Prosperity is
like Tinker Bell: It lives on belief that it lives. Folks who believe (even
incorrectly) that their net worth is up by 40 percent will spend with zest, and
the economy will thrive and grow as a result. Of course this kind of
"demand-side" thinking is extremely out of fashion. After all, if spending
money you don't really have is the key to prosperity, big government deficits
would do the trick just as well. Yet deficits are deeply unpopular, most of all
with the sort of folks who celebrate the new wealth created by the stock
market.

            Of course this whole line of
reasoning would apply to stock market crashes as well as to booms. The one-day
crash of '87, for example, reduced people's net worth by billions without
directly reducing by as much as a single doughnut the amount of goods and
services or the economy's ability to produce more of them. Maybe the moral is
just the obvious one that stock prices occasionally overshoot the mark in both
directions. But maybe the moral is that the only folks who are going to get
their full chicken's worth out of the 8,000 market are those who stop counting
their chickens and start trading them in.

         
      
   
