
   
   
      
         
            Clinton's Medicare Cuts

            
During the first presidential and vice
presidential debates, Bob Dole and Jack Kemp were hit by Medicare attacks from
Bill Clinton and Al Gore some 22 times. That's an average of one Medicare
attack every four minutes.

            Dole's sins: Not only did he
want to slash $270 billion from the program--more than needed to protect the
Medicare "trust fund"--he wanted to hike premiums, force seniors to pay more
out of pocket for care, and push them into managed care. Dole and House Speaker
Newt Gingrich, the president and vice president said, wanted Medicare to
"wither on the vine." All these were, as Gore put it on Meet the Press
recently, "extremist measures that would have devastated Medicare."

            Thank God Clinton was there
to stop it.

            Dole's
limp response was that he would honor his mother's word not to cut Medicare. He
needn't be so defensive. Three years ago Clinton himself proposed basically the
same package of reforms for Medicare--a fact everyone seems to have forgotten
since it was embedded in his massive, ill-fated Health Security Act. Here's the
rundown.

            

               Big Cuts vs. Slower Growth . Consider
this exchange in the veep debate:

            Jack Kemp:
"The president himself suggested that the reduction in the growth of Medicare
over the next five or six years ought to be held to 6 percent. Under the
Republican plan, irrespective of the numbers, it will grow at 7 or even more
percent."

            Al Gore: "I think Mr. Kemp
has unintentionally made a mistake in saying that President Clinton called for
a reduction to 6 percent. ... It is not the president's position."

            Nobody bothered to check out
this one. But the fact is that in 1993 Clinton boasted he could cut Medicare
growth to 6 percent while protecting the program.

            Here's Clinton speaking to
the American Association of Retired Persons in October that year: "Today,
Medicaid and Medicare are going up at three times the rate of inflation. We
propose to let it go up at two times the rate of inflation." Given that prices
were expected to climb 3 percent a year, Clinton meant 6 percent growth for
Medicare.

            "That is not a Medicare or
Medicaid cut," he reassured seniors. "So when you hear all this business about
cuts, let me caution you that that is not what is going on. We are going to
have increases in Medicare and Medicaid, and a reduction in the rate of
growth."

            A draft summary of the Health
Security Act, released in September of 1993, contained a chart showing
projected growth for Medicare slowing to less than 6 percent by 1997, and less
than 5 percent by 1999. And in its independent review of the Clinton plan,
health-care consulting firm Lewin-VHI noted that the act "attempts to slow the
growth in public and private health spending to the rate of growth in the CPI
plus an allowance for population growth." That puts Medicare growth at just
over 4 percent a year.

            Far from devastating, this
slowdown was, the White House said at the time, good for seniors. Ira Magaziner
told a press briefing that "slowing the rate of growth actually benefits
beneficiaries considerably because it slows the rate of growth of the premiums
they have to pay."

            But looked at in the terms
the White House uses today, Clinton was proposing cuts in Medicare spending
beyond the $270 billion Republicans dared propose.

            Like the
GOP plan, Clinton wanted to take a big chunk of savings from Medicare
providers--doctors and hospitals--by cutting back payments to them.

            

               More Cuts Than Needed . At one point,
Clinton warned that the GOP cuts were "more than was necessary to repair the
Medicare trust fund." The implied political point was that Medicare cuts were
going to pay for tax cuts for the rich.

            Clinton's Health Security
Act, however, also cut Medicare more than was needed to repair the trust fund.
Most of the savings from Medicare were to be plowed back into new federal
health programs. As the Congressional Budget Office put it: "Reductions in
Medicare spending would provide a major part of the funding for the
Administration's proposal." More than a quarter of it, by White House
calculations.

            
               Raise Costs to
Seniors . Several times during the debates, Clinton and Gore said that the
Republicans' Medicare-reform plan would have boosted costs to seniors. "It
would have charged seniors more for out-of-pocket costs as well as more in
premiums," Clinton said at one point.

            Under Clinton's Health
Security Act, more than a quarter of the savings came out of the hides of
seniors. They were to be charged higher premiums for Medicare Part B, the
program that covers physician services. New copayments were to be added for
some Medicare services that are now 100 percent covered. Over six years, those
costs to seniors would have totaled $33 billion.

            To be
sure, Clinton concentrated the premium hikes for Part B on the
well-to-do--those seniors earning $90,000 a year or more. The rest would pay
only a quarter of the premium cost, with taxpayers picking up the rest. The GOP
set the contribution rate at just under one-third of the full cost, but they
also "means tested" the premiums so that seniors with incomes over $75,000
would pay a bigger chunk.

            

               Push Seniors Into Managed Care . "Sen.
Dole's Medicare plan ... would have forced a lot of seniors into managed care,"
Clinton said. That's something of a misrepresentation. The GOP plan would have
expanded the managed-care options open to seniors, and encouraged them to take
it. Today, seniors can stick with Medicare, or opt for Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO) coverage, with the government ponying up the premiums. The
GOP plan would have opened that door to the rest of the alphabet soup of
private managed-care plans, such as preferred-provider organizations,
point-of-service plans and physician hospital organizations.

            So would Clinton's 1993
reforms, and even his more recent Medicare proposals. One section in his Health
Security Act was titled "Encouraging Managed Care Under Medicare Program."
Clinton's current reform proposal suggests expanding managed-care options for
seniors. The only difference between the Republicans and Clinton on this score
is that the GOP wanted to give seniors one extra option--to enroll in a
"medical savings account" plan.

            Both
parties used basically the same regulatory machinery to try to make their plans
work in the market without creating a huge "adverse selection"
problem--healthier seniors opting into lower-cost plans. The Republicans'
machinery, in fact, was borrowed almost verbatim from Clinton's plan--which, in
a double twist, the GOP had previously attacked as unworkable.

            

               Let Medicare Wither on the Vine. Clinton
twice said that Medicare would "wither on the vine" under Republican reforms.
The reference is to a comment by House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who said that the
GOP wanted the Medicare bureaucracy to wither on the vine, as seniors
opted for the private plans. But the quote has been misused by Democrats ever
since.

            In any case, Clinton also
forecast the decline of the Medicare bureaucracy. New retirees under his Health
Security Act would be able to stick with the plan they had when they worked.
The government would pay the premiums instead of the employer. Current retirees
could choose a private managed-care plan. According to the Congressional Budget
Office, Clinton's plan would have moved nearly 3 million seniors from Medicare
into private plans in 1998 alone.

            To be fair, the White House
wanted to sweeten the Medicare pot at the same time it was making these cuts by
adding a prescription-drug benefit.

            It has also claimed since
that its proposed cuts in Medicare were acceptable because they were in the
context of "universal health care reform." But that wasn't the argument it made
at the time. Hillary Rodham Clinton told a Senate panel in 1993 that savings in
Medicare were easy because "we have too many examples now of how it can be done
better at lower costs with the same or better quality, and that's what we're
counting on."

         
      
   
