
   
   
      
         
            What Tocqueville Missed

            Nostalgia is rampant among
public commentators today as they look for some critical juncture when U.S.
democracy was flourishing more than it seems to be now, hoping to draw
inspiration and lessons for what might be done to revive our apparently ailing
civic life.

            Those who still admit to
being liberals usually locate the golden era of U.S. democracy in the 1930s and
1940s, when, it is thought, Franklin Delano Roosevelt provided bold,
progressive leadership. Those of conservative or center-right proclivities
characteristically look at America's past through the eyes of Alexis de
Tocqueville, the French aristocrat who toured the fledgling United States in
the 1830s, gathering observations and ideas that were, in due course, published
in Democracy in America . Tocqueville's opus has become one of the modern
world's most influential political ethnographies--that is, a set of densely
descriptive observations of another nation, written to influence political
debates back in one's own country.

            That message-to-home aspect
of Tocqueville's work is important in understanding its limitations. Alarmed by
the simultaneous expansion of democracy and an ever-more-centralized
bureaucratic administrative state in post-revolutionary France, he used his
explorations of early Republican America to make the case to his own countrymen
that they should encourage voluntary associations in civic society as a new
buffer against state centralization.

            "Americans of all ages, all
stations in life, and all types of dispositions are forever forming
associations," Tocqueville reported in a famous, oft-quoted passage. This happy
situation was possible, he felt, because extralocal government seemed barely
present. "Nothing strikes a European traveler in the United States more," wrote
Tocqueville, "than the absence of what we would call government or
administration. ... There is nothing centralized or hierarchic in the
constitution of American administrative power."

            Given
Tocqueville's anti-statist purposes, it is not surprising that contemporary
critics of the U.S. federal government celebrate the great Frenchman's stress
on voluntary associations (understood as functioning in opposition to
bureaucratic state power). Still, before Americans plunge forward on a fool's
errand, we might want to notice that the best historical social science
challenges the claims of conservatives and centrists about when, how, and why
democratic civic engagement has flourished in the United States.

            Before the American Revolution, many towns of the requisite
size for commercialization and urbanization had already emerged, but without a
vibrant set of voluntary associations. By the early 1800s, however, the
emergence of associations in both smaller and larger communities was
outstripping commercial and demographic change. Social historian Richard D.
Brown emphasizes that the Revolution, political struggles over the Constitution
and the Bill of Rights, and deepening popular participation in national, state,
and local elections served to spur associational life. So did religious and
cultural ideals about self-improvement, and growing awareness of extralocal
commercial and public affairs through widespread newspaper reading.

            
Tocqueville himself was well aware of many of these extralocal influences.
Present-day conservatives often overlook how much he stressed political
participation, marveling at the United States as the "one country in the world
which, day in, day out, makes use of an unlimited freedom of political
association," which, in turn, encouraged a more general "taste for
association."

            
In retrospect, it is obvious that what social
historian Mary P. Ryan has dubbed the pre-Civil War "era of association," from
the 1820s to the 1840s, coincided with the spread of adult male suffrage and
the emergence of competitive, mass-mobilizing parties: first the Jacksonian
Democrats, then the Whigs, and finally, the Free Soilers and the
Republicans.

            

               Democracy in America took note of early U.S. newspapers, too.
"Newspapers make associations, and associations make newspapers," Tocqueville
wrote. "Thus, of all countries on earth, it is in America that one finds both
the most associations and the most newspapers." Yet, blinded by his negative
passions about state power in France, Tocqueville failed to grasp what his
observations meant about the early American state.

            As historian Richard John cleverly points out in
Spreading the News: The American Postal System From Franklin to Morse ,
Tocqueville traveled by stage coach in the "hinterland of Kentucky and
Tennessee," remarking on the "astonishing circulation of letters and newspapers
among these savage woods." Yet the Frenchman's travels might not have been
possible if many stage-coach companies had not been subsidized--through
Congress--so that mail could be carried, and representatives travel home, to
remote districts.

            A
well-known quip has it that early modern Prussia wasn't so much a state with an
army, as an army with a state. Similarly, the early United States may have been
not so much a country with a post office, as a post office that gave popular
reality to a fledgling nation. John points out that by 1828, only 36 years
after Congress passed the Post Office Act of 1792, "the American postal system
had almost twice as many offices as the postal system in Great Britain and over
five times as many offices as the postal system in France." In the 1830s and
1840s, the system accounted for more than three-quarters of U.S. federal
employees.

            
Obviously, the institutional structure of the
U. S. government had everything to do with the spread of the postal network.
The legislative system gave senators and (above all) members of the House of
Representatives a strong interest in subsidizing communication and
transportation links into even the remotest areas of the growing nation.
Special postal rates made mailing newspapers cheap and allowed small newspapers
to pick up copy from bigger ones.

            The
postal system was even more important for civil society and democratic politics
than for commerce. Congress could use it to communicate freely with citizens.
Citizens, even in the remotest hamlets, could readily communicate with one
another, monitoring the doings of Congress, and state and local governments.
Voluntary associations soon learned to put out their message in "newspaper"
formats, to take advantage of the mail. Emergent political parties in
Jacksonian America were intertwined with the federal postal system. Party
entrepreneurs were often newspaper editors and postmasters, and postmasterships
quickly became a staple of party patronage.

            In short, the early American civic vitality that so
entranced Alexis de Tocqueville was closely tied up with the representative
institutions and centrally directed activity of a very distinctive national
state. The non-zero-sum nature of U.S. governmental and associational expansion
becomes even more apparent when we consider that most of the big voluntary
associations founded in the 19 th century prospered well into the
20 th , often building toward membership peaks reached only in the
1960s or 1970s and in full symbiosis with public social provision.

            The Grand Army of the
Republic spread in the wake of state and national benefits for Union veterans
of the Civil War, for example. The Fraternal Order of Eagles was so active in
promoting state and federal old-age pensions that the Grand Eagle himself
received an official pen when FDR signed the Social Security Act of 1935. The
great women's federations of the early 20 th century were champions
of local, state, and federal regulations, services, and benefits for mothers
and children. New Deal laws and administrative interventions were vital aids
for nascent industrial unions. And the American Legion sponsored the GI Bill of
1944.

            
               Lessons for
Today
            

            
Maybe the problem today is that many Americans,
quite rightly, no longer feel they can effectively band together to get things
done either through, or in relationship to, government. The problem may not be
a big, bureaucratic federal government--after all, the U.S. national government
still has proportionately less revenue-raising capacity and administrative heft
than virtually any other advanced national state. The issue may be recent
shifts in society and styles of politics that make it less inviting and far
harder for Americans to participate efficaciously in civic life, except locally
or on very narrow issues.

            Data do
show an explosion of Washington, D.C.-based advocacy groups between the
mid-1960s and the early 1980s. But apart from a few on the right--notably the
National Right to Life Committee, the Christian Coalition, and the National
Rifle Association--the few new big voluntary associations that have been
founded have been structured like thousands of smaller ones: They are
staff-led, mailing-list associations.

            Obviously, societal conditions so propitious for
encompassing voluntary federations have changed a lot. Higher-educated
women--once leaders of many such associations--now have nationally oriented
careers, and crowd into cosmopolitan centers. Indeed, by the 1960s, the United
States developed a very large professional-managerial elite that was, arguably,
more oriented to giving money to staff-led national advocacy organizations than
to climbing the local-state-national leadership ladders of traditional
voluntary associations.

            Voters these days are rarely
contacted directly by party or group workers. Politicians may not care much
about them at all if they aren't relatively well-off or members of targeted
"swing" groups of voters. This has happened in electoral politics at the same
time that all our mailboxes are full of computer-generated mailings from
single-issue advocacy groups seeking to raise money from paper
"memberships."

            Were Alexis de Tocqueville to
return to the late 20 th century United States for another visit, he
would be just as worried about these national trends as about possible declines
in purely local or small-group associationalism. After all, one of Democracy
in America 's insights was that vital democratic participation served as a
kind of "school," where Americans learned how to build social and civic
associations of all sorts. He would also surely be surprised that today's
conservatives are using his Democracy in America to justify a
depoliticized and romantic localism as an improbable remedy for the larger ills
of national politics.

         
      
   
