
   
   
      
         
            Small-Biz Blarney

            Everybody knows that small
business creates all the jobs. Why, only last week during the vice-presidential
debate, Jack Kemp argued with evangelical passion for a small-business
capital-gains cut to grow the economy faster. "How about the small businessmen
and women of America that create 91 percent of all the new jobs?" he asked. A
few weeks earlier, during the minimum-wage debate (in which small business was
once again singled out for favored tax treatment), virtually every opponent
argued that raising the minimum wage could hurt small businesses--which create
most of America's jobs.

            This mantra is repeated so
often that everybody believes it. But everybody is wrong.

            What does
it take to kill a bad statistic? More than a Nobel laureate, apparently. Milton
Friedman, a conservative economist and proponent of free-market solutions,
pointed out in a recent Journal of Economic Literature article that the
myth of small businesses' job-creating potency is one of the most durable
falsehoods of America's political economy. Numerous other economists--and even
the occasional columnist--have tried to debunk the myth, but to no avail.

            For example, in his paper titled "On the Size Distribution
of Employment and Establishments," Jonathan Leonard finds that large firms are
the main job generators. Three Census Bureau fellows, S. Davis, J. Haltiwanger,
and S. Schuh, recently published a report titled "Small Business and Job
Creation: Dissecting the Myth and Reassessing the Facts," in which they assert
flatly, "Conventional wisdom about the job-creation prowess of small business
rests on statistical fallacies and misleading interpretations of the data."
(.)

            Magazines
and newspapers have recently run articles like "Debunking the Small Business
Myth," "Small Is Not Beautiful," "Doing the Small Business Shuffle," and "The
Real Engine of U.S. Economic Growth Might Be Bigger Than Any Believe," all of
which have declared the small-business lobby's claim "phony."

            
               Where the
Bad Data Come From
            

            Not only politicians but
newspaper reporters continue to perpetuate the small-business fallacy, usually
without challenge. Take an article in the Los 
               Angeles

               Times on July 6, which referred to "98 percent of all jobs since 1989
being created by businesses with fewer than four employees." Where do these
numbers come from? The Office of Advocacy of the Small Business Administration
will gladly supply you with a table that might appear, at first glance, to lend
support to such claims (see Figure 1).

            Look
across the second row, for example, which seems to tell you that firms with no
employees in 1991 netted an astounding 1,898,600 jobs by 1993.

            
               Figure 1
            

            
               Net Job
Creation by Firm Size, 1991-1993 (Data in Thousands)

            Firm Size (Number of
Employees in 1993)

            [CHART 1 GOES HERE]

            
               *Computed
by subtraction within the same size class.
            

            
               ** Firms with no
employees, but some payroll expenses, in 1991.
            

            Add in the
jobs created by firms with one to 499 employees in 1991 (the next five rows),
and you would compute that small businesses (defined by SBA as having fewer
than 500 employees) added all but 44,800 of the total 2.4 million net jobs
gained by the economy over that period.

            
Well, what's the matter with that? The matter,
of course, is that the rows broken out by initial firm size tell only part of
the story--the happy part. What SBA doesn't make clear in the table it hands
out (though it will tell you if you persist) is that the firm-size rows only
include those firms that "made it"--i.e., those that stayed continuously in
business throughout the period.
            

            And, of
course, it is a fact of America's dynamic marketplace that while many
firms--especially small firms--open for business every year and hire new
workers, almost as many close their doors, sending their workers onto the
unemployment rolls. Overcounting gains and undercounting losses in this and
other ways is what produces the grossly exaggerated picture of small business's
contribution to the U.S. economy. (Economists call the SBA's technique of
sorting firms by class size in a dynamic situation the "regression fallacy."
For a simple example of why it produces a misleading result, click .)

            

               A Quick Fix
            

            To get a better, though
still static, picture of what's really going on, let's relabel and complete
SBA's table (see Figure 2):

            
               Figure 2
            

            
               Net Job
Creation by Firm Size, 1991-1993 (Data in Thousands)

            Firm Size (Number of
Employees in 1993)

            [CHART 2]

            
               *
Computed by subtraction within the same size class.
            

            
               ** Firms
with no employees but some payroll expenses in 1991.
            

            
               Source: Office of
Advocacy, U.S. Small Business Administration, from U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of the Census Data, prepared under contract (table prepared July
1996).
            

            Focus on the top row, the one
optimistically labeled "Net Births" in SBA's version. These are the net changes
(mostly net losses) in job counts produced by firms that either opened or
closed during the period. Looking down at the now-complete bottom-row totals,
you will get quite a different picture of where the net new jobs are. By this
calculation, some 1,673,400 (or almost 70 percent) of the jobs still around in
1993 were added by firms with more than 500 employees in that year--i.e., by
"big" business.

            
Classifying firms by their end--rather than start--size might also seem unfair,
since some very successful small companies may end up big by the close of the
period, and vice versa. We need a more dynamic model to get a real sense of
what's going on.

            

               Going With the Flow
            

            Getting a
good fix on this phenomenon isn't easy, because most government data are
collected to measure monthly employment changes, and there are no current data
available on gross job flows by business size. As a senior economist at SBA,
however, I was able to specify the preparation of special tabulations by the
Census Bureau from business payroll tax reports for the entire private nonfarm
economy. These tabulations make it possible, for the first time, to study job
flows for the same firms as they migrate from one employment size class
to another.

            These
statistics-- never released by SBA and published here for the first
time --tell a fascinating story of job creation and destruction. For
example, the number of firms with employees increased by 30,000 in the period
between 1989 and 1991. This end result, however, was produced by some 1,260,000
firm "births" (a firm reporting no payroll in 1989, but some payroll in 1991),
which were offset by 1,230,000 firm "deaths."

            Looking at job flows by firm size (see Figure 3), we see
that firms that remained small (including those that entered or went out of
business) lost 192,000 jobs during this recession period.

            
               Figure 3
            

            
               Job
Generation by Size of Firm in 1989 and 1991
            

            (Numbers of Jobs in
Thousands)

            xxxxxxx

            * Net jobs
created by boundary crossers = 69,000

            
xxxxxxxxx

            

               Source: Bureau of the Census, special tabulations
            

            
Employment gains from firms going from small to
large were essentially offset by employment losses of firms that were large and
became small. But on net, there was a job gain of 69,000 for
"boundary-crossing" firms. At the same time, large businesses (again including
those that opened or closed) added 802,000 to their payrolls. Subtracting the
small-business losses from the big-business gains gives us a net total of
679,000 jobs added to the entire economy during this period. The analysis thus
confirms what earlier studies had suggested: Big business, not small business,
is the primary generator of U.S. jobs.

            
Predictably, SBA's counts show a totally different (and false) picture (see
bottom of Figure 3). By using the beginning-year counting rule, SBA reports
that small business generated 557,000, or 82 percent, of the jobs. If the
end-year counting rule is used, small business destroyed 872,000 jobs. Neither
statistic is reflective of the job-generation process; they measure only
economic volatility.

            Of course, the period between 1989 and 1991 was one of
recession. However, Census Bureau counts show that during the phase of rapid
growth between 1982 to 1987, an equal number of firms in each size class
reported job gains as losses. This same result held true in the period from
1989 to 1991, demonstrating again that, irrespective of business-cycle
conditions, the probability that a firm will add or lay off workers is
independent of its size. Analysis of the SBA net-change data for the
expansionary period between 1991 and 1993 also reveals that small businesses
created jobs in proportion to their numbers--no more, and no less.

            A simple economic explanation
accounts for these observations. Firms are constantly competing with each
other. Both small and large businesses expand when there is a demand for their
goods and services that they can meet efficiently. All the economic research
suggests that there is no difference in the efficiency of small and large firms
once a firm grows beyond a minimum size. It is for this reason that Census
Bureau data for the last 50 years show no evidence of any change in the
employment size distribution of firms and establishments.

            All this might not matter, if
the small-business fallacy were not used by its promoters as justification for
carving exemptions and preferences for small business into virtually every
piece of economic legislation that passes Congress. As the editor of this
magazine wrote in the Washington 
               Post in August 1993, "Small
business is an important part of the American economy. Most small-business
owners are admirable, hard-working, patriotic. But the case for tilting public
policy in favor of 'small business' is based on logical fallacies and
lobbyists' hokum."

         
      
   
