
   
   
      
         
            Any Volunteers?

            A stickup artist shoves a
Smith & Wesson in your face: Your money or your life, he says, by which he
means you can surrender your money or you can surrender your slightly bloody
money and your life.

            Compare
the gunman's direct approach with the "voluntary standards" shakedown practiced
by the federal government. In recent years, the government has demanded--I
mean, requested--that the computer industry voluntarily accept its encryption
standards. The government also made volunteers out of the TV networks,
imploring them to rate TV programs to reflect sexual content and violence. (All
the networks--except NBC and BET--submitted meekly.) Last October, President
Clinton persuaded a number of firearms makers to voluntarily supply trigger
locks with new handguns. So much for Mao's thesis that political power grows
out of the barrel of a gun.

            Why is the government so keen on seeking voluntary
standards in the first place? Why doesn't it just pass laws or issue
regulations instead? It would if it could. Usually, the request for volunteers
signals the government's recognition--or at least suspicion--that it lacks the
legal authority to force industry or others to bend to its will. It doesn't
want to seek that authority either because it doubts it can muster the
necessary votes in Congress or because the Constitution stands in the way.

            The war on
tobacco offers the most telling example of this sort of extralegal extortion.
While negotiating the tobacco settlement last year, the government wanted
desperately to bar Big Tobacco from advertising its products. The First
Amendment prevents the government from stopping the tobacco companies from
advertising, however, so the negotiators worked out a deal. Limit advertising,
and we'll cap your liability lawsuits. Fearing that ultimately the tort lawyers
would bankrupt them, the tobacco companies agreed to give up their
constitutional ace in the hole. Only when Congress reneged on the immunity side
of the deal this spring did the industry unvolunteer its First Amendment
surrender.

            
Another reason the government prefers
coercion--I mean, persuasion--over legislation is that a law formalizes the
power relationship between the government and the governed. A law provides the
governed with the independent venue of the courts for whatever arguments might
unfold. The last word a bureaucrat wants to hear from the courts about a new
regulation is "unconstitutional."

            Yet
another advantage: Laws can be repealed, but voluntary standards are forever.
Seagram Co. learned this lesson the hard way last year when it abandoned the
five-decades-long voluntary agreement to keep liquor ads off television. Rep.
Joe Kennedy II, D-Mass., responded by introducing the "Just Say No Act,"
banning the ads outright. Observers gave Kennedy's bill little chance of
passing, but Seagram found itself flummoxed anyway. The networks and most
stations refused to sell Seagram air time because they feared liquor ads would
prod Congress into investigating the proliferation of beer ads on television.
Millions of dollars of ad revenue would be lost if Congress chose to regulate
beer ads or, worse yet, proposed new voluntary standards.

            Some industries embrace voluntary standards as a way to
dodge more onerous government regulation. Currently, commercial Web publishers
think they've staved off Federal Trade Commission regulators by establishing
voluntary privacy standards for online users. (
                  Slate
                is one such
publisher. Click here to read its privacy statement.) The FTC completed a survey of
Web policies and practices and will deliver its report to Congress in June.
Other industries, especially pharmaceutical and medical-device companies, love
to wear voluntary regs as a beard and use them to rat out the competition. "Oh,
look, we're in compliance with the voluntary regulations, but Company X
isn't."

            But bowing to voluntary
standards doesn't automatically get a company off the government's hook,
either. When dozens of youngsters found themselves either strangled or
entrapped in the rungs of their bunk beds, the American furniture industry and
the federal Consumer Product Safety Commission worked together to establish a
set of voluntary safety standards. The two sides agreed on guardrail design
standards and provided warning notices for the proper use of the beds (such as
not letting children younger than 6 use them). The CPSC presented the industry
with a Commendation for Product Safety in 1996 for its cooperation, and
commission Chairwoman Ann Brown boasted about its relationship with the bed
makers. "We are a regulatory agency," she said, "but we prefer to work
voluntarily with industry."

            Today, the
industry probably regrets having cooperated. Even though 90 percent of all new
bunk beds sold conform to the voluntary standards, Newsday reported last
month that the commission's staff is now recommending mandatory
standards. Mandatory standards enlarge government power to penalize makers who
don't abide by the rules and also give U.S. Customs the right to reject imports
that don't conform. Having previously agreed to voluntary standards, the
furniture industry finds itself stuck in the regulatory maw. No wonder the
first thing you learn in the military is to never volunteer.

            
The corrupting thing about compulsory
voluntarism is that it preys on the high-minded to the benefit of the
unscrupulous. It turns government suggestions into veiled threats and devalues
true voluntarism. At its worst, it can kick up a stench that would have made
George Orwell gag.

            In fact, the Soviets had a
name for this sort of voluntarism: subbotnik , the voluntary day of
labor. Invented by Lenin, subbotniks were convened on weekends for
cleaning, maintenance, and construction projects that the commissars decided
needed attention. Since communism closed shop in Russia, all the volunteers
have disappeared.

         
      
   
