
   
   
      
         
            Abortion Apostate

            The media love an apostate,
and Ron Fitzsimmons is the apostate of the moment. In November 1995, at the
start of Congress' battle over so-called "partial-birth abortions,"
Fitzsimmons, the executive director of the National Coalition of Abortion
Providers, went on Nightline to argue against a ban. Even ardent
pro-choicers concede the grisliness of the procedure--in which delivery is
induced, the fetus' skull is crushed, and its brains are suctioned. So,
Fitzsimmons now says, he deliberately underestimated how often the procedure is
performed and claimed incorrectly that most such operations were necessary for
the mother's health.

            But last
week Fitzsimmons came clean. "I lied through my teeth," he said in an interview
with the American Medical News . This became front-page news and revived
the partial-birth-abortion issue. Congress failed to override President
Clinton's veto of a ban last fall. But there is speculation that Clinton will
change his position now that the truth has been revealed.

            Media accounts of Fitzsimmons' confession have been
stirring. First, there was the critical moment of moral doubt: The day after
appearing on Nightline , Fitzsimmons says, he felt "physically ill. ... I
told my wife, 'I can't do this again.' " Next, heroic outrage: He stepped
forward when he could no longer watch the debate be "engulfed by spins and
half-truths." Finally, redemption: accolades from pols and pundits. On Meet
the Press , Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, D-N.Y., declared in his
conscience-of-the-nation mode: "Mr. Fitzsimmons did the honorable thing."

            But the media are being as
credulous about Fitzsimmons' new story as they were about his old one. For
starters, why did it take him 16 months to retract lies he claims to have
immediately regretted?

            Then
there's the underplayed fact that Fitzsimmons' mendacity could not possibly
have influenced the national debate, because the segments of the
Nightline interview in which Fitzsimmons says he lied through his teeth
never aired!

            
Quite apart from the melodrama of Fitzsimmons'
recantation and confession, moreover, there is nothing new about what he
"revealed" last week. Last fall, both the Washington Post and the
Bergen Record ran front-page stories asserting that pro-choice groups
underestimate the number of "intact dilation and extraction" (IDE) procedures,
to use the medical term, that are performed. In a piece that pro-life groups
circulated all over the place, the Bergen Record 's Ruth Padawer showed
that one clinic in Englewood, N.J., had performed 1,500 IDEs in 1994. That is
1,000 more than pro-choice groups claimed had been performed in the entire
country. After interviewing doctors who perform the procedure, both papers
concluded that only in very few instances was the IDE actually necessary to
protect the woman's health. Most of them were performed on poor women who could
not muster the money to pay for abortions earlier in their pregnancies.

            Abortion
practitioners have publicly admitted the same for years. Martin Haskell, the
Ohio doctor who developed the procedure, asserted in one paper that 80 percent
of his patients choose it because it is safer and more convenient than the
alternatives. There was no medical necessity. The other leading late-term
abortionist, the now-deceased Dr. James McMahon, presented similar statistics
before a congressional committee two years ago. These two doctors together
performed 500 late-term abortions in one year, and there are at least eight
other doctors who administer it--obviously, this adds up to more than 500 IDEs
a year nationwide.

            Fitzsimmons now endorses the pro-life movement's figure of
5,000. But that figure is as unreliable as the pro-choice movement's 500. None
of the groups that provides reliable statistics about abortion tallies up the
total numbers of IDEs. Consequently, there's much improvisation and sleight of
hand involved when anyone throws around numbers. Both sides claim to have
derived their figures from interviews with doctors who perform IDEs, but
different doctors use different definitions of the procedure and, in many
cases, they probably make only rough estimates of their own caseloads. Whether
the correct figure is nearer 500 or 5,000, it is a minuscule percentage of the
1.5 million abortions performed each year in the United States.

            You might think, from the
attention paid to Ron Fitzsimmons' recantation, that he was a major player in
the abortion debate. But most reporters who cover abortion--to say nothing of
pro-choice insiders--say they had never heard of him. "This guy came out of the
blue," says an official at one major pro-choice group. At best, Fitzsimmons is
a B-league lobbyist. His group, a trade association, represents 220 clinics
(but not Planned Parenthood, the largest abortion provider in the United
States). While it aims to protect abortion rights, its agenda is mostly more
mundane. Right now, its biggest task is negotiating contracts with
pharmaceutical companies.

            
Fitzsimmons (who isn't giving any interviews now) offers no new statistics to
back up his current claim that 5,000 IDEs are performed every year. And most
newspaper accounts fail to point out that, in spite of his confession,
Fitzsimmons continues to oppose a ban on IDEs.

            
There is little doubt about the pro-choice
media's unquestioning acceptance of the faulty pro-choice statistics. Editorial
boards at the Washington Post and the New York Times took the
position that a ban on late-term abortions is bad because it affects only women
carrying badly deformed babies who have no other alternative. Perhaps the
uncritical reportage of Fitzsimmons' new story can be explained by pangs of
guilt about the uncritical reportage of his old one.

            Pro-choicers have muddled
the debate over late-term abortions, and the Fitzsimmons affair is their
disingenuous strategy coming back to bite them. Instead of categorically
defending a woman's right to an abortion, they have chosen to challenge
pro-lifers on the pro-lifers' turf. They squabble over the details of late-term
abortions. But these details are their weakest points. Abortion is necessarily
an ugly business, and it doesn't do them any good to debate the extent of its
ugliness. Once Congress agrees to regulate one sort of abortion because it is
gruesome, the pro-lifers will immediately turn to another form of abortion and
insist that it, too, be regulated, because it, too, is gruesome.

            If a fetus is a fully human
life, then all abortion is murder and the debate over any particular procedure
is beside the point. But the pro-life movement recognizes it has lost the
larger debate, and has therefore adopted a step-by-step strategy. If abortion
is not wrong--irrespective of the circumstances--then the issue becomes a
tradeoff among unpleasant alternatives. And the question is not which of these
alternatives is more unpleasant, but whether the government should be making
the decision.

         
      
   
