
   
   
      
         
            Trumpet Voluntary

            "Business as usual no longer
is enough," explains a press
release for the big Volunteer Summit (officially, "The Presidents' Summit
for America's Future") from April 27 to April 29. Of course business as usual
has never been enough and never will be. The concept exists only for the
purpose of being declared insufficient.

            Orgies of
high-mindedness like the Volunteer Summit--four presidents, Colin Powell, the
networks, celebrities, corporations, foundations, all huffing and puffing in
Philadelphia--are a cheap target for knee-jerk iconoclasm. In our culture,
attitude is easy and sincerity is hard. Newsweek 's cover story is so
defensive about endorsing the summit and its goal--encouraging voluntarism to
help (who else?) children--that you want to reach out, pat the author, and say:
"There, there. It's OK to want to help children." By contrast, recycling
the conceit of Swift's Modest Proposal (to eat children) would be
embarrassment-free.

            So let us stipulate that everyone involved in the Volunteer
Summit means well. President Clinton isn't triangulating. Colin Powell isn't
running. The ex-presidents aren't looking for attention. The corporations
aren't looking for a PR fix. Let us stipulate, furthermore, that a little bit
of good can outweigh a lot of bullshit, and the summit probably nets out as a
Good Thing. But let us also consider the summit's philosophy. Distilled from
all the hot air, this philosophy has two components: 1) American society should
pressure its citizens to do more good works, for children and in general. That
social pressure should be a cooperative project of government, employers, and
the media. 2) Those good works should involve active personal
participation--not just giving money.

            Why, to
start, is it obviously better to give your time than your money? This notion
contradicts one of the basic principles of free-market economics: the division
and specialization of labor. Take an extreme example: a successful
businesswoman earning $250,000 a year. That's about $100 an hour. If her
company thinks she's worth what she's being paid, why should it encourage her
to devote several hours a week to, say, working in a soup kitchen, when others
would gladly--gratefully--do that work for far less? Why shouldn't she work a
few more hours doing what she does best, and let the company turn the proceeds
over to the soup kitchen? Or, more realistically, why shouldn't she write a
large check and not feel guilty about it? Would the soup kitchen really prefer
an hour of this woman's time to $100 cash?

            
Something like tutoring a high-school student
obviously requires more valuable skills than serving soup does. But is it
compassion or arrogance for our executive to assume that her tutoring is worth
$100 an hour? Because that is exactly what she is assuming when she gives her
time instead of writing a check. True, the emphasis of the moment seems to be
less on specific services than on a kind of semi-adoption--"mentoring" troubled
kids, acting as a role model, and so on--and this kind of service is hard to
buy. But she has to be pretty confident in her mentoring skills to believe that
they're worth more than what $100 an hour could buy for a kid (not gym shoes
but professional tutoring and counseling, health care, etc.).

            Of
course, this assumes that our executive actually does write that contribution
check, and that she writes it to the soup kitchen or tutoring program and not
to her alma mater for a new science lab. It also ignores the potential benefits
to her of personal involvement in good works. She might quite reasonably
prefer spending a few hours a week tutoring a high-school kid, to spending them
poring over spreadsheets in her office. She might enjoy the moral
frisson . To be less unkind, she might well be truly morally enriched by
the experience. All of which is fine. But it is not cost-free. If she works in
the soup kitchen rather than donating the cash value of her time, this means
people are going hungry so that she can be morally uplifted. A strange moral
calculus.

            Gen. Powell and the Three Tenors--I mean the Four
Presidents--insist that the volunteer ethic is not supposed to be a replacement
for the government's role. Clinton, in particular, loves this sort of thing as
a way of achieving a national goal without costing taxpayers any money. But
logically, something either is an obligation of society or it isn't. And if it
is being left to voluntarism, that obligation is not being fully met. (That's
why each volunteer "makes a difference," as we are constantly being told.)
Perhaps this or that function cannot or should not be provided by the
government. But to say it is a social obligation that ought to be satisfied
through voluntarism is to have it both ways. Society accepts the
responsibility--and takes the credit--rhetorically, while evading the
responsibility in practice.

            When society's leading
elements--government, business, media, and so on--all start singing in unison,
it's not a pleasing noise. The summit itself is an example of the summit's
philosophy about how things ought to work: identical and mutually reinforcing
messages from your senator, your employer, your TV anchorman, your minister,
your cereal box, your FedEx delivery man ... all urging you to sign up and save
the country. Basically this is the propaganda machinery of war being revved up
in peacetime, which is one reason the rhetoric is so overheated and so full of
martial metaphors. Festivities like the Volunteer Summit address a national
psychological need--for the rhetoric and rallying-round of wartime--as much as
they do the practical problem that is their alleged subject. And the premise
that you must give of your body, not just of your money, makes voluntarism an
ideal theme for such an exercise.

            It's both comic and eerie to
see how easily the free press of a free country can be co-opted into these
pseudowars. (For another recent example, see Jacob Weisberg's recent column
about ABC and the war on drugs.) Offer them an interview with Colin
Powell, and they lose all critical perspective. In fact, a full-page newspaper
ad detailing NBC's abject surrender to the hijacking of all its news shows
touts two different interviews with the former general. One of them is
breathlessly but illogically labeled an "exclusive."

            Business as usual.

         
      
   
