
   
   
      
         
            Quotas and Colin Powell

            "The issue, Mr. President,
is not affirmative action but racial preferences," declared Abigail Thernstrom
to President Clinton at his "Town Hall" discussion on race in Akron, Ohio, Dec.
3. Clinton returned the volley: "Do you favor abolishing the affirmative-action
program that produced Colin Powell? Yes or No?" Thernstrom, co-author of an
anti-affirmative-action tome (and participant in a current dialogue on race in

                  Slate
               ), responded that she does not "think that it is racial
preferences that made Colin Powell."

            In the
current Newsweek , Thernstrom amplifies: Yes, Colin Powell benefited from
affirmative action. But the military has a good kind of affirmative action,
which expands equal opportunity without making racial preferences. She offers
as an example Powell's promotion to brigadier general by President Carter's
Secretary of the Army Clifford Alexander. When originally sent an all-white
list of candidates for the position, Alexander rejected it, demanding a list
that included some blacks. From the revised list, Alexander chose Powell.

            As Jacob Weisberg noted
in last week's 
                  Slate
               , critics of reverse discrimination often
insist that they support affirmative action. And they often point to the
military as the one American institution that's got the distinction right. The
military, by all accounts, has indeed done a great job of integrating its
higher reaches and achieving racial harmony without harming its ability to
serve its mission. Affirmative action in the military is a success. But has the
military avoided the alleged poison of reverse discrimination? Not at all. The
real lesson of affirmative action in the military is that reverse
discrimination is not so poisonous. It gave us Colin Powell.

            
Thernstrom's anecdote about how Powell became brigadier general is ambiguous on
its face. The boss asked for a list that included blacks and then chose a black
off the list. Equal opportunity or reverse discrimination? A little more
information resolves the ambiguity. One reason Powell wasn't on the original
list is that he was, at 42, below the age normally considered eligible for
promotion to brigadier general. An exception was made in order to give
Secretary Alexander a black as he had requested. Powell, who has always been
forthright in his defense of affirmative action, says himself that he wouldn't
have appeared on the second list or been made the youngest general in the Army
if it had not been for preferential treatment.

            
Thernstrom and others imagine the military as a
place where (in her words) "people rise or fall according to their merits, not
their race." But this is a misconception. The services set stringent guidelines
for minority recruitment and promotion that sometimes surpass the supposed
excesses of racially obsessed university admissions officers. For instance the
Air Force, long the most resistant of the services to affirmative action,
recently changed its promotion policy to increase its number of black pilots.
Now, 90 percent of black applicants are accepted, compared with only 20 percent
of white applicants. Do you believe this is the result of pure "equal
opportunity," with nary a drop of "racial preference"?

            Both the
Navy and the Marines have set themselves five-year deadlines to make their
officer corps 12-percent African-American, 12-percent Latino, and 5-percent
Asian-American. In a Nation article supporting these quotas, an
ex-Marine recruiter boasts of his tactic for meeting these goals: "I routinely
turned down long lines of qualified white males to save room for blacks. I
denied whites interviews. I put their names on waiting lists. Every few months
I threw stacks of their résumés into the trash."

            But what about the Army--the service most celebrated for
its history of colorblindness? The Army implemented its affirmative-action
policy in the mid-'70s, responding to rising resentment of white superiors
among the black rank and file, which had resulted in race riots on bases. To
diversify its officer corps, the Army began targeting scholarship money
disproportionately to ROTC programs at historically black colleges and began
heavily recruiting blacks for West Point. At least 7 percent of each West Point
class must be black. That's an order.

            Army
guidelines explicitly require that the officer-promotion panels take
candidates' race into consideration. Promotions, the guidelines say, must
roughly match the racial composition of the pool of candidates. The regulations
naturally say that the panels should not lower standards simply to boost
numbers, but affirmative-action plans often say similar things, and critics
usually have little trouble seeing through it. Members of the panels are under
heavy career and political pressure to meet goals. According to the Pentagon,
more minorities and women have been appointed to promotion boards and
explicitly instructed to act as advocates for the minority and women candidates
who appear before them. To see that as expanding "opportunity" and not granting
"preference" is wildly naive.

            
Promotions are reviewed by a Pentagon agency
called the Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute to ensure that the
process was racism- and sexism-free. A recent article in the Weekly
Standard showed that the officers who serve in the institute on a rotating
basis are trained in lengthy seminars, rife with the goofiest sort of political
correctness. In one class on the "White Male Club," an instructor lectured: "Q:
Who are the white males that sustain power over us? A: Ted Turner, Alan
Greenspan, and Bill Gates." In other sessions, they were required to confess
their own biases and were shown videos from the Oprah Winfrey Racism
Series .

            So if the
mechanics of affirmative action in the military mimic those of affirmative
action in higher education, why hasn't the military taken the same flak? Unlike
the universities, the military has none of the notorious statistics about
dropouts and racial separatism and it has many success stories, such as Colin
Powell's. The military's officer corps, especially the Army's, has been
successfully transformed from a clubby elite, where promotions depended on
golfing partners, into a more integrated meritocracy.

            To be sure, the Army's program insists, though more vaguely
than people admit, that affirmative-action beneficiaries must meet the same
minimum qualifications as their white counterparts. But there is a critical
difference between being qualified, in the sense of meeting some minimum
standard, and being better qualified than all those who are rejected. Choosing
a black over a better-qualified white is still racial preference, even if they
both are "qualified" in the absolute sense.

            The main difference between
military and civilian affirmative action is that the military has an
overabundance of minority candidates. Consequently, the Army can eliminate its
weakest candidates--about one-half of blacks and one-third of whites--and still
have a large number of blacks--about one-third of the Army. Most universities
and federal agencies must compete aggressively over a much smaller pool.

            When affirmative action
works, its critics deny its essential nature. For affirmative action to do
anything, it must involve advancing people who are slightly less qualified.
Not, one hopes, un qualified, but less qualified, under otherwise
prevailing standards, than people who get passed over. It is necessarily a
sloppy process that injects another arbitrary standard into an already
arbitrary decision-making process. But the Army shows the process can work, and
can help.

         
      
   
