
   
   
      
         
            I Smell a Rat

            The National Institute on
Drug Abuse concludes every press release on its Web site with the boast that
NIDA supports more than 85 percent of the world's research on the health
aspects of drug abuse and addiction, and publicizes the results of that
research.

            That the
government's drug warriors are the customers for most health studies on drug
abuse--and that they aggressively peddle these studies--doesn't make the
studies automatically suspect. In fact, the science behind NIDA-funded studies
is reputable 99.99 percent of the time. But what is suspect is the spin
NIDA routinely applies to its sponsored studies, such as the successful
flackery that accompanied the marijuana study that appeared in the June 27
edition of Science .

            The authors of the Science paper--"Activation of
Corticotropin-Releasing Factor in the Limbic System During Cannabinoid
Withdrawal"--suggest in their conclusion that marijuana may be as addictive as
heroin and cocaine, and that pot's "subtle disruption" of brain chemistry may
leave users " 'primed' for further disruption by other drugs of abuse."

            Both the New York
Times and the Washington Post published pieces based on the
NIDA-sponsored study. The first sentence of the Times story is
indistinguishable from that of the NIDA press release.

            The Times : "People who
regularly smoke large amounts of marijuana may experience changes in their
brain chemistry that are identical to changes seen in the brains of people who
abuse heroin, cocaine, amphetamines, nicotine and alcohol, scientists have
found."

            NIDA: "Long-term use of
marijuana produces changes in the brain that are similar to those seen after
long term use of other major drugs of abuse such as cocaine, heroin, and
alcohol."

            Although
the Post 's lead was more original, it, too, followed the NIDA line.
"Marijuana may be a far more insidious drug than generally thought," the
Post reported, "and apparently alters the brain chemistry of pot smokers
in ways that may make them particularly vulnerable to 'hard' drugs such as
heroin or cocaine, two independent research groups have found."

            
How seriously should we take these findings? In
one study, researchers injected rats with cannabinoids--chemicals that act like
THC, the main active ingredient in marijuana--for weeks, habituating them to
the compounds. Because cannabinoids can linger in the system for some time, few
marijuana users experience anything approximating physical withdrawal if they
stop smoking. To mimic cold-turkey withdrawal, the researchers then injected
these habituated rats with a drug that "blocks" the effects of all
cannabinoids. Following the injection of the blocker, the researchers observed
an increase of the brain chemical CRF in the amygdala, a portion of the brain
involved with the emotions of fear and aggression. The presence of CRF in the
amygdala is associated with stress and anxiety. Withdrawal from heroin,
cocaine, and alcohol also increases CRF in the amygdala. The authors of the
paper lean on these findings to suggest that marijuana acts on the brain as
other drugs of abuse do, and that users who stop smoking marijuana might
indulge in heroin, cocaine, or alcohol to stave off the unpleasantness of
increased CRF in the amygdala.

            A (not
financed by NIDA) that also appeared in the June 27 Science , and which
was also mentioned in the Times and Post articles, further
investigates the effects of cannabinoids on rats. The study found an increase
of the neurotransmitter dopamine in rats' nucleus accumbens--often termed "the
pleasure center of the brain"--following several cannabinoid injections. Most
recreational drugs, like heroin, cocaine, alcohol, and nicotine, increase
dopamine in the accumbens. While recognizing that other researchers have tried
and failed to induce an increase of dopamine in the accumbens by injecting
cannabinoids, the authors use their results to suggest that marijuana is more
like heroin and cocaine than was previously thought.

            Before going any further, consider two points. First,
injected cannabinoids may not mirror the effects of smoked marijuana. There are
several other chemicals in marijuana that may modify the effects of THC alone,
and smoking a drug is a different experience from injecting it. (Imagine the
difference between smoking a cigarette and injecting pure nicotine directly
into a vein.)

            Second, rats are not humans.
This does not mean cannabinoid research on rodents is worthless. But there are
several pharmacological and social differences that reduce the relevance of rat
research to social policy. And since the pleasure derived from smoking
marijuana is a core issue, consider a third point: Rats don't like pot.

            I know
this firsthand from my on cannabinoids and rats. Initially, I felt guilty about
drugging rats and then killing them for the necessary dissection. "At least
they're getting stoned first," I rationalized. Then I realized that being
stoned means very different things to rats and humans. Marijuana makes rats
slothful, and they excrete all over themselves. Before the injection they're
quite friendly--these are lab animals, remember, not hardened street rats.
After the injection they--honestly--seem rather depressed.

            
Another fun fact about rats and pot is that
rats won't . When given the choice of receiving an injection of THC or a
placebo, rats consistently choose the placebo. And when given the choice
between a placebo and the cannabinoid blocker, rats choose the blocker. Tens of
millions of humans, as we know, willingly partake of marijuana, and these
differences between rat and human behavior should discourage us from using two
rat studies to assert that a) marijuana is addictive in the same way as harder
drugs are and b) marijuana primes humans for addiction to harder drugs.

            The
Science studies also ignore simple truths about brain chemistry.
Consider that sex causes dramatic increases in dopamine. Laughter, too,
increases dopamine. The syllogism that dopamine equals pleasure and pleasure
leads to addiction just doesn't apply directly to human behavior. How seriously
would anyone take a researcher who suggested that laughter could lead to drugs
and deadly addictions?

            And the CRF-producing process associated by the researchers
with marijuana withdrawal is not unique to drugs. Just as sex increases
dopamine in the accumbens, stubbing one's toe may ignite neurological anxiety.
Indeed, chronic toe-stubbing can lead to the abuse of analgesics like aspirin.
Again, the science reported in Science is reputable. It's just taken out
of context.

            Also lost in the mix is that
fact that other published and studies have found that cannabinoids don't
increase dopamine in the accumbens. Still other researchers have shown that
monkeys don't like the effects of cannabinoids any more than rats do. But
findings like these that don't support the government's drug agenda are rarely
catapulted into the news by the publicity machine.

            So let's set aside for a
moment the drug preferences and predilections and propensities of rats and turn
our attention back to humans. Of the estimated 70 million Americans who have
tried marijuana, only 1 percent have gone on to heavy cocaine use. Perhaps NIDA
and the pliant journalists should inject themselves with a big dose of common
sense.

         
      
   
