
   
   
      
         
            The Changelings

            When did the Washington
Post swap identities with the New York Times ? One day, it seemed,
the Post rollicked readers with its cheeky personality and the next
suffocated them with the sort of overcast official news that made the
Times famous. Meanwhile, the Times sloughed its Old Gray Lady
persona for the daredevilry that was the Post franchise.

            The
switch dawned on me one morning 10 years ago as I found myself flipping through
the Post because I had to, not because I wanted to--and reading the
Times for the joy of it, not because it was the newspaper of record. I
know this sounds like the beginning of an encomium for the Times at the
expense of the Post , but it's not. When the papers traded places, they
exchanged virtues as well as vices .

            In the traded virtue category: The Times takes a lot
of risks. It has turned its back on the five boroughs to become a national
newspaper, even purchasing the Boston Globe , while the Post has
burrowed deeper locally. Its columnists Maureen Dowd and Frank Rich dish the
sort of sauce Nicholas von Hoffman and the young Richard Cohen once served at
the Post . It continues to innovate, with new sections like Monday's
"Business Day" (a k a "The Information Industries") and Saturday's "Arts and
Ideas," while the Post hasn't contributed anything significant to the
template since the "Style" section in 1969. Its Sunday magazine is the best
general interest publication in the world. The Post 's isn't.

            Other
traded virtues: The Times prints in color, the Post doesn't
(yet). The Times sports an aggressive and handsome design. The recent
Post redesign aches like a bad face lift. Times Editorial Page
Editor Howell Raines writes barrelhouse editorials demanding action--such as
the resignation of Janet Reno--that stir substance and fanfaronade. The
Post editorial and op-ed pages are so evenhanded that if Scotty Reston
were resurrected, his soft gas would appear there, alongside that of Jim
Hoagland. And the Times seasons its reporting with opinion, while the
once liberal-and-proud-of-it Post prides itself on cool neutrality (some
would count this as a swapped vice and not a swapped virtue). On the news side,
Post Executive Editor Leonard Downie Jr. boasts he's so bias-free that
he doesn't vote.

            
On the vice side of the exchange, the
Times ... takes a lot of risks. It's now the primary exponent of what
Post ie Bob Woodward famously called the "holy shit" story--pieces so
astonishing that you scream spontaneous profanities when you read them. The
downside of holy shit stories is that they can turn out to be wholly bullshit,
as Woodward learned in 1981, when a reporter under his editorial watch, Janet
Cooke, got caught making up a story about an 8-year-old heroin addict.

            In its
pursuit of holy shit, the Times routinely spins out of control. In 1991,
it published the name of the woman who accused William Kennedy Smith of
rape--for no particular reason--and then apologized for it. That same year, the
paper digested Kitty Kelley's spuriously sourced Nancy Reagan biography on Page
1. In a transparent lunge for a Pulitzer Prize in early 1996, the Times
published a seven-part series alleging that the downsizing of the American
workforce was creating "millions of casualties." Actually, job creation was
booming. Later that year, the paper spread its legs for the theory that TWA
Flight 800 was downed by foul play, based on the discovery of "PETN" residues
in the wreckage. The Times reported: "Law enforcement officers said it
was impossible to know, for now, whether the explosion was caused by a bomb or
a missile because PETN is an explosive component commonly found in both.
Still, the discovery would seem to knock from contention the theory that
mechanical failure caused the airplane to explode on July 17, killing all 230
aboard ." (Emphasis added.) Eventually, the Times and the
investigators abandoned the PETN/bomb theory for the mechanical failure
theory.

            Just this spring, two reckless Times stories slid
off the road. Gina Kolata prematurely announced a cancer cure (while shopping a
book proposal on the subject) and Rick Bragg botched a simple story about
police corruption in small-town Alabama. Bragg, a writerish reporter who would
be at home in Style, earned in the June 9 Times . The jailed sheriff
spent 27 months behind bars, not 27 years, as Bragg originally reported. Bragg
also got the age of the crusading newspaper editor wrong, misstated the paper's
circulation, and mistakenly described the method by which the sheriff defrauded
the government (the sheriff cashed checks improperly made out to him; he did
not cash checks made out to the government).

            Horrible!
Just horrible! But consider the alternative. Who wants to read a porcelain
white newspaper that has flushed all its holy shit? Whose reporters drive
Volvos to work?

            
The Post isn't powered by Volvo--yet.
But in adopting Old New York Times values of cautiousness and fairness
and dullness, in striving to become the new Newspaper of Record, the
Post has lost its verve. Sometimes a loss of verve is not a bad thing.
Compare the Times and Post coverage of the China satellite story.
In the Times , Jeff Gerth implies that illegal campaign donations from
China + the extravagant campaign donations by Loral Space & Communications'
chief executive to Democratic coffers = Clinton's OK of U.S. satellite
launches. The Post 's sober coverage expands the theme to detail how the
president was as happy to fulfill the satellite dreams of the Republican
businessman from Hughes who lobbied heavily and donated sparingly as he was to
satisfy the Democratic businessman from Loral who gave hundreds of thousands of
dollars (see John Mintz's June 25 article, "How Hughes Got What It Wanted on China"). The
Post 's version is probably closer to the facts, but I'd be lying if I
didn't say that I've enjoyed the Times ' sensationalist coverage
more.

            Of course
the Post doesn't tiptoe all the time. Woodward's 1996 campaign finance
pieces struck a chord that still rings, and I predict a similar impact for
Barton Gellman's two-part series last week about how the United States and
China nearly went to war in 1996 (click here and here). At its best, the Post can still swarm a
breaking news story like Flytrap. But at its worst, it sits on hot news. In
1992, the paper delayed its exposé of masher Sen. Bob Packwood, R-Ore., until
after the election, thereby assuring his return to the Senate. In 1994, it
spiked Michael Isikoff's Paula Jones reporting, so he left for Newsweek ,
where he has led the Flytrap story.

            Timesmen don't pay much attention to the Post ,
except to periodically raid the paper--as if it were a minor league team--for
some of its better players. ( Post defectors include Celestine Bohlen,
Gwen Ifill, Julia Preston, Michael Specter, Patrick Tyler, Patti Cohen, and
David Richards--who defected back. Few careers, outside of E.J. Dionne's, have
been made by going the other way.) But it should pay closer attention. It
desperately needs something like the Style section, where it can run imprudent
stories that readers are dying to read but have yet to acquire the Heft and
Importance of a New York Times News Story. Then again, if the
Times were to embrace the virtue of a Style section (or is that a
vice?), would its news sections lose their current virtue of attitude?

            

               Post ies, on the other hand, obsess on the Times . Last month at
the Post 's annual "Pugwash" editorial retreat, outgoing Managing Editor
Robert Kaiser began his speech with the preposterous boast that the
Post , with a staff half the size of the Times ', "does more for
its readers, day in and day out." Kaiser obviously lusts for the Old
Times as he repeatedly calls for "authoritative journalism" and higher
journalistic "standards," and petitions Post ies to be more intellectual
and creative. "Authoritative, creative journalism that meets the highest
standards must have intellectual content," Kaiser says at speech's end as he
road-wrecks his themes. Somebody get this editor an editor!

            
The question of how the audacious paper turned
stodgy floats over the Post newsroom like a thought balloon. The easy
answer: Executive Editor Benjamin Bradlee departed in 1991 after 26 years at
the top. This theory singles out current Executive Editor Downie for abuse, but
complacency took root as early as 1981, when the Post 's cross-town
competitor, the Washington Star , folded, allowing the fat beast to
diddle all it wanted without paying a price. When Donald Graham took over as
publisher, he picked Downie as the editor who would help steer the paper away
from the Georgetown elites and toward the masses, away from national
competition and straight at the suburban dailies. You're reading the paper they
wanted to make.

            Don
Graham's biggest handicap is that he's the publisher who came after Katharine,
and he's fearful that he'll blow her legacy. Downie's is that he came after
Bradlee, and he's afraid he'll blow his. Who remembers the guys who canoed
after Lewis and Clark? No wonder they operate the paper as if the frontier has
closed behind them. In that context, Graham's conservatism makes business
sense. His paper claims the highest reader penetration in the nation and is
immensely profitable. Warren Buffett, a major stockholder in the company,
whispers into his ear that he's a business genius. Why disturb the money-making
machine?

            The last time the paper took an editorial risk was in 1986,
when it barred no expense in relaunching the Washington Post

               Magazine as a prestige Sunday magazine on the scale of the New York
Times 
               Magazine . But the Magazine never got to compete with
the Magazine : It was bushwhacked by a black talk-radio demagogue who
unfairly labeled the debut issue racist and targeted the paper with
demonstrations and a boycott. Its momentum shattered, the extravagantly funded
Washington Post Magazine limped along for a couple of years until the
Post abandoned its grand financial and editorial ambitions and
downscaled it.

            Various
sections of the Post have improved since then--it has invested heavily
in zoned suburban coverage, expanded its business page, improved the quality of
its travel section, extended the heft of its sports coverage, experimented with
an advertorial insert about consumer electronics, and added a monthly midbrow
science/history section ("Horizon")--but it's taken no publishing risks.

            
The boldest Post stroke in recent years
came this spring when Downie dethroned Kaiser as managing editor and appointed
Steve Coll, a 39-year-old Pulitzer Prize-winning whiz, who most recently served
as Sunday magazine editor/publisher. Coll's vision for the Post , also
laid out in a Pugwash speech, sounds like a description of the New New York
Times : "[T]he future of the Post depends mightily on our ability to
excel at enterprise journalism--on our ability to think more creatively, to
tear the skin off of our subjects more often, to write better, to go deeper, to
be more alive, to make more of a difference to readers." Good luck, Steve,
you'll need it.

            Perhaps the Times
derives its edge from its succession politics. Whereas Ben Bradlee served as
Post editor-for-life, the Times places an informal term limit on
its executive editor job, and this turnover has helped to reinvigorate the
paper: Times executive editors know they must make their mark in haste,
before their tenure is over. A.M. Rosenthal reinvented the paper during his
tenure from 1977 to 1986, stealing from Clay Felker's playbook to explode the
Times into a many sectioned national paper. His successor, Max Frankel,
brought vivid writing to the paper from 1986 to 1994, making sure that one
story made it to Page 1 every day just because it was fun to read. Joseph
Lelyveld, who took over from Frankel, has stayed their courses.

            Meanwhile, the 56-year-old
Downie is now seven years into the job. If he were a Times man, they'd be
farming him out to write a column right about now. Instead, he's ensconced like
the pope.

         
      
   
