
   
   
      
         
            William Bennett, Gays, and the Truth

            "This is tough news. It's
not pleasant to hear," said former Education Secretary William Bennett on ABC's
This Week Nov. 9. "But it's very important, and it's part of telling the
truth." The occasion for tough-but-needed truth telling: Bill Clinton's
first-ever presidential speech to an organized gay-rights group, the Human
Rights Campaign. Clinton had conferred respectability--wrongly--on the gay
quest for approval when in fact, said Bennett, he "should tell the truth on
this one": Homosexuality "takes 30 years off your life." The average life
expectancy for gay men, Bennett declared, was just 43.

            Many a mother's heart around
the country must have sunk at that moment amid premonitions that she would
outlive her son. A well-known public figure would think twice before delivering
tidings that grim, right? And Bennett's statistic was no slip. Only days later,
in the Nov. 24 Weekly Standard , he repeated the assertion phrased for
maximum emphasis:

            "The best
available research suggests that the average life span of male homosexuals is
around 43 years of age. Forty-three ." (Italics his.)

            Yes, it's a sensational, arresting number, which may soon
pass into general circulation. Already, for example, the National

               Review has repeated it unskeptically in an editorial. Where did the
figure come from, and how plausible is it?

            Bennett
got the number from Paul Cameron, a researcher well known to followers of gay
controversies. Cameron, a former assistant professor at the University of
Nebraska who has consulted for such gay-rights opponents as former Rep. William
Dannemeyer, R-Calif., heads a group called the Family Research Institute.
Cameron resigned under fire from the American Psychological Association and was
later formally terminated from membership following complaints about his
research methods. He has had run-ins with other professional groups, including
the Nebraska Psychological Association and the American Sociological
Association. According to Mark Pietrzyk's exposé in the Oct. 3, 1994, New
Republic , the state of Colorado initially hired Cameron as an expert
witness to defend its statute restricting gay-rights ordinances, then elected
not to use his testimony after it got a closer look. His life-span figures have
circulated for years in religious-right circles, but Bennett's comments appear
to represent their first real breakout into wider public discussion.

            
Cameron's method had the virtue of simplicity,
at least. He and two co-authors read through back numbers of various urban gay
community papers, mostly of the giveaway sort that are laden with bar ads and
personals. They counted up obituaries and news stories about deaths, noted the
ages of the deceased, computed the average, and published the resulting numbers
as estimates of gay life expectancy.

            What do vital-statistics
buffs think of this technique? Nick Eberstadt at the American Enterprise
Institute sums up the reactions of several of his fellow demographers: "The
method as you describe it is just ridiculous." But you don't have to be a
trained statistician to spot the fallacy at its heart, which is, to quote
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention statistician John Karon, that
"you're only getting the ages of those who die." Gay men of the same generation
destined to live to old age, even if more numerous, won't turn up in the
sample.

            Other
critics rattle off further objections. The deaths reported in these papers,
mostly AIDS deaths, will tend to represent the community defined by such papers
or directly known to their editors. It will include relatively more subjects
who live in town and are overtly gay and relatively few who blend into the
suburbs and seldom set foot in bars. It will overrepresent those whose passing
strikes others as newsworthy and underrepresent those who end their days in
retired obscurity in some sunny clime.

            Bennett is a busy man, but even he has access to the back
of an envelope. A moment's thought might have suggested a few simple test
calculations. Suppose he assumes--wildly pessimistically, given current
incidence data--that half the gay male population is destined to catch the AIDS
virus and die of it. The actual average age of AIDS patients at death has been
about 40. (Presumably protease inhibitors will extend average longevity, but
that will only increase Bennett's difficulty.) For the number 43 to be the true
average death age for the entire population of gay males, HIV-negative gay men
would, on average, have to keel into their graves at 46. Looked at another way,
if even half the gay male population stays HIV-negative and lives to an average
age of 75, an average overall life span of 43 implies that gay males with AIDS
die at an implausibly early average age (11, actually).

            Against
this, Cameron and his supporters argue that, according to their survey of
obits, even if they don't have AIDS, homosexual males tend to die by
their mid-40s (and lesbians by their late 40s). Some downright peculiar results
followed from this inference. One is that--contrary to the opinion of virtually
everyone else in the world--AIDS in fact hasn't reduced gay males' life
expectancy by that much--a few years, at most. Moreover, the obits also
recorded lots of violent and accidental deaths. From this Cameron and company
concluded not that newsworthy deaths tend to get into newspapers, but that gays
must experience shockingly high rates of violent death. With a perfectly
straight face they report, for example, that lesbians are at least 300 times
more likely to die in car crashes than females of similar ages in general.

            
Unfortunately there really is no satisfactory
measure of actual life expectancy among gay men. However, Harry Rosenberg, the
mortality-statistics chief at the National Center for Health Statistics, says
he's unaware of evidence that HIV-negative gays have a lower life expectancy
than other males. Rosenberg also points to one reason to think the HIV-negative
gay male may actually live longer on average than the straight male: Gays may
have higher incomes and more education on average than straights--two factors
powerfully correlated with longer life spans. (Bennett himself appears to share
this view, terming gays, "as a group, wealthy and well educated.")

            Challenged by the Human
Rights Campaign's Elizabeth Birch in the letters column of the Dec. 8
Standard , Bennett, remarkably, dug in to defend the Cameron numbers,
which he said coincided with the views of other authorities such as
psychiatrist . Satinover's 1996 book, Homosexuality and the Politics of
Truth , does discuss gay life spans, but cites as its authority ...
Cameron's study. In other words, Bennett is not adducing a second authority for
his assertions but merely falling back on the first via its recycling by
another writer.

            Throughout the controversy,
Bennett has made much of the cause of "truth" with a capital T. His
Standard article, portentously titled "Clinton, Gays, and the Truth,"
accused the Clintonites of scanting that important commodity. Bennett is right
to the extent that there's no excuse for telling falsehoods in the course of
raising otherwise legitimate issues. He should mind his own lesson.

         
      
   
