
   
   
      
         
            Theatrical Indecision

            With the opening of another
Broadway season imminent, you might be wondering about the health of American
theater. Is Broadway dying or thriving? Does Disney's new 42 nd
Street playhouse portend good things or bad things for the Great White Way?
Will extravagant productions funded by the megalomaniac Canadian mogul Garth
Drabinsky revitalize or destroy the American musical? Whither serious drama?
According to the New York Times , the answer to these questions is
yes.

            In the
Times ' pages, Broadway has died a thousand deaths and prospered in a
thousand booms. No season has ever been plain average. Consider this classic
example: a 1981 story by Carol Lawson headlined "Theater Enjoys Biggest Boom in
Years." The same author assesses the 1982 season: "Broadway Is in its Worst
Slump in a Decade."

            Plotting a trajectory of Times headlines from the
last five years, you begin to suspect that Broadway is mechanically acting out
some dialectical process that dooms it to fall on its face every other year.
1992: "On Broadway, the Lights Get Brighter." 1993: "Broadway Blues." 1994: "On
Broadway, the Numbers Are on the Rise." 1995: "Entertainment Is Killing
Broadway." 1996: "A Hit Season for Broadway: Seems Like Old Times With Influx
of Theatergoers." 1997: "Despite the Broadway Boom, Serious Plays Face Serious
Peril."

            
Compounding the confusion caused by these historical fluctuations are
contradictory assessments of Broadway's condition at any given moment. Take
Margo Jefferson's "Good Reasons to Have Faith in the Theater" (May 5, 1996) and
Robert Brustein's "The End of Broadway's Run" (April 8, 1996). Or Glenn
Collins' "Broadway Pays Big Dividends" (Feb. 17, 1994) and Bruce Weber's "Make
Money on Broadway? Break a Leg" (June 3, 1993).

            
The Times is torn constantly between
touting and panicking. It takes very little to set off alarms. In 1993, when
the Tony-winning Jelly's Last Jam announced that it had failed to recoup
investors' money, the paper editorialized, "The Great White Way is ailing." In
1995, the cause for concern was the opening of Edward Albee and Terrence
McNally plays off-Broadway: "Some of the most beautiful theaters in the world
are on the brink of permanent obsolescence."

            It is not
just a matter of theatrical exaggeration. Reporters and critics have a
deep-seated anxiety about the future of this institution they write about. A
LEXIS-NEXIS search shows that the metaphor of Broadway as an "endangered
species" has been reprised eight times since 1989 in the headline or lead
paragraph of an arts-section piece. Last year a Times 
               Magazine
piece titled "Broadway Is Dead; Long Live Broadway" excerpted quotes from the
paper's greatest drama critics--such as Walter Kerr and Frank Rich. Apparently,
for most of this century, theater's biggest boosters have been convinced that
they were celebrating an antiquated institution long displaced by movies and
television. In 1953, Brooks Atkinson wrote: "As usual, the theater is dying.
... From an economic point of view, the legitimate theater is like its
buildings: it is obsolete." This anxiety colors these critics' assessment of
Broadway's prospects. Any evidence of Broadway's prosperity is instantly and
optimistically greeted as a potential watershed, an end to the perpetual
crisis. All negative data merely exacerbate the fatalism.

            To be fair, it is possible to argue with logical
consistency that Broadway is simultaneously booming and busting. For instance,
the line adopted in several recent Times pieces is that while
extravagant musicals can score funding and bring in huge crowds of tourists,
serious plays using experimental techniques and tackling risqué subjects
languish. In other words, Broadway is thriving as a business but dying as an
art form. But wait. Maybe it's thriving as an art form but dying as a business.
When Rich celebrated the 1992 season, he qualified his enthusiasm for the shows
by adding, "As a business Broadway remains, more unhealthily and nervously than
ever, the oldest floating crap game in New York."

            Whatever.

         
      
   
