
   
   
      
         
            The Myth of the 500-Foot Home Run

            On June 24, fans at
Seattle's Kingdome witnessed one of the most dramatic pitcher-hitter
confrontations since Walter Johnson faced Babe Ruth. On the mound, the
Mariner's Big Unit, 6'-10" Randy Johnson, the tallest man ever to play in the
majors, and the most proficient strikeout pitcher in history. At the plate,
Oakland's Mark McGwire, the best and strongest home-run hitter since Ruth.

            Although
Johnson whiffed McGwire twice on the way to a record-breaking total of 19
strikeouts, McGwire hit what was estimated as the longest home run in at least
a decade. He got all of a 97-mph fastball, and launched it at 105 mph in the
general direction of Canada.

            On the radio, Mariner announcer Dave Niehaus marveled, "A
high fly ball, belted, and I mean belted , deep to left field, into the
upper deck! My, oh my, what a shot by Mark McGwire! That is probably the
longest home run ever hit here. ... It will be interesting to see how far that
ball will be guesstimated. ... We have often wondered if McGwire got ahold of a
Randy Johnson fastball how far he could hit it, and I think we just saw
it."

            Shortly
after, Niehaus gave the estimated distance: "538 feet--unbelievable, absolutely
unbelievable. The longest home run ever hit here in Seattle ... the longest
home run I think I have ever seen hit." Not only that, it seems to be the
longest ball hit since 1988, when the distance of major-league home runs was
first estimated on a wide scale. Sports pages and broadcasters across the
country are still heralding McGwire's homer as one of the great feats in
slugging history.

            
But there's a catch: The 538-feet figure,
announced by the Mariners about 40 seconds after the ball landed, was an
overstatement worthy of P.T. Barnum. According to three physicists who have
worked independently and have written extensively on the science of baseball,
the human limit for hitting a baseball at sea level, under normal temperatures
and with no wind, is somewhere between 450 feet and 470 feet.

            Curious
that anyone could hit a ball 538 feet in an indoor park near sea level, I
called the Mariners to see how they devised such a spectacular number. The team
repeatedly refused to explain how they arrived at the figure or to allow me to
speak to whoever made the estimate. Mariners PR Director Dave Aust stresses
that the figure is "a guesstimate." "We don't really believe in the process,"
Aust says, distancing the team from the McGwire number.

            That "process" has evolved over time. In 1988, IBM
established the "Tale of the Tape" program, devising a system by which home-run
distances could be estimated. Sponsorship of the Major League Baseball-licensed
program was assumed by telecom giant MCI in 1992 and redubbed the "MCI Home Run
Program." The program's Web site lists the 10 longest home runs of the year and
provides a searchable database of the home runs of the previous two years.

            "We do not
measure the home runs," says MCI spokesman Cal Jackson. The distances are
estimated by the individual clubs and then provided to MCI. "We act as a
warehouse for the numbers that Major League Baseball sends us."

            
Unsatisfied with the 538-feet number, I did my
own figuring. I consulted the 1976 Kingdome blueprints, a more recent
laser-survey diagram of the stadium, and the Seattle Times game story,
and visited the park twice. Here are the facts: McGwire's homer landed in the
eighth row of the left side of section 240 in the second deck--439 feet
(measured horizontally) from home plate and 59 feet above the playing
field.

            How much
further could the ball have gone? Based on a review of the trajectory charts in
The Physics of Baseball and Keep Your Eye on the Ball: The Science
and Folklore of Baseball , conversations with University of Puget Sound
physicist Andrew Rex, and correspondence with aerospace engineer and baseball
researcher Roger Hawks, I determined that the McGwire home run would have
traveled about 474 feet. A mighty home run, yes, but still 64 feet short of the
length claimed.

            Rex and Hawks agree that any home run hit that far must
approximate the "maximum-distance trajectory"--that is it can only be a high
fly or a normal fly, not a line drive. McGwire's homer was a high fly, as
Niehaus attested, and as was confirmed by his broadcast partner Rick Rizzs, who
marveled at the ball's hang time. According to the Major League Baseball
system, a high fly will descend at an angle whose cotangent is 0.6. In
trigonometry-for-dummies terms, what that means is that for every foot the ball
would have continued to drop vertically, it would have traveled another 0.6
feet horizontally. Here's the math: 439 feet + (59 feet x 0.6) = 474 feet.

            McGwire's
"538-footer" isn't the only questionable long ball of the season. The MCI Web
site claims six 500-footers in 1997, five by McGwire and one by Colorado
Rockies star Andres Galarraga, hit in Miami. Galarraga's home run, originally
announced as 573 feet, then revised at the park to 529 feet, is listed at 529
feet by MCI. By my calculations, it probably went about 479 feet. And yet
another reason to doubt the 1997 numbers: Apparently, the IBM/MCI program
recorded no 500-footers from 1988 to 1996.

            
Don't get me wrong--all the homers listed on
the MCI top-ten list were remarkable shots. And I'm not arguing that
500-footers are impossible. A few have been hit, but all were aided by
altitude, the elements, or both. The best-known of these, Mickey Mantle's
mythical 565-foot blast on a windy day at Washington's Griffith Stadium,
probably traveled about 506 feet, according to The Physics of Baseball
author Robert K. Adair.

            The MCI Web site spells out
the intended method of measuring these home runs. "Distances are measured using
a grid system matched to each ballpark's unique parameters and configuration.
Each home run is estimated based on how far it would have traveled from home
plate on a horizontal line had it not been obstructed by something (seats,
fence, roof, foul pole, other stadium parts, etc.)."

            If every team worked
according to the MCI plan, each stadium would be accurately diagramed with a
fine-grained grid related to its seating sections, level by level. This would
tell the estimator how far the ball was from home plate when it landed in the
seats, bullpen, or other stadium area, and how high it was above field level
when it landed. (In today's stadiums, very few home runs touch the ground
before hitting something higher first.)

            Working
with the distance and height, the estimator would assess the ball's
trajectory--was it a liner? a normal fly? a high fly?--and use a formula to
determine the ultimate distance the ball would have traveled. Click for the
formula.

            In theory this is not a bad system, but in practice it's
not always fully observed. Some teams work from arcs rather than grids, making
the estimators' jobs more difficult. Some teams measure only to the point of
impact, rather than to the likely field-level landing point. The Rockies don't
have height data, and must estimate that dimension. The Red Sox can't see where
balls, hit beyond "The Monster" into the street, land. If McGwire had hit his
home run in Baltimore, for example, it would have been measured at about 448
feet under the Orioles' point-of-impact house rules. Such departures make the
various major-league home-run distances inconsistent, and usually make them
less accurate as well.

            Major
League spokesman Patrick Courtney acknowledges that there have been questions
about the MCI program, and says that the measurement issue will be discussed at
league PR meetings next month "so everyone will be on the same page for next
year."

            
Let's hope so. Baseball, a game of inches and
meticulous record-keeping, deserves accurate and consistent data, and these
awful numbers have already tainted one set of record books. Click for the
story. The pity is that the home-run-measurement program, as conceived by IBM
in 1988, was never uniformly implemented. Now is the time for scientists to
review and refine the system and for Major League Baseball to ensure compliance
and train the estimators.

            After a period of
adjustment, during which many long home runs will seem puny, we'll slowly
reacclimate ourselves to reality. Weaned off the inflated estimates, numbers
that add 60 feet to big home runs, we'll finally appreciate the majesty of a
440-footer.

         
      
   
