
   
   
      
         
            Money Talks

            The NATO raid in Bosnia leads at the New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times . New revelations about Democrat fundraising lead at the
Washington Post . The upholding by a federal court of
"Megan's Law" leads at USA Today .

            The Bosnia action, an assault on the Banja Luka police HQ and several other
police facilities, all thought to be centers of support for war criminal
suspect Radovan Karadzic against Bosnian Serb President Biljana Plavsic, met
with no resistance and resulted in the confiscation of truckloads of weapons
from Karadzic supporters. But according to the NYT , it nonetheless
represents a "far more muscular, interventionist role" for NATO, which, in the
words of the LAT , amounts to "clearly taking sides in an explosive
crisis."

            The WP 's lead reveals that last January, as part of an attempt to woo
a potential head of the Democratic National Committee, President Clinton had
agreed to decree that the DNC would no longer accept "soft money." But says the
Post , when the candidate declined, citing family obligations, the idea
went away.

            The Post 's column one story, written by Bob Woodward and Ann Devroy,
adds a few more warts to the presidential portrait with its revelation that
last August, Clinton had a 45-minute one-on-one meeting with the CEO of Federal
Express, Frederick Smith, to discuss a Japanese trade barrier that was costing
Smith's company millions. And, the paper reports, less than three weeks after
that tete-a-tete, Federal Express gave $100,000 to the DNC, part of a total of
$275,000 in soft money that the company ponied up to the Democrats during the
last election cycle. This all happened after Clinton was advised in a DNC memo
to call Smith personally to solicit a contribution. One memo, reports the
Post , advised the president to "ask him for $150,000."

            Smith tells the WP that the money contributed "had nothing to do with
the meeting he had with Clinton." And yet just a few sentences later, the
article states, "Smith said that it would be unwise for a company with $13
billion in annual revenue not to make the requested contributions. 'Sure,
you're darn right, you better be responsive,' Smith said. 'Whether you use the
language of the street and call it a shakedown or whether you just call it our
system, however you put it, it's a messy system.'"

            A common press syndrome is immense interest in the politics of a bill, but
almost no interest in the workings of the law it becomes. So it's refreshing to
see articles like the Wall Street Journal lead, which looks at what happened when
one company tried to hire welfare recipients to gain tax credits under a bill
passed last year as part of welfare reform. Great in theory, says the
Journal , but in practice, it's very hard for a business to scare up
meaningful numbers of eligible employees and even harder to retain them for the
400 hours the law requires for the awarding of the credit.

            I must not be cosmonaut material, because I'm drifting in deep space after
just narrowly surviving a collision, a total power failure and a heart problem,
I'm not thinking, okay, let's at least do the milk commercial. But according to
the Post , that's exactly what former Mir commander Vasily Tsibliev did.
A spokeswoman for the Israeli long-life milk product that Tsibliev drank on
camera inside the rapidly disintegrating craft says a $450,000 fee was paid to
the Russian space agency. No word on whether Tsibliev saw any of it.

         
      
   
