
   
   
      
         
            Indictment du Jour

            The Mike Espy indictment leads at USA Today ,
the Washington Post , and the New York Times .
At the Los
Angeles Times , it's a California Supreme Court decision holding that
employees who are discriminated against on the basis of age have the same legal
rights as victims of race and gender bias. (Given the nation's rising median
age and California's trend-setting status, this means stand by for lots of
ageism suits.)

            The 39-count indictment handed down against Espy charged that the former
Clinton Secretary of Agriculture solicited and received more than $35,000 in
gifts, trips, game tickets and other gratuities from seven companies doing
business with Agriculture. USAT points out that regardless of the
outcome, this is political death for a man once thought to be destined to be
Mississippi's first black governor.

            Everybody reports that the charges come after a three-year, $9 million
investigation by a special prosecutor. But the WP makes the point that
this prosecutor has also collected $4.5 million in criminal fines from other
subjects of his investigation. The NYT story covers much the same ground
as the others, but breaks out with its observation that the indictments mean
that Espy is "the highest-ranking member of the Clinton administration to be
charged with a crime." Also, Espy can't have enjoyed reading in the
Times that Don Tyson, the former CEO of one of the companies Espy is
accused of receiving an illegal gift from, Tyson Foods, "has been talking to
investigators in exchange for immunity.and he may be called to testify at
Espy's trial."

            The LAT reports on its front page that federal authorities in New
York have charged three people and the news bulletin service they work for, an
outfit called Breaking News Network, with mail fraud, conspiracy and electronic
privacy violations in connection with the interception of pagers' display
messages. Included among the victims of the news gatherers were police who, in
recent years have taken to using the pagers to protect some of their more
sensitive communications from media scanners.

            What do Miramax co-founder Harvey Weinstein, investment banker Steven
Rattner, publishing heir Dirk Ziff, Wall Street hedge fund manager Orrin
Kramer, Boston developer Richard Friedman, Xerox chairman Paul Allaire, GE CEO
Jack Welch, Universal Studios chairman Frank Biondi, Dreamworks partner David
Geffen, and television exec Barry Diller have in common? According to the
Wall Street Journal , they have all had play-time
with President Clinton on Martha's Vineyard since the start of his vacation
there. CEOs, says the Journal , in contrast to the wonks and pols who
were the original FOBS, are the new FOBs.

            On the NYT op-ed page, Pulitzer Prize-winning author Richard Rhodes
argues that the solution to last week's huge tainted meat scare and other
similar problems with the food supply has been sitting on the shelf ready to go
for 40 years. It is, he says, food irradiation. Rhodes says continuing to
eschew the technique's use because it involves radioactivity is the sort of
fanatic thinking that plagued the introduction of vaccination, water
chlorination, pasteurization and fluoridation.

            The WP reports that White House aide Sidney Blumenthal and his wife
filed suit yesterday against Matt Drudge and AOL, asking $10 million in
compensatory damages and $20 million in punitive damages. Bringing AOL into it
just adds more juice to the world's first-ever Internet libel case.

         
      
   
