
   
   
      
         
            Mourning in America

            The lead story all around--and then some--is Diana's funeral. Earlier in the
week it was often claimed that Di's death was getting so much ink because of
her charitable works. But this was refuted by today's coverage, in which Di
claimed whole front pages, but Mother Teresa was relegated to the inside.

            The papers generally agree on what was most noteworthy about the day's
events in London: that the outpouring of English public emotion hadn't been
matched since the end of World War II, that, with its engaged participation in
the ceremonies, the royal family seemed to bounce back into public favor, and
that Diana's brother's remarks were probably among the most frank ever made
inside Westminster Abbey. The New York Times
describes his eulogy, with its description of Diana as "the most hunted woman
on earth," as "passionate," and the Washington Post says it was "barbed and biting." The
Los
Angeles Times refers to the man as "Diana's angry brother."

            Some of the reporting on the service is quite a nice throwback to the days
when people everywhere depended on newspapers to know what such events were
like. However, this one was seen by perhaps half the people on the planet, so
it's hard to justify the lengthy descriptive articles that are so prominent
today.

            And it's definitely hard for a paper to justify two of these
wordfests. But that's what the NYT gives us. Not only do we get Warren
Hoge's "Diana Buried as a Nation Mourns," but also R.W. Apple's "Through
London's Streets, the Sounds of Silence Toll." The overkill is particularly
obvious when both pieces etch the same details. Hoge: "When [Diana's brother,
Earl Spencer] ended his talk minutes later...there was spontaneous applause in
the church and on the expansive meadow of Hyde Park jammed with thousands of
people who were watching the service on giant television screens." Apple:
"Spencer's castigation of the news media as collaborators in his sister's
death, relayed by loudspeaker to those outside the Abbey, brought applause."
Hoge: A wreath on the casket had a "white card stuck in it with the word
'Mummy' written on it." Apple: "People threw blossoms at the princess' casket
as it rolled by on a gun carriage, draped in a royal standard with sprays of
white roses, tulips and lillies atop it, one of them bearing the single word,
'Mummy.'"

            The WP points out that guests at the funeral included, besides such
obvious attendees as former British Prime Ministers Margaret Thatcher and John
Major, the likes of Tom Hanks, Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, and Steven Spielberg.
But the Post doesn't bother to explain whether these glitterati were
there because they were friends of Diana's or were simply exercising the modern
celebrity's nearly universally-recognized right to get any hard ticket.

            An early-bird edition of the LAT gives a revealing insight into the
priorities of Dodi Al-Fayed's family. In reporting that the Ritz Hotel released
security video tape that show Diana and her party leaving the hotel in an
apparently orderly manner, the paper quotes an Al-Fayed spokesman's explanation
for doing so: "The Ritz Hotel has been accused of what amounts to negligence or
worse."

            Today's contest: What could the NYT 's Alessandra Stanley possibly
mean in this exit line to her "Week in Review" appreciation of Diana? "At 36,
she died a horrible death, and one that seemed portentously linked to her
extraordinary life."

         
      
   
