
   
   
      
         
            The Puppy Alibi

            The tentative settlement of the UPS strike leads at USA Today and
the New York Times ,
and tops the Wall Street Journal front-page news digest. (The strike
development does not make the Washington Post first-edition front, nor oddly, that of the
paper with the most time to handle the late-breaking story, the Los Angeles
Times .) The WP leads with the widening probe into the NYC police
brutality case, which, the paper reports, produced the arrests of two more cops
yesterday and which will now include a federal civil rights investigation. The
decision by a New Orleans civil jury in the largest breast implant class action
suit to date that Dow Chemical Co. knew that silicone was potentially harmful
to humans and conspired to withhold relevant safety data from women gets a lot
of front-page play today. (An award of actual damages will require the further
showing that actual harm resulted.) But it leads the home paper of the Silicone
Valley, the LAT .

            In a sort of law of conservation of implants, the LAT front also
brings word that the FDA has just approved a new kind of surgical implant for
hands that is said to allow quadriplegics to grasp and release objects.
USAT has this story on its front page too.

            
               USAT reports the UPS deal is for a five-year contract that increases
the base wage for part-timers and expands the number of full-time slots yet
maintains the current multi-employer pension plan structure, although,
according to the NYT , with some changes that officials wouldn't
describe. The WSJ reports that the Teamsters have also just reached a
contract with the unionized workers at its Washington headquarters. The
workers, who have been handling UPS strike logistics, had been in difficult
negotiations with the Teamsters over wages. The paper says relations remain
tense at union headquarters despite the accord.

            Both the WP and the NYT report that as a result of the NYC
brutality scandal, all 38,000 of the city's cops will be required over the next
six months to spend three or four hours meeting with community critics to
discuss police behavior. The NYT reports that the family of the beaten
man announced plans to file a $55 million lawsuit against the city. The
Times coverage seems particularly well wired inside the
investigation--it reveals that one of the men arrested yesterday, Thomas Wiese,
denied involvement and moreover originally seemed to cooperate in implicating
other cops. The paper states that Wiese claimed to be playing with an abandoned
puppy elsewhere in the station house when the attack allegedly took place.

            The NYT sports section reports that some teams have complained to the
National League that the New York Mets are using video cameras positioned at
various points around Shea Stadium to steal their signs. The story states
something that is probably not known by many a serious baseball fan--namely,
that baseball rules do not address sign-stealing, and that no one has ever been
ejected from a game or suspended for engaging in the practice.

         
      
   
