
   
   
      
         
            Gore: Here and Everywhere

            In the papers, as in life, new deaths crowd in on the old. So we have
USA
Today dedicating its entire front to Diana, with a cover story about
the global village funeral to come, and anchored by a huge head shot of the
princess, but we have the Washington Post , New York Times ,
and Los
Angeles Times leading with the news of yet another suicide bombing in
Jerusalem.

            This time it was three scumbags, a record number apparently, killing
themselves and others in a popular public place with bombs spewing nuts and
bolts. The Hamas wing that claimed the last bombing, of a crowded Jerusalem
market in July, claimed this one too. The group issued a deadline for freeing
all Arab prisoners held by Israel--Sept. 14. The coverage is similar from paper
to paper, although the NYT more clearly communicates the pent-up anger
felt by Israeli officials. And the Post goes in for the most grit,
repeating AP dispatches about one terrorist's spine flying through a shop
window and a severed head laying in the street.

            
               What is the sound of one hand shredding? The LAT , the
WP , and the NYT each have front-pagers about the testimony at
yesterday's fund-raising hearings by three Buddhist nuns involved in an
Election '96 Gore fund-raiser held at their California temple. The nuns had
identical bright robes, glasses, and shaved heads, and were each less than five
feet tall, so the papers go more for laughs than they otherwise might. But it's
a natural tendency: after all, the hearing room featured nearly life-sized
blowup photos from the event, of the nuns and of Gore making a Buddhist
gesture. Also, according to the NYT , the nun who identified herself as
the temple treasurer said that when she oversaw the collection from nuns of
checks made out to the "DNC" totaling $55,000, she didn't know what "DNC" stood
for.

            The WP , which has been spearheading another story also posing trouble
for Gore, namely, that of his White House rainmaking phone calls, sees the
story a bit more gravely than the others. Its headline reads, "Nuns Tell of
Panic about Fund-Raiser," and it puts their admissions yesterday of covering up
the evening's financial tracks by altering and destroying documents right into
the sub-headline. And it's the Post that calls the day's hearings
"perhaps the most striking testimony" yet presented. The Wall Street Journal "Washington Wire" today carries a
completely different unseemly tale about the VP and fund solicitations. The
heat on Gore is definitely turning up.

            The Diana media oil slick continues to spread. The NYT and LAT
each run front-page meta pieces about the significance of the royals' behavior
in the wake of her death. And the LAT also throws in a meta-meta
front-pager on how the English people read so much into the behavior of the
royals. (And American journalists don't?) And the Post reports that by
early next week, Pocket Books will have 850,000 copies of various Diana books
in stores, even one by her astrologer (if he didn't tell her not to get in the
car, what good is he?). The WP also reveals that gossip bio queen Kitty
Kelley's long-in-the-works book on the royals is done but couldn't be rushed
out in time for the current Dianamania.

            Remember that first joint Mexico-U.S. study of illegal immigration that the
NYT wrote about last weekend? The Times , you'll recall, saw the
study as proof that conservatives were overstating the problem of illegal
immigration. Well, the WP does its piece on the study today--under the
headline "Illegal Immigration Hurts U.S. and Mexico, Study Finds."

            Rarely able to resist a cheap shot at the president, the WSJ says he
was disappointed that Diana wasn't granted a state funeral, because if she had,
he could have made the trip.

         
      
   
