
   
   
      
         
            Scams and Smokes

            Corruption and cigarettes dominate today. There's even corruption involving
cigarettes. USA Today leads with the call by Teamsters union
presidential candidate James P. Hoffa for a special prosecutor to look into
allegations that union president Ron Carey and the Democratic party may have
been illegally funding each other in 1996. The Washington Post leads with rampant abuses of the D.C.
employment disability system. The Wall Street Journal front-page "World Wide" news box refers
to an AP story about the head of the World Health Organization saying that
cigarette makers now under increasing restrictions in the U.S. should not be
allowed to expand into other countries. The New York Times
goes with a lengthy expose charging that the world's largest tobacco companies
are selling billions of dollars' worth of cigarettes each year to traders and
dealers who funnel them into the black market. The Los Angeles
Times lead is that according to Census Bureau projections, a steady
rise in births and a continuing stream of immigrants will add nearly 18 million
people to California's population by 2025.

            Although the tobacco companies deny doing anything to abet the smuggling of
their product, the Times piece surveys recent criminal cases in Spain,
Italy, and China that show otherwise. The reason this is an important story is
directly connected to the WHO director's remarks. If governments can't regulate
the illegal inflow of cigarettes into their countries, they can't generate
effective health programs for discouraging smoking, especially, notes the
NYT , because smuggled smokes tend to be cheaper, which means teenagers
can buy more of them.

            The NYT front page has a story sure to further turn up the
temperature about the ease with which potential donors of dubious backgrounds
have gained access to this president. It seems that the organizers of a Ponzi
scheme based on jewelry sales were, through a third-party political donation to
the DNC, able to wangle a photo op with President Clinton, and then used the
resulting photo in their promotional literature to snare more investors.

            The WP is using the occasion of the recent takeover of many
departments of the Washington, D.C. government by a new governing board as an
opportunity to look carefully at some of the city messes that need cleaning up.
Today's lead details how since 1990, the District has spent more than $170
million on salaries and long-term medical expenses on city workers who file
disability claims. The article reveals that the government allows people to
file false claims with virtual impunity, because of generous rules and a lack
of investigators. Often workers never have to go any further to get the money
rolling in than getting a note from their own doctor.

            A letter to the editor in the Post provides a picturesque example of
the mentality that drives many such a problem inside the Marion Barry empire.
The writer happened to be in a city water department office to discuss a water
bill when she noticed what the employees were drinking from a large commercial
tank supplied for the staff's use--imported bottled water.

         
      
   
