
   
   
      
         
            Burying the Lead

            At USA
Today the top story is that some safety experts are concerned that a
new soon-to-be-mandatory emissions control device could start fires in crashes.
At the New York Times
the lead is that California's ban on public program racial preferences goes
into effect, and it's accompanied by a big picture of a protest march organized
by Jesse Jackson proceeding across the Golden Gate Bridge. At the Washington Post it's that many top jobs in the Clinton
administration remain unfilled. And the Los Angeles
Times leads with developments in Bosnia.

            A cardinal sin of news reporting is downplaying the real news of a
story--this is known as "burying the lead" and once upon a time it was
considered an even bigger disaster for a journalist than having a kid not get
into Sidwell Friends. But today not one, but two papers do it, and with the
same story, no less. The LAT 's lead is that senior U.S. officials
including former special envoy for Bosnia, Richard Holbrooke, have supported
using NATO troops to defend the president of Bosnia's Serb republic, Biljana
Plavsic, if hard-liners tried to overthrow her. Then the piece goes on to say
that NATO forces have helped Plavsic consolidate her control over her country's
police and broadcast media and that Thursday, while continuing to conduct that
campaign, they got into a violent confrontation with Bosnian Serb
demonstrators. But the story delays the news that two U.S. soldiers were
wounded in the melee until after the "jump"--the continuation of the story on
an inside page. But wait!--there is another Bosnia story on the LAT
front, near the lead, in column six, just a little lower down. Yet its
headline, "US Soldiers Clash with Irate Bosnian Serbs," doesn't mention the
U.S. casualties, and the piece itself doesn't get to them until the third
paragraph. The WP downplays the casualties as well, running its Bosnia
story at the bottom of the front page, omitting mention of them in its
headline--"Bosnian Serb's Backers Stone American Troops"--and not getting to
them in the piece until the seventh paragraph. (Headline writers, please note:
not mentioning the known outcome is like saying "Yankees Played Red Sox
Yesterday.") The NYT plays the story lower on its front page, but gets
the casualties into the headline: "2 G.I.'s Are Hurt Confronting Pro-Karadzic
Bosnian Serbs."

            The really big story on the USAT front is the revelation that the
provision in the new budget bill that allows tobacco companies to reduce their
liability in smoking-related lawsuits by $50 billion was written by.the tobacco
companies. "The industry wrote it and submitted it, and we just used their
language,'' is what Kenneth Kies, staff director of the Joint Committee on
Taxation, is quoted as saying.

            Anthony Lewis' Times column is another in his recent series of pieces
excoriating the INS. He tells the story of a German women who falls in love
with and marries an American while on a visitor's visa and after getting some
bad advice from the INS leaves the country while her application for a
permanent visa is still pending. The result? She ends up in prison for eight
days and then is deported. So far the couple has burned up $10,000 in legal
fees over this, and the husband had to abandon his business here to rejoin his
wife. "Is anyone in our Government," wonders Lewis, "ready to call our tin-pot
immigration dictators to account?

            And right next to that piece is an op-ed by Washington-based public ethics
maven Charles Lewis. For those inclined to cut Mike Espy some slack because
he's only charged with taking $35,000 worth of stuff, Lewis makes the point
that the poultry and processing workers Espy was once supposed to be looking
out for make, on average, $16,374 a year.

         
      
   
