
   
   
      
         
            Strike UPS and Downs

            President Clinton's most detailed public comment to date about the UPS
strike along with some signs of progress in the negotiations is today's news
leader. The only difference between the papers is emphasis. The New York Times
and USA
Today headlines focus on the increased presidential pressure while the
Los
Angeles Times headline highlights the increasing chances for a
settlement. The Washington Post emphasizes both with its "Clinton Says Deal
Near in UPS Strike." Only the Wall Street Journal gives much high exposure to strike
pessimism: its front-page news digest UPS item, after noting the progress, adds
that "both sides indicated they are prepared to escalate the conflict if a deal
isn't reached soon."

            What's driving all this are two Sunday developments. First, upon his arrival
for a three-week stay in Martha's Vineyard, Clinton said, "It's my gut feeling
they'll settle," and called on both sides to "redouble their efforts." And
meanwhile, on separate Sunday chat shows, the heads of the Teamsters and of UPS
acknowledged progress. The WP says that Clinton's decision to speak out
was a calculated gambit to give negotiators a push and was also conceived as a
signal that he is not neglecting the situation even though he's on
vacation.

            Details in the UPS coverage include this comment made by the head of UPS on
"Meet the Press" that is repeated in both the WP and LAT : "A lot
of.business has gone away and a lot of business isn't coming back." The strike
has made many aware for the first time just how central UPS has been to the
daily workings of the economy (80 percent of all package delivery) and if this
is true and not just tactical posturing, then that economy is in for a
noticeable change. The NYT chooses to point out the importance of UPS by
noting that the because of the strike, "Blood banks have complained of being
forced to destroy blood" they couldn't ship and that "dozens of school systems
are worried that they will not receive shipments of books before the school
year begins." Does that depiction of the strike's impact function as implicit
support for the company's position? And if so, is that okay in a news
story?

            Inside the WP is a story about pocket lining at the White House. No,
nothing to do with the travel office or the Lippo group--just the little matter
of guests (an estimated 2,600 a year just at the formal dinners there) leaving
a little heavier than when they arrived. Commonly appropriated items include
silverware, plates, and even drapery tassels. The piece tantalizes with the
news that during Camelot, Pierre Salinger hired a professional pickpocket to
quietly recover spoons on their way out the door, and that in 1990 a Secret
Service agent was convicted of stealing more than $7,000 in presidential
china.

            Yesterday, in a piece about new presidential advisor Sidney Blumenthal, the
NYT 's Alison Mitchell wrote that the New Republic referred to
Blumenthal with the line, "A beat is just an assignment but a slut is who
you've become maybe." Today, the Times corrections page says this "was
truncated and misattributed because of an editing error. One word was
incorrectly transcribed, compounding the misimpression." What they're trying to
just barely admit is this: It seems that in fact, the New Republic had
nothing to do with the quote, that Mr. Blumenthal said it, but (obviously) not
about himself, and only via a character in a work of fiction that he wrote and
that actually that character didn't use the word "slut" but the word "slot." So
to review the bidding from yesterday's "paper of record": A single sentence
with the wrong subject, the wrong source, and the wrong quote.

         
      
   
