
   
   
      
         
            Want Spoiled Fries With That?

            Bad burger meat dominates, leading at USA Today ,
the Washington Post , and the New York Times .
The Wall Street Journal heads up its top-of-the-page
"World-Wide" news box with another pretty important health story, the admission
by the CEO of the nation's largest cigarette maker that his product may have
killed 100,000 people. The Los Angeles Times leads with state charges being
filed in the Ruby Ridge case.

            Everybody has the same basic details on the recall of 25 million pounds of
burger meat: It was produced at a Hudson Foods plant in Nebraska. It was the
largest meat recall in history, prompted by 16 people in Colorado getting food
poisoning from a strain of E. coli bacteria that can lead to kidney failure and
death. And the Dept. of Agriculture doesn't have the legal power to close a
suspect food plant or unilaterally recall its product, but gets its way on
these matters by threatening to pull out its inspectors. It is widely reported
that because of this episode, the Secretary of Agriculture now intends to ask
Congress for that closing power.

            The NYT goes a little further than the others in describing the meat
regulatory system, pointing out that, concerned by problems of contamination,
Agriculture officials have recently approved a new more stringent system of
controls, but adding that the new system is not scheduled to be in place
anywhere until early next year, and not at the Hudson plant until 1999. Also,
the NYT is alone in explicitly stating that the Colorado victims
survived. On the other hand, the Times puts the relevant consumer
information--the lot number of the suspect meat and the company and government
800 numbers--at the very bottom of the story, where, editors know from long
experience, most readers will never see it. The Post mentions the
various places in the Washington area where the meat might have ended up,
including the Pentagon food system, but is mum on whether any got near the
burger lover in the White House. (But don't bet against an eventual
presidential connection. Hudson Foods is headquartered in Rogers, Arkansas. Can
a political payoff or Rose Law Firm connection be far behind?)

            Today's papers provide vivid examples of how much headlines and placement
can vary, leading to widely different impressions about what's important. Why
is it, for instance, that the LAT puts California's biggest social
impact story in a generation, the upholding by a federal court of the
proposition that overturns virtually all of the state's affirmative action
programs, in a tiny box nearly at the bottom of the front page? (Especially
curious given that the LAT has given previous, less-definitive court
decisions concerning this proposition huge splashes.) And why is it that no one
but the Journal has that tobacco CEO's confession on the front page?

            And why does the Post headline its inside story about what he said,
"Smoking May Have Killed Thousands" when the man said "100,000"? And why, even
though the Ruby Ridge development involves the highly unusual event of homicide
charges being brought against an FBI agent, is that story left inside the
WP ? (It's on the front at USAT , the NYT , and the
LAT .) And the headlines over that story tend to befog rather than
clarify. The Post tags the story this way: "FBI Sniper Charged."
USAT runs it under "FBI Sharpshooter charged in Ruby Ridge." The
Times heads it with "Two Men Charged in '92 Idaho Shootout." These are
all unnecessarily off, kind of like running "Man Bites Something" without
mentioning that the bitee was a dog. The FBI should definitely be mentioned in
the headline, and so should the fact that a second man, a survivalist, was also
charged. Only the LAT gets it right: "Idaho Charges FBI Agent, Activist
in Ruby Ridge Deaths."

         
      
   
