
   
   
      
         
            Di-versity

            Di still dominates, but other stories get their due. For instance, the
Los
Angeles Times leads with yesterday's 257-point gain on Wall St, and the
New York Times
goes with a piece about how private hospitals, with the advent of managed care
and lower doctor's fees, are now courting Medicaid patients because of the
guaranteed government dollars they represent, while shunning uninsured patients
more than ever. The nightmare scenario, says the piece, is that "desirable"
patients will altogether abandon public hospitals, with the "desirable" doctors
following suit. (The Times 's decision to lead with a trend piece--that
is, a piece that could have run just as well a month from now--suggests a deep
desire not to wallow in Diana. Evidently, this desire is not universal at the
paper, however; for the second day in a row, the op-ed page runs three
Diana screeds.)

            
               USA
Today leads with the latest news in the death of the princess--the
decision by French authorities to investigate six photographers to see if they
committed involuntary homicide or violated France's Good Samaritan law, and the
revelation that a new round of toxicology revealed that Diana's driver was even
more alcohol-impaired than originally reported. The LAT , NYT and
Washington Post also give prominent front-page space
to these developments.

            
               USAT also reports that Hillary Clinton will attend the funeral
service and that Di's oldest son Prince William is insisting on walking behind
his mother's coffin in the ceremony. The following passage from the WP
about the photographers under investigation shows the meta-levels the story has
now ascended to: "As they were released and their handcuffs removed, the
suspects slipped out side entrances to the huge courthouse building, avoiding
the waiting banks of television and still cameras. French photographers said
they would not have taken pictures of them anyway, out of 'solidarity.' The
seven also were said by other journalists to have avoided the spotlight because
they had sold their stories of detention to tabloid newspapers and wanted to
preserve exclusivity."

            The LAT , while keeping up on the Diana front, manages to find more
front-page room than most for other hard-news stories. It's on this front that
you'll find out about how U.S. troops, surrounded by a stick-wielding mob,
returned the use of a TV transmitter to Bosnian Serbs loyal to war criminal
suspect Radovan Karadzic in return for promises to tone down propaganda
emanating from the station and to provide political opponents access to it. And
where you'll be provoked by a piece about a recent Arizona killing involving
bounty hunters to realize that this field is preposterously
under-regulated.

            In the LAT 's coverage of the big stock market move, there's the usual
dueling experts explaining that this is either the sign of bigger things to
come or the end of the good times. But there's also this says-it-all sentence:
"[A] typical stock investment grew nearly as much Tuesday as a simple savings
account grows in a year."

            According to the Wall Street Journal "Tax Report," the IRS audited about
14.5 percent of the estate-tax returns filed in 1995. The Journal
doesn't say so, but the overall audit rate is more like 1 percent. So the
message is clear: still one of the best ways to avoid taxes is to avoid
death.

            Both USAT and the NYT report that a study just out concludes
that new doctors, steeped though they may be in high-tech medicine, can't
properly use a stethoscope. Doctors in the survey only identified 20 percent of
the heart problems that can be routinely diagnosed via the instrument. Doctors
who play a musical instrument did better.

         
      
   
