
   
   
      
         
            All Diana

            Today, it's pretty much all Diana, all the time. The Los Angeles
Times leads with the news that Diana's driver had "three times the
lawful level of alcohol in his blood" as he raced through the streets of Paris
"at 110 mph." USA Today runs a four-column headline--"DIANA'S DRIVER
LEGALLY DRUNK"--across its top front, and gives the whole rest of its 1A over
to various Di-gressions: not just the drinking and the speeding, but also the
funeral plans, a Prince William profile and a detail about the driver it
credits to the Times of London , reporting that just before speeding away
from the Ritz he taunted photographers by telling them "Catch me if you
can."

            The Washington Post also has a lot on the drunk driving angle,
but quotes Dodi Fayed's father's lawyer as insisting that the revelation
"changes absolutely nothing" and that it was an "ambience of harassment" of
Diana and Dodi Fayed by the photographers that was the key. But the
Post , alone among the majors, also manages to find room for a story that
might reasonably be thought equally important: that several hundred Bosnian
Serbs attacked nearly 300 heavily armed U.S. troops yesterday.

            There being no obvious business angle to the Diana story, the Wall Street Journal contents itself with a long-front page
feature answering a question no one is asking: Could the accident give rise to
any legal proceedings that would be "OJ II?" The answer, says the
Journal , is no.

            The New York Times
tries to rise above the vulgus by giving its lead space to a piece about the
coming session of Congress. Mistake! First of all, the Congress piece is
virtually news-free: it's conjecture, after all, about what may happen there
between now and January, and secondly, some of the material in the three
Diana-related front-page articles is really good. There's the director of a
photo agency saying, "Holding the photographers responsible when the cause was
clearly excessive speed is absurd." (Do you think there's a chance that now
instead of, or in addition to, inspiring a campaign against tabloids, this
tragedy might spur a renewed campaign against drunk driving?) There's a French
photojournalist saying, "Those who denounce the paparazzi today will be the
first to buy the photos of the young princes crying at Lady Di's funeral." And
the revelation that although at least one photo agency is said to be offering
U.S. rights to color photos of the crashed Mercedes, showing Diana covered in
blood, the National Enquirer turned down the deal and urged other
publications to do the same. (Of course, those pictures will surface, and don't
be surprised if they also eventually make their way into a "mainstream" paper,
probably over a caption like, "Media experts debate: Was the Star wrong
to publish these pictures?")

            If that's not enough, the NYT also has three Diana op-ed pieces.

            The WP reports that local AIDS prevention programs reflect different
standards of expected conduct. In suburban Virginia, for instance, the advice
tends towards abstinence. But in Washington, D.C., a pamphlet about the dangers
of oral sex with a man advises women to look into condoms and dental dams.

         
      
   
