
   
   
      
         
            Chronicle of a Death Foretold

            Trent Lott's snap decision
to schedule an immediate debate in the Senate represents an important opening
for supporters of McCain-Feingold, the main vehicle for campaign-finance
reform. But do not suppose that the majority leader has developed any sympathy
for a bill that would ban soft money, limit independent expenditures, and
tighten disclosure requirements. Republicans have a huge stake in the current
system, under which they out-raised Democrats by 50 percent in the last
election cycle. Incumbents have an even bigger edge over challengers. Thus, for
the boss of the incumbent Republicans, to permit the playing field to be
leveled would be to go beyond good sportsmanship. It would be an act of
self-immolation.

            But even if Lott's motive
for offing McCain-Feingold remains as powerful as ever, carrying out the hit no
longer looks so simple. Fred Thompson's hearings have done what Lott and his
henchmen Don Nickles and Mitch McConnell feared they would do--they have
dramatized the general horror of the current system more than they have the
particular excesses of the incumbent president. Simply dismissing reform as
unnecessary--Lott's approach as recently as a few months ago--no longer
suffices. At the same time, the Republican leadership can't be too brazen. To
count on party discipline to reject McCain-Feingold outright, or to use the
power of the gavel to prevent it from coming to the floor, would be to court a
public backlash and a revolt within the Republican caucus. That kind of
leadership can make a party leader look bad.

            So a
straightforward machine-gun massacre is out. Thanks to the baroque vestiges of
Senate procedure, however, Lott and company still have other weapons at their
disposal: the ice pick, the poisoned umbrella tip, the exploding cigar, the
James Bond shark tank, the Batman buzz saw, quicksand, car bombs, a variety of
slow-acting toxins, the complete works of Joyce Carol Oates, and their bare
hands. (Some of these weapons are, of course, too barbaric to actually use.)
Here's the best current thinking about how Republican leaders are likely to try
to snuff their victim, beginning next week.

            Supporters of McCain-Feingold universally expect Lott to
first try attaching one or more killer amendments . The idea here is a
booby trap. You add something offensive that doesn't alter the appearance of
the bill, allowing Republicans to support it while compelling Democrats to vote
against it. The most probable amendment is one that expands on the Supreme
Court's Beck decision. In 1988, the court ruled that union members have
a right to demand a refund of the portion of their dues spent on politics.
McCain-Feingold would "codify" Beck , by requiring unions to notify their
members of this right. Nickles argues for what is known as a "hard
Beck
               " provision, which would go further, giving union members a
chance to opt out permanently. The AFL-CIO considers this non-negotiable, as do
most Democrats. They argue that corporations may spend money on politics
without offering a rebate to dissatisfied shareholders. If Senate Republicans
tack on a Nickles amendment, Democrats might even filibuster to block
McCain-Feingold, which otherwise has their unanimous support.

            The
advantage of a Beck -based amendment is that it would create a version of
the bill friendly to Republican interests to counter what Lott can argue is a
version beneficial to Democrats. But assuming that Lott does not persuade any
of the bill's four Republican supporters--John McCain, Thompson, Susan Collins,
and Arlen Specter--he would need all 51 of his remaining team members to win
the vote. The fate of reform will then rest with a few Republicans from strong
labor states, such as Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania and Spencer Abraham of
Michigan. If Lott loses on Beck , he may try other killer amendments,
such as one that would abolish the public financing of presidential campaigns
and get rid of the $3 tax checkoff that pays for it. The folks on McCain's side
think the votes on these amendments will be decisive. If they can fend off the
Klingons, it will demonstrate a majority for genuine reform.

            
In that event, Lott may try to undermine the
bill in back-room negotiations . This would be more in the line of
judicial murder. For example, his faction might agree to ban soft money--but
only in exchange for deregulating hard money. McConnell would like to end all
limits on direct contributions. Short of that, he would like to raise the limit
on total annual contributions by any individual from $25,000 to $75,000.
Because both a wealthy person and his/her spouse can give each year, this would
mean that he or she could effectively contribute $300,000 in an election
cycle--not unlimited money, but pretty close. Fred Wertheimer of Democracy 21,
a reform group, notes other recondite anti-reform measures that Lott might try
to sneak in. He might try to undo the ban on direct corporate and labor
contributions that has been in effect since 1907 or undo soft-money
restrictions by leaving state committees free to dabble in federal races.

            The
burden of resisting these feints will fall partly on Minority Leader Tom
Daschle but principally on McCain--who, as a Vietnam POW, survived torture in
the Hanoi Hilton. If McCain holds out for a strong bill, Lott may have no
alternative to an old-fashioned filibuster . Supporters of
McCain-Feingold will probably need not just 50 votes for victory (with the tie
to be broken by Al Gore) but 60 votes to invoke "cloture" and break a
filibuster. McConnell heads the National Republican Senatorial Committee, and
thinks Republicans can remain in control of the Senate for the next 20 years if
they can defeat McCain-Feingold. He has said he is ready to use any means
necessary. A truly diabolical man, he could read Art Buchwald columns on the
floor of the Senate until even McCain cries uncle.

            This kind of public execution of reform would look
terrible, so Lott might try to mitigate a filibuster by offering as a
substitute his own phony reform bill . Think of this as a "pod" or
replicate version of campaign-finance reform. It might contain a grab bag of
changes tied to revelations about the Clinton campaign of 1996, such as banning
contributions from domestic subsidiaries of foreign businesses, phone
solicitations from the White House, and paying guests in the Lincoln Bedroom.
But surely this wouldn't satisfy anyone. And one downside would be the implicit
admission that most of what Democrats did in the last election wasn't
illegal.

            If McCain-Feingold gains
enough shame-leverage to pass the Senate, expect an attempt to kill it in the
House. Speaker Newt Gingrich, who argues that we need more money in campaigns,
not less, expressed his die-hard opposition to McCain-Feingold last week. He
could use the complex House rules to smother the bill. If some sort of
momentum carries the idea through both chambers, differences between the two
versions would still need to be ironed out in conference committee . This
would provide additional opportunities for sabotage. Conferees appointed by
Lott and Gingrich could insert a poison pill that would 1) move
Democrats to vote against final passage or 2) be bait for a presidential veto.
They could also implant a constitutional depth charge , by burying
something that violates the First Amendment and would be likely to result in
the whole mess being thrown out by the Supreme Court.

            And that's just the stuff
they've thought of so far . McCain-Feingold may be a bill with nine
lives. But Trent Lott knows that there are many, many ways for it to die.

         
      
   
