
   
   
      
         
            JFK TKO

            It's hard to remember a book
that has benefited from as much bad publicity as Seymour Hersh's The Dark
Side of Camelot . A month before it was published, the New York Times
ran a lengthy front-page account of how its author had fallen for a set of
forged papers that supposedly detailed a $600,000 hush-money payment from the
Kennedys to Marilyn Monroe. Subsequent stories in The 
               New Yorker
and Vanity Fair slammed Hersh for his gullibility in being seduced by
these documents (which are not mentioned in his book). The Vanity Fair
story, by rival investigative reporter Robert Sam Anson, flayed Hersh as a
greedy journalistic thug who blackmails sources.

            Since the
book came out this week, the press has greeted Hersh's examination of JFK's
sexual excess, his various connections to the mob, and other sometimes
hyperbolic charges with exaggerated derision. Time tries to have it both
ways with a cover this week that says, "DEBUNKING JFK: Seymour Hersh takes on
Camelot, but how believable is his new book?" The inside story, like the one in
Newsweek , attacks Hersh for repeating old hat charges, and for producing
a farrago of implausible fantasies. On the Today show, Hersh endured a
two-day grilling that seemed like payback for the time and money NBC had wasted
on a documentary it abandoned because of suspicions about the forged papers.
"Do you think you were blinded by the desire to tell a sordid tale?" was the
kind of question Matt Lauer asked him. The most bitter critics are those whom
one must hesitate, in light of current knowledge, to call the Kennedy Mafia.
Former aides and acolytes like Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Theodore Sorensen
have lumped Hersh with Oliver Stone, taking the line that the book is paranoid
speculation. Sorensen, whom Hersh portrays as a Kennedy toady, has been
especially nasty in denouncing it as "a pathetic collection of wild
stories."

            It comes as something of a surprise, then, to read The
Dark Side of Camelot and find that it is not a trashy conspiracy screed at
all. Investigative reporters are often difficult people, and Hersh, who is one
of the best, sounds less pleasant than most. His book, however, is not merely a
great read. Much of what's in it is also 1) new; 2) shocking; 3) well
supported; and 4) worth knowing.

            The
Kennedy flame keepers would have you believe that Hersh passes off malicious
gossip as historical fact, Kitty Kelley-style. Hersh does hyperventilate from
time to time, but he still manages to present his case in roughly the way a
fair-minded historian or journalist should. He includes enough contrary
evidence that readers can disagree with his conclusions without doing their own
research elsewhere. Take one of his bombshells, the story of Kennedy's secret
first marriage. Hersh thinks Kennedy married a divorcee named Durie Malcolm in
Palm Beach in 1947 and that the marriage lasted about 15 minutes. His chief
witness is Charles Spalding, a close friend of JFK's, who says he was asked to
remove the wedding documents from a Palm Beach courthouse. Hersh acknowledges
that Spalding, 79, suffers from short-term memory impairment, and that he
couldn't find family members or friends to confirm the story, which Malcolm
indirectly denies. While he buys it himself, Hersh doesn't portray his evidence
as better than it really is.

            
The same goes for his fascinating scoop about a
break-in at Judith Exner's Los Angeles apartment in August 1962. Exner, who was
at various times the lover of Frank Sinatra, JFK, and the Chicago-based mobster
Sam Giancana, was under heavy surveillance by the FBI because of her mob ties.
According to FBI files obtained by Hersh, agents monitoring her home saw two
men break in via the fire escape. Tracing the license plates, they determined
that the burglars were the two sons of I.B. Hale, a former FBI special agent
who was head of security for General Dynamics Corp. Hersh links this to the
company's pursuit--and otherwise inexplicable award, a few months later--of a
contract to build a $6.5-billion jet fighter. He thinks General Dynamics
blackmailed the president into giving it the contract. Once again, though, he
readily admits that his evidence falls short of proof. "During the five years
of research for this book, I tried unsuccessfully to find out how General
Dynamics learned of Judith Exner's ties to Jack Kennedy," he writes. "I was
unable to make contact with Billy or Bobby Hale despite repeated efforts."

            I won't
bore you again about the skinny-dipping parties, the prostitutes at the White
House and on the road, JFK's range of venereal diseases, his affair with a
suspected East German spy, or his narrow escape from being drawn into the
Profumo scandal. The approved journalistic technique is to retail all these
prurient nuggets while appearing to hold your nose. The press treats these
eye-popping revelations as if curiosity about them, rather than the deeds
themselves, were something to be ashamed of. Even if true, the critics suggest,
such information is not historically "relevant." But it is obviously relevant
to any real understanding of JFK. Hersh does not argue this point very well. In
The Kennedy Imprisonment , Garry Wills did a much better job of
connecting the family attitudes toward sexual conquest, the pursuit of power,
and the conduct of foreign policy. But Hersh supplies the raw material that
substantiates that case as never before.

            The book has plenty of flaws. Of these, some of the most
telling are failures to square minor inconsistencies. For instance, Hersh
relates one anecdote about a Secret Service agent having to prevent the first
lady from finding out for herself what she suspected was going on in the White
House swimming pool. Later in the book, Hersh describes Jackie Kennedy's
strenuous efforts to avoid catching JFK in action. Another example is Hersh's
failure to harmonize his various stories of how Joe Kennedy Sr. helped steal
the 1960 election for his son by paying off Giancana to help deliver the union
vote in Chicago. When it comes to major foreign-policy events--the Bay of Pigs,
the Berlin Crisis, the Cuban Missile Crisis, and Vietnam--Hersh is out of his
depth. There is more to these episodes than his monochromatic tales of a
president willing to take any risk, tell any falsehood, for the sake of
political advantage.

            Hersh is much better on the
way in which the press protected Kennedy. Trusted reporters were at his beck
and call, ready to advise on policy and bury indiscretions. In a 1960 letter
Hersh found in the Kennedy Library, Ben Bradlee--then of Newsweek and
later the editor of the Washington Post --advises Kennedy not to pick the
unmannered rube LBJ as his running mate. Bradlee also helped out in 1962 when
Kennedy needed to put rumors about his secret marriage to rest. In cases where
a reporter wouldn't play ball, Bobby Kennedy could easily pick up the phone and
get editors to kill a story. Of course, the press no longer plays this role on
behalf of the Kennedys or any other politicians. But something of the old
dynamic may persist in the hostile reaction to Sy Hersh's book.

         
      
   
