
   
   
      
         
            Adultery and Boredom

            We now know what Gary Hart
did wrong. He got caught cheating on his wife a decade too early. In 1987, when
Hart embarked on the Monkey Business with Donna Rice, public exposure of
infidelity was a career-wrecker. Today, the episode would play out differently.
Hart's adultery would get reported, but the nation would yawn. The story would
vanish quickly from the news, and all the pundits would say that Hart's
wandering eye was less important than his expertise on weapons procurement.

            That, at
least, is the revised scenario suggested by the two sex scandals that broke
last week. Reputable publications reported that the president of the United
States and the mayor of New York City were actively unfaithful spouses--and no
one cared. According to a New York Daily News poll, 85 percent of those
surveyed said that charges in a Vanity Fair article that Rudy Giuliani
was having an affair with his communications director would have no impact on
how they voted. Only 7 percent said the information would make them less likely
to vote for Giuliani. There has been no comparable poll about Newsweek 's
report that Clinton "fondled" a woman named Kathleen Willey during a 1993 job
interview in his office. But there is no sign of harm to the president's
approval rating, which continues to hover in the low 60s. Ten years ago, both
these stories would have launched full-dress feeding frenzies, which as likely
as not would have chewed up successful politicians and spat them out onto the
refuse heap.

            Now such stories don't even rate as scandals. They mainly
provoke orgies of media self-examination, which usually take the form of
reporters who got scooped beating up those who broke the story. As ever before,
it was amusing to watch the prestigious media organs resist temptation as best
they could, only to yield hypocritically a few days later. When Vanity
Fair broke the Giuliani story, the New York Times characteristically
turned up its nose, printing only a brief mention of Giuliani's denial on Page
B4. A few days later, "Metro" columnist Clyde Haberman slipped more detail in
under the guise of discussing whether the mayor was spending too much time at
the office. "When you think about it, the most interesting part of this
flapdoodle over the state of the union at Gracie Mansion is what it tells us
about Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's frenetic work habits," Haberman wrote,
implausibly. The Washington Post gave similar backdoor treatment to the
Willey affair, mentioning it only in the context of Willey being subpoenaed by
Paula Jones' lawyers. The Post subsequently covered it in much greater
detail as a press story about how Matt Drudge, who publishes an Internet tip
sheet, scooped Newsweek by reporting what the magazine was about to
report.

            The Drudge
angle is significant. By reporting gossip about gossip, Drudge has
single-handedly lowered the bar for what constitutes "news." A few days ago, he
reported a rumor that Sidney Blumenthal, a former journalist who is now a
Clinton official, was once accused in court filings of "spousal abuse." This
was utterly false, and Drudge retracted it under threat of a lawsuit. But all
this was reported in the Post and elsewhere, putting the falsehood into
wider circulation. As the supermarket tabloids have shown, the ethical standard
of the bottom-feeding publication is the one that ultimately prevails. Once
something is published by anyone, it becomes fair game for analysis and
repetition. Irresponsible, inaccurate postings on the Internet are now a back
door for stories that don't even meet the standards of the tabloids.

            
But as the standards of journalistic legitimacy
have declined, the formerly godlike power of the establishment media to decide
whether politicians will live or die has also diminished. In the Gary Hart
days, the Times and Post were inclined to withhold information
about the personal lives of politicians on the assumption that readers couldn't
handle it. While sophisticated journalists might understand that an
extramarital affair wasn't such a big deal, the public at large was too bigoted
and judgmental to put such information in proper perspective. A frequent lament
by columnists from that era was that the United States wasn't like France or
Britain, where politicians' sex lives were considered their own business.

            That
attitude was condescending and undemocratic. If voters considered all Ten
Commandments pertinent to their decision about whom to vote for, the New
York Times had no business suppressing information about one that it
thought was OK. But on the evidence of the most recent cases, the folks in
flyover country have grown more worldly than big-city journalists give them
credit for. While people may be extremely interested in details about any
famous person's sex life, they don't deem that information particularly useful
or relevant when casting their votes. In one 1994 Harris poll, 71 percent said
it was none of their business whether Bill Clinton had been unfaithful to his
wife. In 1992 and 1996, the election results suggested that they were telling
the truth about how they felt.

            Admittedly, New York City is not South Carolina, and
information that might not harm a Democratic president could still destroy a
Republican governor. In Clinton's case, everyone has fully assimilated the
notion of the president as an adulterer, or worse. An added datum weighs far
less than does a novel accusation against someone previously considered a good
family man. But something clearly has changed. Even conservative Republicans,
like Trent Lott, now hesitate to make blanket condemnations of adultery.
Ironically, while the press in Britain and France has moved toward an American
standard of private-life investigation over the last decade, the American
public seems to have evolved a more European attitude. We're more concerned
about politicians' performance in office than about the condition of their
marriage vows.

            This new
maturity argues not for an advance, but for a retreat on the part of the press.
If voters don't deem personal lives politically relevant, there's no
justification for reporters invading people's privacy to find out about them.
This open-ended assault by the press is one of the main factors driving many of
the people we want in public life away from public life. And if the public
doesn't think adultery matters, the press is exploiting politicians merely for
its own aggrandizement. One Newsweek columnist suggested this week that
the Vanity Fair story was defective, among other reasons, because its
evidence fell short of the photographic. But getting better evidence means even
more disagreeable snooping, à la Gary Hart. What journalists need is a stricter
standard of relevance, not a higher burden of proof.

            
One might make a case that the latest sex
stories are relevant just the same. According to Vanity Fair , several
members of Giuliani's inner circle have broken with him over a spokeswoman the
mayor values for more than her spin. It was getting absurd for reporters to
analyze developments at City Hall without referring to a romantic attachment
they believed to be a key force in events. In the Willey case, appointment to a
federal board and a trip to a conference in Indonesia raise the question of
whether the president misused government resources. But reporters can always
find pretexts of one kind or another: that the person is a hypocrite, is lying
about it, is doing it on government time, or--the old standby--that the issue
raises questions of "character." It's time to quit fishing. When it comes to
simple adultery, journalists should listen to the voters. If they don't care,
there's no reason why we should, either.

         
      
   
