
   
   
      
         
            Strange Webfellows

            Ira Magaziner is best known
as the chief structural engineer of the Clinton administration's biggest
boo-boo, its first-term attempt to pass comprehensive health-care reform.
Though he stayed on at the White House after that debacle, Magaziner hasn't
been much heard from since, and his actual responsibilities have been something
of a mystery. Well, Magaziner has been found--making policy for the Internet.
Webheads, already angry at Clinton for the Communications Decency Act, might
regard Magaziner's latest assignment as insult added to injury. But in fact,
the story of the Clinton administration and the Internet--and especially of how
the White House came to support the unconstitutional, unpopular law known as
the CDA--is more complicated and interesting than that.

            Magaziner
has spent the last eight months in charge of an interagency task force that is
trying to figure out how to expand international opportunities for online
business. I hold in my hands, a few days in advance of its release, the task
force's draft report. It contains one remarkable passage. Along with their
worries about intellectual-property protections, tariffs, and technical
standards, Magaziner and company write that they are concerned that "many
countries, including the United States, are considering or have adopted laws to
restrict access to certain types of content through the Internet. ... These
multiple interests may result in barriers for US providers attempting to enter
certain national markets." The report proposes a statement of U.S. policy on
content restrictions: "Promote the use of industry ... self-regulation and
rating systems, and technical solutions to empower parents and other users to
resolve contentious access issues (e.g. children's access, pornography and
violence)." (The latest version removes the word "pornography" from this
sequence.)

            This white paper is notable for two reasons: The first is
that the chief author, who is known (fairly or otherwise) for his fondness for
heavy regulation, seems to be leaning in a more libertarian direction.
Congratulations, Ira. But the more significant point is that the report
completely contradicts what has heretofore been the Clinton administration's
position on the Communications Decency Act, which was signed by the president
in February. The CDA, as most people reading this probably know, attempts to
regulate content through criminal penalties for those who violate standards of
decency (standards drawn so broadly that they might prohibit, for instance,
David
Sedaris' "Diary" from last week) with "any comment, request, suggestion,
proposal, image, or other communication that, in context, depicts or describes,
in terms patently offensive as measured by contemporary standards, sexual or
excretory activities or organs."

            The Clinton administration's
support of the CDA--which it is now defending before the Supreme Court--has
been a bit of a mystery. It turns out to have been a bit of an accident. Last
year, when the CDA was first proposed by James Exon, the Democratic senator
from Nebraska, the Clinton Justice Department frowned. In May 1995, then-acting
Assistant Attorney General Kent Markus wrote to Sen. Patrick Leahy that among
other problems, the proposal was an attempt to "impose criminal sanctions on
the transmission of constitutionally protected speech." Inside the White House,
according to Clinton sources, Vice President Al Gore and members of his staff,
who have general responsibility for Internet-related issues, tried to steer the
administration away from supporting the act.

            As the
bill headed toward overwhelming passage in the Senate, however, political
reality began to assert itself. With an election coming up, the last thing the
Clintonites wanted was to get on the wrong side of a potentially explosive
issue dealing with children and pornography. "No way are you going to get
yourself in a position where the president isn't willing to go as far as a
Democratic senator in restricting child pornography on the Internet," one
senior administration official explained. Child pornography and obscenity are
illegal anyway, but that was a fine point the administration wasn't willing to
risk elucidating on the verge of a campaign.

            
So, part of the explanation is cowardice in the
face of potential demagoguery. Another part is that the CDA was folded into the
telecommunications bill, an acre of legislation that reorganizes one-seventh of
the nation's economy. It was a bill in which the administration had many
interests--the v-chip, competition among local telephone companies, and so on.
The White House could not afford to antagonize Exon by opposing his pet
provision. Those inside the administration who were troubled by the
constitutional implications of the CDA rationalized their cop out by saying
that the law was sure to be overturned anyway--as indeed it was, in a 3-0
decision that gave three Philadelphia judges a welcome opportunity to sound
like Oliver Wendell Holmes.

            
Clintonites say the decision to appeal that ruling is essentially pro
forma ; the solicitor general rarely chooses not to not defend the
constitutionality of a law the president has signed. The CDA was almost one of
those rare occasions. In its Court of Appeals brief, the Justice Department
stipulated that the so-called Comstock provision in the law, which restricts
the dissemination of information about abortion, was unconstitutional and would
not be enforced. Gore, in particular, wanted to avoid an appeal by finding a
way to settle with the various plaintiffs in the suit. According to
Clinton-campaign scholar Dick Morris, "the administration's decision to take
the bill to the Supreme Court was over Gore's objections." Morris says he had
two discussions with Gore about whether there might be an alternative way to
stop children from gaining access to inappropriate material on the Internet.
"We couldn't really find a technical way of doing it," Morris says. Others in
the White House believe it was Morris himself who prevailed against Gore and
got the administration behind the act.

            In any case, political logic prevailed. Officially, the
decision was made by Clinton's first solicitor general, Drew Days III. He had
his own reasons for pursuing the case. In the early days of the administration,
Days made a legally sound but politically disastrous decision to appeal the
child-pornography conviction of a graduate student for having videotapes that
showed teen-age models with their clothes on. The Supreme Court agreed with the
brief Days filed in that case, Knox vs. U.S ., but the Senate voted 100-0
to condemn his intervention, and Clinton promptly disavowed his own solicitor
general in public. Days, who previously was thought to have a good shot at a
seat on the Supreme Court, fell off the Clinton short-list. Soon after deciding
to appeal the CDA, he returned to Yale Law School.

            Days' successor, Walter
Dellinger, will argue the case before the court in March. Friends seem certain
that the former constitutional-law professor at Duke personally opposes the
CDA. But Dellinger, who is still acting solicitor general pending official
nomination and confirmation by the Senate, wasn't about to risk premature
termination of his career. He wouldn't comment. But privately, he may believe
what many in the administration offer in defense of their indefensible
position: that a resounding Supreme Court decision against them will do more to
advance the cause of free expression than would leaving the Court of Appeals
opinion unchallenged.

            If that is the
administration's strategy, it is foolhardy. The Supreme Court might not
cooperate in rejecting the administration's public position and embracing its
secret desire. Furthermore, it's preposterous that a president re-elected on
rhetoric about building a bridge to the 21 st century hasn't bothered
to work out a minimally consistent position on the Internet. The basic problem,
as I've argued before, is Clinton's lack of respect for civil liberties,
exacerbated in this instance by a lack of understanding beyond the vice
president's office of what is at stake in the development of the Internet. But
a simple solution might be at hand. It can be expressed in four words I thought
I'd never utter: Listen to Ira Magaziner.

         
      
   
