
   
   
      
         
             Reno Divorce

            Even by Washington standards, Janet Reno has
suffered a wicked case of conventional-wisdom whiplash. After famously "taking
responsibility" for the botched FBI raid in Waco in 1993, she was lionized for
her refreshing readiness to be held accountable. Before long, however, the
buck-stops-here cliché grew stale, and the story line changed. It became:
Because of Reno's managerial incompetence and the disarray she presided over at
the Justice Department, a lot of innocent Branch Davidians died unnecessarily.
(Version 2 is at least as dubious as Version 1.) Originally hailed as "the very
best appointee of the Clinton administration, bar none," by Morton Kondracke,
Reno has more recently been called the president's "worst major Cabinet
appointment" by the editors of the Weekly Standard .

            The latest and most
dramatic turnabout has been on the question of Reno's "independence." The
approved view until recently was that Reno had made herself irrelevant--a
Washington nonplayer--by being so intractable and prissy. Various articles
published in 1995 and '96 included mutterings from White House officials that
the attorney general had no relationship with the president, and that officials
would love nothing more than an excuse to replace her after the election. More
recently, however, Republicans have insinuated--and the news media have
reflected--the view that Reno is not just a team player, but a political shill
for the White House. This is because she refuses to appoint an independent
counsel in the campaign-finance scandal . The New York Times , in a
recent editorial, raised doubts about Reno's "loyalty to the public." Newt
Gingrich, the historian, went well beyond that, comparing Reno to Richard
Nixon's Attorney General John Mitchell, who went to jail for obstruction of
justice.

            Gingrich's comments are as offensive as usual, but even the
milder form is absurd. People do play against type from time to time, but the
charge that Reno has suddenly become a docile tool of the White House simply
doesn't wash. Her decision on the independent-counsel issue may be good or
bad--but it is legally defensible, and the evidence that Reno has been swayed
by political factors doesn't amount to a prima facie case.

            The first point is Reno's
own background and personality. As state attorney in Dade County, Fla., Reno
acquired a reputation not just for integrity but for an almost fanatical
probity. She asked the governor to appoint an independent counsel to prosecute
her own mother when the late Jane Reno was arrested for drunken driving. In
Miami, as in Washington, Reno was criticized for her management style, for her
sentimental notions about crime, and for her general mulishness. But until a
few months ago, no one ever accused her of bending the law.

            Even if she were a different sort of person, the case that
Reno is acting politically in not appointing an independent counsel would fall
apart over the issue of motivation . When calls first came for an
independent counsel in November, Reno might have been vulnerable to pressure.
She was, by all accounts, eager to stay on as attorney general in an
administration that was not at all eager to keep her. Until some time after the
Inauguration, Clinton might have got away with getting rid of her while he was
replacing others in the Cabinet.

            But political
circumstances have changed since then. The best thing Reno could possibly do to
guarantee her own job security is to appoint an independent prosecutor. If she
did, Clinton could never get rid of her. If he tried, it would be treated like
a version of the infamous Saturday Night Massacre, when Nixon kept firing
Justice Department officials who wouldn't fire special prosecutor Archibald
Cox.

            Whether Reno's decision not to appoint is correct on the
merits is another question, which won't be settled here. But it is pretty
clearly within the bounds of reasonableness. Reno's critics have been
imprecise, and often contradictory, on the question of why they think she must
appoint an independent counsel. Under the law, the attorney general is obliged
to do so if she comes across "specific and credible" evidence of criminal
wrongdoing by a high-level official covered by the act. She also has the
discretionary powers to appoint an independent counsel if she feels there would
be a "personal, financial, or political conflict of interest" if normal Justice
Department procedures were followed.

            Though it is blindingly
obvious to Reno's critics that criminal acts were performed by high-level
Clinton officials, they don't agree among themselves about which actions by
which officials qualify. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., thinks it's Al Gore's
fund-raising calls from his office. Common Cause thinks it's Bill Clinton's
coordination of soft-money expenditures from the White House. Orrin Hatch,
R-Utah, thinks it's letting John Huang into the White House.

            Reno says that no accusation against either Gore or Clinton
meets the "specific and credible" standard. Gore, she asserts in a lengthy
response to a request from Hatch, was raising soft money, which is not covered
by the regulation that prohibits solicitations from government buildings. The
coordination of soft-money expenditures that Clinton was involved in, she says,
isn't illegal. I think this last interpretation is unfortunate, because it
opens the floodgates for unlimited contributions from corporations and labor
unions, which is what the post-Watergate election reforms were supposed to
prevent. But legally, Reno is on pretty firm ground.

            That leaves the more vague--and
discretionary--language about "personal, financial, or political conflict of
interest." No one has suggested that Reno has a financial or personal stake in
the latest scandal. Hatch and others have made the case that she faces a
political conflict: Reno is an appointee of the administration presiding over
an investigation that is potentially embarrassing and damaging to the
administration. But the standard for appointing an independent counsel can't be
that broad. Attorneys general face political conflicts every day--whether to
bring cases against enemies, associates, friends, even relatives of members of
the administration. Given a broad interpretation, the conflict-of-interest
provision would require dozens, if not hundreds, of independent counsels. Reno
has apparently construed this ambiguous provision in the only way one sensibly
can. It gives her a wider berth than the "specific and credible" language, but
it does not require her to appoint an independent counsel every time someone in
the opposing party detects the appearance of a political conflict.

            Paradoxically, caving in to her critics would
bolster Reno's reputation for fearless independence. If the attorney general
had ordered up an independent counsel, not only would her job have been secure
but the New York Times (and maybe even Sen. Hatch) would be swooning
over her once again. Standing up to them, and doing what she evidently feels is
right, means being taken for a Clinton hack. To her great credit, Reno has thus
far rejected the perception of independence in favor of the genuine
article.

         
      
   
