
   
   
      
         
            Battered-Republican Syndrome

            Back when men were men and
women were women, conservatives were conservative on the subject of child
abuse. That is, they were in favor of it. "We all got the belt that night," Pat
Buchanan wrote in his autobiography, describing his father's preferred form of
punishment. On Crossfire , Buchanan could always be counted upon to
defend the educational advantages of a good lashing, whether in Singapore or
Chevy Chase. In Depression-era Russell, Kan., it was Bob Dole's mother, Bina,
who acquainted her children with the salubrious effects of the strap on
Saturday afternoons. For Republicans, a sound whipping always meant good
values.

            Those
days, it appears, are gone. With Shine and Sling Blade --films
about men damaged by their abusive fathers--nominated for Best Picture, and
Kathryn Harrison's The Kiss moving up the best-seller list,
conservatives want to tell you: We were abused too. As adult children of
alcoholics, sons of deadbeat dads, witnesses to battered-spouse syndrome, and
victims of every sort of paddling and walloping and thwacking, Republicans are
no longer ceding ground to Bill Clinton when it comes to feeling the pain of a
dysfunctional nation.

            The latest example of this weird phenomenon is Dan Burton,
the super-right-wing representative from Indiana who is set to run the House
investigation into Democratic fund-raising practices. (Burton is the one with
the Vince Foster fetish whose AIDS hypochondria prevents him from eating soup
in restaurants.) In a profile in the Washington Post last week, Burton
recounted the story he has told before--in People , among other
places--of how his father, a 6-foot-8-inch, 280-pound bully, used to pummel the
whole family. Charles Burton hit his son for getting up to go to the bathroom
in the middle of the night and hit him for wetting his bed if he didn't get up
to go. When Burton was an infant, his father beat him black and blue for crying
in a movie theater. After his wife tried to leave him, Charles Burton abducted
her. Charged with kidnapping, he was convicted and spent two years in prison.
When he got out of prison and came around to where the family lived, Dan
Burton, age 14, faced him down with a shotgun.

            Burton
first raised the subject of his experiences to underscore his support for a
bill to aid battered wives. Now he is deploying his pain in a legislatively
less specific way, to try to show that he is not the reactionary bogeyman most
people think he is. One doesn't wish to indicate any lack of sympathy for what
sounds like a truly wretched and brutal childhood. But if we are to draw a
lesson from Burton's story, it is not that he is a sympathetic and caring man
because of his experiences, but rather that he is working out an inherited
disposition to abuse children on a more ambitious level. It was Burton who
advocated using nuclear weapons against Iraq during the Gulf War. He doesn't
beat his own three kids--he just wants to kill hundreds of thousands of
innocent Arabs.

            
Burton has company that includes the Republican
leaders in both houses. Trent Lott, the Senate Majority Leader, is not the kind
of fellow who wears his heart on his sleeve, so it came as something of a shock
when, several weeks ago, he revealed his own wretched childhood to a reporter
for the New York Times Magazine . Lott's father, a shipyard worker in
Pascagoula, Miss., was an alcoholic who died in a drunken-driving accident in
1969. "That sort of problem does affect you. You are forced into problems
between your mother and your father. It makes you grow up maybe a little
early," Lott said. But he added that his wasn't a dysfunctional family. "After
I was 4 or 5 years old, I don't think my father ever laid a hand on me."

            Most
Republicans must be satisfied with one abusive father. Newt Gingrich had two.
According to various profiles, his natural father, Newton McPherson, stayed out
late at the pool hall one night soon after marrying Newt's mom. When
McPherson's young bride tried to wake him the next morning to go to work, he
slugged her. The next man she married, Bob Gingrich, was not physically
abusive, but he was cold and uncommunicative toward his stepchildren. Newt has
compared him to the Great Santini, the inflexible military father in Pat
Conroy's novel. "It was a sort of classic broken home," he has said. When Newt,
age 19, married his high-school math teacher against his stepfather's wishes,
Bob Gingrich not only refused to come to the wedding, he wouldn't let Newt's
mother or sisters attend, either.

            Moving to the back benches, one finds Jim Nussle, a
Republican House member from Iowa, dealing with his anger over an absent
father. "I have a deadbeat father I have never met," Nussle said on the House
floor in 1995, arguing for a provision to compel states to get tougher on
child-support collection or risk losing federal aid. "I don't want to have
anybody else go through it." On his side in support of the measure was another
Republican representative, John Ensign of Nevada, who told of his own father
abandoning his family, forcing Ensign's mother to support three children by
working as a "change girl" in a Las Vegas casino.

            When
Republicans start talking about being neglected and abused, you can bet that
they're about to violate some sacrosanct conservative principle like states'
rights or the need to shrink government. "I'm a conservative," Nussle said,
apropos of the issue of child-support enforcement, "and when I hear people talk
about states' rights, I say, 'Hold it, guys, there is a duty here for the
federal government.' " Burton used the same phraseology when explaining his
willingness to intervene against domestic violence, despite the otherwise
highly constricted role he sees for the federal government. "I'm not advocating
more government or Big Brother in Washington trying to solve the problem," he
said. "But I'm not saying that government shouldn't have a role in trying to
get the job done." The exceptions to conservative orthodoxy that these
Republicans carve out are victim-specific, narrowly tailored to their own
miseries. Burton is anti-abuse, but doesn't fret about missed child-support
payments. Nussle, by contrast, wants to punish deadbeat dads, but not abusive
ones; he's a co-sponsor of the Parental Rights and Responsibilities Act, which
says it's fine to smack the kids (the phrase used is "reasonable corporal
discipline").

            
These little contradictions aside, one wonders
why stodgy Caucasian Republicans are playing the victimology card at all. The
basic explanation: the powerful lure of what Wendy Kaminer calls the Recovery
Movement. A decade ago, politicians didn't boast about being abused. They all
sounded like Bob Dole and Pat Buchanan. In the early 1980s, even Bill Clinton
ran a TV ad in which he folksily asserted, "My daddy never had to whip me twice
for the same thing." By 1992, Clinton was telling the country about how he
stood up to that same daddy for slapping his mom around. Republicans, a little
behind in the game, are trying to say, "We feel your pain too." They're finally
cottoning on to the political value of the confessional culture. With their
party intellectually adrift, the appeal of this style of content-free,
Oprah-fied populism continues to grow for them.

            Or maybe there's a simpler
explanation. These guys need professional help, but are afraid to be seen near
a psychiatrist's office. Pouring their hearts out to reporters is the only
therapy Republican politicians can get.

         
      
   
