
   
   
      
         
            Republican Revisionism

            By Jacob
Weisberg

            The Dec. 16 issue of the
Weekly Standard opened with the kind of editorial one is used to reading
in conservative magazines. Titled "It's Time to Take on the Judges," it heaped
outrage on the recent decision by a California federal judge halting the
enforcement of Proposition 209, passed by the voters last month, which bans
state-sponsored affirmative action. The Standard denounced Judge
Henderson's order as "an assault on popular will" and an act of "judicial
usurpation." Growing more indignant by the paragraph, the editors declared it
"time to ignite a popular outcry against unelected officials and their efforts
to invalidate the results of elections."

            It all
made sense--unless you happened to have read an article in the previous issue
of the Standard about Proposition 215, the other big California ballot
initiative this year, which legalized the use of marijuana for medical
purposes. In that piece, William Bennett and John Walters, Bennett's deputy
drug czar during the Bush administration, argued that the will of the people
must be overridden. The authors recommended that the federal government
invoke an obscure provision of the Controlled Substances Act of 1917 to revoke
the licenses of doctors who dare to act on Proposition 215, and that the Drug
Enforcement Administration ignore state authorities and "use its power" to
"move unilaterally" against pro-pot doctors.

            The Bennett position, which has been seconded by Sen. Orrin
Hatch of Utah, among others, actually violates two core conservative
principles. One is federalism--the preference for state authority over federal.
We have all endured screeds from conservatives on how terrible it is for
Washington to usurp power from the states. The other is the demand that judges
defer to voters. If DEA officials peremptorily overrule state law, as Bennett
wants, the issue will end up in the courts, where conservatives will,
presumably, favor unelected federal judges backing the decision of unelected
federal bureaucrats to overturn the popular will. In defending this scenario,
Bennett, Hatch, and others have already used the same argument conservatives
denounce as elitist and patronizing in the case of the affirmative-action
initiative: that disingenuous wording misled voters about the measure's real
effect.

            Decrying a
judge's interference with the affirmative-action initiative is more in keeping
with general conservative complaints about "judicial activism"--but not in
keeping with much previous conservative huffery on affirmative action itself.
Conservatives have often expressed the view that affirmative action is
unconstitutional. In other words, when democratically elected governments act
pro affirmative action, judges should overrule them; when democracy acts
anti affirmative action, the people's will must be sacrosanct.

            
Before I get too high on my own horse, I ought
to acknowledge that liberals aren't always paragons of intellectual
consistency, either. In the case of the California initiatives, many liberals
have been just as outcome-based as the Standard crowd, denouncing
federal meddling in the case of 215 while supporting Judge Henderson on 209.
And let's give conservatives a bit of credit. On one significant issue, the
line-item veto, they held firm on an old stance even though doing so meant
handing a Democratic president a knife to gore Republican oxen (though they did
postpone the day as long as possible and are now contending that Clinton's
conception of it is too broad).

            But despite these caveats,
Republicans are still the biggest offenders when it comes to inconsistency. On
a broad range of issues, the tensions--to choose a nice word--between their
principles and their practice have gone completely out of control.

            The basic reason for these,
um, tensions is that many "principles" of modern conservatives were developed
under political conditions that prevailed in the 1980s--a Republican president,
a Democratic Congress, and a liberal federal bench. Conservatives don't seem to
have anticipated that this might change. They guessed that they would do better
with a "strong executive," a weaker legislative branch, and a restrained
judiciary for many years to come.

            This
meant, for instance, that they didn't just defend Reagan administration
officials, like Ed Meese, who were accused of wrongdoing. They opposed the
whole institution of the special prosecutor (a k a independent counsel) in
categorical terms as a violation of the separation of powers. Before the 1992
election, congressional Republicans caused the law authorizing special
prosecutors to expire. After Clinton's election, conservatives changed their
minds and decided to reauthorize the law. Today, the shoe having switched feet,
one no longer hears conservative worries about abuse of the independent
counsel's office. Indeed, conservatives have been busy protesting James
Carville's attacks on Whitewater Special Prosecutor Kenneth Starr as the
scandalously inappropriate undermining of an essential institution of public
accountability. Five years ago, Republicans were denouncing Lawrence Walsh, the
Iran-Contra special prosecutor, with greater venom and less justification. On
this point at least, Democrats have been much more consistent, supporting the
independent counsel's office throughout, despite their own partisan objections
to Starr.

            Arelated issue is presidential pardons. In the closing
weeks of the presidential campaign, Bob Dole made a big fuss about Clinton's
refusal to categorically rule out pardons for former associates caught up in
Whitewater. Several Republicans in Congress said they would consider such
pardons grounds for impeachment. But in 1992, a lame-duck George Bush was
following Dole's urging when he pardoned Caspar Weinberger and five others
indicted or convicted in Iran-Contra. Dole called Walsh's investigation "an
outrageous $35 million political persecution of Republicans," and applauded the
pardons. At the time, Walsh was trying to get Weinberger to rat out Bush in
exactly the same way Starr reportedly is trying to get Susan McDougal to finger
Clinton.

            
Republicans have also evolved a bit on the issue of "executive privilege," the
doctrine that protects communications between the president and his top
advisers. In 1982, Ronald Reagan invoked this right to keep EPA documents about
toxic-waste disposal from Congress. George Bush did the same when the House
Banking Committee got interested in his administration's relationship with Iraq
before the Gulf War. In instances where Clinton has asserted the privilege,
however, the same Republicans who apologized for Reagan and Bush have been
scathing in their denunciations. For instance, when Clinton cited executive
privilege as a reason for holding back a memo from FBI Director Louis Freeh
criticizing his drug policies, Bob Dole asserted that the president had no
basis for refusing to divulge it.

            
Another case in point is the matter of the
president's powers as commander in chief. In the 1980s, Democrats could be
counted upon to argue that Republican presidents needed congressional
authorization for military action. Republicans, on the other hand, invariably
maintained that the War Powers Act, which Congress passed in 1973 to assert its
constitutional power to declare war, was unconstitutional, and that military
authority rested solely with the president. Reagan argued that the War Powers
Act didn't apply when he sent troops to Lebanon in 1982, or to Grenada in 1983,
or when he bombed Libya in 1986. George Bush didn't ask permission to invade
Panama in 1989. Bush did ask for a resolution authorizing the Gulf War--by far
the biggest U.S. military action since Vietnam--but only with the stipulation
that he would go ahead with or without Congress' OK.

            Since a
Democrat has occupied the White House, it has been a different story. When
Clinton sent troops to Haiti over GOP objections, Republicans voted for a
resolution declaring that Clinton "should have sought" congressional support.
In the fall of 1995, none other than Henry Kissinger--the author of the secret
incursion into Cambodia that prompted the War Powers Act--asserted that Clinton
must "obtain clear and unambiguous congressional backing" before sending troops
to Bosnia. And after not being told in advance about a missile attack on Iraq
in September, Republicans on the Senate Armed Services Committee spoke of
reviving the War Powers Act.

            Or, consider the issue of informing Congress about "covert
actions." In the 1980s, Democrats on the Intelligence Committee were always
complaining that the Reagan administration had failed to tell them it was
mining Nicaragua's harbors, arming the Contras, and so on. Republicans said
Congress was trying to "micromanage" foreign policy, couldn't be trusted not to
leak vital secrets, and so on. Now, it is Republicans who are apoplectic about
a much less compelling incident, the Clinton administration's failure to relay
its knowledge that Iran was secretly arming the Bosnian Muslims. Sen. Arlen
Specter says this breach is so serious that he may hold up Anthony Lake's
nomination to head the CIA. But Democrats have admitted their mistake; Lake and
outgoing CIA Director John Deutsch have both said the administration should
have told Congress about the Iranian arms sales, even though the United States
wasn't behind them. And the Intelligence Committee has concluded that the
Clinton people broke no laws in this incident. During the Iran-Contra affair,
no comparable gestures of contrition were forthcoming from Republicans. And in
that case, laws were broken.

            No one expected a great deal
of intellectual consistency from Richard Nixon or Gerald Ford. But today's GOP
wants to be the "party of ideas" and looks to leaders like Newt Gingrich and
Antonin Scalia to articulate its guiding principles. To govern according to
well-defined precepts is a worthy aspiration. But so far, for Republicans, an
aspiration is all it is.

         
      
   
