
   
   
      
         
            Pundit Heaven

            
               Pundit
Heaven
            

            
               
                  Slate
                is proud
to announce the addition of 41 new columnists. Well, not exactly. What we have
added is a new page called Pundit Links, with links to the most recent columns by
nearly every major opinionmeister currently available on the Web, ranging
alphabetically from Russell Baker to George Will, and ideologically from Molly
Ivins to--oh, R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr., we suppose. The whole New York
Times crowd is there, for example: Maureen Dowd, Frank Rich, A.M.
Rosenthal, and so on. Along with 32 political pundits, there are links to nine
gossip columns--the New York Post "Page Six," Liz Smith, and so on--as
well as to the op-ed pages of seven major newspapers.

            Get to
Pundit Links by clicking here, or via our "Pundit
Central" page, where we give you a quick and (we hope) insightful and
entertaining roundup of what happened on the weekend talk shows. And if you
don't want to trust us on this, Pundit Links will take you to the talk-show
transcripts, too. Bookmark Pundit Links (Netscape Navigator users) or put it in
your Favorites folder (Microsoft Internet Explorer or America Online users) and
you'll never find yourself short of an opinion again.

            
               Having
Written, Continued
            

            Who said, "I don't like
writing, I like having written"? "Readme" asserted it was Gloria Steinem.
Sundry readers guffawed and credited Dorothy Parker or Gertrude Stein. Now
comes 
                  Slate
                reader (and occasional writer--see his dispatches on
"My Life as a
Nielsen Family") Randy Cohen with the following from Dr. Johnson: "I allow
you may have pleasure from writing, after it is over, if you have written well;
but you don't go willingly to it again."

            Any other nominees? Let us
know at read@slate.com.

            

               --Michael Kinsley
            

         
      
   
