
   
   
      
         
            Here's an Idea

            Talk to a Democratic
pollster or consultant these days, and you're likely to hear a lament about the
shortage of politically potent ideas. Looking toward the midterm election in
1998, President Clinton and his party have no rabble-rousing answer to the
Republican promise of sweeping tax overhaul. Sure, they can point out that the
most familiar conservative proposal--Dick Armey's Flat Tax--is a hoax. It would
produce a huge revenue shortfall for the government and/or a big tax hike for
the middle class. But you can't beat a horse with no horse. Republicans have on
their side populist ire against the IRS, lobbyists, lawyers, and accountants.
And filing your return on a postcard--or not having to file one at all--is a
pretty appealing notion.

            In fact,
there's a perfect Democratic answer to Armey's tax reform. It's called tax
reform: good tax reform. The shared idea of both kinds of tax reform is
cleaning the Augean stables of the tax code. You make everyone's life simpler,
and you get lower rates by getting rid of loopholes and making the law neutral
among different kinds of income; you promote economic efficiency. Resources go
where the invisible hand directs them, not where they can get the most
favorable tax treatment. Under the reform championed by Bill Bradley, which
passed in 1986, the corporate rate dropped from 48 percent to 34 percent. For
individuals, 14 brackets and a top rate of 50 percent shrank into three
brackets and a top rate of 28 percent.

            But the 1986 tax reform has been gradually undone by three
intervening budget bills, in '90, '93, and '97. Preferences have crept back in,
shelters are returning (see 
                  Slate
               's do-it-yourself tax
shelter), and figuring out your taxes is more complicated than ever. Yet
for some reason, the only major politician who has tried to latch onto the
issue is Richard Gephardt. Gephardt, who was a sponsor of tax reform in the
1980s (the original bill was known as Bradley-Gephardt), has proposed to do it
again. He points out that higher tax rates for higher incomes aren't what make
the tax code complicated: You can get 99 percent of the flat tax's simplicity
without giving up the principle of progressivity. Gephardt's version of tax
reform would make the code more progressive. A basic rate of 10 percent
would cover 75 percent of taxpayers. Four other rates, ranging up to 34
percent, would cover the rest. Gephardt would get rid of all deductions except
those for home-mortgage interest, charitable contributions, and state and local
taxes.

            
Some version of this idea ought to be a natural
for Clinton. As he made clear in an interview with the New York Times
last week, he's fishing around for a tax proposal to include in his January
State of the Union address. Unfortunately, the reports trickling out suggest
that he is likely to suggest some modest tinkering--a small tax rebate, paid
for by possible future budget surpluses, or more "targeted" incentives to
promote the right kind of investment. Clinton seems to have no interest in bold
and sweeping tax reform. Why not?

            The most
common explanations you hear are: 1) Dick Gephardt; 2) Bob Rubin; and 3) the
interest groups. The Gephardt theory is based on political rivalry. Clinton and
Al Gore don't want to be accused of copyright infringement. Under the most
Machiavellian theory, the election of a Democratic Congress in 1998 would be
bad for Gore, since he would have to run against Speaker Gephardt in
2000. This supposedly makes Clinton want to avoid excessively good ideas until
after the midterm election. The Rubin theory is that the Treasury secretary has
persuaded everyone to let well enough alone. With the economy swimming along so
nicely, why meddle? The last theory, the most malignant, is that the Democrats
are too much in the thrall of interest groups and fat-cat campaign contributors
to assault their cherished tax preferences.

            None of these explanations fully adds up. In politics,
plagiarism is not only legal but also often effective. If Gore and Gephardt
were both for tax reform, Gephardt would lose his best issue. "I thought of it
first" is a pretty weak line in a debate. The Rubin argument may have a little
more substance. Tinkering with the tax code is always hazardous. When lobbyists
see the hood open, they all come running with their monkey wrenches--you never
know what may get "fixed." But that's a better argument against the grab bag of
breaks that Clinton is likely to propose (which will encourage special
pleading) than it is against sweeping reform. The power of moneyed interests
doesn't explain much, either. All the industries that benefit most from tax
loopholes--real estate, oil and gas, finance--give much more money to
Republicans. Only the unions, worried about the deduction for employer-paid
health care, cut much sway with Democrats.

            A better
explanation for the failure to jump aboard tax reform is the wider political
predicament of liberals. In the present climate, it is nearly impossible to
spend money on new spending programs. But it is sometimes possible to disguise
spending programs as tax breaks. Of course, a dollar of government revenue lost
to an investment tax credit is a dollar added to the national debt as surely as
a dollar spent on food stamps. In fact, the cost is usually higher, since
indirect incentives tend to be less efficient than direct expenditures. But
Republicans tolerate government-by-incentive, so Democrats rely on it. A clean
tax code would foreclose this dodge.

            
Since he was a governor, Bill Clinton has
recognized the tax code as an excellent hiding place for social policy. If he
has any appreciation of the economic value of tax neutrality, or of the
political appeal of simplicity, he has never shown it. In the 1992 campaign
Clinton proposed not only higher rates on the rich and a new business tax to
support worker training, but also augmented research and development credits, a
long-term capital-gains exclusion, and various other bounties intended to
support education and the environment. Although Clinton's 1993 budget plan
indisputably strengthened the economy by reducing the budget deficit, it truly
undid tax reform. It turned four rates into six and created a powerful bias in
favor of capital gains vs. ordinary income. In 1997, Clinton drove dozens of
nails into the coffin: The bill he signed created six different capital-gains
rates, two kinds of IRAs, and so on. (Many of these were actually Republican
initiatives, pushed by the very politicians out there denouncing the complex
tax code and demanding a flat, no-loopholes system.)

            The president obviously
isn't an economic purist. But you still have to wonder how such a smart policy
wonk can fail to be bothered by the perversities and complications of the tax
code. The only other explanation is something we learned about Clinton during
all that Whitewater business. Hillary does the taxes.

         
      
   
