
   
   
      
         
            Such a Deal

            If you want to understand
the bitter debate over rent control that now dominates social interaction in
New York, you have to begin by ignoring arguments about social justice, market
economics, and all appeals to principle. Instead, apply crude Marxist dogma:
It's a battle of naked class interest. The catch is that the "classes"
glowering at each other across the barricades aren't rich and poor. They're the
New Yorkers with scandalously sweet deals vs. all those who get screwed as a
result.

            Recent
experience has done much to reinforce my own class consciousness as a member of
the latter group. My wife and I were minding our own business in an unregulated
apartment in the rapidly gentrifying East Village when we returned from work
one day to a letter informing us that our already (to non-New Yorkers) alarming
rent of $1,950 was going up $700. That's for a largish one-bedroom in a
marginal neighborhood. This catapulted us into Manhattan-real-estate hell, a
place where rapacious brokers extract usurious commissions on glorified broom
closets renting for $2,300 a month. We lucked out, relatively speaking. Thanks
to a connection, we fell into a nice, $2,000 one-bedroom in Chelsea, without
paying a finder's fee. Absent the artificial shortage created by rent
regulation, we would either have a bigger place or pay much less for the one
we've got.

            The moral and economic arguments against rent control are
pretty much unassailable. Under the present system, government intervenes in
the market to protect a class of people defined to some extent by long-term
residency, but to an even larger extent by luck. This massive intrusion in the
real-estate market, which might be hard to justify even if it had purely
beneficial consequences, has a number of obviously disastrous ones. It deters
young people and new immigrants from moving to New York City; it encourages
landlords to neglect their buildings; it makes them hate their tenants. But
even as a victim of this misbegotten system, I hope Joseph Bruno, the
Republican state Senate leader who has been threatening to let all the rules
expire on June 15, cuts a deal to let rent control continue a little longer.
New York City is a highly complex, weirdly evolved organism--kind of like a
pickled old codger living on gin and cigarettes: He should have started
behaving more sensibly a long time ago, but forcing him to suddenly do it now
would be an act of cruelty, more likely to kill him than to make him
healthier.

            What would
happen if rent regulations were really abolished? It's a pretty safe bet that
in most parts of Manhattan, market rents would settle in somewhere between the
$2,000 a month I pay and the $600 that others pay for nearly identical
apartments in the same building. Using the estimates promoted by the Rent
Stabilization Association (the newspeak name for the group representing
landlords who actually wish to end rent stabilization), the typical
one-bedroom in the Village or on the Upper West Side might go for $1,300 to
$1,400 after the shakeout. A rent like that calls for a pretax income of at
least $50,000. Once you figure in New York City and state taxes, a more
realistic figure would be $60,000. A two-bedroom apartment suitable for raising
a child in might cost only a bit over $2,000, which would demand an income of
at least $90,000. These are conservative estimates; I find it hard to imagine
bargains like that being freely available, even in a totally deregulated
market.

            
The poor, who are subsidized directly, and are
likely to be exempted even in the case of radical decontrol, would stay put.
What Manhattan would lose is what remains of its middle class, those earning
between $25,000 and, say, $75,000. This would mean a tremendous blow to the
city's social variety and cultural vitality. Gone would be the used-bookstore
owner, the public-school teacher, the family that's been in the same Upper West
Side building for 100 years, the office manager (a guy I actually know) who
attends every performance of the Metropolitan Opera. Without protection for
those marginal, cosmopolitan souls who cling to it tenuously, Manhattan would
become much more the way people who don't live here imagine it, a soulless
playground for yuppies, with an alienated underclass underfoot. The city would
become more rational and less charming--more like Tokyo, less like Rome. The
irony is that the yuppies who would benefit financially from the end of the
rent-control system would probably like living here much less without it.

            Decontrol
would also make New York uglier. One of the big points made by opponents of
rent control is that the present system prevents the construction of new
buildings. Because rent regulations say you can't evict people when their
leases are up (if they even have leases), one obstinate tenement dweller can
block the creation of a 50-story high-rise. But who wants new buildings in
Manhattan? What an apartment building looks like--on the outside--affects
everybody, not just the landlord and the tenant. New York's old buildings are
gracious and charming, even those that are run-down. Its new ones--at least
those of the residential variety--are generally horrible. It is rent control
that has preserved the aesthetic as well as the social fabric of the kind of
variegated, low-rise neighborhoods Jane Jacobs celebrated in The Death and
Life of Great American Cities , which in many other places were knocked down
to make way for high-rise development. Manhattan, again like Rome, should be
regarded as largely finished.

            In all likelihood, there will be a compromise on rent
control. Let's hope it's not like the "luxury decontrol" compromise in 1993,
when everyone agreed to end controls for those with incomes over $250,000,
whose apartments rented for over $2,000. Both conditions apply, which means
that if you earn $8 million, and your eight-room apartment on Central Park West
only costs $847, you get away unmolested. Rent-control defenders stick up for
the worst excesses of the system on Realpolitik grounds; they want the
rich on their side in the fight to keep the whole shebang. But given the
outrage such excesses generate, advocates would be better off cutting the rich
loose and gaining a modicum of redistributive equity for their side of the
argument. Any sane person has to be against rent control after hearing about
Bernard-Alexis Poisson de Menars, a French marquis who a few years ago was
reported by Newsday to be paying $103.50 a month for a duplex on the
Upper East Side that he didn't even live in. When his landlord tried to lure
him into a smaller apartment in the same neighborhood, he insisted that it
would not befit a man of his "class and social station." This time, the
"luxury" threshold will probably be scaled back, while exempting anyone over
62, regardless of income. Surely there should be an exemption for middle- and
lower-income elderly. But why should Alistair Cooke get to keep hogging those
eight rooms on Fifth Avenue for $2,078? If he wants all that space, let him pay
for it.

            
The goal of a rent-regulation compromise should
be to diminish unfairness and mitigate perverse side effects without giving a
shock to the city's social system. This argues for a fairly straightforward
means test for rent control, say $100,000 a year. There will be people, some of
them elderly, who make more than $100,000 but still can't afford the rents
their apartments could command on the free market. They will have to move. How
big a tragedy is that?

            The other essential reform
is "vacancy decontrol," which would allow landlords to charge market rent when
apartments empty. (Tenant groups argue that this gives landlords an incentive
to harass tenants. But landlords have plenty of incentive to harass tenants
now, since they're already allowed to raise the rent somewhat when an apartment
changes hands.) The intergenerational handing down of rent-controlled
apartments, which Gov. George Pataki favors, perhaps on the Republican
principle that no form of inherited wealth is bad, should also disappear. These
reforms would mean that rent control would evanesce over the next 30 or 40
years. It would be Nicorette for New York's neighborhoods, instead of cold
turkey.

         
      
   
