
   
   
      
         
            The Jesse Helms Ballet

            Every year around this time,
the Rite of Spring is performed in Washington. Sadly, this is not the great
Stravinksy-Diaghilev collaboration, but a less distinguished ballet
choreographed by Jesse Helms. Here's the synopsis: In the first scene, a
Republican trots onto the stage and declares himself mortally offended by some
bit of raunchiness connected to the National Endowment for the Arts. (This year
it's Pete Hoekstra of Michigan, who is distraught over The Watermelon
Woman , a film about black lesbians.) As percussive storm clouds gather,
distinguished artists like Ron Silver and Whoopi Goldberg swoosh in to defend
the agency. The battle rages; the agency eludes destruction. The curtain falls
on conservatives shaking their fists and vowing to get the NEA next time, like
Snoopy cursing the Red Baron.

            But does
the NEA really escape? Jane Alexander, who has chaired the endowment since
1993, has been a formidable advocate for continued culture funding. She has
successfully walked a tightrope in the censorship debates, using her
administrative power to block grants that would have spelled trouble while
sticking up for those that came under attack after they were awarded. Neither
left-wing performance artists nor right-wing senators have called for her head.
Her shrewdness and star appeal may have kept the endowment alive through
troubled times. But the well-intentioned Alexander may ultimately be seen as
the William Westmoreland of the NEA. For the sake of preserving the agency, she
has come close to destroying it.

            Take a look at the NEA's just-announced 1997 grants. The
chairwoman is not to blame for how few there are. In 1995, Congress cut the
culture agency's budget from $170 million to $99.5 million, and banned awards
to individual artists. What is largely Alexander's doing, however, is that the
remaining grants reflect not a serious commitment to high culture in America
but a kind of passive, middlebrow populism. Alexander's survival strategy has
been to slosh a thin gruel of artistic mediocrity around the country. The
strategy has worked, and may have been necessary, and of course it's easy to
carp from the outside. But I think she has carried it a bit too far.

            Until the
budget cuts, the NEA gave awards in 17 categories corresponding to familiar
disciplines in the fine arts. Alexander's forced reorganization collapsed the
17 into four: "Planning & Stabilization," "Education & Access,"
"Heritage & Preservation," and "Creation & Presentation." Even the
names reflect a kind of pre-emptive surrender--no art here, they declare. The
biggest chunk of change--$29.5 million--now goes as block grants to state and
regional arts agencies. Most of what's left goes to arts administration and
arts education. The little direct support remaining is geared to sound
inoffensive. In fact, much of it is political, but in a mushy
identity-diversity way. The result is that the agency's enemies and friends
alike may die of boredom before they turn up anything either offensive or
inspiring.

            
Turn to a page of the new awards at random.
Fifty-five thousand dollars goes to Ballet Hispanico of New York, "to support
the development of a model study unit, utilizing concerts, study guides,
teacher training and residences, to celebrate the cultural contributions made
by Hispanics to the United States." A theater in Berkeley gets 75 grand for an
"Asian Pacific American Audience Initiative." An "international festival of
Wheelchair Dance" gets 40. Elsewhere, there's $50,000 for the East Tennessee
Community Design Center in Knoxville, to help "design professionals" bring
"alternative design" to "underserved areas." Another $75,000 goes to the
Concerned Citizens for Humanity Ltd. of Hartford, Conn., "to support the
creation of STOPAIDS, a statewide design project tailored to educate at-risk
youth and persons with hearing disabilities on the problems of HIV/AIDS."

            The NEA
does still support some elitist high culture, including the Metropolitan Museum
and the Seattle Opera. But the drift toward art as self-esteem building and
away from art for art's sake is clear. In part this reflects trends in the art
world. It also reflects Alexander's strategy of encouraging conservative
legislators to rethink their philosophical objections to arts spending through
the crude but effective device of putting money in their districts. In recent
congressional testimony, Alexander began her litany of the NEA's good works
with "important folk arts projects like the one sponsored by the Alabama
Folklife Association to publish and document primitive Baptist hymns." Do I
detect a subtle jab even as Alexander outmaneuvered the Baptist primitives in
Congress?

            The endowment's supporters in the entertainment industry
are less deft. At a rally in Washington in early April, a Broadway composer
named Richard Adler sat down at the piano and declared, "I dedicate this medley
of my songs to Senator Jesse Helms and to Newt Gingrich--to their destruction."
In the words of Alec Baldwin, who heads the Creative Coalition, "The people who
run the Republican Party in this country are really rotten, nasty, horrible
human beings." Such comments can hardly make life easier for the civilized
Republicans like Amo Houghton and Rick Lazio of New York, whose dissent from
party orthodoxy is all that is keeping the NEA alive at present.

            The
arguments made by movie stars in defense of the NEA are even sillier. Actors
like Susan Sarandon and Whoopi Goldberg seem incapable of grasping that denying
someone a government grant doesn't violate the right to free speech. Hardly
more persuasive is F. Murray Abraham's line that "if farmers can be subsidized
for not growing things, why can't artists be subsidized for producing?"
Republicans are quick to point out that they're phasing out farm subsidies. But
even if they weren't, arts subsidies can't be justified on the basis that they
even out the spending score for urbanites. The justification for the NEA is
that we as a nation want a more robust cultural and intellectual life than the
market will otherwise provide. Claiming an equal right to pork-barrel
undermines that case.

            
There is, to be sure, plenty of idiocy among
the NEA-bashers. Sen. Tim Hutchinson, R-Ark., argued at a recent press
conference that government funding for the arts is censorship. Others at
the same event made the facile case that federal funding produces bad art.
"This is about an elite group who want the government to define what art is
good," Newt Gingrich said. GOP Whip Tom DeLay added that "the American people
will get better art once the government gets out of the way."

            It is fun to speculate about
Tom DeLay's idea of "better art." Maybe fewer pictures of whips in rectums and
more of rectitudinous whips? It's strange that conservatives who insist that
the government must make more forceful moral judgments take the relativistic
position that it's incapable of ever making aesthetic ones. And their
criticisms of the NEA are self-fulfilling. In the old days, nobody paid much
attention, and the artists on NEA panels were free to make meritorious
decisions. They supported a lot of great and good art. Now, in an environment
politicized by the right, the NEA is supporting more of what Gingrich deems
"bureaucratic art." Whose fault is that?

            The NEA is alive, but it's
on life support. Know-nothing attacks and a desperate defense strategy have
conspired to wreck what a decade ago stood as a well-functioning, valuable, and
inexpensive agency of government. Jesse Helms is still complaining, but he's
having the last laugh just the same.

         
      
   
