
   
   
      
         
            Sen. Symbol, R-Pa.

            Rick Santorum, the
pudgy-faced freshman senator from Pennsylvania, is a hero among social
conservatives this week for producing a big majority vote in favor of his
proposed ban on partial-birth abortions. Even pro-choice pundits have declared
themselves impressed that Santorum got five more votes than he did the last
time his bill came up, and that this year's converts included Minority Leader
Tom Daschle of South Dakota (who emitted a stream of gobbledygook when asked to
explain his flip-flop).

            But it
may be worth noting that thanks to his victory, Santorum will be responsible
for more, not fewer, abortions in the United States. Here's why: As the debate
heated up last week, Daschle offered a compromise that the White House was
apparently willing to support. Daschle's alternative would have gone far beyond
what Santorum has proposed, banning abortions by any method once a fetus is
"viable." The point of viability is now as early as 22 weeks into a pregnancy
(and seems likely to be stalled there absent some huge scientific
breakthrough--see Slate's "Gist"). But Santorum rejected Daschle's proposal in favor of his
own narrower ban.

            Why would a believing Catholic like Santorum attach a
higher priority to prohibiting a grotesque-seeming but relatively rare practice
than to curtailing--perhaps significantly--the number of abortions performed
nationally? Santorum himself has contended that partial-birth abortions are
never necessary--from the patient's point of view. If his partial-birth ban
becomes law, women could still get a late-term abortion using a different
method. But under Daschle's proposal, late-term abortions of all types would
become illegal, except in cases where there was a dire threat to the mother's
health. What's more, Clinton indicated that he would have signed the Daschle
alternative, which would have made it the law of the land. Clinton has pledged
to veto Santorum's bill. In other words, Santorum preferred having an issue
with which to beat Democrats to achieving a genuine victory. He hinted at this
reasoning at the press conference he held Tuesday after the vote. "We've got
members up for re-election," he told reporters. "I wouldn't want to be home
defending this vote anywhere in the country."

            That
choice is the essence of Rick Santorum. All politicians draw upon symbols and
symbolic issues like partial-birth abortion, which often have little real-world
consequences. Few, though, can match Santorum in the pursuit of political
symbolism to the detriment of substance. In his quest for wedge issues,
Santorum has managed, in his short time in the Senate, to make Trent Lott look
like a man of principle, John Warner like a deep thinker, and Newt Gingrich
like Miss Manners.

            
Like many on the right who decry the role of
government, Santorum is largely a product of it. In Martinsburg, W. Va., where
he lived until the age of 7, both his parents worked at the Veterans'
Administration Hospital. With the help of student loans, young Rick attended
Penn State, then got an MBA from the University of Pittsburgh and a law degree
from Dickinson. He bought his first house with the help of a Pennsylvania
low-income-housing assistance program. His only exposure to life in the private
sector was a brief stint as a lawyer and lobbyist (where his clients included
the World Wrestling Federation). Nonetheless, Santorum can sound like a militia
member when he gets busy denouncing big government: "I've read the Bible.
Nowhere in the Bible does it say that America will be here 100 years from now,"
he said at a rally in 1994. "We can blow this. This country can fail. This
government can take your freedom. I know you feel safe for now ... but don't
give up your freedoms. Don't give up your freedom." In the article in which
these comments were quoted, his tone of voice was described as an impassioned
whisper.

            After he
was elected to the House in 1990, Santorum became the leader of the so-called
"Group of Seven," a clique that prefigured the Gingrich class of 1994. His
gang's chief issue was the House Bank scandal and their goal, to force full
disclosure of the number of checks bounced by various members. Their
second-biggest issue was opposition to congressional pay raises. While he tried
to incite the public about these totemic reform issues, Santorum immersed
himself in the far more subversive legal corruption of the campaign-finance
system. His biggest supporters were the pharmaceutical and medical-insurance
industries, impressed with his implacable resistance to health-care reform. In
both the House and the Senate, he has remained firm in his doctrinaire
opposition to any kind of meaningful campaign-finance reform.

            Hepped up on Gingrich's candidate-training tapes, Santorum
announced his plans to run against incumbent Harris Wofford in 1994. The
winning campaign Santorum ran was notable for its uncalled-for personal
nastiness. Responding to Wofford's support for national service, Santorum
smirked, "Someone's going to pick up trash in a park and sing 'Kumbayah' around
a campfire and you're going to give them 90 percent of the benefits of the GI
Bill." Santorum fictitiously claimed that those enrolled in AmeriCorps received
$30,000 a year, then accused Wofford of being dishonest. "I have never seen
another candidate in my life who would stand up in front of the voters and tell
lies, absolute lies, the way he does," he fulminated.

            At 36,
Santorum became the youngest member of the Senate and made a name for treating
fainthearted older members of his own party with the same boorishness and
arrogance he had displayed toward Wofford. Shortly after being elected, he
attacked Mark Hatfield, the senior senator from Oregon, for refusing to provide
the margin of victory in a Senate vote on the balanced-budget amendment.
Santorum proposed punishing Hatfield by stripping him of his chairmanship of
the Appropriations Committee. That, Santorum reasoned, was how things worked in
the House. The effort was roundly defeated in the Republican Caucus.

            
Santorum's personal unpleasantness and affinity
for injecting religion into politics have led many liberals to cast him as a
sort of Jesse Helms of the North. In fact, Santorum's voting record on many
issues is more in line with the moderate profile of Pennsylvania's other
senator, Arlen Specter. Santorum is rarely on the losing side of any 80-20 vote
in the Senate. Though he is no friend to the environmental movement, he is
relatively pro-union. He supported Bill Clinton's proposed ban on permanent
replacement of strikers and voted for an increase in the minimum wage.

            One looks in vain, however,
for any thread of consistent belief. Santorum is pro-life, but supports the
death penalty; he opposed NAFTA, but favored GATT; he wants to balance the
budget while providing more pork for Pennsylvania. Unlike some of his class of
'94 comrades in the House, who are principled in their bullheaded way, he never
met a principle he wouldn't swap for a few more votes. As he cultivates the
impression that he is standing on his convictions in the partial-birth abortion
fight, Rick Santorum is in reality doing just the opposite.

         
      
   
