
   
   
      
         
            Big-Tent Democrats

            Last week I noted that while
Republicans are quarreling in a self-destructive way, like old-fashioned
Democrats, Democrats appear to have learned Ronald Reagan's lesson about
submerging internal differences for the sake of victory. Can this be true?

            If
Democrats are doing less infighting, it isn't because they've reached some sort
of ideological consensus. On the main issues of domestic and economic policy,
the disagreements among Democrats are greater than the gap between Bill Clinton
and the Republicans in Congress. Traditional Democrats think balancing the
budget is a big mistake. Self-styled "New" Democrats regard it as Clinton's
proudest accomplishment. Liberals are still smarting over the fact that he
signed the welfare-reform bill. To centrists, it was a moral and political leap
forward. Labor unions are intent on stopping trade liberalization. Globalizing
Democrats think it's curtains if Chile doesn't get to join NAFTA.

            In the House, the trade fight is getting pretty nasty. The
AFL-CIO and the Teamsters feel unappreciated for the role they played in
Clinton's re-election, and the UPS strike left them in a truculent mood. But
even with its new militancy, labor seems to recognize that the half-loaf of an
impure Democratic administration is vastly preferable to no loaf--a Republican
one.

            Others on
the party's left manifest an even more striking change in attitude. Take a look
at The New Majority , a recent collection of essays by left-wing economic
populists. As recently as a couple of years ago, many of these left Democrats
couldn't go a paragraph without denouncing the moderating tendencies of the
Democratic Leadership Council. These days, most offer only a gentle tug in the
opposite direction. Paul Starr, a sociology professor at Princeton who was once
a harsh critic of the New Democrats, writes that "the party won't fly without
both of its wings." Building the Bridge , a collection put out earlier
this year by the DLC-affiliated Progressive Policy Institute, omits the usual
DLC tirades against the paleolibs. Note, however, that the motivation in both
cases is pragmatic agreement-to-disagree (what Lee Atwater, as Republican
chairman, used to call "the big tent") rather than any genuine ideological
convergence.

            
Part of the explanation for the warming trend
is that the most divisive issues of the 1970s and '80s have faded. There's no
Democratic fratricide on defense and foreign policy because after the Cold War
there's little to get fratricidal about. On cultural issues, many of the scabs
Democrats used to love to pick have healed. George Stephanopoulos offers a
wonderful example of how Democrats used to act. After the bruising
Kennedy-Carter convention fight in 1980, the National Organization for Women
refused to endorse Jimmy Carter--over Ronald Reagan! That wouldn't happen
today, largely because the issue of women's rights no longer divides either the
Democrats or the larger society. (And that is because on this issue, among
others, the left has carried the day--despite the bromide that ideology has
ended because conservative ideas have won.)

            Of
course, there still are divisive social issues. But Bill Clinton has done a
shrewd job of abandoning the losing issues while turning the rest to the
party's advantage. He surrendered on the death penalty, welfare, and civil
liberties while sticking with abortion, gun control, and affirmative action.
This solution offers something to centrist reformers and something to the
party's interest-group base.

            But the chief reason for relative harmony is the object
lesson of the last few elections. Democrats have seen the fruit of their
Yugoslav tendencies, and they have decided they'd better learn to live
together. In 1992, they were more or less tricked into making common cause.
Bill Clinton touched all the party's erogenous zones, wooing each faction into
the illusion that he loved it alone. After the Inauguration, each awoke to the
realization that the president was a policy polygamist. Disappointed by
Clinton's too-sweeping health-care-reform plan and his failure to cut spending,
the DLC trashed him openly and, at one point, even considered breaking off from
the party. Disenchanted by Clinton's pursuit of free-trade expansion, labor
largely sat out the 1994 midterm.

            That
election taught all of them that there are things worse than partial victory.
In Newt Gingrich and the Republican radicals, Democrats new and old found the
unifying force of a common enemy. Whether you wanted charter schools and
tradable pollution credits or higher pay for teachers and EPA mandates, you
didn't want the federal government to abdicate all responsibility for education
and the environment. And with the president defending against an
anti-government assault wave, there was no need to settle on a Democratic
agenda. The question of what new programs to support would be a largely
theoretical exercise, at least for a while.

            
But as the Newt peril fades, Democratic
differences are becoming clearer. The first thing the party disagrees about is
why Clinton recovered and won re-election. Old Democrats point to a poll by
Stanley Greenberg, Clinton's 1992 pollster. It showed that 59 percent of those
who voted for Clinton in 1996 did so because of his support for domestic
programs--his defense of Medicare, Medicaid, education, and the environment.
Only 31 percent of those who voted for Clinton did so because of his "centrist"
positions--a balanced budget and welfare reform. New Democrats, on the other
hand, point to a post-election study by Mark Penn, Clinton's 1996 pollster.
According to Penn, Clinton won because of his centrism and his emphasis on
values issues. Where Greenberg contends that "downscale" voters provided
Clinton's margin of victory, Penn argues it was middle-income,
middle-of-the-road suburban voters who swung the election.

            Each
analysis supports a political ideology. Greenberg and the contributors to
The New Majority think Democrats can win future elections by identifying
with the concerns of working people. Those in the bottom half are threatened by
globalization and technological change. They look to Washington to mitigate the
new economy's negative consequences. The party should thus support, and not in
any way privatize or drastically reform, the successful social-insurance
programs like Medicare and Social Security that made it popular with downscale
voters in the first place. Beyond that, the Democratic agenda should be to
extend new benefits like universal health care and child care.

            Penn and the New Democrats disagree with all this. They
think the Democrats must identify with the moral and economic concerns of a
largely suburban middle class. For these people, the New Economy offers more
promise than hazard. New Democrats don't want any expensive new federal
programs, and they want to remake most of the old ones with market-based
ideas.

            Bill Clinton has developed a
rhetoric and a series of positions that span this divide. He supports
"families" and the "future" without specifying which families or what future.
Initiatives like community policing and expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit
appeal to all parties in the debate. But what happens after Clinton? Many on
both sides anticipate that the Democratic primary of 2000 will be a showdown,
with Dick Gephardt representing the old Dems and Al Gore standing in for the
new. But it may not shake out that way. Gephardt might or might not emerge as a
serious challenger to Gore. The election could just as easily be a contest
among several candidates--such as Bob Kerrey, Bill Bradley, Tom Daschle, and
Gore--all of them trying to emulate Clinton's flight on both wings. That was
what George Bush tried to do after Reagan. It worked well for a while, until it
didn't work at all.

         
      
   
