
   
   
      
         
            Search for tomorrow.

            
               Search
for Tomorrow
            

            We are
pleased to introduce, as of sometime Friday, Aug. 22, Slate Search 2.0--a new,
improved version of our search function. In addition to a normal text search of
the entire site, Slate Search 2.0 will allow you to:

            Search all Slate articles,
present and past;

            Search for articles by a
particular author, or get a list of all Slate authors;

            Search for articles in a
particular department, or get a list of all Slate departments;

            Search
for articles that ran on or around a particular date.

            A simplified search function
(Slate Search Lite) will appear on the bottom of every new page from now on,
and the full-featured search is available on the Search Page. There is
also a page of Search Hints.

            In short,
you no longer have an excuse not to explore the riches of Slate, past and
present, whenever the need arises for insight on any aspect of the human
condition. Please give it a try.

            
               But Wait.
There's More!
            

            Our crack
development team (that is, our development team that is crack, not our team
developing crack) is hard at work on Slate Search 3.0. This upgrade will allow
you to:

            Search for words that rhyme
with a particular word, or get a list of all words;

            Search for articles of a
particular ideological slant or cultural preference (such as a prejudice
against Norwegian movies);

            Search for articles by
authors who have been divorced, have red hair, or voted Republican in at least
three but not more than five of the past six presidential elections;

            Search for condescension,
sentimentality, irony (with separate options for intentional and
unintentional), pandering, obscurantism, and puns;

            Search for hidden codes that
prove the existence of God;

            Search for "666," hotlinks to
Netscape, and other evidence of Satan worship;

            Search for
obsequious references to Bill Gates.

            This will be a marvelous new
tool, produced by a marvelous company. Is Bill Gates a great guy, or what?

            

               --Michael Kinsley
            

         
      
   
