
   
   
      
         
            Payback Time

            Back when Republicans owned
the White House and Democrats ran the Senate, Orrin Hatch of Utah was the
Florence Nightingale of wounded nominees. He called it a "tragedy" that
"politics" had entered the judicial-nomination system. Defending Robert Bork,
Hatch commented, "When you have a man of this caliber, I think it's just
terrible to try and make an ideological battle out of it." When it came to
executive-branch appointments, Hatch was adamant that the Senate defer to the
president's choices. On this basis, he stood up for William Bradford Reynolds,
rejected for the No. 3 job at the Justice Department in 1985; and William
Lucas, shot down as head of the civil-rights division in 1989.

            Now Hatch
is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, and he's the one blocking the
president's choices--most recently the nomination of Bill Lann Lee to be
assistant attorney general for civil rights. Aware that he is vulnerable to a
charge of double standards, Hatch has his defense ready. He says he's not a
hypocrite, because the Democrats changed the rules. In a hearing before the
recess, Sen. Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., proposed that the committee pass the Lee
nomination on to the full Senate without a recommendation, something Hatch had
wanted to do for Lucas eight years ago. Hatch responded that sauce for the
goose is sauce for the gander. "I argued for reporting the nominations of Brad
Reynolds and Bill Lucas without recommendations," he said. "But Sens. Biden,
Kennedy, Leahy, and Kohl all voted no."

            There's no denying that Democrats changed the rules. As
Stephen Carter explains in his book The Confirmation Mess , contested
appointments were relatively rare from the 1870s through the 1970s. But around
the time Ronald Reagan became president, Democrats rediscovered the more
literal, pre-Reconstruction understanding of "advice and consent." (This in
itself is ironic: Usually it is Republicans who insist on taking the words of
the Constitution literally and Democrats who argue for a broader
interpretation.) In 1981, the Democrats forced Ernest Lefever to withdraw as a
nominee for assistant secretary of state for human rights because he gave no
indication of caring about human rights. (It didn't help matters when family
members said Lefever thought blacks were genetically inferior, or when Lefever
himself told Sen. Charles Percy that his opponents were part of a Communist
conspiracy.) In 1985, the judiciary committee prevented Reynolds from moving up
at Justice because of the Reagan administration's position--which Reynolds
endorsed--that Bob Jones University, which forbade (and continues to forbid)
interracial dating, should be allowed to keep its tax-exempt status. This was
followed by the rejection of Bork for the Supreme Court, of John Tower for
secretary of defense, and of Lucas. The new Democratic standard was that
deference could no longer be expected, at least for jobs involving civil and
human rights.

            
Conservatives contend they're just playing by
these rules. "A deeply satisfying and entirely valid reason for rejecting the
nomination is pay-back," George Will wrote in a recent column on Lee. Others
made the same argument about Lani Guinier, who never even got a hearing for the
civil-rights job in 1993; and about Walter Dellinger, who served for several
years as "acting" solicitor general because Republicans wouldn't confirm
him.

            But in
fact, the GOP has gone beyond tit for tat. Democrats always conjured up some
kind of pretext: Reynolds hadn't enforced the law; Lucas had no background in
civil-rights enforcement and hadn't declared some stuff at customs. In Lee's
case, however, Hatch says he's opposing a qualified nominee simply to draw the
line on an administration position he disagrees with. "I think it's time for us
to that are dividing America and ripping us apart," he declared in
committee.

            Furthermore, Republicans have done away with deference for
a whole range of posts that touch upon contentious social issues, not just
those involving civil rights. Before the 1996 election, Republicans killed the
nomination of Henry Foster to be surgeon general because of his support for
legalized abortion. Now they are sitting on the nomination of David Satcher for
the same reason. Hatch has also been holding up dozens of nominations for
federal judgeships. In these cases, as in Lee's, conservatives have taken the
implicit position that if the president's nominee shares the president's views,
that is reason enough for rejection.

            Nothing
can stop the Republicans from changing the rules of the nomination process
unilaterally, as the Democrats did in the 1980s. And there's no way to enforce
consistency. Conservatives are free to defer to the president on ambassadors
and secretaries of Commerce, but not on chairpersons of the NEA and surgeons
general, if they so desire. It is also egregiously unfair to charge, as Sen.
Barbara Mikulski, D-Md., and others have, that Hatch and his colleagues are
guilty of anti-Asian racism because they have chosen to make a fuss in Lee's
case and not in others. But ability and good sense are two different things.
Hatch's zero-deference stance is a foolish one, even for those who share his
politics.

            
The first problem with the Hatch standard is
that it won't work. If senators take the position that they will not accept
presidential nominees who share the president's views on important issues, many
jobs will remain perpetually unfilled. In the case of civil-rights enforcement,
this might not bother Republicans, many of whom don't believe in the whole
concept. But keeping an important post vacant may actually undermine the
attempt to change the policy it represents. Civil-rights enforcement can be
directed more quietly from another desk. As long as it is, there won't be any
point person to answer for administration policies, or to the public. In the
case of judicial nominees, there's a more serious problem of justice delayed
(which, as we know, is justice denied) due to a shortage of judges.

            The
second problem is less tangible. The more policy disputes are personified, the
more the confirmation process becomes a war of martyrs and dragon slayers, the
uglier and more unproductive politics becomes. On top of the many sacrifices
public servants already must make--disclosure, lower pay, restrictions on what
they can do after they leave--they must increasingly bank on being gratuitously
ripped apart by a totally politicized confirmation process. This seems too much
to ask. Already, those who aspire to confirmation must express themselves in
euphemisms and pretend to have no views.

            There's no reason why affirmative action, in particular,
needs to be fought out at this sublimated level. In recent decisions, the
Supreme Court has both circumscribed preferential policies and made clear that
they can be limited or abolished by legislation. If Hatch and his party want to
try to proscribe race-conscious policies by democratic means, nobody's stopping
them (from trying, that is).

            The last issue is practical.
Some day, divided government will again be divided the other way. When that
happens, Democrats will be bound to escalate the confirmation battle once more,
to settle their score with Hatch. And so on, and so on. The game of payback
never ends.

         
      
   
