
   
   
      
         
            Washington Swingers

            Washington morality is a
curious thing. It is capable of focusing on certain kinds of misbehavior with
halogenlike intensity for short periods of time. But it's also highly
selective, often preoccupying itself with one modish ethical issue to the
exclusion of others that are equally serious. Since the election, everyone has
been consumed with outrage over the Clinton
campaign-finance scandal and, by extension, over anything related to
political fund raising. But no one seems to care any more about influence
peddling, a category of sleaze that is equally pervasive, arguably more venal,
and much more easily cured.

            As cases
in point, consider two current examples: Haley Barbour and Alexis Herman. In
the Republican Party, no one bats an eyelash when Barbour offers himself as a
gun-for-hire, available to lobby congressional leaders to whom he was giving
policy advice just a few months ago. And among Democrats, it isn't considered
either surprising or scandalous that the president would nominate as secretary
of labor Alexis Herman, the most accomplished swinger through Washington's
revolving doors since the death of her mentor, the late Ron Brown.

            Barbour and Herman are about as different in background and
temperament as two Beltway insiders can be. He's a Republican good ol' boy from
Yazoo City, Miss., whose colorful metaphors invariably invoke pigs, dogs, and
mules. She grew up on the other side of the Old South's racial divide, and
speaks flavorless corporate English. He likes to be in front of the cameras.
She likes to work behind the scenes. But they're basically in the same
business. Both have prospered in Washington by skillfully exploiting the
intersection of public policy and private interests.

            Let's take
Barbour first. Despite Bob Dole's defeat, Barbour was considered a great
success as chairman of the Republican National Committee, a job he held until
last month. Under Barbour's leadership, Republicans raised $312 million in the
1996 election cycle, a record amount credited with saving the Republican
Congress. How did Barbour raise all that money? He did it by being more
explicit than ever before about the connection between big contributions and
what is euphemistically called "access." Corporations that gave $250,000 or
more became Republican "season-ticket holders," with regular opportunities to
schmooze GOP congressional leaders. They were even assigned special Republican
National Committee staff members to help with their problems in Washington.
After the election, Barbour scolded members of the Business Roundtable for
giving some 30 percent of their donations to Democrats. Without exclusive
support, he threatened, Republicans might not prove so effective a conduit for
business interests.

            
In his new private capacity, Barbour holds out
the promise of being a very effective conduit himself. As soon as his term as
RNC chairman ended, he returned to his old lobbying-law firm, Barbour Griffith
& Rogers, and founded a semidetached "strategic communications" firm with
Ed Gillespie. Gillespie, the former chief of staff to House Majority Leader
Dick Armey, is best known as the guy who came up with the idea for the Contract
With America. As a former House employee, Gillespie is bound by the
post-employment restrictions that apply to ex-congressional staff members. But
Barbour, who hasn't worked in government since the Reagan administration, can
start lobbying Newt Gingrich and Armey right away. And Gillespie can, of
course, give Barbour plenty of advice on how to go about doing so.

            The
combination of high-powered connections and freedom from legal restraints makes
Barbour uniquely valuable to corporations involved in what economists call
"rent-seeking." According to a short item in last week's Wall Street
Journal , Barbour immediately faced a bidding war for his services between
the regional phone companies and the long-distance services AT&T and MCI.
The regional companies appear to have had deeper pockets--Barbour went with
them. Neither Barbour nor Gillespie responded to phone calls, or to a faxed
list of questions. But according to the Journal , Barbour will focus on
the implementation of the Telecommunications Act, which involves issues
relating to how soon the long-distance companies can compete in the
local-service market. Consumer groups tend to side with the long-distance
companies in their dispute with the regional ones. But whatever the merits of
his case are or aren't, it will be pretty amusing to watch Barbour take sides
in a propaganda war after letting everybody know he was available to work for
either side on mercenary terms.

            When it comes to the revolving door, Alexis Herman is less
of a Bigfoot than Barbour but more of an innovator. As head of the Women's
Bureau in the Labor Department during the Carter administration, she helped to
write regulations requiring federal contractors to comply with goals and
timetables for hiring minorities. After she left the Labor Department, she set
up a firm to advise companies on how to comply with those regulations. But
that's not the half of it. According to a recent story in Business Week ,
when Herman was at Labor, she also helped to steer government job-training
grants to a firm she once worked for as well as to a youth-training program run
by Jesse Jackson. Jackson, a very close friend of Herman's, spent much of the
1980s boycotting and threatening boycotts against firms whose minority-hiring
practices he deemed inadequate. In most cases, he negotiated settlements with
the companies he targeted--settlements that often included a recommendation to
hire Herman as a diversity consultant. More recently, Jackson helped Herman by
lobbying Clinton to name her and not former Pennsylvania Sen. Harris Wofford as
secretary of labor.

            The press,
gripped by Herman's not-especially-notable part in the Democratic National
Committee fund-raising scandal, has largely ignored the many interesting
convolutions in her various roles. Herman kept her consulting business going
even after she became chief of staff to Ron Brown at the DNC in 1989, a clear
conflict of interest. Under one particularly lucrative diversity-consulting
contract, which Senate investigators are now looking into, Herman advised
Washington developer Herbert Miller on how to comply with minority-hiring
guidelines on a project called Market Square. In addition to a $205,000
payment, Herman got an ownership stake in the deal, which is now listed on her
financial-disclosure forms as being worth between $500,000 and $1 million.
(Miller, a big contributor to the DNC, had coffee with the president last
year.) According to Clinton sources, Herman has often lent an inside helping
hand to another longtime friend, Washington super-lawyer Vernon Jordan.
Jordan's corporate clients include American Airlines, a very happy company this
week. It would be interesting to know what role Herman played in the
president's decision to break the American Airlines pilots' strike.

            
I'm not suggesting that any of Herman's
liaising around is illegal. But noncriminality is a pretty low standard for
appointment to the Cabinet. It is the standard, however, that the Clinton
administration has applied, not only in Herman's case, but even more notably in
the choice of Ron Brown for the post of secretary of commerce. In the case of
Republicans, ethical standards are, if anything, lower. During the last
Congress, Gingrich rehabilitated convicted felon Michael Deaver as a Republican
adviser in good standing, while the Dole campaign brought such notorious
sleaze-meisters as Lyn Nofziger, Paul Manafort, Charlie Black, and John Sears
back into the fold.

            Like
campaign finance, revolving-door lobbying is a systemic problem in American
politics. The difference is that whereas campaign finance is an immensely
complicated problem that can only be fixed with changes in the law, the Augean
stables of K Street could be cleaned up pretty easily if anyone cared. All it
would take is for a few prominent politicians to stop elevating lobbyists to
high office, and to quit taking their calls. It's a cheap, easy, and effective
solution that unfortunately doesn't fit in with this season's spasm of
morality.

         
      
   
