
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Calling
All Poets
            

            Since 
                  Slate
               's
first issue, which included a poem by Seamus Heaney, we have published only
poems solicited by our poetry editor, Robert Pinsky. That policy has helped to
establish 
                  Slate
                as a place to read and publish poetry. The policy
was also a necessity, since we didn't have a way to screen submissions. Now,
with a screening system in place, we are pleased to announce that we are
accepting submissions of unsolicited poetry.

            Now listen closely. Poetry
submitted for publication must be sent by snail mail (i.e., stamped paper mail)
and accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope. (No e-mail submissions,
please.) Manuscripts should have the author's name and address on each page and
should be sent to 
                  Slate
                Poetry, 236 Bay State Road, Boston, MA
02215. And don't forget the envelope!

            
               
                  Slate
               
publishes one poem every week. You can read it and also listen to it in the
voice of the author (or, if the author is dead, in the voice of Robert Pinsky).
Click here for this
week's poem, and here for a complete list of and links to poems published in

                  Slate
               .

            

               
                  Slate Week Off, Um, We Mean, Slate Special Issue

            
               Time magazine, we
hear, is putting out a special issue today, Wednesday, because of the historic
importance of this week's events involving oral sex in the White House. This
special issue will replace next week's regular issue of Time . Here at

                  Slate
                we also are closing a full week's issue today, but to be
honest it's simply because it's August and we want Thursday and Friday off.

            On second thought, though,
why be honest? We're not under oath or anything. And heck, even if we were
...

            So, we hereby declare this a

                  Slate Special Issue: Oral Sex and Beyond: A Historic Week in
Washington: Clinton: Will He Survive? To recover from the weightiness of it
all, we will be posting 
                  Slate
                Lite through Friday, Aug. 28. It's
not all that lite. "Today's Papers" will continue to be posted (and e-mailed)
every day. "The Week/The Spin," "Pundit Central," "International Papers,"
"Summary Judgment," "Explainer," "Chatterbox," "Culturebox," "Moneybox," "The
Breakfast Table," "The Book Club," "Diary," and "News Quiz" will appear as
usual. Next week's diarist will be James Fallows (beginning Monday, Aug. 24),
and next week's Breakfast Table conversation (also beginning Monday) will be
between Lucianne Goldberg and Erik Tarloff. And, of course, any important
development in the news (war, for example, or a new semen stain) may well drag
us in off the shuffleboard court.

            Some readers have vigorously
objected to the amount of attention the media in general and

                  Slate
                in particular are devoting to the scandal we call Flytrap.
As a service to these readers, we have set up a special page
listing, and linking to, all 
                  Slate
               's Flytrap coverage.
Flytrapophobes can use this page to learn which 
                  Slate
                articles
they may wish to avoid.

            

               --Michael Kinsley
            

         
      
   
