
   
   
      
         
            The Vapid Center

            By Jacob
Weisberg

            It's deep-thoughts time at
the White House. Gearing up for his second Inaugural Address, Bill Clinton has
been trying on themes and buzz phrases like an advertising-copywriter-cum-pope.
Last month, at the annual meeting of the Democratic Leadership Council, the
president spoke of occupying the "vital, dynamic center" of American politics.
More recently, at a White House prayer breakfast, Clinton said he wanted to
foster a "spirit of reconciliation" and quoted the late Cardinal Joseph
Bernardin to the effect that time is precious and should not be wasted on
acrimony and division. "The truth is, all of us just have a little bit of time
left," Clinton told the breakfasting clergymen.

            One
doesn't wish to deny anyone his rightful share of grandiloquence, but there is
a hazard here. It's that Clinton, who has been showily contemplating his
presidency for the past two months, will misconceive his second term. If he
thinks it's about moral leadership, or about standing above the hurly-burly of
politics, he's kidding himself. What is portentously called Clinton's "place in
history" will probably depend less on his sounding like Václav Havel than on a
bunch of quotidian issues--what he referred to dismissively in his
prayer-breakfast speech as "balancing the budget and all that."

            This is partly a judgment on Clinton's own strengths and
weaknesses. The president has yet to utter a truly memorable line (if you don't
count "I didn't inhale"). No one looks to him for moral example. He does,
however, understand the fine points of public policy as well as any president
we've had, and is capable of putting the public welfare ahead of narrow
political considerations when it really matters. A few such painful choices
rescued what might otherwise have been a disastrous first term. The most
significant of these was his decision to press for deficit reduction instead of
new spending programs in his first budget. But there were others, too: His
decision to support NAFTA and his belated intervention in Bosnia. These were
not the areas where he thought he would stake his claim to greatness. Yet, by
making the right decisions on big issues he couldn't avoid, Clinton salvaged a
record of accomplishment and earned his re-election.

            This time,
the decisions are equally momentous--and probably more difficult. The amount of
courage Clinton displays in acting to reform Medicare and Social Security will
determine whether these successful and popular programs survive into the next
century in anything resembling their present forms. But the stakes are even
greater than that. Absent significant reform, the escalating costs of these
programs will, in decades to come, crowd out what remains of the federal
"discretionary" budget--the FBI, NASA, Yosemite, and all the rest. As
discretionary programs are trimmed back to pay for mounting entitlement costs,
the possibility of Clinton or any other president deploying new programs to
address national problems will become more and more remote. Not acting to
reform entitlements will mean Clinton leaving a dysfunctional federal
government behind him when he goes.

            
The most urgent part of the entitlement problem
is Medicare. Perhaps more than any other single issue, this won Clinton the
1996 election. And it was not pure "Medi-goguery" that did it. The Republican
push for Medical Savings Accounts threatened to undermine Medicare by removing
the healthiest and wealthiest beneficiaries from the common insurance pool. But
at the same time that he resisted this irresponsible conservative position,
Clinton saddled himself with one of his own: support for Medicare without
higher payments by beneficiaries or structural reforms to ensure long-term
solvency. Republicans, badly burned by the issue, say the ball is now in
Clinton's court.

            
Leadership on this issue will consist of calling the GOP's bluff by proposing
both short-term cuts and long-term structural reform. Unfortunately, Clinton
shows little sign of doing either. He intends to make only minor adjustments in
his February budget proposal, fixes that will purport to keep the system
solvent for 10 years. The administration is developing a plan that is likely to
combine reduced payments to doctors and hospitals with a proposal to shift the
costs for home-health care out of the Medicare trust-fund account. This is an
accounting gimmick, which would keep the trust fund technically solvent for a
time without reducing costs overall. Clinton might still address the long-range
problem later. But as elections get closer--for congressional Democrats in 1998
and for Al Gore in 2000--the attraction of "defending" Medicare will reassert
itself.

            Social Security, by contrast, is a long-range emergency.
This program isn't going broke now, but unless we do something about it soon,
the long-term problem will become insoluble. Conservatives, many of whom do not
believe in Social Security in the first place, are hard at work devising plans
to undermine it by shifting to a system of individual accounts. As more
moderate solutions are deferred, that kind of transformation becomes
increasingly likely. If, however, Clinton forces difficult changes now, we can
avoid catastrophe later. Among the most sensible options are a slight increase
in the retirement age (in keeping with growing life expectancy), a mild
means-test (in keeping with principles of fairness), and an adjustment in the
Consumer Price Index (in keeping with economic reality).

            Among these reforms,
adjusting the CPI is the most important. Because it would reduce mandated
benefits of various kinds in a reasonable way, it would go a long way not just
toward fixing Social Security, but also toward bringing the federal budget into
structural balance. It's also a politically safe way to raise taxes, since tax
exemptions are, like many benefit programs, indexed for inflation. Clinton
probably shouldn't appear to "politicize" the issue of how the CPI is
calculated by publicly supporting Sen. Pat Moynihan's bill to cut it in half,
to 1.1 percent. But he can surely finesse the result some other way. Rob
Shapiro of the Progressive Policy Institute suggests creating an entirely new
index--a Cost of Living Index--to replace the CPI, which would be one solution.
The problem falls to Clinton partly because Social Security is his party's
greatest achievement, and partly because Republicans are rightly terrified
about raising the subject on their own. If only Nixon could go to China, only
Clinton can reform Social Security.

            Entitlements are not the only
thing that matters. In addition to all the things we can't foresee, the
historical verdict on Clinton will also hinge on such issues as whether he
manages to steer welfare reform back in the right direction; whether he avoids
being drawn into a counterproductive tax cut; and whether he overcomes his own
recent history to lead campaign-finance reform. But on all these, the basic
principle is the same. The president needs to spurn the vital center, defy the
spirit of reconciliation, and recognize he has only a little time left to tell
the public what it doesn't want to hear.

         
      
   
