
   
   
      
         
            Lying All the Way to the Bank

            By Jacob
Weisberg

            On the last day of the
Democratic National Convention in Chicago, I woke to the news that presidential
adviser Dick Morris was about to resign over reports that he had been
consorting with a $200-an-hour prostitute. I was, of course, amazed. But then I
thought: "Why should anyone be surprised? Morris is a $200-an-hour
prostitute." Things have changed since then. Morris has raised his prices.

            Now a
normal person would be offended by what I've just written. In Morris' case,
though, I'm afraid he may use it as a blurb for the paperback edition of his
book, Behind the Oval Office . The current version includes this blurb
from a brutal demolition job in Vanity Fair : "He never stops. Somehow,
each shocking thing he does tops the shocking thing he did last year, or last
month, or even last week." Morris' career has developed the curious quality of
a plea bargain in reverse. If you say he's guilty of a misdemeanor, he will try
to persuade you he's actually committed a felony.

            In reality, he's not fit to stand trial. Morris discusses
right and wrong as if those concepts were as remote from his own experience as
lunar geology. "I wanted to address the values agenda three or four times a
week," he writes at one point in the book. "First, though, we had to identify
through polls which values were important to Americans." Blind people often
have highly developed powers of hearing and smell, but in Morris' case, he does
not seem to have compensated for an attenuated moral sense with any other
heightened abilities--not intelligence, not political savvy, and certainly not
literary acumen. Despite being rotten to the core, Dick Morris demonstrates in
his book that he has nothing else to offer.

            Morris casts himself, of
course, as the man who brought Bill Clinton back from calamity and got him
re-elected in 1996. Most of the press fell for this hype during the campaign.
But Morris' own account undermines the myth. By claiming credit for absolutely
everything, Morris leaves you wondering whether he deserves credit for anything
at all. To call his recollections "unreliable" would be a massive
understatement. There is hardly anything he says in the book that he does not
contradict at some other point in the book. Usually, the mutually contradictory
statements fall within a few pages of each other. Here are just a few subjects
where Morris leaves the reader absolutely mystified about his views and his
role:

            
               Negative advertising:
On page 60, Morris swears off it. "As Eileen [Morris' wife, who is now
divorcing him] and my therapist, Dr. Elizabeth Hauser, softened my rage and
brought me inner peace for the first time in my life, I decided to abandon
negative advertising as a métier." On page 63, Morris boasts about an ad he had
produced for Clinton, attacking an opponent, in the 1990 Arkansas gubernatorial
primary: "Don't let McRae build a wall around Arkansas." Five pages after that,
Morris brags about his script for an ad in the general election of that year.
It culminated in this assertion: "You can't trust Sheffield Nelson."

            
               Foreign intervention:
"Noninvolvement in Bosnia had been a central element in my advice," he writes
on page 253. But just a few pages earlier, Morris was taking credit for
Clinton's brave decision to send troops to Bosnia. And a few pages later, he's
telling the president to bomb the Serbs back to the Stone Age. "I don't mean
the current stuff ... where NATO sends in only a few planes," he counsels. "I
mean an air strike that continues until they give up."

            
               Press leaks:
"Throughout my tenure at the White House, I never leaked information unless I
was told to," Morris writes on page 171. On the same page: "I called David
Broder of the Washington Post to give him background on the strategic
implications of the speech and he ran a story." The call wasn't authorized--in
fact, Morris got in trouble for it, he says.

            
               Budget
cuts: On page 93, Morris advises Clinton: "Medicare cuts are your single
biggest weapon against the Republicans. They are hated by the public, old and
young." Three pages later, he writes: "I argued that as long as we lined up
with the congressional Democrats and just sniped at cuts in school lunches and
Medicare, we would get nowhere."

            This last contradiction is central, because it goes to the
heart of Morris' claim to have got Clinton re-elected. The conventional
understanding at the time was that it was Morris' liberal enemies--George
Stephanopoulos, Harold Ickes, and Leon Panetta--who were arguing in favor of
fiercely resisting Republican cuts in social spending, while Morris was telling
Clinton to distance himself from the intransigent congressional Democrats.
According to my sources at the time, Morris was desperately pushing for a
budget deal and making the kind of hilariously precise electoral promises for
which he was legendary: If he compromised with Gingrich, Clinton would win by a
14-point margin, take back Congress, and so forth.

            In
reality, both plans were in play in the re-election effort: Morris'
"triangulation" and the Ickes-Panetta-Stephanopoulos tactic of standing firmly
against Republican cuts in Medicare, Medicaid, education, and the environment.
Both strategies were crucial. Clinton recovered his lost popularity by
resisting domestic budget cuts, while his centrist "values" agenda helped to
solidify his electoral gains. In retrospect, Clinton appears to have shrewdly
pitted the Ickes group against Morris as an exercise in the management style
FDR called "creative tension." Clinton needed Ickes to help him shore up his
liberal base and prevent a Democratic-primary challenge. He used Morris to help
him move to the center. Morris tries to take credit for both strategies. But if
there was a great political mind behind this synthesis, it was that of the
candidate himself.

            
Getting the president re-elected is only one of
the many, many accomplishments claimed by Morris, who plays both Boswell and
Johnson in his memoirs. You may not have known that it was Morris who had
suggested Al Gore for vice president in 1992, and that it was Morris who had
recommended James Carville as strategist in that campaign. Through secret back
channels to other political consultants, Morris tells us that he managed
relations between Clinton and Boris Yeltsin. It was none other than Morris who
played a pivotal role in the Dayton Peace Accords. (Richard Holbrooke to
Morris: "Without those words of the president's that you passed to me, I would
never have been able to get it done.") And it was Morris' ideas that kept
Clinton on track even after his--Morris'--downfall. (Clinton to Morris: "We're
basically following your game plan. It's working well.")

            But, even
as he emulates the rooster that thinks the sun rises because it crows, Morris
demonstrates how right Panetta and the others were to be terrified about his
running amok in the White House. Among the Morris microinitiatives that didn't
quite make it were a 33-cent postage stamp, with a penny going to your favorite
charity, and a plan to force banks to meet new anti-mugging standards for ATM
machines. Morris' "small-bore" ideas, as he calls them, made the presidency
look somewhat ridiculous in 1995 and 1996. The ones that were killed in the
crib would have turned neo-Clintonism into a full-scale self-parody.

            Through it all, Morris maintains that what he was doing was
really very high-minded. "I don't spin anything," he writes huffily. "I put new
substance and ideas before the voters." Even as we see him fighting to reduce
governing to the most trivial micro-pandering, Morris asserts the primacy of
principle. "Some reporters seem to think that the real story is never the
candidate's idea, but always the motivation to improve his or her political
status," he writes. A few pages later, of course, he's explaining why Clinton
had to sign a welfare bill that no one liked in order to get re-elected (a veto
would have meant a "three-point loss").

            By the end
of his book, Morris has cast himself as a modest egomaniac, a shy publicity
hound, a principled manipulator, a loyal traitor, and a truthful liar. He isn't
just confused, he's the dialectic incarnate. He aims for evil, but only manages
to look ridiculous.

         
      
   
