
   
   
      
         
            Happy Birthday, Heritage Foundation

            Next
month marks the 25 th anniversary of the Heritage Foundation, the
biggest and best known of the conservative think tanks. The festivities began a
few weeks ago with a black-tie gala for 1,700, at which Margaret Thatcher spoke
on the topic of "Courage." ("Ronald Reagan and I refused to accept the decline
of the West as our ineluctable destiny," Thatcher declared, displaying her
usual modesty and sense of fun.) The revelries are to continue for two full
years, with a traveling lecture series featuring such speakers as William
Bennett, who will orate in Oklahoma City about "Truth," and Clarence Thomas,
who will address the people of Palm Beach on the subject of "Character."
Another vast dinner in Washington will cap the series and Heritage's
$85-million fund-raising drive. To commemorate the occasion, the foundation
also has sponsored a gushing account of its first quarter-century, The Power
of Ideas , by Lee Edwards. The book's title is incongruous, since the whole
point of the Heritage Foundation is that ideas alone have little power without
a big push.

            By all measures, Heritage has much to celebrate. From
across the political spectrum, opinion appears to be unanimous that the
organization has been singularly effective in accomplishing its mission of
dragging American politics to the right. Since the 1980 release of its
Mandate for Leadership , a detailed program for the incoming Reagan
administration that the Reagan administration actually took seriously, Heritage
has played a central role in setting not only the broad conservative agenda but
also the details of legislation. Edwards' book delights in quoting envious
encomia from the enemy camp. Michael Shuman of the left-wing Institute for
Policy Studies credits Heritage with a bigger influence on American politics
and policy than any other conservative institution. Will Marshall, president of
the New Democratic Progressive Policy Institute, says Heritage "wrote the book
on how to market and popularize political ideas." The Nation , among
others, keeps up a steady drumbeat on this theme: Why doesn't the left have an
advocacy organization as influential as Heritage? Well, why not?

            The most
obvious explanation is money. A right-wing "advocacy tank" like Heritage is
able to raise much more than its liberal counterparts for the same reason that
Republican candidates out-raise Democratic ones. Those who have a lot to
give--corporations and rich individuals--give primarily in their own
self-interest. (And, unlike political candidates, organizations like Heritage
can accept donations directly from corporate treasuries.) Self-interested money
goes to organizations that promote lower taxes and less regulation, two topics
on which Heritage is absolutely unflinching. To be sure, there is disinterested
conservative money, and self-interested liberal money, such as the union funds
that go to the Economic Policy Institute, a think tank that opposes free-trade
agreements. But such exceptions don't change the rule. The Brookings
Institution, often cast as Heritage's liberal counterpart, could never dream of
raising $85 million in two years.

            In fact, Brookings isn't really Heritage's liberal
counterpart. Though it has historically exhibited a modest liberal
slant--diminished in recent years--Brookings thinks of itself as a scholarly
institution devoted to objective research into public policy. It would never
spend its money in an explicit effort to harm its political foes, because it
does not conceive of itself as taking a side and does not view politics as
ideological warfare. This is even more true of the big "liberal" foundations
such as Ford, Rockefeller, and MacArthur. New Right conservatives, on the other
hand, as exemplified by Heritage, are quite explicit about viewing politics as
combat. In the words of Heritage's president, Ed Feulner, "We conduct warfare
in the battle of ideas." Washington exerts a strong moderating influence, and
Feulner has been attacked in recent years for going "establishment"--wanting to
be prestigious and respected like Brookings instead of being powerful and
feared. This is the same fault Heritage attacked the American Enterprise
Institute for in the 1970s. But even if it has settled down a bit, Heritage
still retains an insurgent mindset. It views itself as the center of a radical
movement, even if it has become part of an entrenched Washington
establishment.

            Because of its combat mentality, Heritage has never been a
place with very high standards. Like other conservative outfits, it loves the
lingo of academic life. Its hallways are cluttered with endowed chairs,
visiting fellows, and distinguished scholars. The conceit here is that as a PC
Dark Age has overcome the universities, conservative think tanks have become
the refuge of thought and learning. At Heritage in particular, this is a laugh.
AEI and the Manhattan Institute frequently produce stimulating books and
studies and occasionally arrive at unexpected positions. Even the more dogmatic
Cato Institute has cultivated a reputation for rigorous research and analysis
from a libertarian point of view. Heritage, however, is essentially a
propaganda mill. There are exceptions. Stuart Butler, a Brit who runs the
domestic-policy shop, has done solid work on enterprise zones, and took pains
to develop a conscientious conservative alternative to the Clinton health-care
plan. But on the whole, Heritage is focused on selling and promoting its views
rather than on developing thoughtful or nuanced ones. It spends nearly half its
$29 million annual budget on marketing. It prides itself on producing reports
with concision and speed. According to Edwards, one recent innovation is the
colored index card summarizing a conservative position in "short, punchy
sentences." According to Heritage's "Vice-president for information marketing,"
these cards have been "wildly successful" with Republicans in Congress.

            Its
ethical standards are as lax as its intellectual ones. Heritage is a tax-exempt
501(c)(3) organization, which means it is not supposed to lobby Congress.
Edwards notes that a disclaimer appears at the foot of all its publications.
"Nothing written here is to be construed as an attempt to aid or hinder the
passage of any bill before Congress." This is an evident absurdity. Heritage
exists to aid and hinder legislation before Congress and often boasts
about doing so. Edwards quotes the Heritage disclaimer immediately after he
finishes explaining that Feulner and Paul Weyrich founded Heritage because in
the early 1970s, AEI was taking its tax-exempt status too seriously. Having
been investigated by the Internal Revenue Service, AEI didn't focus on getting
its reports into the hands of members of Congress before the relevant votes.
For whatever reason, liberal groups tend to be more punctilious about this.
Many are split between two organizations, a 501(c)(3), to which contributions
are tax deductible, and a 501(c)(4), which is simply not taxable itself, and
which has more latitude in lobbying. This reduces the amount liberal groups can
raise, enhancing their natural disadvantage.

            
At bottom, the big liberal think tanks remain
temperamentally different from the likes of Heritage. They have their vices, to
be sure. They can be ponderous, conventional, and gimmicky--and miraculously,
sometimes all three at once. But you can't see the Twentieth-Century Fund
feeding policy popcorn to Democrats in Congress. They'd be insulted by the
idea. It's hard to imagine the Progressive Policy Institute naming a
"Vice-president for information marketing." You can't conceive of Brookings
putting out a volume of self-serving bluster like the Edwards book. In fact,
Brookings did commission a history for its 75 th anniversary in 1991.
It was serious, critical, and self-questioning in a way that is totally alien
to the Heritage Foundation. Though Democrats have become better in recent years
at suppressing their differences in favor of their common interests, they still
shy away instinctually from a united front of the kind that Heritage is.

            Liberals say they want to
learn from the most successful organization on the right. But in reality,
they're more comfortable, and probably better off, wishing the Heritage
Foundation a happy birthday and admiring it from afar.

         
      
   
