
   
   
      
         
            The Spinmaster Aptitude Test

            Contrary to popular belief,
the Clinton administration did not invent spin. But the Clintonites have
produced an extraordinary amount of it. This is partly because they have a lot
to spin about, and partly because they just seem to like spinning.

            Lately
the outpouring has been especially torrential. In addition to the spin coming
from the president ("The Lincoln Bedroom was never sold") and the vice
president ("There is no controlling legal authority"), there has been a steady
gush from administration spokespersons Mike McCurry, Ann Lewis, and Lanny Davis
at daily White House briefings and on television. Judged in terms of how
effective it is at defusing the fund-raising scandal, this PR work ranges from
catastrophically bad to fairly good. What is odd is that the Clinton
administration, spin-happy as it is, doesn't seem to have any sense of which
kinds of spin are effective and which only make matters worse.

            To get a taste of the different styles, I put some generic
scandal questions to various administration flacks. Ann Lewis, the deputy
director of communications, was the first one I reached. I asked Lewis to
explain why Gore's fund-raising calls from the White House did not violate the
law prohibiting the solicitation of funds on government premises. She said only
the White House counsel's office could discuss legal issues, so I asked, on a
more general note, whether Gore was in any trouble. "Obviously I don't think
he's in trouble," she said. Why not? "Well, I think what we have so far
learned, what the Washington Post seems to have learned, to their great
astonishment, is that candidates for re-election would actually campaign on
their own behalf. A Democratic candidate in 1995--at a time when Congress was
shutting down the government, repealing the ban on assault weapons, and trying
to shut down the Department of Education--would have taken seriously the issues
that were at stake. Shocking!" That was all Lewis had time for.

            My next
call was to Amy Weiss Tobe, the spokeswoman for the Democratic National
Committee. I pressed her on a different issue--the White House sleepovers. I
accepted, I said, the administration's position that there was no price on
staying in the Lincoln Bedroom. But wasn't the Lincoln Bedroom one of the tools
Clinton used to help raise money for the 1996 election, as Clinton's
handwritten "Ready to start overnights right away?" note clearly indicates?
"There was no link," Tobe said. "The president can invite whomever he chooses
to stay over. He invited friends and supporters and others. There was no ticket
price." Understood, I said, but weren't sleepovers used as a fund-raising tool?
"I don't believe so," she said. "Again, there was no price on it." After a
third try, I gave up trying to get her to admit the obvious.

            
Finally, I reached Mike McCurry, the White
House press secretary. When I asked why Gore hadn't broken the law, McCurry
directed me to a story in that day's New York Times , which suggested
that Gore might have broken the letter but not the spirit of the law. "If you
look at the history of the [law], it was intended to make it impossible for
federal officials to extract payments from federal workers," he said. On the
blanket prohibition against raising money on federal property, McCurry
suggested that it couldn't sensibly apply to the president and vice president,
who actually live on federal property. But, he added, "this issue has not been
tested." Next I tried the Lincoln Bedroom question. Wasn't it used as a
fund-raising tool? "Staying over at Clinton's house was certainly a tool. I
wouldn't dispute that," McCurry said. "It was a tool Clinton enjoyed using."
Bush and Reagan, he added, used a variety of fund-raising tools as well.

            Let's
look a bit more closely at these approaches. Asked a direct question, Lewis
immediately changes the subject to some other issue, like gun control. She
never gives so much as an inch in admitting wrongdoing. At a news briefing Feb.
25, Lewis offered the following kerfuffle: "The president and Mrs. Clinton
enjoy spending time with their friends. They regularly asked people to stay at
the White House ... especially old friends and sometimes people they ... met
more recently and--here's the key--wanted an opportunity to talk to ... in a
personal and nonofficial setting when they could. ... And I'll also say, having
gone over the list and having read through it this weekend, I can now see why
the president and the first family are proud of the people who came to the
White House as their personal guests." Lewis went on to explain that one of the
guests was an old friend who was dying of cancer. This unctuous display
infuriated members of the press corps--several told me they avoid talking to
Lewis. One prominent national reporter describes Lewis' style as commenting on
the rain outside by claiming that the sun is shining. Because she is viewed as
an apparatchik, anything Lewis says is discounted 100 percent.

            Tobe and Lanny Davis (the official scandal spokesman at the
White House--who never called me back) are less spin-happy than Lewis. They
will not try to tell you that the Lincoln Bedroom sleepovers were really about
old friends dying of cancer. Rather, they stick to an authorized script--and
when that fails, they retreat into a fog of obscurantism. At the Feb. 25 White
House briefing, Davis was asked whether "access" had been sold to contributors.
"Of course, people coming to the White House have access to the president by
definition, because he's there. But we regard the notion of special access
because a contribution is made as something that is contrary to our policies."
Huh? That evening, on Nightline , Davis repeatedly told an incredulous
Ted Koppel that Clinton's note about sleepovers was meant to refer to friends
and supporters. "Ted, I'm struck by how many people are looking at dots,
connecting them where there's no evidence to connect them. The president has
clearly said that there was absolutely no requirement, no price tag. These were
friends and supporters of his coming to his residence." This mirrored the
low-spin style of Ron Ziegler, Nixon's spokesman during Watergate . The
president acknowledges that a wide variety of meteorological conditions,
including precipitation, are common this time of year. You might call that
"rain," but we don't . It provokes a mixture of sadism and sympathy from
reporters, who proceed to turn the hapless flack into a human punching bag.

            McCurry takes a different
approach. Rather than sticking to a line that is obviously absurd, he admits
problems. He then goes into impressive detail about what the law is, and how it
might or might not have been broken. Having proved that he is a sentient human
being, he subtly points his questioner in a different direction--weren't
practices similar to this one actually common under previous presidents?
McCurry's model is John F. Kennedy, who would fully engage with reporters,
occasionally deflect a question with humor, and seldom--if ever--get caught
out. Is it raining outside? Sure it's raining , McCurry tells you. In
fact, it has rained 0.23 inches today--average for the year .

            Only the
last of these approaches works. But the Clintons, who dislike and distrust the
press themselves, seem not to have learned the obvious lesson. Instead of
credibility, they have looked for the quality of ultimate loyalty in their
flacks. The previous scandal spokesman was Mark Fabiani, a McCurry-style
spinner who was liked and trusted by reporters and who managed, almost
single-handedly, to cure the FBI-file scandal with a dose of openness. But the
administration replaced Fabiani with Davis, whose main qualification was that
he had volunteered to defend the Clintons on Crossfire . It hired Lewis
for the same reason--she devised the "Don't Pillory Hillary" campaign on her
own. As their relations with the press deteriorate to levels of hostility not
seen since 1993, the Clintons are failing once again to recognize that a lack
of loyalty is not their biggest problem. A lack of credibility is.

         
      
   
