
   
   
      
         
            The Constitution and Campaign Reform

            Supporters of
campaign-finance reform deserve fairly high marks for realism these days. Most
of the good government groups like Common Cause, Public Citizen, and the League
of Women Voters have long favored a comprehensive solution based on public
financing of congressional campaigns. With varying degrees of enthusiasm,
however, they all have come around to supporting the half-loaf baked by Sens.
John McCain and Russ Feingold; and even to rooting for the quarter-loaf of
McCain-Feingold Lite, the version now crumbling on the floor of the Senate.

            In one
way, however, the advocates of McCain-Feingold are still being wildly
optimistic. They are counting on the Supreme Court to reverse its long-standing
doctrine on campaign regulation and freedom of speech. There are strong First
Amendment obstacles to various provisions in the bill. The court is unlikely to
remove these, which means that even if reform does pass, it will accomplish far
less than its supporters intend.

            He who would wade into this swamp must first immerse
himself in Buckley vs. Valeo , the 1976 Supreme Court case that made
campaign-finance reform a sadistically complicated and possibly hopeless
enterprise. Buckley was a review of the 1974 (post-Watergate)
campaign-finance reforms, which were supposed to cure many of the very problems
McCain-Feingold is supposed to cure. In general, Buckley upheld
restrictions on political contributions while rejecting limits on
political expenditures . The core issue was whether money equals speech.
The court conceded that giving money to a political candidate is a way of
expressing support. But it reasoned that the message "I support candidate X"
has little relation to the amount of money you give. However, when you spend
your money directly communicating the message "I support candidate X" (or "I
am candidate X"), that spending is an exercise of free speech protected
by the Constitution.

            But this bright line in
principle between contributions and expenditures quickly gets fuzzy in
practice. When is spending to promote a candidate really just an in-kind
contribution? If I want to spend my salary on an ad saying that Alfonse D'Amato
is a distinguished statesman and a much underrated thinker, I'm free to do so.
But what if I work out the text of my encomium with his campaign manager? The
court created a distinction between "independent" and "coordinated"
expenditures. Coordinated expenditures amount to an in-kind contribution, and
are subject to all the rules and limits.

            Even
"independent" expenditures are not free of all restrictions if they involve
"express advocacy" of a candidate, as opposed to a discussion of the issues
that stops short of explicit endorsement. Under current law, such expenditures
must be publicly disclosed, and corporations and unions are forbidden to make
them (except through PACs, which raise money from employees and members
ostensibly on a voluntary basis and have their own set of financial limits).
Corporations and unions, however, have become adept at devising ways to help
their favored candidates that stop just short of "express advocacy."

            
McCain and Feingold are valiantly attempting to
crack down on the major abuses that have sprouted in the cracks of the
Buckley ruling. The bill closes the soft-money loophole, which is the
worst abuse of the current system. Soft money is money donated to and spent by
the political parties, ostensibly for reasons other than direct support of
candidates, but without limits on who may give or how much. Unfortunately, the
Supreme Court ruled last year that spending by a political party cannot
automatically be assumed to be "coordinated" with a senatorial campaign. The
effect of this decision was to establish that political parties have the same
rights as individuals and other kinds of groups to make independent
expenditures in the vicinity of an election.

            
McCain-Feingold says that federal office holders and national party leaders
can't solicit soft-money contributions to state parties in order to evade the
limits on hard-money contributions--as they did so bountifully in 1996. Some
smart First Amendment lawyers who are doubtful about other parts of
McCain-Feingold think this kind of soft-money ban is also OK. But it will
surely be challenged.

            The reform-heads run into bigger trouble on the other two
issues: wealthy candidates who spend gargantuan sums of their own money and
phony issue ads that are barely disguised campaign ads. On the first point,
McCain-Feingold tries to prevent the Michael Huffingtons of the world from
spending more than $50,000 of their own riches by forbidding political parties
from making "coordinated" expenditures on their behalf. The device is borrowed
from the rules for presidential elections, in which candidates accept spending
limits in exchange for government subsidies. Buckley said this was OK
because the limits were "voluntary." McCain-Feingold would forbid political
parties to aid their own candidates unless the candidate "voluntarily" accepted
the personal spending limit. This might well strike the justices as being more
like a stick than a carrot, making the choice not "voluntary" at all.

            The independent-expenditure
problem is the most serious. McCain-Feingold attempts to rein in political
spending by corporations and unions through expanding the definition of
"express advocacy." In essence, the bill states that any mention of a candidate
by name within 60 days of Election Day counts as express advocacy. This
standard would make criminals out of the two little old ladies who, in the
ACLU's favorite example, took out an ad in the newspaper on the eve of the 1972
election to protest Nixon's bombing of Cambodia. Though promoters of
McCain-Feingold contend that this redefinition is consistent with
Buckley , what they really mean is that they hope the Supreme Court will
be prepared to rethink Buckley . Their theory is that the court will look
at the mess of recent elections, and decide that the line it drew two decades
ago in Buckley is unworkable. Well, it's a theory.

         
      
   
