
   
   
      
         
            Reading Safire's Mind 

            
               It's been five years of
frustration, but I think I've finally got Elvis by the short and curlies. It's
a tangled Web that POTUS has been weaving around his crony Hubbell. Now his
spin has spun out of control. What everybody thinks, and nobody can print, is
that the president got his Asian associates to pony up, lest a pinched pal feel
the urge to sing to Starr. No evidence, but no matter. I'll read Bill's mind
and baptize the story "hushgate." Who knows what didn't happen? If I'm guessing
right, there's another Pulitzer in it for me. If not, bygones will soon go
bye-bye, and I'll still make Bibi's day. Clinton has been squeezing the
settlements a bit too hard lately.
            

            William
Safire might complain that this attempt at insight into his thinking is
grotesquely unjust. After all, I don't know that Safire recognizes the
unfairness of the accusations he flings around with such abandon in his column.
I can't prove that he is motivated by the quest for fame and power rather than
the desire to get at the truth. I don't even truly believe that he sticks up
for the Likud Party out of personal loyalty to the Israeli prime minister
rather than genuine conviction. But I could pass off all that malicious
innuendo as fact, and still remain within the boundaries Safire sets for
himself in his twice-weekly "Essay" column in the New York Times .

            The least defensible of Safire's columns are his
intermittent efforts at "Reading Bill's Mind." In the latest of these, which
appeared May 4, Safire projected a view inside the criminal consciousness of
the president of the United States. "Just when I should feel terrific about my
economic boom making possible my budget deal, I can feel the damn prosecutors
closing in," the column began. "My main vulnerability, Dave Kendall tells me,
is arranging for that half million in hush money to Web Hubbell." Even for
Safire, the passage, and the column, were extraordinary. Under cover of his
favorite literary device--temporarily being someone else--Safire was accusing
the president of active involvement in an effort to obstruct justice--an
impeachable, indictable offense.

            This
charge couldn't have appeared anywhere else in the Times . Absent some
kind of evidence, the reporters on the national staff who have been covering
the Clinton scandals can only say that prosecutors and congressional
investigators are exploring the possibility that Clinton might have had some
role in arranging Hubbell's post-employment benefits package. Even Safire's
fellow opinion columnists wouldn't dare leap to his conclusion. They might
argue, as A.M. Rosenthal did in an unusually good column a few days after
Safire's, that Clinton's version of events doesn't add up, and that there are
strong grounds for suspicion about the serendipitous help Hubbell got. But
accusing someone, even the president, of a crime without evidence crosses a
divide that is usually observed even in op-ed land--the line separating
plausible opinion from pure speculation.

            
Safire gets away with sliming Clinton by
artfully exploiting his status as hybrid reporter/columnist. Unlike Rosenthal,
Anthony Lewis, and other traditional op-ed page writers, Safire does
actual--and sometimes extensive--reporting. He has even been known to
use-- how shall we say it? --strong incentives to encourage highly placed
officials to leak to him. What he writes carries the implication that he knows,
thanks to his inside tipsters, that which will soon come to light. But, with
increasing frequency, Safire has been abusing the privileges he grants
himself.

            Let's look closely at the
rest of that mind-reading column: "Easy to say now that the cover-up is always
worse than the crime," the interior Clinton/Safire monologue continues. "But
what were we going to do in 1994? Let Web twist in the wind? Abandon him to
that sumbitch Starr, until he started talking about our use of his
father-in-law as a front, about the Rose files in his basement, about what
Vince Foster had been working on?

            "We
bought three solid years, and a re-election, by getting our friends to take
care of Web."

            The welter of innuendo here is so thick that one can hardly
peer through it. Safire is saying that in 1994, Clinton had committed a variety
of crimes that would, if they had been brought to light, have prevented his
re-election. Hubbell, he suggests, knew about all of them, and so had to be
kept quiet with bribes. But what crimes might Hubbell have kept to himself?
Only Whitewater buffs will have any idea in this paragraph. But those who
follow this stuff should recognize that, like the theory Clinton arranged hush
money for Hubbell, Safire's hints about what got hushed up are pure conjecture.
Later in the column, Safire does some more thinking on behalf of the president:
"My stonewalling just has to work past the '98 elections. Then I can finish out
my term and pardon everybody including me on the way to Al's inauguration."

            
The key to Safire's deeper purpose is his
promiscuous use of terms like "cover-up," "stonewall," "hush money," "twist in
the wind," "hang tough," and "pardon." This is the lingo of Watergate, an event
that remains at the center of Safire's consciousness. As a Nixon speechwriter
from 1969 until 1973, Safire managed to avoid being dragged into the scandal
that ruined the careers of almost everyone he worked with. But after he joined
the Times in 1973, Safire took it as his mission to exculpate Nixon and
his henchmen. While the Watergate story was still breaking, Safire focused on
dirty tricks by JFK and LBJ, to try to demonstrate that what Nixon had done was
no worse than what previous presidents had done. In fact, he has been trying,
ever since, to prove that "they all do it."

            The
Carter years were represented in Safire's column by a series of associative
wordplays--"Billygate," "Waterquiddick," "peanutgate," "Koreagate," and--most
significantly--"Lancegate." Safire won a Pulitzer in 1977 for helping to force
the resignation of Carter adviser Bert Lance in a scandal no one much
remembers. In his excellent book Watergate in American Memory , Michael
Schudson well describes Safire's efforts to "Watergateize"
Carter-administration scandals. The interesting point that emerged subsequently
was that the conservative Safire wasn't just using the Watergate comparison to
bash Democrats. He was--and, weirdly enough, still is--writing principally as a
Nixon apologist aiming to trivialize Watergate itself.

            Though he is a graceful writer and a skilled reporter and
has a sharp mind, Safire is hitting with a corked bat. No one should be angrier
about this than Stephen Labaton, Jeff Gerth, and Safire's other colleagues at
the Times who have patiently pursued the Clinton scandals in a careful
way. Safire's journalistic cheating undermines their professional work. Back
during the first term, when Safire called the first lady a "congenital liar,"
his hyperbole overshadowed the fibs Hillary Rodham Clinton was accused of
telling. The weight of the Times is such that unfairness anywhere in the
paper casts a shadow over legitimate stories that appear elsewhere.

            
               I know, I know. But the
old dog's been at it going on 25 years. Can't ask him to learn a new
trick.
            

         
      
   
