
   
   
      
         
            The Conintern

            Essential to the self-image
of conservatives is the notion that they are enemies of an established
orthodoxy, insurgents against the dogmatic political correctness that
predominates on the left. Some recent gleanings, however, suggest that the
opposite is true. The party where humorless thought police work to enforce a
rigid ideological discipline isn't made up of Democrats. It comprises
Republicans.

            A vision
of the Conintern, circa 1997, emerges from two recent magazine pieces, both by
young conservative journalists. The first is a profile of Grover Norquist Jr.,
a lobbyist and adviser to Newt Gingrich, by Tucker Carlson. It appeared in the
New Republic after the Weekly Standard , where Carlson is a staff
writer, turned the idea down. The article portrays Norquist as a buffoonish
commissar who has misplaced his principles to the extent of accepting money to
lobby on behalf of the Marxist government of the Seychelles. In passing,
Carlson describes Norquist's weekly Wednesday morning meetings, where
conservative-movement activists, political strategists, congressional staffers,
and conservative journalists who are deemed loyal, from places like the
National Review and the Washington Times , gather to hash out what
can only be called the party line.

            The second article, which appears in the current issue of
Esquire , is by David Brock, author of The Real Anita Hill and
The Seduction of Hillary Rodham . Accompanied by a kinky photograph of
the author, tied to a stake with his chest bared, it describes how Brock became
persona non grata on the right by writing too sympathetically about
Hillary Rodham Clinton. Brock, strangely enough, acquiesces in the popular
misconception that his book was sympathetic to the first lady. In fact, Brock's
book was quite vicious about her, attacking her in a McCarthyite vein and
casting her as a Commie symp rather than a sleaze.

            But as a
glimpse into the world of conservative journalism, Brock's article is
revealing. Brock portrays a political subculture in which loyalty to the cause
means everything, truth very little. He recalls being told by one well-known
conservative to leave town when he made trouble for the anti-Clinton cause by
inconveniently pointing out that Gary Aldrich's book, Unlimited Access ,
was a crock. Before long, Brock was being disinvited to conservative
conferences and parties and denounced by his old allies as a turncoat.

            
This kind of treatment has no parallel among
liberals. A few left-wing journalists, such as Nat Hentoff and Christopher
Hitchens, have caught flak for dissenting from the conventional liberal
position on abortion. But there is no liberal "movement" like today's
conservative movement, and no such thing as a liberal-movement journalist in
the sense that Brock functioned as a conservative one. It is instructive to
compare what happened to Brock with the way Sidney Blumenthal (formerly of the
New 
               Republic and The 
               New 
               Yorker ) was treated
by his former colleagues when it was announced that he was joining the staff of
the Clinton White House. Blumenthal was attacked by fellow liberal journalists
for having compromised his journalistic independence by being too kind to
Clinton. No conservative journalist would ever be accused by his fellows of
being too close to Reagan, or to Gingrich. The conservative journalists who get
in trouble with their colleagues are people like Brock, Kevin Phillips, and
Michael Lind, who are accused of disloyalty to conservatism .

            Laura
Ingraham is a legendarily on-the-make young conservative pundit, who may need
to prove her independence to media outlets more than her loyalty to the
Conintern. Ingraham was Brocked a few months ago when she wrote on the New
York Times op-ed page that Rep. Dan Burton, R-Ind., should step aside as
chairman of the House campaign-finance investigation. Robert Novak, the
columnist, promptly denounced Ingraham as a "so-called conservative." At the
conservative gathering known as the Dark Ages Weekend, Norquist asked her what
she was trying to accomplish by criticizing fellow conservatives in the
Times . Ingraham would have to choose, he said, "whether to be with us or
against us." Norquist also let it be known that Ingraham would no longer be
welcome at those Wednesday morning sessions.

            Conservative journalists don't just have the inside track
on Republican strategy--they help devise it. Consider, for instance, the many
roles of John Fund, one of the editors of the Wall Street Journal
editorial page. Fund has doubled as a member of the Speaker's Advisory Group, a
small cluster of Gingrich's close advisers. According to sources, Fund nearly
left the Journal a few months ago to become Gingrich's chief spokesman.
After accepting the job initially, Fund changed his mind, perhaps because he is
more helpful where he is. (He declined comment.) Fund's denunciations of
Gingrich apostates have the flavor of Stalin-era attacks on Trotskyite
heretics. Earlier this year, when Arianna Huffington argued in her syndicated
column that Gingrich should step aside as speaker, an editorial promptly
appeared in the Journal charging Huffington with "intellectual
exhibitionism." This tone is Gingrich's own. The speaker has been known to send
notes to errant conservative journalists describing their work as
"strategically counterproductive."

            The
Washington Times ' editorial page, directed by Tod Lindberg, functions
like the Journal 's. The Carlson piece shows how Norquist can secure an
editorial supporting his clients, no matter how obscure the subject. The paper
includes a few liberal points of view for window dressing, but hardly any
dissenting conservative ones. Though the Times carries Huffington's
syndicated column, she has been censored when she has tried to write critically
about Gingrich. Again, the liberal equivalent of this--the New York
Times refusing to run criticism of Clinton by Anthony Lewis--is
unthinkable.

            
Nor is there any liberal equivalent to the way
various conservative outlets--from the National Review to Novak's
syndicated column and Rush Limbaugh's radio show--all disseminate the same
message du jour . Before the 1996 election, the conservative propaganda
line generally reflected poll-tested talking points on issues like taxes or
welfare reform. As Gingrich falters, however, the line seems to be less about
issues where conservatives disagree with liberals and more about conservatives
selling out fellow conservatives. A month ago, the word emanating from all the
above-mentioned orifices was that Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah was betraying his
party by co-sponsoring a health-care reform bill with Ted Kennedy. This week,
it is that Gary Bauer, a leader of social conservatives, has allowed himself to
become a tool of Gingrich's enemies by opposing the renewal of Most Favored
Nation status for China. These attempts to stamp out free thinking suggest what
is really going on inside the GOP: an effort to submerge the battle of
ideas.

            Of the
main Conintern outlets, the least reliable in its political coverage is the
Weekly Standard , which regularly launches fusillades against the
Republican leadership, almost always for departing from the True Faith. (For a
related article on conservative cultural correctness, see "But Is It Art
Criticism?" by Franklin Foer in this issue of Slate.) William Kristol, the
Standard 's editor, recognizes such attacks for the great publicity
stunts they are. But even the Standard , it seems, has its limits.
According to Kristol, Deputy Editor John Podhoretz turned down Tucker Carlson's
Norquist proposal because he didn't want the magazine to be seen as carrying on
a vendetta against Gingrich. It's seen that way just the same. Norquist has
been spreading the word that Rupert Murdoch, the Standard 's owner, must
stop funding the magazine. Carlson says he has had calls from the conservative
Politburo, including one from Michael Ledeen, a former Reagan National Security
aide, who told him, "No one who believes what we believe should be attacking
Grover."

            Much of this kind of behavior can be traced back to what
Richard Hofstadter famously described as the "paranoid style" of the American
Right. Conspiratorial conservatives have a tendency toward what Hofstadter
called "the imitation of the enemy." Thus the Ku Klux Klan wore the vestments
of the Catholics they despised, and the John Birch Society organized itself in
secret cells and front groups modeled on the Communist foe. Contemporary
conservatives believe that the most powerful institutions in American society
are part of a liberal conspiracy. They feel this gives them license to create
conservative counterinstitutions, from magazines to think tanks. But these
conservative institutions--the Washington Times , the Heritage
Foundation--are part of an ideological mission in a way that "liberal"
ones--the Washington Post , the Brookings Institution--are not.

            Exaggerated and crude claims
of liberal bias have become an excuse for poor journalistic standards, and for
shoddy intellectual ones as well. But the worst of it isn't the propaganda that
passes for conservative thought these days. It's the deadly sense of enforced
conformity, the stale air that blows in from the stagnant ponds of the
Right.

         
      
   
