
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Don't
Readme
            

            The sole purpose of this
"Readme" column is to draw your attention to our cornucopious coverage of the
Clinton sex scandal. If you've missed the news at all, "Today's Papers"
will catch you up on daily developments from the past week. (Earlier Papers
are, of course, accessible from the current column.) For the world's reaction,
check out "International Papers." "The Week/The Spin" supplies the big picture in a small
package--plus our Clintometer, which scientifically measures within 1-percent
accuracy the chance of the president not finishing his term. It is updated
daily. In "Chatterbox," we file random tidbits, insights, observations, and
factoids. Chatterbox is updated at least once a day, usually more often.
"In Other
Magazines" synthesizes the coverage in Time , Newsweek , and so
on. If you miss the weekend talk shows, "Pundit
Central" will have them all neatly packaged for you by midday Monday.

            
               
                  Slate
               'schief
political correspondent has been filing daily from the D.C. epicenter. Catch up
on his reports
in "Dispatches & Dialogues." While you're there, read the latest exchanges
between Susan Estrich and David Frum about Matt
Drudge, the cybergossip who broke the story. David Plotz's "Assessment"
this week is a composite portrait of Bill Clinton's dream date. Washington
editor Jodie T.
Allen denies having slept with the president. (Not one of her more
persuasive essays, in the view of her colleagues.) "The Gist" brings together all
the varying explanations for the president's alleged behavior, looking for a
unified theory. In "Frame Game," William Saletan analyzes how the various players are
struggling to position Monica Lewinsky in the public mind. And Jared Hohlt's
"Web Sites"
review is your guide to the many Monica sites that have already sprung up.

            Next Week: The Clinton
Scandal--Media Overkill?

            

               --Michael Kinsley
            

            P.S. Not everything in

                  Slate
                this week is about Bill and Monica. Stephen Harrigan
returns with his latest tally of "Plot Holes" in
current movies. The "Medical
Examiner," Atul Gawande, offers a doctor's novel argument on abortion. Anne
Hollander, our fashion columnist, praises fake fur. And that's not all ...

         
      
   
