
   
   
      
         
            Newt Descending

            He was persecuted,
tormented, and crucified. But at Easter, he rose. That, at least, is what Newt
Gingrich's apostles are saying about him, pointing to their man's successful
trip to the Far East and his return to public visibility following the
congressional spring recess.

            Newt is
sounding like his old self again. Wednesday he called for abolition of both the
capital-gains tax and the estate tax. (For more on the capital-gains debate,
see this "Dialogue" between Michael Kinsley and John C. Goodman.) In an
hour-long speech to GOPAC Monday night, he boasted about the Contract With
America's influence in Mongolia. Once again the historical pedant, he explained
why the Clinton campaign-finance scandal--which he previously called merely
"worse than Watergate"--is actually tantamount to the fall of Rome. In ancient
times, "sending lobbyists and offering bribes to Rome became the easiest and
most profitable route to wealth and power for many local leaders," Gingrich
said. "If it is proven that the Chinese Communists were trying to funnel money
into a presidential defense fund, then the Roman model of foreign corruption
will indeed be raising its head within the American system."

            Contrary to the media hype and rumors floating around
Washington, Gingrich will probably not be deposed before the next election. To
get rid of him would require not just a few dozen defections, but a majority
vote of the House Republican caucus. There is still no fully plausible
successor, and sacking Gingrich would mean Republicans running in 1998 on a
record of catastrophe rather than mere inaction. At the same time, the
precariousness of Newt's position is making him and other Republican leaders
act in weird, unpredictable ways. The speaker's shakiness has turned the House
into a strange and somewhat silly place.

            The most
obvious effect of Gingrich's insecurity is on his own behavior, which has
consisted lately of dramatic lurches, first to the left, then to the right.
Before his China trip, Gingrich's comeback strategy was to show that he was not
the radical-right ogre of Mother Jones direct mail. He made nice with
Jesse Jackson and announced that he was dropping affirmative action as an
issue. He warmly received Alec Baldwin and other liberal actors, who came to
lobby on behalf of the National Endowment for the Arts. Though Baldwin had been
quoted calling him "evil," Gingrich invited him and the other thespians back
for dinner, and declared that the NEA might not be such a bad thing after all.
Conservatives who were annoyed by Newt's nice-guy act were truly outraged when
he suggested that one way to get a balanced-budget agreement might be to put
off tax cuts.

            
This gambit was based on what was at least a
plausible political calculation. If Republicans could separate their tax cuts
in the public mind from the domestic budget cuts necessary to balance the
budget, Democrats could no longer accuse them of throwing old people into the
snow in order to save money for Steve Forbes. The idea was also to do with
taxes what House Republicans had shrewdly done with welfare reform in 1996,
holding the president's feet to the fire by sending him a politically popular
stand-alone bill. But the result of Gingrich's suggestion was blind fury on the
right. Eleven of the freshman hotheads elected in 1994 openly challenged the
speaker's leadership. In a short, shocking article in the Weekly
Standard , Rep. Peter King of New York called Gingrich "political road
kill." In the last Congress, Gingrich didn't have to stand for this kind of
insubordination. Faced with an episode of dissent back then, he stripped one
nonconformist freshman of a choice committee assignment.

            Now,
however, Gingrich lacks the power to punish, and can do little more than suck
up to his conservative critics. He apologized profusely for the
"misunderstanding" about his comments on tax cuts. His GOPAC speech was filled
with right-wing red meat, such as a proposed crackdown on the political
influence of unions and a demand that the Internal Revenue Service be brought
to heel. On April 9, he surprised everyone by proposing a more aggressive tax
cut than any of his more conservative GOP colleagues, calling for an end to all
taxes on both capital gains and estates, changes that would cost the Treasury
some $300 billion over five years. In keeping with conservative newspeak,
Gingrich referred to these as the taxes on "savings and job creation" and the
tax on "death benefits."

            Gingrich is not the only one behaving erratically. As he
moves to shore up his right-wing credentials, his more authentically
conservative rivals are trying to establish their own credibility in the eyes
of moderate Republicans. The first to suggest that going after the NEA again
might not be such a hot idea was not Gingrich, but the libertarian Majority
Leader Dick Armey. When he came out with his put-off-the-tax-cuts suggestion,
Gingrich was actually endorsing a proposal by ultracon Republican Whip Tom
DeLay. DeLay has been taking sudden umbrage at accusations that he is a tool of
corporate lobbyists. Armey has been losing weight and restraining his
proclivity toward quasioffensive humor. (At one press conference earlier this
year, he joked, "I'm happy to be black--I mean back," and chided journalists
about their preference for the Old Testament.) Gossip swirls about the four-way
rivalry among the top Republicans who rank just below Gingrich: Armey, DeLay,
John Boehner, and Bill Paxon. The latest rumor has Armey and Paxon teaming up
as speaker and majority leader.

            All this
jockeying has forestalled any real Republican agenda. Compared with the
hyperactive 104 th Congress, the 105 th has been a joke.
What little time it has actually been in session it has spent on issues like a
resolution supporting the Georgia judge who posted the Ten Commandments in his
courtroom, and a congressional gold medal for Frank Sinatra. Last week, the
House passed a resolution banning the use of federal funds for assisted
suicide. Of course, no federal funds go to assisted suicide. In a caucus
meeting last week, Gingrich reportedly said that Republican critics who
complained he had no agenda "weren't smart enough to understand it."

            
The most damaging consequence of Gingrich's
weakness is the difficulty of negotiating what might be the GOP's proudest
achievement--an agreement to balance the budget. The paradox is that while a
deal would shore up Newt's position, he hasn't got enough power to negotiate
one. Though the GOP and the administration are quite close on the numbers,
those on Newt's right flank are likely to portray any agreement with the
president as a capitulation born of weakness. In 1995, Gingrich had the clout
to make a centrist budget compromise stick. Now such an agreement would
probably provoke open rebellion, divide the House, and deprive the speaker of a
working majority.

            The result is a complex
stalemate. Republicans face the prospect of running in 1998 with a discredited,
unpopular speaker who is nonetheless impossible to dethrone, and with no record
of accomplishment. As the Democratic National Committee sinks deeper into
scandal-related debt, the Democrats can look forward to running without a
functional party organization to support them. The lame vs. the destitute--it
could be a great race.

         
      
   
