
   
   
      
         
            This Is Your Network on Drugs

            ABC is devoting the full
range of its resources to a month-long "March Against Drugs." The network says
it will forgo $20 million in advertising revenue to air anti-drug
public-service announcements. World News Tonight , as well as Good
Morning America , Turning Point , and 20/20 , is featuring
stories about the dangers of drug use. On March 30, "D-Day," Peter Jennings
will host a "town meeting." Non-news shows, including General

               Hospital and Home 
               Improvement , have been drafted into
service too. On the March 14 episode of the sitcom Grace 
               Under
Fire , Grace finds drugs in her son's room. As a child of the 1960s, she
finds it hard to raise the issue with him. But in the end, according to an ABC
publicist, Grace decides to take a "hard line."

            ABC's
little adventure in what is known in the trade as "cause-related marketing" is
the most serious episode of Disneyfication since the Mouseketeers took over the
network in 1995. The March Against Drugs replaces journalism (and
entertainment) with agitprop. Beyond that, the willingness of a top news
organization to suspend all skepticism is one more sign that the drug war has
reached another baroque period.

            The story of ABC's descent into this morass begins with
family. James Burke, the head of the Partnership for a Drug-Free America, is
the brother of Daniel Burke, who, until shortly before the Disney takeover, was
the head of Capital Cities/ABC. Under Daniel Burke's leadership, ABC tried to
distinguish itself as the anti-drug leader among the major networks, running a
plethora of partnership-produced public-service announcements, including the
famous fried-egg commercial, "This is your brain on drugs." Capital Cities
instituted a pre-employment urine-testing program that covered the ABC
newsroom. David Westin, who recently replaced Roone Arledge as president of ABC
News, has redoubled these efforts. Last year, when the partnership presented
research indicating a national rise in teen drug use, Westin hatched the "March
Against Drugs" idea.

            The first
question Westin should have asked himself is whether it ever makes sense for a
news organization like ABC to climb into bed with an advocacy organization like
the partnership. Fighting racism and protecting the environment are good causes
too. But had ABC allied itself with even mainstream organizations like the
NAACP or the Sierra Club, alarm bells would have gone off--and rightly so.
Despite the worthiness of these causes, questions arise about the methods,
tactics, reliability of information, and sources of funding of any advocacy
organization. Nonprofits often provide essential help for reporters, but it's
Journalism 101 that you treat them skeptically--as sources, not as allies in a
crusade.

            
The Partnership for a Drug-Free America is a
nonprofit group that produces super-slick TV and print advertising to try to
"unsell" drugs. Until very recently, the partnership was heavily supported by
the cigarette and liquor industries, which want to distinguish their products
from illegal drugs. The partnership no longer accepts smoking and
drinking money, but about half its support comes from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, whose wealth is based on pharmaceuticals.

            These biases are reflected
in the March Against Drugs. Drinking by teens is arguably a bigger problem than
the use of illegal pills, plants, and powders. According to surveys, 30 percent
of high-school seniors say they have been drunk in the last month. Only 10
percent say they use drugs. But ABC isn't talking about that. "Most experts
agree that it is OK if your kids see you having an occasional drink," says an
educational pamphlet distributed by the network in connection with the march.
ABC has aired no stories about the abuse of prescription drugs so far this
month. It did, however, run an alarmist story on Good 
               Morning

               America about kids sniffing toxic household chemicals, which it claimed
kills 1,000 kids a year--a statistic that drug experts say has no basis.

            What's a
little exaggeration in a good cause? The air of hyperbole that surrounds the
ABC march is in keeping with the partnership's Madison Avenue attitude that a
message doesn't have to be accurate if it sells. One famous partnership ad
suggested that smoking pot produces the flat-line brainwave of a comatose
person. ABC News would never knowingly be a party to the dissemination of such
crude and dishonest propaganda during a real war, as opposed to a metaphorical
one like the war on drugs. But this month, it seems to be dropping all its
usual standards.

            Richard Evans, a Massachusetts lawyer who wrote a piece in
Time about the difficulty of talking honestly to one's kids about drugs,
was flown to New York to participate in a taped round-table dialogue for
Good 
               Morning 
               America . He says his comments criticizing the
partnership were edited out of the discussion before it aired. Perhaps this was
because of time constraints or because Evans was inarticulate--though he was
pretty cogent on the phone. And ABC has made some efforts in the direction of
balance. Last week, World News Tonight ran a fair-minded story about
Baltimore Mayor Kurt Schmoke, who advocates treating drugs as a public-health
problem rather than a law-enforcement one. But if another dissenter is
presented this month, it will probably be some stoned freak with a ponytail.
It's your choice: communism or Joe McCarthy. That's not atypical of TV
journalism, which thrives on the conflict of extremes. But ABC used to do
better. A couple of years ago, it broadcast America's War on Drugs: The
Search for Solutions , a much praised hour-long special that questioned the
tactics and methods of the drug war.

            There is a crudeness to the
March Against Drugs campaign that must make Ted Koppel wince. A pamphlet called
How to Raise Drug-Free Kids (produced by the partnership, Reader's
Digest , the Department of Education, and ABC for the project) makes the
project of child-rearing sound like growing seedless watermelons. Never
experimenting with drugs is seen as the chief goal of growing up. "Drug-Free
Kids" might sound like just another dumb slogan à la "Just Say No." But these
slogans have consequences. "Zero Tolerance" led to the near-expulsion of a
13-year-old girl who gave Midol to a friend at school. "Drug-Free Kids" is
already encouraging parents to drug-test their own children--something Good
Morning America thinks might not be such a bad idea.

            Historians are likely to look
back on ABC's March Against Drugs as a high-water mark in the anti-drug
irrationalism of the mid-'90s. There's a returning kids-on-milk-cartons sense
of hysteria to the whole crusade. This would have been a good story for ABC
News, if ABC hadn't been so busy being part of the problem.

         
      
   
