
   
   
      
         
            Blacks Only

            The debate about affirmative
action is usually cast as a fight between conservatives who wish to abolish the
policy and liberals who want to keep it. That is a misunderstanding. The
argument is actually between conservatives who want to remodel affirmative
action and liberals who want to conceal it.

            Even
those conservatives deemed the most extreme on issues of race, like Charles
Murray and Dinesh D'Souza, do not favor doing away with affirmative action.
Rather, they propose to base it on the principle of economic disadvantage.
This, they contend, would bring similar results in terms of diversity, without
the evident unfairness. Critics also sometimes argue that race-based
affirmative action would be fine if it were limited to efforts at "recruitment"
and "training." They generally agree that affirmative action is acceptable as a
"remedy" for specific acts of past discrimination. Many who think that
affirmative action shouldn't be required by law favor it as a voluntary policy.
And, of course, most opponents of affirmative action practice it themselves.
Black opponents of affirmative action, for example, are heavily favored over
whites with similar views in getting promoted by the conservative propaganda
machine.

            If group preferences are wrong in principle, as these
opponents maintain, none of their exceptions makes much sense. Consider the
"remedy for past discrimination" dodge. Say you're a highly qualified white man
denied a job by the Birmingham Fire Department. Are you supposed to feel better
if you got turned down because the department once discriminated against
blacks? You yourself never practiced discrimination. The class-not-race
alternative is even less of an improvement. It actually heightens the injustice
of affirmative action by punishing some people for a historical wrong that they
not only didn't participate in, but that also never occurred. America is as
famous for economic opportunity and class mobility as it is for its legacy of
racial oppression. Class-based affirmative action trades in a vexed solution to
a real problem for an even more vexed solution to an illusory problem.

            Liberals,
on the other hand, spend less time defending affirmative action than they do
trying to make it innocuous and invisible. The Clinton administration clings to
the evasion enshrined by Justice Lewis Powell in the Bakke case: "Rigid"
numerical quotas are unfair and discriminatory, while "flexible" goals are not.
Race should be a factor, but it must not be the factor. What's the real
difference? In either case, members of a protected group win jobs, promotions,
and educational slots that would otherwise go to better-qualified white men.
This is colorblindness of a sort: No one can identify specific victims or
beneficiaries of "factor"-style affirmative action, even though both would
exist as surely as they do under a policy of explicit quotas.

            
Other liberals propose more euphemism as a
solution. In a recent issue of the New York Review of Books , George
Fredrickson recommends that supporters of affirmative action avoid the words
"racial preferences" and "reverse discrimination" in favor of the term
"equality of opportunity." This is like Gerald Ford's attempt to fight
inflation by banning it from his vocabulary.

            Clinton
says he wants to "mend" affirmative action. Opponents, it turns out, say the
same thing. So, behind the vicious argument is actually something like shared
understanding that affirmative action is a toxic medicine, sometimes necessary,
that we've been using too freely. The dosage needs to be scaled back. But how?
Here's my proposal.

            Any kind of affirmative action means preferring some people
over others for reasons having nothing to do with their intrinsic
merit--however merit is measured. That is not something that the state, or any
private institution, should take on lightly. But it remains justified in one
case--that of African-Americans. The wrong done to slaves and their descendents
is unique in American history. Slavery, racism, and segregation have left a
black social deficit that is damaging, not just to blacks but also to American
society as a whole. Were this problem evaporating on its own, affirmative
action would not be necessary. The condition of blacks is improving, but there
is strong evidence--see, for example, Orlando Patterson's new book The
Ordeal of Integration --that affirmative action has played an essential role
in fostering both integration and the growth of the black middle class. If
affirmative action needs to be reformed, the way to fix it is to narrow it, to
cover blacks only.

            This was
the original idea of affirmative action. John F. Kennedy's 1961 executive
order, which first created preferences in federal contracting, applied only to
blacks. So did Lyndon B. Johnson's better-known 1965 order. The justification
was spelled out in Johnson's Howard University speech of that year, written by
one Daniel Patrick Moynihan. "You do not take a person who, for years, has been
hobbled by chains, and liberate him, bring him to the starting line of a race,
and then say, 'You are free to compete with all the others,' and still justly
believe that you have been completely fair," Johnson said. In later years,
however, the concept was stretched to cover other minorities and women, who
were less hobbled at the starting line. The greatest expansion was under
Richard Nixon, who, it has been suggested, saw affirmative action as a Trojan
horse to slaughter Democrats. Yet Democrats continued to push to qualify new
groups for government set-aside contracts and other forms of preference.

            
Expansion of affirmative action was an
instinctual response of liberalism, and not in the crude talk-radio sense that
"liberals love big government." The New Deal political model for social
programs was to include the semideserving and undeserving along with the truly
deserving. A broad base of beneficiaries meant a broad base of political
support. Clinton has responded to opposition to affirmative action in exactly
this way. His "mend it, don't end it" speech of July 1995 emphasized that
affirmative action helped women--half the voting population. He even listed
"gender" before "race" in defining the policy. Though this approach didn't stop
Proposition 209 in California, it has become policy. The administration's
explicit strategy for saving affirmative action is to rally women in its
defense. Thus new Small Business Administration regulations intended to make it
easier for white women to compete for loans.

            There is,
to be sure, a long history of discrimination against women, Hispanics, Chinese,
and so on. But the mistreatment of all groups other than blacks was far less
severe, and it has proven far more amenable to cure without radical
intervention. Hispanics, Asians, even African and Caribbean blacks, are by and
large following the classic patterns of immigrant and ethnic assimilation. For
various reasons, blacks are not.

            In their abstract mode, conservatives argue that any group
bias is unfair. Why should whites who did not themselves discriminate against
blacks be punished for what their or someone else's ancestors did? The answer
is that it shouldn't be thought of as punishment. Whites who never practiced
discrimination are nonetheless beneficiaries of it.

            As a
thought-experiment, consider what it might mean to a white victim of reverse
discrimination if blacks had always been equal. Imagine a law school class with
100 places. Under affirmative action, a white applicant who ranks
99 th might well be denied admission while a black who ranks
105 th would get in. But where would those two applicants have ranked
if blacks had not been enslaved and discriminated against? Under the
overmechanical assumptions of affirmative-action opponents themselves (and
putting aside the racial IQ theories of Murray and some others), blacks would
move up the list, and whites would move down.

            
Blacks are 12 percent of the population. That
doesn't necessarily mean that in a world with no racial discrimination, present
or past, 12 of the top 100 candidates would be black. But the number would be
closer to 12 than to the likely two or three in today's world. And in that
case, the white candidate at 99 th place today wouldn't get in
anyway.

            In other words, if our goal
is to replicate a colorblind world, a world with some forms of racial
affirmative action comes closer than a world without it.

         
      
   
