
   
   
      
         
            I, Gingrich

            By Jacob
Weisberg

            And you think you're
busy. Consider the plight of the poor speaker of the House. Item No. 1 on his
list of things to do for June 30, 1993, was to "articulate the vision of
civilizing humanity and recivilizing all Americans." That task completed, he
intended to "define, plan and begin to organize the movement for civilization
and the effort to transform the welfare state into an opportunity society to
help people achieve productivity, responsibility and safety so they can achieve
prosperity and freedom so they can pursue happiness." Perhaps anticipating some
slight feeling of exhaustion after completing such tasks, Gingrich also
reminded himself (No. 6) about "diet, exercise, recreational renewal with
Marianne." Oh, and Newt, don't forget to pick up a gallon of milk on your way
home.

            This personal agenda is but
one of many treasures to be found in a huge, paperbound tome with the sexless
title In the Matter of Representative Newt Gingrich: Exhibits to Draft
Report of the Select Committee on Ethics . Published as an evidentiary annex
to the much shorter and duller House Ethics Committee report itself, the volume
contains notes, memos, doodles, cancelled checks, and other Newt ephemera from
1990 to 1994. Many pages are reproduced in Gingrich's own,
open-this-parcel-at-your-own-risk, don't-mind-the-protruding-wires scrawl. And
though it came with a bill to the author for $300,000 instead of a $4.5 million
advance, In the Matter is a book that, unlike To Renew America ,
captures the essence of what the Chinese might call Newt Gingrich Thought. In
the spirit of recreational renewal, then, let us delve.

            There is
some tough sledding before you get to the fun part. In working out plans for
his various front groups and fronts-within-fronts, Gingrich speaks in a
language consisting almost exclusively of acronyms (COS, PFF, GOPAC, ALOF, AOW,
ACT, RAC, and CONET, among others) and abstract nouns (opportunity,
responsibility, civilization, vision, organization, analysis, dissemination,
etc.). These nouns are often grouped in motivational quadruplets. Gingrich
never asks anyone to listen; he admonishes them to Listen, Learn, Help, and
Lead. He organizes his activities according to Visions, Strategies, Projects,
and Tactics. At another point, he suggests that Republicans consider the
application of Wedges, Magnets, Shields, and Turf. Failing that, he recommends
Message, Mechanism, Method, and Team Building to advance the goals of Freedom,
Self-Government, Safety, and Prosperity.

            In his heart, the speaker is a modules man. In developing
the course materials for his college course, "Renewing American Civilization,"
he suggests the need for a "Core Doctrine Module." He does not wish to neglect,
however, The Flying Upside-Down Module (meaning not explained), the We Are a
Majority Module, or the Quality Module. Modules are not to be confused with
models, such as the Tory Franchise Model (a plan for conservatives to capture
marginal districts). Nor are they synonymous with paradigms, as in the Vision
Implementation Paradigm described in Exhibit 98.

            As he
flies around like George Jetson in his upside-down module, Gingrich is ever
counting. He offers two reasons why we must replace the welfare state, three
steps toward success, Four Great Truths of our Generation, five Pillars of
Freedom and Progress, seven aspects of committing ourselves to real change,
nine zones of invention and creativity, 10 steps toward Renewing American
Civilization, 13 Renewing America Strategies, 14 steps to replacing the welfare
state with an opportunity society, and 17 key factors in a House victory. These
are easier to remember if you sing them. On the fifth day of Gingrich, my
true love gave to me: five pillars of freedom and progress, four great truths
of our generation, three steps toward success, two reasons we must replace the
welfare state, and a 501(c)(3) .

            
Newt often resorts to visual aids as well. In
one sketch of a private cosmology, detailed in the speaker's Unabomber style of
random capitalization, "NEWT action" is at the center, hurling arrows in every
direction. To the left lie: build up, preparAtion, and attention Focusing. On
the right: FOllOW through, diSSEMINATion, and consolidAtion then improved
EVAluAtion and improved preparation For Future action. In another picture,
perhaps the speaker's most fluid and evocative rendering, stick figures
representing Newt and Marianne recreate renewingly at the center of their solar
system. Radiating out are: HOUSE and other GOP members, NAtionAl Whip,
technology, quality, Olympics, the rest OF Georgia GOP, 6 th
District, MiliTary Foreign policy, Speeches, C-SPAN, Other GOP, recreation,
MiSSion-MOVement planning-development, health, Teach?, write books, and
something that looks like "write eMoos."

            You would be hard pressed to
argue that Gingrich wants a positive self-image. In Exhibit 42, he scribbles
out what he sees as his own "primary Mission."

            --Advocate of
civilization

            --definer of
civilizAtion

            --Teacher of the rules of
civilization

            --arouser of those who Form
civilizAtion

            --Organizer of the
pro-civilization activists

            --leader (possibly) of the
civilizing Forces.

            Only
"possibly"? This pang of modesty soon passes. Before long, Gingrich is writing
to his colleagues who are helping to plan his college course: "Our goal is
education and not immediate profit. Together we are going to make history as
well as teach it." In another ransom-note style memo, he breaks down his list
of things to do into two categories: 1993-2018 and 2018 onward. In the first 25
years, he will write "a SerIEs oF booKs ('The history of Freedom, prosperity
and safety')." In the second category, he will create "A body of rules and
EXamples that is a doctrine of Freedom, self-government, safety and
prosperity."

            Finally there is Newt's deep dada mode. "I keep reminding
my friends we've entered the decade of the teenage mutant ninja turtle," he
offers in one speech draft. Who are these friends? Why do they need constant
reminders? Have they suggested that he see somebody? "We are in the business of
transforming the United States from a welfare state into an opportunity
society--the opportunity society is based on the basic principles of #11," he
scribbles in another memo. Is this a Fermat's Last Theorem-type joke? There is
no "#11." In the agenda for a meeting to consider the future of one of his
outfits, "American Citizens Television," the following "positive" alternatives
are offered:

            a) Send Clear Signals

            b) Allow Charter Members to
Earmark Funds

            c) Adopt North Pole rules on
spending

            d) Great show for September
29

            e) All out effort November
11-12 Charter Meeting

            f) Renewed Emphasis on Fund
Raising

            g) Find Cinderella.

            I don't know about you guys,
but I say we find Cinderella.

            He is $300,000 poorer,
perhaps, but rich in the fruits of his own imagination. Another sheet of
grandiose, lunatic jottings ends with the demented scrawl: "This page is the
highest vAlue assigNMent/ tasK/ qua of 1993." OK, Newt, we'll pay. Just please
don't hurt us.

         
      
   
