
   
   
      
         
            Liberal Tobacco Whores

            To liberals, Harry McPherson
is a saintly figure. As a longtime aide to Lyndon B. Johnson, McPherson was an
important advocate for the civil-rights movement, a dove on Vietnam, and one of
the architects of the War on Poverty. In 1965, when marchers were attacked in
Selma, McPherson helped persuade LBJ to deploy the National Guard to protect
them. Inside the White House, he tried to talk Johnson out of escalating the
war.

            Today
Harry McPherson is a tobacco lobbyist representing Philip Morris, RJR Nabisco,
and the three other tobacco companies that have been negotiating a global
settlement with the attorneys general of 40 states. McPherson's heavily
Democratic Washington law firm of Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPherson &
Hand is being paid about $200,000 a month by the tobacco industry, according to
the National Journal . As senior partner, McPherson has also helped
recruit liberal heroes of a more recent vintage as cigarette lobbyists. The
firm recently deployed Ann Richards, the acid-tongued former governor of Texas,
to work on the settlement alongside former Senate Majority Leader George
Mitchell, who was already on the case. Other well-known Democrats have also
joined the tobacco team recently. Carter Eskew, a political consultant who has
worked for Sens. Chris Dodd, Joseph Lieberman, and Tom Harkin, is giving media
advice to the companies involved in the $368-billion settlement, with the help
of others at his Democratically inclined PR firm, the Bozell Sawyer Miller
Group.

            It is hard to say precisely what all these big-name
Democrats are doing on behalf of the tobacco companies. According to a report
in the Dallas Morning News , Ann Richards, who is not a lawyer, recently
paid a lobbying call on Sen. Ted Kennedy to encourage him to either support the
agreement (which needs congressional approval) or soft-pedal his objections.
Richards declined to comment, as did her former Chief of Staff Jane Hickie, a
Verner, Liipfert attorney who is one of four lawyers conducting negotiations on
behalf of the industry. Mitchell also declined to comment, as did Eskew. None
of them has yet filed a lobbying disclosure form that might give additional
particulars. McPherson says that his own work involves advising the tobacco
companies and lobbying the White House and Congress to support the deal.

            Unlike Verner, Liipfert's
recently acquired Republican bauble Bob Dole, who is still covered by
post-government-employment restrictions on lobbying, Mitchell is free to work
his former colleagues. Mitchell was the one who brought the tobacco companies
in as clients, and who participated in some of the early negotiating sessions.
But McPherson says Mitchell hasn't yet "done much talking" on Capitol Hill
because he has been too busy as special envoy to the Irish peace talks. But
that distraction hasn't stopped Mitchell from lobbying on other issues.
According to a recent issue of Roll Call , Mitchell and Dole worked
together on a provision of the budget deal on behalf of Fruit of the Loom. With
Mitchell working the Hill and Dole advising backstage, the firm succeeded in
striking out a provision supported by President Clinton that would have allowed
more apparel imports from the Caribbean.

            To see
these two former legislative colossi bury their ideological differences and
come together on behalf of American underpants is either inspiring or
grotesque, depending on your perspective. But while Dole's agreement with the
firm is that he won't lobby for the tobacco companies, Mitchell is likely to
ply the corridors of the Capitol for them this autumn.

            
McPherson argues that lobbying on behalf of the
tobacco settlement is not the same as working for the tobacco companies under
ordinary circumstances, something he suggests his firm would not have done. He
says the proposed deal serves the public interest by restricting cigarette
advertising and marketing, and by requiring the tobacco companies to cough up
billions if youth smoking fails to decline dramatically. "If Congress enacts it
in pretty much its current shape, I believe it will be the biggest step forward
in public health with regard to tobacco in history," McPherson says. "The
tobacco companies have had to come forward with an inconceivably large number
of major concessions--committing to change everything about the way they
advertise and market cigarettes."

            Berl
Bernhard, another Verner, Liipfert partner who is an old-time liberal--he
worked for Edmund Muskie and at the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights--offers a
similar defense of his firm. He says that Verner, Liipfert agreed to take on
tobacco clients only after being persuaded that they were ready to mend their
ways, and that a global settlement would serve the common good. Bernhard avers
that he has been amazed by the billions of dollars the tobacco industry has
agreed to pony up. "The amount of money is staggering," he says. "They have
gone way beyond where I thought they would go."

            In a deal like this, it's not unusual for both sides to
claim, as McPherson and Bernhard do, that they're getting the short end of the
stick--that's all part of the negotiation. What is truly odd is lawyers
suggesting that cutting a lousy deal absolves them of blame for working for
creeps. This defense is also preposterous. Like any lawyers, the Verner,
Liipfert attorneys are trying to get the best deal they can for their clients.
The morality of their participation doesn't depend on how badly they do.

            McPherson
and Bernhard also stretch the bounds of credulity when they suggest that what
they're doing is OK because they're merely working on a settlement, not on
traditional tobacco-industry concerns such as preventing regulation. There's no
moral distinction here. You settle a case if you believe you'll be better off
doing so. And in any event, there's no reason to think Verner, Liipfert's work
will be confined to the settlement. An April 23 statement announces that the
firm has been retained "to provide counsel in light of the heightened legal and
regulatory activities surrounding tobacco products." I asked both Bernhard and
McPherson whether the firm would in fact limit its work to the settlement. Both
answered in lawyerly fashion that the issue of work on other matters "hasn't
come up."

            
Finally, it is fallacious to suggest that
because society may benefit from a compromise with an evildoer, work on behalf
of the evildoer is justified. If Verner, Liipfert's lawyers are good--and they
are at least well connected--they will strike a better bargain for their
clients than the clients would otherwise have got. These lawyers might make the
case that even tobacco companies have rights, and that the public interest
actually was served by getting these companies a better bargain. But they
didn't make that case, at least to me. They themselves appear to accept--or at
least to be unwilling to challenge--the widely held assumption that the public
interest lies in the worst possible deal for the tobacco companies.

            The traditional lawyer's
defense--that the Constitution entitles everyone to legal
representation--hardly cuts it here either. Working for Philip Morris isn't
like defending an indigent murderer in a death penalty appeal. It's more like
defending a rich mobster. Philip Morris is going to have decent-quality
representation whether or not any particular lawyer decides to sully his hands.
And in this instance, the "lawyer" defense is even weaker because Mitchell,
Richards, Eskew, and the others are working not just as lawyers, but as
lobbyists and media advisers as well. Despite the best efforts of Washington's
influence-peddling community, there's still no constitutional right to lobbying
or PR. If you can't find a lobbyist, the court won't appoint one for you.

            Former Republican National
Committee Chairman Haley Barbour, too, is working on behalf of the companies
involved in the settlement, and he deserves as much scorn as his Democratic
counterparts. But somehow you expect that from Republicans, whereas you don't
expect it from big-name national Democrats, especially Northerners like George
Mitchell. The only thing you can say on behalf of the liberals is that, while
greedy operators on both sides have sold out to the tobacco industry, they
alone seem to feel a bit embarrassed about it.

         
      
   
