
   
   
      
         
            Car Talk

            The urge to explain an
entire election in terms of a single lesson or message is usually worth
resisting. But in this week's off-year voting, the chief theme seems too strong
and too weird to resist. The new driving force in American politics is
driving.

            The two biggest races were
the gubernatorial contests in New Jersey and Virginia, and both were dominated
by car talk. In New Jersey, Democratic challenger James McGreevey put a pledge
to make driving cheaper at the center of his campaign. Taking a page from his
opponent Christine Todd Whitman's playbook of four years ago, McGreevey
promised an across-the-board reduction of 10 percent, not in income taxes but
in auto-insurance premiums. In New Jersey, where people spend more time behind
the wheel than in any other state and consequently pay the most for auto
insurance (though few recognize any connection), this was an offer almost too
good to refuse. It very nearly turned a previously popular incumbent out of
office in the midst of an economic boom. In exit polls, nine out of 10 voters
said the insurance issue was an important factor in their vote.

            In a
capitalist economic system, you might wonder at the idea of a governor simply
ordering a statewide price reduction. But in New Jersey, nearly everyone takes
it for granted that you can't have a free market in anything as important as
automobile insurance. Only the Libertarian candidate, Murray Sabrin, favored
deregulating the system under which insurers must petition a state board to
raise rates and are forbidden to earn profits of more than 6 percent a year.
Whitman and McGreevey battled over what kind of additional regulation
would most effectively force a reduction in rates. Whitman offered the more
sensible proposal, a sort of managed-competition scheme modeled on national
legislation sponsored by Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan. Her plan would require
insurers to offer as one option a true no-fault policy, which says that you
can't try to recover damages for pain and suffering. She saved her job by
claiming that this would mean an even bigger break for motorists--of up to 25
percent.

            In Virginia, it was the Republican who hot-wired the
cheaper driving issue and drove it to victory. The state derives much of its
revenue from an anachronistic personal-property tax, which has evolved into a
tax mainly on automobile ownership. James Gilmore, the Republican candidate,
promised to abolish this tax and coasted to victory by a 13-point margin.
Gilmore's Democratic opponent, Don Beyer, might have been expected to
capitalize on this issue himself. In addition to being the former lieutenant
governor, he is a car dealer in northern Virginia, famous for his mysterious
advertising slogan, "Don Beyer Volvo--The Great Experiment on Route 7." (What
does it mean? Click .)

            Back
during the summer, according to news reports, Beyer's political consultants
recommended that he call for the abolition of the car tax before Gilmore did.
Unfortunately for Beyer, a bad case of liberal compunction set in. He said that
dropping the tax would bankrupt the state and harm education. After Gilmore
started hammering him with the issue, Beyer countered with a complicated
proposal of his own that would have given a tax rebate to lower-income drivers
only. While slightly more realistic, this lacked the simplistic appeal of
abolition.

            In the only congressional race of this election, the
contest for Susan Molinari's seat on Staten Island was fought in part over the
cost of driving across the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, which connects Staten
Island to Brooklyn and thence to the rest of the world. Democrat Eric
Vitaliano, who has been a state-assembly member for many years, took credit for
reducing the cost for Staten Island residents, who get discounts of up to 70
percent on the $7 round-trip toll (and who can ride to Manhattan at no charge
on the Staten Island Ferry). This was good, but it wasn't good enough.
Vitaliano lost to a Republican City Council member, Vito Fossella, who said
that he would work to eliminate the toll on the bridge completely.

            In Denver, voters rejected a $16-billion expansion of the
city's light-rail system. Supporters of the plan argued that better public
transportation would reduce traffic and lighten Denver's notorious "brown
cloud." Opponents objected to a four-tenths-of-1-cent increase in the sales tax
to pay for the system, and argued that public transportation is a violation of
nature in the West, where people like to drive.

            In
Seattle, the danger of getting caught in bridge traffic at rush hour is a
citywide obsession (and a subject with which 
                  Slate
               's headquarters
team frequently bores those of us in the provinces). The mayor's race this year
was fought in part over alternative approaches to preventing further
development and congestion. Even in New York City, a place where sane people do
not drive, incumbent Mayor Rudy Giuliani scored some points by taking on every
country in the world over the issue of diplomats who double-park near the
United Nations.

            
It's easy to disparage auto politics as the
parochialism of a post-ideological era. With the Cold War won, the budget
balanced, crime in free fall, and the economy booming, politics is so free of
important content that elections can hinge on who will be nicer to cars. It is
a bit stupid to spend time debating who is more likely to accede to a toll
increase--as the candidates did in New Jersey. But some of the driving issues
are not trivial. According to one recent federal study, 70 percent of urban
freeways are now clogged at rush hour. What makes this more than a problem of
traffic engineering is that you can't reduce congestion without raising issues
like air pollution, the greenhouse effect, and the harm that metropolitan
sprawl can do to a region's quality of life.

            What is dismal about this
politics is that the new pandering about driving is as bad as the old pandering
about tax cuts. One difference is that this time around, Democrats are less
likely to get played for suckers. In New Jersey and Staten Island, candidates
from the two major parties debated the relative merits of alternative
free-lunch options. Reducing insurance rates by discouraging frivolous lawsuits
is a perfectly sound idea. But so too would it be a good idea to discourage
driving through higher tolls, pricier gas, and better public transportation. A
program like this would mitigate environmental and congestion problems as well
as quality-of-life concerns.

            Politically, however, such a
platform probably won't get you very far. The last politician to propose making
driving more expensive was Al Gore, who fought to include a small energy
tax--which would have included gasoline--in the Clinton administration's 1993
economic plan. It almost sank the whole deal. Since then, there's been no
mention of tollbooths on the bridge to the 21 st century.

         
      
   
