
   
   
      
         
            Clinton's Catch-96

            When Bob Woodward's byline
appears on Page One of the Washington Post , it generally means: It's
time to pay attention. And indeed, Woodward's April 8 story, an
it's-even-worse-than-you-thought piece about the Clinton campaign-finance
scandal, sounded pretty sordid. It reported that White House officials had
tipped off the Democratic National Committee in 1995 about Grigori Loutchansky,
a bad-egg Latvian businessman with alleged ties to the Russian Mafia.
Loutchansky, who had been invited to meet the president at a $25,000-a-plate
fund-raiser (with a ticket paid for by an American business associate), was
promptly uninvited. The reason this is troublesome is that the news about
Loutchansky's background came indirectly from the National Security
Administration, and that folks at the DNC who lack security clearances were
thus recipients of an unauthorized leak of highly classified information.

            CNN
played this revelation all day, and the other networks reported it on the
evening news. "If this allegation proves true, and this disclosure actually
took place, it constitutes a felony violation," said Rep. Porter Goss, a
Republican from Florida who chairs the House intelligence committee. "I am very
troubled by the implications for breaches of long-standing security controls at
the White House and the apparent misuse of intelligence information for
political purposes."

            In this furor, a few significant details were overlooked,
however. The first was that the essence of Woodward's "scoop" had been reported
two-and-a-half weeks earlier in the Washington Times . The Times
relied on what looks to have been the same source--a leak from Indiana Rep. Dan
Burton's Government Reform & Oversight Committee, which had apparently got
wind of the issue via DNC documents handed over in response to a subpoena. When
the story appeared in the Moonie-owned Times , no one cared. Only the
Woodward imprimatur made it national news.

            A more
significant problem with Woodward's story is that the DNC didn't need any
classified leaks to find out that Loutchansky, who had met the president at an
earlier fund-raiser in 1993, was trouble. Before the 1995 dinner even took
place, none other than William Safire had written about Loutchansky in the
New York Times , noting that the Latvian had been refused entry into
Canada the previous year because of suspected "Mafiya" connections. Safire's
source was Comrade Criminal , a book about the Russian Mafia by the
journalist Stephen Handelman that was available months before the fund-raiser
at the Hay-Adams to which Loutchansky was given the invitation that was then
withdrawn. The DNC could have spared itself the need for NSA intercepts by
reading the paper or visiting the library.

            
But the larger irony of this turn in the
scandal is that when Woodward wrote his story, the Clintonites were still being
beaten up in the press for not having communicated similar information
about Chinese bad guys trying to sidle up to the president. A month earlier,
the hot new revelation in the scandal was that officials at the National
Security Council had neglected to pass on to their superiors the contents of a
briefing by FBI officials, who warned that the Chinese government might be
trying to funnel money into the 1996 campaign. Incidentally, the
Chinese-influence story had been broken by the same Bob Woodward.

            What would have constituted
proper handling of the FBI disclosure to the NSC? Presumably the same type of
procedure that draws bitter denunciations in the Loutchansky episode. The NSC
might have told White House officials, some of whom were supervising fund
raising for the campaign, to be on the lookout for Chinese bearing gifts. For
this warning to be effective, those White House officials would have had to tip
off the DNC, which was soliciting the money directly. In a separate but related
episode, the administration has been pilloried for failing to heed exactly such
a warning from NSC officials about Johnny Chung, a Beijing-connected "hustler"
who got six Chinese friends into the taping of a radio address by the
president.

            "You
really are damned if you do and damned if you don't," says one anonymous source
quoted in the most recent Woodward story. It's good of Woodward to acknowledge
this irony--if briefly. A more prominent quote--from "one senior official"--is
less sympathetic to the double bind that the Clintonites now find themselves
in. "This was top secret, and it further demonstrates the total politicization
of all intelligence and White House operations. Anything and everything was
done in the name of fund-raising." Had Loutchansky got to see the president,
Woodward would probably have written a story about lax screening procedures at
the White House.

            In fact, this story was written, though not by Woodward. In
February, Tim Weiner of the New York Times reported that the
administration was no longer using vetting procedures put in place by Ronald
Reagan to keep foreign ghouls away from the president. "In their eagerness to
raise campaign money, [DNC officials] invited friends of the President's
fund-raisers--including China's biggest arms merchant, favor-seeking Indonesian
businessmen, a reputed Russian mobster and other dubiously credentialed
dealmakers--to meet with Mr. Clinton," Weiner writes. "Nor did the White House
check the suitability of Americans invited by the Democratic National Committee
to meet the President, allowing, among others, a twice-convicted felon to sip
coffee with Mr. Clinton." The procedure Weiner complains was dropped was
essentially what Woodward complains happened with Loutchansky.

            The most
vociferous journalistic critics of the president preach it round or preach it
flat when it comes to these kinds of contacts. The Wall Street

               Journal 's editorials now oscillate between accusations that the
administration abused sensitive information on the one hand, and allegations
that it ignored intelligence warnings on the other. Safire, too, has ricocheted
between lambasting the administration for abusing quasi-independent
intelligence and law-enforcement agencies, and blasting it for ignoring
intelligence so it could raise gobs of money. In the case of the FBI-NSC China
warning, Safire thinks that the Justice Department behaved too cautiously
because it didn't wish to tip off Chinese agents lurking inside the
administration.

            
So what's a president--or an attorney
general--to do? Safire suggests that Janet Reno should have asked to see the
president alone, "warned him unequivocally of the penetration, enlisted his aid
in the investigation--or, if she thought it necessary, read him his rights."
Read him his rights for what crime? Being a Chinese spy? That bit of hysteria
aside, it's not hard to imagine Safire and the Journal waxing apoplectic
if the attorney general had asked for a private meeting to warn the
president. Clinton's critics would surely have portrayed such a meeting as a
corrupt politicization of the Justice Department, reminded us again of the
misuse of the FBI in Travelgate and Filegate, and called once more for an
independent counsel.

            The Clinton administration
has done plenty to fuel suspicion of all kinds. But at some point, the skeptics
have to choose: Did the Clintonites abuse power by trafficking in classified
information or by ignoring it? You can't commit both crimes--or, at least, not
at the same time.

         
      
   
