
   
   
      
         
            How to Appear Thoughtful

            At the height of his Hamlet
act over whether to vote for the balanced-budget amendment, Robert Torricelli,
the first-term Democratic senator from New Jersey, gave an interview to the
New York Times . "I understand this will be one of the most important
votes I ever cast," he told the paper. "I'm taking an extraordinary amount of
time talking about it." Now, another senator might have noted that he was
spending a lot of time thinking about the issue, perhaps, or
listening to the arguments on both sides. But this is the Torch,
remember--who, in just a couple of months, has distinguished himself as the
member of the upper chamber most in love with the sound of his own voice. When
you consider that his colleagues include Robert Byrd and Joe Biden, that is
really something.

            
Torricelli might be a blowhard, but he isn't dumb. After 14 years in the House,
he seems to have figured out in a hurry how this Senate thing works. "I didn't
get here by design," he told reporters at a press conference on Wednesday, Feb.
26. He was referring to his role as the decision maker on the balanced-budget
amendment, which is set to fail by one vote early next week. This claim of
guilelessness was instantaneously belied by Torricelli's suggestion that he and
three other Democratic "undecideds" had the narrow defeat of the bill. But
Torricelli's accomplishment was more than just manipulating the timing of his
announcement to make himself the center of media attention. He also showed how
easy it is in Washington to cultivate the appearance of thoughtfulness without
doing a minute's worth of actual thinking.

            The challenge of looking like a soul-searching statesman
was made harder by Torricelli's previous record on the issue. As a member of
the House, he had voted in favor of the balanced-budget amendment, in the same
version he now opposes, three different times. During his recent campaign, he
said in unequivocal terms that he was in favor of the amendment, donning his
record on the issue as a Kevlar shield against the charge that he was a
fiscally irresponsible liberal. So his first order of business in the Senate
was to begin to lay the groundwork for a flip-flop. Torricelli didn't do
anything so dramatic as to say he might have been wrong in the past. Instead,
he reinterpreted his past position as semaphore. He wasn't really voting
to amend the Constitution at the time. He was trying to send a "message" about
fiscal irresponsibility to various presidents and to Congress. (When I conked
you over the head with that frying pan, I was merely indicating my
concern .) Never mind that Torricelli was in the House himself, being as
fiscally irresponsible as the next guy. In Congress, people send messages to
themselves all the time.

            The second
step is the fun part: agonizing in public. The national grandmaster of this
technique is still the former governor of New York, Mario Cuomo. But in the
Senate, the great role model is , who held a national dialogue with himself in
1993 before finally choosing to cast the deciding vote in favor of the first
Clinton economic plan. But Kerrey carries off indecision better than Torricelli
does, because with him, it's not an act. He is truly, paralytically ambivalent,
perpetually ruminating about whether he should run for president even while
running for president in 1992. Torricelli was merely feigning indecision when
he gave interviews to the New York Times and National Public Radio the
week before last saying how seriously he took the arguments on both sides, and
how impressed he was with the deep consideration of important issues that took
place in the Senate.

            
Step 3 is negotiating with the folks who need
your vote. At this stage, you are the most popular guy in town. The president
invites you over to watch the Super Bowl. His aides respond to your smallest
hint with servile alacrity. "David Broder, calling for you on Line 1." And so
forth. Being the swing vote means you can ask for the moon and stars--but you
can't ask for pork if you want to be seen as a deep thinker. Demanding a bridge
as your price would be tacky, especially in exchange for killing off a
big-ticket fiscal-austerity measure. (Six months down the road, you can ask for
all the post offices you want.) More dignified is to ask for some kind of
commission. In 1993, Kerrey got a commission on entitlements in exchange for
his vote on the budget. Torricelli had been expressing concern about the lack
of capital budgeting--the inability, under our system of federal accounting, to
spread out the costs of "investment" expenditure. Presto: After a conversation
with the president, in which Torricelli made clear his intention on the vote,
the White House announced the formation of a capital-budget commission to
examine this important issue. Click to have Slate's editor explain what's wrong
with Torricelli's capital-budget idea.

            The final
step is coming up with a pretext for your decision. Tim Johnson of South Dakota
used the possibility of Social Security cuts to justify his flip-flop several
days earlier, but that was just to bear the weight of another senator, even a
light one. So Torricelli took a different tack, objecting to the Republican
version of the amendment because it didn't contain any provision for the
above-mentioned capital budget, and proposing an amendment to the amendment to
provide for one, pending the report of the Torch Commission. The merits of that
issue aside, this was an absurd proposal in the context of debate about a
balanced-budget amendment. Balanced budgets and capital budgets are
contradictory ideas. Being against the former because it doesn't provide for
the latter is like saying you don't like a house because it doesn't have
wheels.

            After the amendment's sponsor, Orrin Hatch of Utah, refused
to accept this change, Torricelli took the "Sorry, wish I could help" line. "I
need the gentleman from Utah to explain to me how a generation unborn in
circumstances unforeseen will deal with renewed military hostilities, a deep
recession, or the problem of declining economic competitiveness." Nice bit of
ask-notting, that "generation unborn in circumstances unforeseen." Reverse word
order will get you everywhere in the Senate. After his endless speech on the
Senate floor in defense of our founding "ancestors," Torricelli repaired to the
Senate radio and TV gallery to continue his monologue. "I have struggled with
this decision more than any ... I have ever made in my life," Torricelli said.
Chins were stroked. Editorials were penned, hailing the decision. A strange new
mantle of respect descended on Bob Torricelli.

            Of course, truly thoughtful
senators don't go in for this kind of rigmarole. Take the now-retired Paul
Simon of Illinois, who took a courageous position in support of the
balanced-budget amendment and held to it consistently--even in 1995, when the
Democrats were one vote short, and wouldn't have succeeded in defeating the
amendment without the help of Republican Mark Hatfield. I think Simon was wrong
on the merits, but I never questioned his sincerity on the issue. Or take
Torricelli's predecessor, Bill Bradley. Bradley took the same position that
Torricelli did on the balanced-budget amendment after actually thinking
about it, and without making a fuss.

            But quiet
contemplation is not Torricelli's métier. To quote again from the pre-decision
piece in the Times :

            
               After a long discourse
on the ins and outs of his vote, Mr. Torricelli drops a hint that when it
matters, he will not desert his party. "The U.S. needs to determine a proper
level of debt," he said, "and it's possible several members could emerge to use
votes on this to force new creative talking."
            

            Or, more creatively yet,
maybe one new senator could just stop talking for a while.

         
      
   
