
   
   
      
         
            Dear Microsoft

            To:
Microsoft Top Management

            From:
Jacobwe

            Re:
Unsolicited Advice

            I am one
of the journalists who has embarked on the experiment of working for a software
company. I probably speak for all of us when I say that it has been
interesting. Recently, it's been especially interesting. A few months ago,
everyone I met seemed to think that working for Microsoft was a pretty cool
thing to do. Now, strangers treat us like we work for Philip Morris. The
company's current legal and public-relations headaches leave me, personally, in
an awkward position. I've devoted a good chunk of my career as a political
journalist to criticizing the mercenary culture of Washington: influence
peddlers, PACs, and so on. Suddenly, I find myself working for a company with
big political problems. My bluff has been called. With my own prosperity
possibly at stake, would I urge my employer to remain aloof from the Beltway
bazaar?

            No one else seems to share my disquiet. Ironically, one of
the charges leveled against Microsoft of late is that the company has sinned by
not playing the Washington influence game forcefully enough. Only now,
the analysis goes, is Bill G. realizing his mistake in neglecting to hire
lobbyists, dole out huge campaign contributions, and so on. The theme of a
recent front-page story in the New York Times was that the failure to
flex political muscle demonstrates an arrogance and stubbornness for which
Microsoft is now paying the price.

            The charge
of lacking respect for Washington blurs the issues. It confuses 1) the valid
observation that Microsoft often has a haughty attitude in general; 2) the at
least arguable contention that it has run afoul of antitrust law; 3) the
plausible suggestion that hiring more lobbyists, etc., would be a smart thing
to do; and 4) the entirely absurd notion that refusing to pay tribute inside
the Beltway amounts to some kind of ethical failing. Sit out the Washington
legalized-bribery game? Why, that's downright un-American!

            
As you know, it's a bit of a myth that
Microsoft is only now noticing the other Washington. Since the Justice
Department filed suit Oct. 20, the government-relations department has hired no
new lobbyists, in-house or on contract. The old roster is intact. It includes
such hired guns as Grover Norquist Jr., an adviser to the speaker of the House,
and former Reps. Vin Weber, R-Minn., and Thomas Downey, D-N.Y., who happens to
be one of Al Gore's closest friends. Norquist and Downey have worked for
Microsoft for some time, as have Michael Deaver and his colleagues at Edelman
Worldwide, who do PR. Microsoft's D.C. office, with three full-time lobbyists,
has been in operation since early 1995. Before that, the company had the help
of lawyers in the Washington office of Preston Gates Ellis & Rouvelas
Meeds--as it still does. This team has lobbied Congress and the executive
branch on all the issues that matter to Microsoft: Internet freedom, encryption
policy, immigration for high-tech workers, the tax-deductibility of stock
options, extending the R & D tax credit, software piracy abroad, taxation
of Internet commerce, and so on.

            At the
same time, I'm sure you will agree that Microsoft is somewhat diffident about
playing politics. AT&T has 50 full-time representatives in Washington to
Microsoft's three. AT&T donated $1.25 million in PAC contributions to both
parties in the last election cycle. Microsoft gave $43,500. I can't say whether
you have kept your political profile low for the right reason--maybe you were
just cheap, or lazy, or out of your depth on the other coast. But whatever the
cause, I would argue that your relative passivity in Washington is something to
be proud of. You haven't tried to corrupt the democratic process by handing out
wads of cash. You have done less than any company approaching your size to
underwrite the sleazy business of influence peddling. Because Microsoft isn't
looking for favors from the federal government, it resists paying a fee to
self-appointed middlemen. The company gets no credit for this stance. Mother
Jones has a piece in its new issue blasting Microsoft for politicking in
Washington, which gives you the distinction of being attacked both for lobbying
and not lobbying in the same month.

            The practical issue is much harder than the ethical one.
Sure, the world would be a better place if there was no corporate money in
politics, and no hired-gun lobbyists, as it would if there were no land mines
or nuclear weapons. But can one big company disarm unilaterally? Even Charles
Lewis of the Center for Public Integrity--the least compromising critic of the
revolving door--was quoted in the New York Times suggesting that
Microsoft has to do what everyone else does. Other stories have pointed out
that competitors are hauling out the big guns. Netscape recently signed, among
others, Bob Dole (who couldn't even give his own Internet address correctly on
national television) and Greg Simon, Gore's former domestic-policy adviser.
Microsoft's competitors see Washington as their salvation. How can you fail to
mount a defense?

            I can't in
good conscience argue that you shouldn't field a team. Modern legislation and
regulation are technical and complex. Any big company needs skilled people who
can process the implications of proposed changes and argue for its interests. I
regretfully acknowledge that it may even make practical sense to have a few
hired guns like Norquist, Downey, and Weber around--people of value only for
their connections to power, not for any knowledge or talent.

            
Don't get me wrong--I think that what these
people do for a living is slimy. They're not all equally bad, but I have
trouble deciding who is worse. Is it the right-wing commissar Norquist, who
defied subpoenas from the Thompson Committee about his role laundering campaign
contributions for the Republican National Committee (he is contemptuous
of the law)? Or is it Downey, a former reformer from the post-Watergate Class
of '74 who wants everyone to think of him as a Boy Scout even as he sells his
connections to anyone who can pay his fee?

            Another
quandary: Is it worse for lobbyists to exploit their personal relationships
with government officials, or to sell the illusion that they are doing so?
After years of covering lobbying, my impression is that the business is about
80 percent con. You never know for sure what you're getting, which,
unfortunately, is an argument for ponying up. The company has billion-dollar
issues at stake. At $120,000 a year for Norquist and $160,000 a year for
Downey, it's a cheap lottery ticket. And odd as it sounds, hiring influence
peddlers generates good will on Capitol Hill. In Congress, where people think
of themselves as underpaid, there's hostility toward Bill Gates based on the
fact that he's got a lot of dough and doesn't share it with people like them.
Republican staffers, in particular, see Microsoft as a Democratic-inclined
company that is never going to hire them when they're ready to go through the
revolving door. This is a pretty venal outlook, but it's built into the
Washington operating system the way, say, Internet Explorer is said to be
integrated into Windows. Many people think Microsoft can easily separate
Windows and IE if it wants to, but nobody would claim that Microsoft can
single-handedly re-create the culture of Washington.

            There are, however, advantages to not being heavy hitters
inside the Beltway. Refusing to pay an unjustified toll may be contemptuous of
Washington, but it's respectful of democracy. In a way, I think it has already
helped Microsoft's image. You've been slammed for not throwing your weight
around in D.C., but would certainly be criticized much more if you did throw it
around. Microsoft has been defensive about its low-key Washington role when it
could legitimately be boasting about it.

            Of course it's hard to brag
about your reluctance to hire Washington sleazeballs when you have Michael
Deaver on your payroll. Deaver isn't just an ordinary convicted felon. He was
on the cover of Time-- making a phone call from his limousine--as the
symbol of the influence-peddling excesses of the 1980s. I'm sure he experienced
a great deal of personal growth during his community service, but he's not the
guy to organize a PR blitz around the theme of restraint in playing the
Washington game.

         
      
   
