
   
   
      
         
            

            
               The
Compleat Harry
            

            Not since Homer, the critics
agree, has anyone produced an epic narrative like "O.J. by the Sea," Harry
Shearer's series of dispatches from the O.J. Simpson civil trial. The entire
series is, of course, available in "The Compost." But for Slate readers who wish to fondle this
classic of our times, bind it in leather, display it on their coffee tables,
and pass it along as a treasured heirloom to their children, we are proud to
offer a new sort of instant book. The entire series has been repackaged as a
Microsoft Word document (also as an Adobe Acrobat document), which can be
downloaded, free as O.J., and printed out. Like our weekly print-out edition of
Slate itself, "O.J. by the Sea" is nicely formatted in double columns for
standard 8½-by-11 paper.

            Surgeon
General's Warning: "The Compleat O.J. by the Sea" is 94,025 words long, and the
printout is exactly 84 pages. (The file takes about six minutes to download at
28.8K.) Keep in mind, though, that you can also download the file and read it
on-screen.

            
               Let's
Talk About You
            

            More than 3,600 Slate readers
took the time to respond to our reader survey a few weeks back, for which we
thank you. The results prove beyond a doubt that reading Slate is good for you.
How else would Slate readers have acquired a median income of $75,000 to
$100,000 and a median net worth of $250,000? Eighty-six percent of you claim to
be college graduates, and 57 percent have postgraduate degrees (not all, we
trust, from law school). You spend an average of 37 minutes a week reading
Slate.

            Over half
of you use Netscape as your browser. Nothing wrong with that, you understand.
Some of our best friends use Netscape. Slate, of course, is happy--indeed,
grateful--to welcome readers of all races, religions, genders, and browser
preferences.

            

               Housekeeping Details
            

            If you haven't yet sampled
our new, alternative "Table of Contents," go to the Contents page and click on the word
"Date" right below the Slate logo. Current articles will then be listed by the
date they were posted, with the most recent stuff first. If you like that
better than our highly conceptual system of departments and page numbers,
that's fine with us. (To return to the regular Contents page, just click on
"Page Number.")

            New
readers might like to be reminded that you can sign up for free e-mail
delivery of our "Slate on Paper" edition, nicely formatted for printing out
(just like the Harry Epic--only shorter). It's delivered automatically every
Friday afternoon. You can also get an actual printed copy of Slate each week,
but that'll cost you money. Call 800-555-4995 for details.

         
      
   
