
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Change
of Address
            

            Since Slate's founding, way
back in the mists of 1996, its e-mail address has always been slate@msn.com.
Beginning next week, though, we will have our very own e-mail domain,
"slate.com." This will allow us to generate a confusing proliferation of
different e-mail addresses, a process we begin now:

            To sign up for free e-mail
delivery of Slate itself, send a message to help@slate.com. Don't forget to include which e-mail
software program and provider you use. (For actual delivery of Slate on Paper,
call 800-555-4995.)

            To sign up for a free weekly
e-mail announcement of what's new in Slate, send a message to read@slate.com.

            For technical information,
answers to questions, and solutions to problems with receiving Slate (or,
perchance, to thank our technical staff for the flawless technical performance
of this site and its ancillary products), e-mail help@slate.com.

            To send a letter to the
editors, you can e-mail letters@slate.com.

            Other Slate-specific e-mail
addresses will be operating soon, including, of course, a private e-mail
channel from Bill Gates, havethemkilled@slate.com.

            
               Instant
Book
            

            As of midday Wednesday, March
5, 1,369 Harry Shearer fans had downloaded our special Collector's Edition of
Harry's "Dispatches" from the O.J. Simpson Civil Trial. The download page is
still available in "The Compost." If you're feeling nostalgic for wonderful
characters from the O.J. saga like Dennis Fung, click here to
download a copy for yourself.

            
               "Name
the Scandal" Contest
            

            A good shorthand name for
the Democratic fund-raising/Lincoln Bedroom/John Huang set of controversies
seems as elusive as the story itself. Slate readers responding to last week's
invitation to name the scandal have not covered themselves in literary glory. A
few of the more bearable suggestions: Hotel Bill, Cash Inn, China Pattern, The
John Wilkes Toll Booth, Sheets for Treats. None of these do it, in the
considered opinion of our distinguished panel of judges. Please keep trying,
either in "The Fray" or by e-mail to letters@msn.com.

            
               Art
History
            

            
               The
Hard Way by Matthew Ritchie, which first appeared in "Slate Gallery," has
been added to the permanent Web site collection (yes, there is one) of the San
Francisco Museum of Modern Art. It is also part of the Slate magazine permanent
collection, a k a "The Compost," and you can see it again by clicking
here.

         
      
   
