
   
   
      
         
            Fade in Japan

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times each lead with the onset today of the House Judiciary Committee's
debate about whether to initiate an impeachment investigation against President
Clinton. The New York Times
plays that story as its off-lead and goes instead with word of a private
meeting over the weekend in Washington at which Japan's top financial officials
told Secretary of the Treasury Robert Rubin and Fed chairman Alan Greenspan
that their country's banks are in far worse trouble than has ever been publicly
admitted.

            The coverage makes it clear that the Judiciary committee's discussions will
be highly partisan, but also that due to the committee's Republican
majority--USAT reminds that the committee count is 21 Rs and 16 Ds, and that
with the exception of California Rep. Mary Bono, all the Rs are white,
Christian, conservative men--in just a few days the entire House will be voting
on whether or not to authorize the committee to start an impeachment inquiry.
There is more of a question about how many crossover votes this will get in the
full House. The NYT implies that in a floor vote, Democrats from
conservative or swing districts might cross over. The WP quotes a Sunday
chat show prediction by a leading Republican congressman that as many as 100
might do so. All the papers report that the consensus is that despite all this,
there aren't sufficient impeachment votes in the Senate.

            The NYT and USAT note Judiciary chairman Henry Hyde's Sunday
talk show comment that the committee's majority counsel, David Schippers, may
well recommend that some of Ken Starr's charges be dropped while adding some
others. The NYT says the additions might include lying under oath and
concealment of a felony. Last Saturday, the WP , citing an informed
source, reported that there would be new charges of witness tampering,
obstruction of justice, and making false statements under oath, but today's
WP only mentions the latter new charge. The NYT says that
Schippers will express the personal regret he feels as a registered Democrat
about the charges he's tendering. The Post says he may name Monica
Lewinsky as a co-conspirator. But the LAT quotes Hyde as saying that he
doesn't see the need to call her as a witness.

            According to the NYT lead, the governor of the Bank of Japan told Rubin and
Greenspan that the capital behind his nation's top 19 banks has dwindled so low
that if international rules requiring capital on hand to be at least 8 percent
of total outstanding loans were strictly enforced, they might be banned from
operating overseas. Indeed, says the Times , the bank governor's remarks
suggest that some of Japan's banks don't even have the 4 percent capital Japan
requires for domestic banking. According to the paper, the situation was
clouded by the conflicting remarks of other senior Japanese banking
officials.

            The LAT front tells a disturbing tale about the current state of
security of the Russian nuclear arsenal. It seems that last month, at a naval
base near Murmansk, a 19-year-old sailor killed eight crewmen aboard a nuclear
submarine and took control of the vessel for twenty hours, repeatedly
threatening to destroy it, creating the potential for what one scientist quoted
in the LAT calls a "floating Chernobyl." The episode only ended when the
sailor, who had locked himself in one of the vessel's torpedo bays, killed
himself. Russian authorities, you won't be surprised to learn, said the
submarine and the people in the vicinity were "absolutely safe."

            An inside story in the NYT says that tomorrow, Amnesty International
will publish a harsh report condemning the U.S. police and criminal justice
system for "a persistent and widespread pattern of human rights violations."
The paper quotes the head of Amnesty International, who is from Senegal, as
saying that "it seems to me that the international community, in terms of
standards, is moving really ahead of the standards obtained in the United
States today." Hmmm...where would you rather be arrested, in the U.S. or
Senegal?

            Revealing little story in the WP business section by
the paper's legal reporter, David Segal. Seems that a George Washington
University law student was unhappy about the lack of attention the school's
student body has been getting from Prof. Jonathan Turley, who has been spending
a lot of time lately on TV commenting on l'affaire Lewinsky (39 appearances
between January and August). So the student devised a little experiment. Last
month, he called Turley's office, leaving a message that he was a GWU student
asking for an office appointment. Thirteen minutes later, his roommate called
up, leaving a message falsely identifying herself as an ABC News producer. The
"producer's" call was returned in 32 minutes. The student's call was never
returned.

         
      
   
