
   
   
      
         
            Tapes' Last Crap

            The big stories are about the promise of good things, foreign and domestic.
The WP, LAT, and NYT lead with a Mideast peace deal apparently almost in sight.
USAT fronts that but leads with hints from top Federal Reserve officials that
the Fed is likely to cut interest rates again next month. The paper quotes the
Fed's vice-chairman and three other Federales to the effect that the central
bank is intent on keeping credit loose enough to prevent a slowdown in the U.S.
economy. The WSJ flags the Fed scenario in its front-page news box.

            The WP , NYT and LAT report that starting yesterday
afternoon, Benjamin Netanyahu and Yasser Arafat entered into intense one-on-one
bargaining. Everybody writes that the U.S.-backed land-for-peace deal has been
basically accepted. The papers also say the two parties have arrived at
compromises regarding the Palestinian National Covenant (which currently calls
for the destruction of Israel), the arrest of suspects wanted in Israel and the
release of Palestinians from Israeli jails, but that the issue of whether or
not Arafat might declare the territory he administers an independent state
still remained a sore point. The papers report that the discussions are being
conducted under the rule that no agreed-to provisions would be final until an
overall agreement is reached.

            The NYT and LAT have the most physical details about what went
on behind closed doors, right down to seating arrangements. The two papers
report that last night, President Clinton, who had been at the summit all day
(accompanied, notes the LAT , by Buddy) invited King Hussein of Jordan to
join the talks and that once there, the king delivered an impassioned speech
calling on Netanyahu and Arafat to press for peace. The papers report that the
deal being worked out involves a finishing-touches meeting a few months from
now, probably in the Palestinian-governed Gaza Strip, with Clinton in
attendance. This has not been confirmed by the White House.

            Meanwhile, reports the LAT , on the West Bank, dozens of Israeli
settlers blocked roads and held prayer rituals to drive home their demands that
no more land be returned to Palestinian control. And, adds the paper,
Palestinians pressing for the repatriation of their relatives in Israeli jails
took to Gaza streets. And three Jewish parents who lost children to terrorist
attacks began a hunger strike outside Netanyahu's office.

            The LAT 's "Column One" notes a trend among those arrested for
Internet porn: they have a disproportionate tendency to kill themselves. Of the
34 Americans arrested in a September 3rd 14-nation child porn raid, reports the
paper, four have since offed themselves. The suicides tend to be respectables
who've never previously been in any kind of trouble and are desperate to escape
the impending humiliation, like the former Air Force pilot in Maine who
asphyxiated himself, the University of Connecticut microbiologist who slashed
his wrists, or the Colorado computer consultant who shot himself in the
head.

            Both the NYT and WP report that, according to a study released
yesterday, 1.4 million black men--13 percent of all black men--are ineligible
to vote in the election next month because of a felony conviction. The
Post says this is seven times the national average. The study found that
the proportion of black males in prison has increased ten times faster than for
white men over the past decade.

            The WSJ "Washington Wire" reports that Ken Starr's investigators are
looking into whether or not Linda Tripp's tapes were doctored. A NYT
op-ed by former Watergate prosecutor Richard Ben-Veniste makes the observation
that Starr's ardor about the tapes apparently has its limits: he never for
instance, called Lucianne Goldberg before his grand jury. The reason,
Ben-Veniste suggests, is that her testimony might reveal that Starr knew about
the tapes before he swears he first heard of them--which could suggest a
working relationship with Paula Jones' legal team.

            Tucked into a WP "Style" section story by Michael Powell on the South
Carolina governor's race is this sentence: "He's angered the Bubba vote, the
black vote, the gambling vote and the anti-gambling vote and all that in just
in the past few months." Notice that you can't defend the usage here by
observing that many people actually use the B-word, because a lot of those
folks also use the N-word, which the Post would never run. No, this is a
perfect illustration of the truism that there's still one group in this country
that "respectable" people, even (especially?) sophisticated newspaper people,
can slander--Southern white males. Hey, Posties , time to rework that
style-sheet.

         
      
   
