
   
   
      
         
            Medium Performances

            The grinding on of the House Judiciary committee's impeachment hearings
continues to dominate. The coverage focuses on the multi-media-illustrated
presentations made yesterday to the committee by the Republican counsel, David
Schippers, and the Democratic counsel, Abbe Lowell. The HJC is expected to vote
today or tomorrow and the papers flatly assume that a censure proposal will be
defeated and that at least one article of impeachment will pass. It remains
unclear whether an additional censure measure will be put before the full
House. Everybody has the detail that Newt Gingrich has sent out a letter to all
House members advising them that the full House will probably begin reviewing
the impeachment matter next Thursday. The NYT, WP and LAT fronts all run
stories describing the White House's low-profile campaign to work on wavering
Republicans. The LAT lead reports that White House advisors are
considering whether President Clinton should make a fresh public comment on the
matter and USAT says there is "speculation" (not the best phrase--the reader's
entitled to know whose speculation we're talking about here) that
Clinton might even make a deeper public apology before leaving for the Middle
East on Saturday.

            The papers note that the two committee lawyers used snippets from President
Clinton's Jones case deposition and his appearance before the Starr grand jury
as well as from the Linda Tripp tapes of Monica Lewinsky. The WP sees
the qualities of a campaign ad in Lowell's playing of a montage of Kenneth
Starr's testimony before Judiciary, in which he was shown to frequently respond
to questions with "I cannot recall."

            The LAT and NYT note that in defense of Clinton, Lowell
pointed out that impeachment wasn't wielded when Abraham Lincoln suspended
habeas corpus, when Roosevelt misled the public about Lend-Lease, nor against
Ronald Reagan in connection with Iran-Contra. The LAT and WP
report that Lowell also observed that the Watergate tapes showed the president
orchestrating a massive cover-up using the CIA and the IRS, whereas the
Lewinsky tapes showed "Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp talking about going
shopping." Now, of course, the Watergate tapes also contain much trivia and the
Lewinsky-Tripp tapes also contain more serious matters. Shouldn't the papers
point this out?

            Schippers' presentation is seen as harder-edged. It's noted by both the
WP and USAT that he told the panel he'd found evidence of as yet
unspecified further criminal actions by President Clinton but left it out of
his presentation because of time constraints (says the WP ) or because
Ken Starr and the DOJ asked him to (says USAT ). In response, reports the
WP , committee Democrat Rep. Zoe Lofgren said this tactic was "Joe
McCarthyite." The NYT says both Lofgren and Barney Frank had this
reaction.

            It wouldn't be far-fetched to suppose that the White House was ultimately
behind today's WP story claiming that Judiciary impeachment stalwart Bob
Barr was a keynote speaker earlier this year at a meeting of the Council of
Conservative Citizens, which views interracial marriage as genocide against
white people and says Abraham Lincoln's core constituency was socialists and
communists. In a letter, the paper reports, Barr declares the accusations
unfounded. The source of the allegation is Clinton defender Alan
Dershowitz.

            The NYT front and an inside WP story each report that despite
Federal Election Commission staffers' findings that both Bill Clinton and Bob
Dole should remit millions to the government for misusing party funds for ad
purchases in 1996, the FEC voted unanimously against requiring such a payback.
The papers opine that the climb-down is an invitation to further questionable
use of ad money in the next presidential race.

            The NYT runs a story inside saying that a new study by the Alan
Guttmacher Institute has determined that in 1996 there were 650 "intact
dilation and extraction" abortions, procedures where the fetus is partially
delivered and then aborted. This is the procedure called by abortion opponents
"partial birth abortion." The Times avoids taking sides in the debate
simply in its choice of nomenclature by identifying the procedure as the
"late-term method that anti-abortion groups call partial-birth abortion." Since
it's not possible to be partially born, Today's Papers prefers "partial
delivery abortion." The NYT goes on to note that the number of
non-surgical, medical abortions--achieved by taking a drug like RU-486--is
rising rapidly, now taking place at the rate of about 8,000 per year.

            Both the NYT and the WP report that this coming Sunday night,
"60 Minutes" producer Don Hewitt will appear on the show to apologize for a
previous broadcast of footage about the Colombian drug trade (purchased from a
documentary-maker) that is now known to be fake, with actors playing drug
dealers and a drug lair turning out to be a film-maker's hotel room.

         
      
   
