
   
   
      
         
            Settling News

            All papers--the New York Times , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles
Times --lead with the $850,000 settlement reached Friday between
President Clinton and Paula Jones, which will end Jones' 4-1/2 year sexual
harassment case against the President. Under the agreement, Clinton offers no
apology to Jones--a condition which "[Jones] had once called her most important
demand," notes the NYT . Clinton must pay Jones within 60 days; the money
is expected to come from insurance or Clinton's legal defense fund. Real estate
magnate Abe Hirschfeld's flamboyant offer to pay Jones $1 million is not part
of the settlement. The agreement must first be approved by the federal judge
who dismissed the Jones suit in April, but this should be routine.

            Purveying the logic of the Clinton side, the President's lawyer Robert
Bennett commented, "The president has decided he is not prepared to spend one
more hour on this matter." One jubilant White House official quoted in the
WP says, "What this means is that not a single one of those 750 days
[left in Clinton's term] will be taken up by Paula Jones." All papers conclude
that the Jones settlement brings Clinton one step further toward closing the
impeachment proceedings.

            In other scandal developments, carried in all papers: Independent counsel
Kenneth Starr sent the House Judiciary Committee two boxes of new documents on
Kathleen Willey, the former White House volunteer who has alleged that Clinton
of groped her. The new information--which was not made public--"did not contain
a formal accusation of wrongdoing against Clinton," avers the NYT . The
papers concur that the material is unlikely to delay the Clinton impeachment
inquiry. In a separate development, Hillary Clinton's former law partner
Webster Hubbell was slapped with a 15-count indictment yesterday by Starr, who
accuses Hubbell of lying to federal regulators. Starr has already brought two
indictments against Hubbell; Hubbell has already served 18 months in federal
custody. Hubbell's frustrated lawyer, John Nields, commented, "It is not normal
for a prosecutor to keep indicting the same person over and over again."

            The WP and NYT front stories on a landmark $206 billion
settlement proposal reached between eight states and tobacco companies--a topic
that the LAT ran as a lead last Wednesday. The states had sued to
recover costs of smoking-related medical care. Under the agreement--the details
of which should be finalized by Monday--tobacco companies would face various
marketing restrictions, including a ban on billboard advertising. Before the
settlement is implemented, it must be ratified by most of the other 38 states
with pending or contemplated suits against tobacco companies.

            With few major new developments in the U.S.-Iraq standoff, all papers run
front-page stories on violence in Indonesia. Troops and riot police in Jakarta
fired on Friday demonstrations by thousands of anti-government protesters,
mostly students. At least five people are dead. The WP writes that it was the
"bloodiest day of street battles since the fall of then-president Suharto last
May."

            An excellent piece in the NYT "Arts" section chronicles the growing dissent to "Washington Consensus," a post-Cold War
methodology that favors open markets and freer trade. Alarmed by the global
financial crisis, some leaders, notably Europeans, are pushing for stronger
global economic regulation. Specific proposals have ranged from establishing a
new U.N. Security Council for economic affairs to setting exchange rate
targets. However, Washington, buoyed by the "spirit of American capitalism,"
tends to be averse to increased global regulation.

            Those British royals are feuding again. This time, says a WP "Style"
article, it's Charles in the doghouse. Apparently Charles' media gurus
have spun the prince as steady and reliable, in contrast to Diana's wildness.
This is sacrilege against Lady Di. Media stories also contain unpardonable
hints that Charles is tired of the shadow of his mother, Queen Elizabeth II,
and actually wants to be king someday. As implicit punishment, Queen Elizabeth
II will skip her dear son's 50th birthday fete Saturday night for, um, an
unfortunate scheduling conflict.

         
      
   
