
   
   
      
         
            Stiff Warning

            
               USA
Today and the Los Angeles Times lead with Janet Reno's finding that there
is no reason to continue looking into Al Gore's 1996 election fundraising. The
New York Times ,
which has hawked the story on its front and editorial pages harder than anybody
else, off-leads the denouement. Earlier in the week, when the AOL/Netscape deal
was in the works, the Times went with something else, but leads with it
today now that there's a fork in it. The Washington Post leads with word from GOP sources that a
single charge of perjury against President Clinton might win a House floor
vote, but additional charges such as obstruction of justice would not. The
paper also says that the idea of a resolution censuring Clinton is gaining
congressional momentum.

            If the Gore decision seems familiar, that's because Reno made it once
before, but then reopened the investigation based on new evidence of Gore's
attendance at some meetings where ultimately illegal approaches to fund-raising
may have been discussed. Both the LAT and NYT explain that the
gist of Reno's finding yesterday was that there was no compelling evidence from
Gore's remarks at these meetings that he was contemplating flouting the
election finance laws. Some Republicans expressed strong emotion about Reno's
decision. "We need to take these matters out of the hands of the Attorney
General...," Sen. Orrin Hatch is quoted saying in the LAT , while Rep.
Dan Burton is in the NYT saying, "Once again, the attorney general has
failed to follow the law. For the past two years, the attorney general has made
it clear she is committed to protecting the president." The papers agree that
Reno's decision clears the deck for a much more trouble-free Gore run at the
White House in 2000.

            The NYT lead describes the AOL/Netscape tandem as a "corporate odd couple," referring
to the former's pitch to the "technologically challenged" and the latter's
status as the epitome of leading edge siliconsciousness. Yet the story spells
out the companies' common vision of a not-distant world in which the Internet
is accessed primarily by high tech but easy-to-use and low cost appliances that
would be as ubiquitous as cell phones are today. However, the Times says
many Netscape programmers may be reluctant to work for AOL because of its
"middlebrow" (why not "middlebrowser"?) reputation, setting up a big run on
Netscape by headhunters.

            Both USAT and LAT run reefers to stories inside about
increasing Viagra concerns (also noted inside by the WP ). Both papers
report that the FDA is adding stricter health warnings to Viagra labels. In
addition to the current warning against taking the medication if a patient is
already taking any heart drug containing nitrates, the labels will now also say
that Viagra could be risky for men with heart problems or very high or low
blood pressure. The LAT explains that this is based on a close look at
the 130 cases of American men who've died--mostly from heart attacks--after
popping the pills. The point is that when sex itself is risky because of
underlying cardiological problems, then impotence remedies should be avoided.
Also, both papers report that investigators are trying to determine if Viagra
is implicated in a Maryland airplane crash last Saturday, which would be a
first. A bottle of Viagra prescribed for the dead pilot was found in the
wreckage. It's known that in about 3 percent of users, the drug disturbs color
vision, which could make reading cockpit instruments and runway lights
problematic.

            The Wall Street Journal "Tax Report" says more and more
"not-so-wealthy" people are getting hit with the alternative minimum tax, which
was designed to keep the wealthy from dodging federal tax entirely through the
artful use of deductions, credits and the like. The paper cites the example of
"one veteran Washington tax adviser" who was amazed to receive an IRS letter
informing him that he owed $1,175 in AMT. This report would be a lot more
compelling if the Journal had told the reader what the man's income was.
But absent this information, it's a little hard to get worked up about this
issue. Today's Papers doubts that there are many veteran Washington tax
advisers who aren't well off.

            The LAT front and the NYT op-ed page put forward a total of
three pieces on the ethics of last Sunday's "60 Minutes" Kevorkian broadcast.
The Times anti-Dr. K. op-ed calls the broadcast a "snuff film" and
wonders, in light of the shows big rating and attendant advertising revenues,
"Shouldn't the profit motive end where life and death become mere commodities
for public consumption?" Frank Rich, in his Kevorkian column, is worried too, but decides that the show was
justified by its prompting of honest debate on a topic now more shrouded than
oral sex. And he quotes the show's Don Hewitt and Mike Wallace appealing to the
same principle. Messrs. Hewitt and Wallace make the same case in the
LAT . It wasn't sweeps numbers they were after, they claim, but important
news. None of this coverage mentions a simple way CBS could have been much more
convincing on this point: donate all ad revenues produced by the show to
charity. How about to a hospice?

         
      
   
