
   
   
      
         
            Credit in the Cards?

            The New York Times and the Los Angeles
Times lead with Saturday's meeting in Washington of the Group of Seven
industrial nations. The Washington Post leads with next year's planned exodus of 33
HMOs from Medicare.

            The G-7 meeting resulted in a statement--described in the NYT 's
second paragraph as a "vaguely worded communiqu,"--which cites the world's
worsening financial problems and recommends "exploring" President Clinton's
call for extending emergency lines of credit to emerging nations buffeted by
financial troubles. France and England have voiced support for Clinton's
proposal, but Germany and Japan maintain reservations. The WP 's inside
article on the subject highlights Japan as the G-7 meeting's focus. After
Japan's Finance Minister met with Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin in the
morning, Japan unveiled its own $30 billion aid package for Asia. The Clinton
administration immediately criticized it as not addressing Japan's more
fundamental need for bank restructuring--to which the Japanese Finance Minister
shot back that the U.S. plan will never lift off unless a reluctant House
approves $18 billion for the International Monetary Fund.

            The WP lead, a national story with a local focus, says that 33 HMOs
will leave Medicare early next year because they are not recovering their
costs. (Thirty-one other HMOs are withdrawing in selected areas.) This
development will force almost 250,000 patients nationwide either to enroll in a
different Medicare-covered HMO, or to switch to a standard, more expensive
Medicare plan. Yet even as so many HMOs pull out of Medicare, there are
concurrently 25 HMOs hoping to expand their Medicare involvement and still more
HMOs with applications pending.

            A WP front-pager explores the tangled web of geopolitical
relationships around Azerbaijan's massive oil reserves (which could potentially
produce 3 million barrels of oil a day). Maneuvering around countries such as
Russia and Iran, both with vested interests in the region, is among the
bedeviling challenges for big U.S. oil companies and for the Clinton
Administration.

            All papers run stories on Sunday's elections in Brazil, in which incumbent
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso is expected to triumph handily despite the
country's economic turmoil. Described by the LAT as "one of the
hemisphere's most impressive presidents," Cardoso is seen by voters as the only
realistic person for surmounting the financial crisis which has seen Brazil's
stock market plunge 41%. Among the alternative candidates: a left-wing
politician expected to get one-quarter of the vote and, more exotically, an
"excitable surgeon known simply as Eneas, who calls for Brazil to build an
atomic bomb" (in the NYT 's words).

            The NYT runs an op-ed
by Gerald Ford. Breaking his silence on the Lewinsky scandal, the former
President asserts that President Clinton "has broken faith with those who
elected him." Ford proposes the following punishment: "A harshly worded rebuke
as rendered by members of both parties," to be administered in the well of the
House chamber. "Let it be dignified, honest, and above all, cleansing," says
Ford. As a NYT news article points out, Ford's op-ed represents a
possible boon for the Clinton administration, since Ford is breaking rank with
Republicans who advocate impeachment.

            The cover of the NYT "Book Review" (plus an inside WP "Book
World" piece) is given to Philip Gourevitch's extraordinary book on the Rwanda
massacres, We Wish To Inform You That Tomorrow We Will be Killed With Our
Families . Gourevitch's narrative demonstrates the "collective criminality"
of Rwandan Hutus--neighbors hacking neighbors to death--as well as the
all-too-familiar inaction of the U.N. The NYT reviewer, who notes that
clothed skeletons still litter the floor of one death-church-turned-memorial,
fears that the rehabilitation envisioned by Gourevitch may yet be a long way
off.

         
      
   
