
   
   
      
         
            Rest for the Wary

            All papers lead with the narrowly aborted U.S. attack on Iraq. Just hours
before the U.S. was to launch a massive air strike campaign (at 9 a.m. EST
Saturday, the Washington Post reports), Iraq in a letter to the U.N.
signaled its willingness to let U.N. weapons inspectors return. After reviewing
the overture, however, the U.S. called Iraq's conditional concessions
"unacceptable" and remains poised to attack.

            The letter, sent early Saturday by Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz to
U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan, said that Iraq would let the weapons
inspectors return, apparently unconditionally. Annan spoke with Aziz over the
phone and seemed convinced of Iraq's sincerity. However, a later annex sent by
Aziz laid out several conditions for the resumption of weapons
inspections--including the lifting of the oil embargo on Iraq. Dubious,
National Security Adviser Sandy Berger said Iraq's proposal had "more holes
than Swiss cheese." President Clinton canceled the first leg of his Asia trip
(which he was secretly planning to do anyway, according to the WP ) and
sent Vice President Gore to Malaysia instead.

            The papers note that the U.S. is now in a tricky situation, with huge forces
amassed in the Gulf and Iraq stalling. The New York
Times says advisors told Clinton to order the attacks earlier in the
week to avoid precisely such a situation. All papers also note that Saddam
Hussein has successfully weakened Clinton's international support; says the
Los
Angeles Times , "the wily dictator has lost none of his tactical
cunning." Russia has now voiced its aversion to the use of force, and the U.N.
Security Counsel is divided over the sincerity of Saddam's latest proposal. The
U.N.S.C. and the U.S. are now at odds over what the "annex" says; while the
U.S. will not tolerate the conditional annex, Kofi Annan's spokesman, Fred
Eckhard, has said that the annex "does not constitute conditions." Britain
still strongly backs the U.S. position.

            A New York Times op-ed by Richard Danzig, the soon-to-be-sworn-in
Secretary of the Navy, outlines possible defense strategies against
"NEW"--nonexplosive weapons, such as biological agents or computer viruses.
Declaring that "we ought to assume that successful attacks should occur,"
Danzig proposes various response strategies such as "educating medical
personnel, preparing responsive plans and stockpiling antibiotics." Also on
Danzig's wish list: "giving our computer systems redundancy" so that the
effects of a computer attack are mitigated.

            The NYT off-lead chronicles the myriad ways that AIDS cripples
Africa's businesses. AIDS health care costs huge amounts (even with health
benefits caps); young people who could be promoted are dying; the supply of
workers and specialists is depleted; and in some hard-hit areas, government
agencies are downsizing because they anticipate a lack of personnel.

            In an inside article charmingly entitled "Paris Finally Gets the Poop," the
WP reports that Paris is becoming a sanctuary of "dog toilet
enclosures"--and dogs are actually using them. In case dogs miss, "moto turds"
sweep through for pickup. Paris' citizens (encouraged by a hefty fine for messy
dogs) are also getting their scoops out--a rare example, says the article, of
civic activism in Europe.

         
      
   
