
   
   
      
         
            Plugging in a Speaker

            House politics continue to dominate. The WP leads with the de facto
Speakerhood of Rep. Robert Livingston. The LAT goes with the fractious
Republican caucus he will try to lead, which the WSJ also addresses in a
front-pager. The NYT goes instead with yesterday's Judiciary hearings at which
scholars said middle-ground outcomes like censuring the president had no
constitutional basis. The hearings are also the off-lead at the WP and
make the front at the LAT and USAT, which leads instead with the Supreme
Court's allowing the continuance of Wisconsin's program of subsidizing poor
children's attendance at private and religious schools. This voucher story
makes the LAT and NYT fronts, but is played inside at the
Post .

            The WP , LAT and NYT each give the who's-up-who's-down
on the House GOP wrangle but there is no clear sense communicated about what it
all means. The LAT bothers to tell us that to hold together the House
GOP caucus Livingston may have to, to coin a phrase, "resort to scotch tape and
bailing wire," but doesn't tell us much about the ideological differences
operating except to say that Livingston has been slammed by the WSJ
editorial page and is also disliked by something called the Traditional Values
Coalition. The coverage tells us that Livingston is apparently all about tone
and management and (could this be the Jesse Ventura effect?) that he's a black
belt in karate. But that's about it. For a topography of the House GOP, turn to
the Journal account, which nicely articulates the three main branches of
its conservatism: pragmatic, economic, and social.

            As for the lesser offices in the hierarchy, the papers don't even
communicate what they do. The reader has no idea what to make of learning that,
for example, the vice chair of the House Republican Conference is challenging
the Majority Leader. The one exception to this complaint is the Post 's
reporting on the job of Majority Whip, Tom DeLay. Delay, it seems, was able to
vector support to Livingston because he possesses the only really up-to-date
list of members' phone numbers and addresses.

            The NYT observes that if the Republicans were looking for a way to
gracefully abandon impeachment, this was not in evidence at the Judiciary
hearings. The other papers see things the same way. Although it was Elbow Patch
and Tweed Day at the committee, the NYT shows that often the academic
witnesses were just foils for members' speechifying. All the experts testified
that the standards for impeachment should be kept very high, but some of the
Republican members of the committee made it clear they felt that lying about
sex qualified.

            It's a bit sobering to read that the WP 's political dean, David
Broder, refuses to bury Newt Gingrich's career in public life. His model for
Gingrich in '98 is Nixon in '62--down but not out. If, writes Broder, the
Democrats clobber the GOP in the 2000 presidential vote, Gingrich would be
positioned for a comeback, this time as a presidential candidate.

            As an apparent conflict with Iraq looms, USAT reports on a visit made
last month to a Navy carrier now enroute to the Mediterranean. The paper
reports that the ship is deployed with 250 fewer crew than it's supposed to
have, with the result that flight operations cannot be sustained at the tempo
commanders would like. The paper reports that although the Navy denies that the
carrier's recent fatal flight deck collision had anything to do with
shorthandedness, the service has experienced a rise in its flight accident
rate. The story quotes one civilian defense expert's assessment: there's plenty
of money, it's just being spent on the wrong things--glamour weapons instead of
parts and manpower.

            For those wondering how long Kenneth Starr's operation could stay in
business, the WP runs a story inside about the independent counsel
appointed to look into conflict of interest charges against Eli Segal, a
one-time Clinton national service advisor. Nine months after getting the case,
the IC recommended against prosecuting Segal, and no further action was taken
against him. But more than a year after that, the office still exists, albeit
down to one attorney working about half time. Why? Well, says, the Post ,
the office had to continue operating while those investigated or required to
testify appealed for reimbursement of their legal expenses. And there's the
cost in time and money of, as the law requires, turning over all paperwork to
the National Archives. And best of all, since any IC office must be audited by
the government every six months, someone must be retained to preside over the
office while it's being audited. That's how the Segal IC is still managing to
spend more than $250,000 a year.

         
      
   
