
   
   
      
         
            Toupee or Not Toupee

            
               USA
Today and the New York
Times lead with a hardy perennial: the restart of Middle East peace
talks. The Washington Post and Los Angeles
Times also front the story. The Post leads with word that next
month some unions and liberal activist groups plan to run midterm election TV
spots supporting President Clinton and accusing Republicans of pursuing his
scandal at the expense of other issues. The LAT goes with what looks
like a California story, but is really a national one: Governor Pete Wilson's
okaying of moving the state's presidential primary up to March 7th, where it
will be preceded only by the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. The
paper says critics worry that the move could result in half the states and
three quarters of the voters casting ballots within eight days, "compromising
the democratic benefits of a more deliberative primary process." The LAT
also stresses "wide speculation" that Wilson's move was personal because it
could benefit his presidential bid by giving him a strong showing early on. The
NYT top-front story on the primary move only lightly touches on this
point, after the jump.

            The NYT and USAT leads say that yesterday's surprise White
House meeting between President Clinton, Yasir Arafat and Benjamin Netanyahu
accomplished an agreement in which Israel accepts a further 13 percent pullback
from the West Bank (in addition, USAT points out helpfully, to the 27
percent already governed by the Palestinian Authority). This had been a
sticking point in the past, the papers explain, now apparently unlocked by the
idea (of American origin, says the NYT ) of having nearly a quarter of
the evacuated land be declared a nature reserve and hence not occupied by the
Palestinians either. But a familiar loose end remains loose: Israel's demands
for specific Palestinian actions to tighten security in the area. The
NYT 's report that Clinton characterized the latest talks as making
substantial progress savors of a glass-half-full feeling, while a
glass-half-empty sense comes with USAT 's report that Madeleine Albright
declined to describe the session as a "breakthrough," and with the paper's
description of Arafat and Netanyahu as "stone-faced" (although in the
NYT 's photo, both men are smiling somewhat).

            Although it's obvious that successful Middle East diplomacy could be a
powerful deflection from Clinton's scandal and could help immeasurably in the
upcoming elections, the papers don't make much of this. USAT plays it
highest, putting the thought in the sixth paragraph. The NYT waits until
after the jump, and although the WP 's story mentions Netanyahu's
domestic political concerns, it never mentions Clinton's.

            The Post lead says some House Democratic staffers are worried that a
pro-Clinton ad campaign would siphon off money needed by House candidates, and
that House Minority Leader Richard Gephardt is already "irked" at White House
officials for unleashing James Carville's particularly aggressive anti-Starr,
anti-Gingrich defense of Clinton last Sunday.

            Stories inside the NYT and WP report that a study coming out
today demonstrates the shortcomings of a flagship program designed to help poor
absentee fathers earn more and pay more child support. The program, Parents'
Fair Share, which tries to help mostly black and Hispanic high-school drop-out
absentee fathers via training and counseling, has been found in an independent
study not to have increased their earnings and to have only marginally
increased the amount of money they give their kids. The Post mentions in
its fourth paragraph a very relevant limit on possible success--that 70 percent
of the men in the program have arrest records. The Times doesn't get
around to this until its twelfth paragraph.

            According to Wall Street Journal 's "Work Week" column, higher earners
put in longer days than those with lower incomes--the top ten percent work
about an hour a day longer than the bottom ten percent. A century ago the
situation was reversed. The curves probably crossed in the 1950s.

            In an op-ed, former WP military reporter George C. Wilson wonders
why, if the military now expects most of its missions to be related to
peace-keeping and counter-terrorism, President Clinton and Secretary of Defense
William Cohen continue to allow the Army to spend millions on tanks, the Navy
to keep buying $2 billion submarines, the Air Force to keep buying stealthy
$160 million fighters, and the Marines to buy $40-$60 million vertical
take-off-and-landing troop carriers instead of much cheaper helicopters.

            Wonder why only the WP has Jiang Zemin's speech declaring complete
victory over China's recent floods--in which he compares the triumph to the way
in which the Chinese Communist Party stood up to the democracy demonstrators
in Tiananmen Square. And why does the Post run it on page 13?

            Meanwhile the bulletins flow like wine on the WSJ front, where a
feature reports that--drum-roll, please--the comb-over is losing market share.
What's more, according to the story, the world is still guessing about whether
or not Sam Donaldson wears a toupee.

         
      
   
