
   
   
      
         
            No Flights of Fancy

            
               USA
Today and the New York
Times lead with NATO's decision, in response to Slobodan Milosevic's
apparent stand-down in Kosovo province, to lift the immediate threat of
airstrikes against Yugoslavia. The Washington Post goes with what it calls "the first sign of
trouble" with the just-brokered Middle East peace accord--Benjamin Netanyahu's
postponement of his cabinet's vote on it, citing doubts about Palestinian
compliance. (This story is the NYT 's off-lead.) The Los Angeles
Times lead is a sharp slide in a leading measure of American consumer
confidence, a story also flagged on the Wall Street Journal 's front-page news box.

            The papers report that NATO emphasized it would not hesitate to take
military action if Yugoslavia violated the commitments it recently made to
peaceful behavior in Kosovo. The NYT explains that Yugoslavian
activities will be monitored by a multinational aerial reconnaissance effort,
including American U-2 spy-planes. USAT , the NYT and the
WP (in its inside story on Kosovo) mention another element of NATO
deterrence: the decision to send an unspecified number of troops--possibly
including U.S. soldiers--to Macedonia. From there, the two papers say, the
troops could intervene in Kosovo. The LAT , in its front-page Kosovo
story, doesn't mention this deployment.

            The NYT explains that U.S. officials are very concerned about whether
Albanian forces will respond to the Yugoslavian pullout by resuming their armed
insurrection, which is what prompted Milosevic's incursion in the first place.
The paper reveals that the U.S. recently held extensive talks with the rebels, urging them not to attack Serbs
in the region. The NYT also points out the Kosovo agreement allows
Milosevic to fight back if his forces are attacked. With on-the-ground
reportage and interviews, the LAT stresses the militant attitude of the
Serbs remaining in Kosovo. The WP mostly does the flip side, describing
the return of Albanians to their ravaged homes. A statistical variance:
USAT says Serb forces produced 400,000 refugees. The NYT 's number
is 250,000.

            The LAT lead and the Journal say that the Conference Board's
study of 5,000 households divined a consumer confidence level at its lowest ebb
in two years and also a big decline in Americans' expectations for the future.
The LAT quotes an expert saying that every recent recession has been
preceded by a drop in this latter measure, although, the paper adds, not every
drop has been followed by recession. But the Journal quotes an economist
saying that recession would be very unusual in the current low-interest
environment. However, such studies are closely watched, says the LAT ,
because consumer spending accounts for more than two-thirds of the U.S.
economy.

            
               USAT 's off-lead reports that President Clinton will unveil a $156
million effort today to combat AIDS among blacks and Hispanics, two groups
where, despite the general decline in AIDS mortality, the disease remains a top
killer. The NYT and WP run inside stories on a fresh UN finding
that in Africa, AIDS is cutting life expectancy and will reduce the continent's
population within the next ten to fifteen years. The Times cites experts
who believe that barring a medical miracle, Botswana and Zimbabwe will lose up
to a fifth of their populations to AIDS in the next decade.

            An AP story on the USAT front and inside the WP reports that
the FAA is warning pilots not to take Viagra within six hours of flying,
because the color discrimination problems sometimes associated with the drug
could make it hard to interpret cockpit gauges and runway lights.

            A letter writer to the WP , who claims to have worked
for some of the biggest Cabinet departments, asks an interesting question: Why
is the federal government accusing Microsoft of monopolistic business practices
when, he says, those departments discourage the purchase of non-Windows
PCs?

            The back pages of the Post also disclose that a just-released
independent counsel's report found that high-ranking government officials
committed a "monumental and calculated abuse of the public trust." How could
the WP possibly justify running one of Ken Starr's reports on page 17?
Well, it's not Starr's report--it's the independent counsel's report on
wrongdoing at HUD, an investigation that got started more than eight years
ago.

         
      
   
