
   
   
      
         
            Not Erection Results

            The elections rule. USA Today slugs the story "Democrats Dash GOP Hopes," and
its front-page "cover story" says yesterday brought "good news for the man who
wasn't on the ballot," Bill Clinton. Similarly, the New York Times
main headline reads in part, "Democrats Hold Off G.O.P. Advance, Weakening
Impeachment Prospects...." The Los Angeles
Times headline lavishes its big type on the victory of Democrat Gray
Davis in the California governor's race, the re-election to the Senate of
Barbara Boxer and the victory of the initiative permitting Indian-run casinos.
And the headline over the Washington Post lead credits the Democrats with scoring
significant upsets-- the Post , like everybody else, stressing the defeat
of GOP incumbent senators Alfonse D'Amato of New York and Lauch Faircloth of
North Carolina.

            The papers cite the general satisfaction exiting voters expressed--with
Clinton, with the economy, and with their own lot in life. And everybody says
6o percent of voters thought Clinton should not be impeached. The upshot is
that the Republicans will not achieve a filibuster-proof majority in the
Senate. Although, as everybody notes, the Republicans do retain control of both
the House and the Senate.

            The press consensus is that the only real bright spots for the Republicans
are the victories of the brothers Bush in the Texas and Florida gubernatorial
races. The LAT says that George W. Bush's re-election instantly makes
him the Republican presidential front-runner. The NYT 's R.W. Apple says
both Bushes are to be reckoned serious presidential contenders. And Maureen
Dowd only seems to be half-joking when she suggests that the brothers form
a
Bush-Bush ticket in 2000.

            A front-page Wall Street Journal story details a little-noticed aspect
of the emerging e-marketplace: large corporations are moving slowly into
Internet marketing, not really any longer because of misgivings about its
power, but because it threatens to destroy traditional hands-on sales channels,
which still constitute about 90 percent of most companies' order flow. For
instance, the Journal ponies up a Seattle GM dealer who has made ten
additional sales this year with the help of his automaker's Web sites, but who
also worries that GM might someday just take buyers' orders directly and get
rid of him.

            With the papers relentlessly rah-rahing over the latest exploits of the home
team, often, amazingly, on the front page, it's sobering to take in the
NYT op-ed on the rampant
criminality of professional football players. According to the piece, it's
look-the-other-way day in the front office. Coach Dick Vermeil of the St. Louis
Rams is quoted saying this about a linebacker charged last week with
involuntary manslaughter in a crash in which the other driver died: "I think
it'll be good for him to get back and get with his teammates and get going
again." Then there's another Ram who plays on despite having pleaded guilty to
aggravated assault in a case where the victim suffered partial paralysis and
brain damage. And the Miami Dolphin wide receiver who, despite one conviction
and two arrests for beating his fianc,e, was offered a new contract by the club
and has never been disciplined by the league. The author, Jeff Benedict, claims
that a study he helped conduct shows that 1 out of 5 NFL players has been
charged with a serious crime.

            An AP story inside the WP reports that the Caldor department store
chain has apologized for unwittingly publishing 11 million copies of an
advertising circular in which two smiling boys are depicted playing Scrabble
around a game board where the pieces clearly spell out the word "RAPE."

            The WP , famous for applying wholesomeness principles to its copy,
outdoes itself today. The Reliable Source's item about an election day
get-together of old pols includes this quote from one of them: "If a bomb went
off in this place, 50 percent of the country's known supply of [equine
droppings] would be destroyed." Can't the Post see that whereas the
actual phrase used would go by virtually unnoticed, the paper's baroque
translation only forces the reader to dwell on the matter?

         
      
   
