
   
   
      
         
            Watch This Space

            It's almost a clean sweep of the papers for John Glenn--his last Tang go
leads at USA
Today , the New York Times ,
and the Washington Post . USAT 's front page is All Glenn All
the Time and includes a huge spectacular blast-off photo. The Los Angeles
Times gives almost half of its front page to Glenn, but leads with the
death of L.A. County Sheriff Sherman Block (the nation's highest paid elected
official) from a brain hemorrhage in the midst of a re-election campaign where
the main issue was whether he was in good health. Only time will tell if the
LAT 's reporting was insufficiently aggressive when, earlier in the week
after Block underwent emergency brain surgery, it ran a headline saying that
Block's "survival is expected."

            The papers see the Glenn launch, viewed by hundreds of thousands of
spectators and carried live on just about every television station, as a magic
unifying moment for the whole country. "Captivated Nation Cheers" is how a
USAT headline puts it. The Wall Street Journal reports that 71 percent of voters hold
a favorable view of Glenn. And both the WP and the NYT note that
the euphoria all but smothered criticisms that Glenn's presence was merely a
publicity stunt. True, in a separate story, the Post does note that the
mission has marketing tie-ins (for which Glenn refused compensation)
with Kodak and with Mattel's "John Glenn Action Pack"--toy figures of the
astronaut cum senator cum astronaut. And the NYT follows up yesterday's
curmudgeonly editorial describing the mission as "a testament more to past
eminence than present value" with today's "Editorial Observer" saying that even Glenn's original blast-off
wasn't that important. But otherwise, the NYT is pretty much in step,
running no fewer than six Glenn stories inside. Remarkably, even when
discussing the potentially dangerous loss during the launch of a protective
metal panel, there is no mention in any of the Glenn leads of the space
program's last "special" astronaut, Christa McAuliffe.

            The NYT off-lead reveals that as part of the case federal prosecutors
are building against terrorists associated with Osama bin Laden, they have
filed still-secret charges against an Egyptian-born former U.S. Army Green Beret. The ex-soldier
is alleged to have switched from being a U.S. anti-terrorist specialist to
being an anti-U.S. terrorist. The article all but comes out and says the man
was a CIA asset, in that it cites his odd military record--he apparently joined
the U.S. Army as a non-citizen while in his mid-thirties--and puts him in
Afghanistan during the CIA-managed anti-Soviet insurgency there.

            The LAT and NYT fronts report that yesterday, an Israeli
soldier died using his jeep to take an explosion a Palestinian suicide bomber
intended for a bus full of Israeli school children. (The story is carried
inside at the WP and USAT .) The papers say that the event is the
first real test of Yasser Arafat's determination to honor his recent commitment
to increased West Bank security. He seems to have passed, by immediately
condemning the bombing and placing the spiritual head of Hamas, the terrorist
group implicated in the attack, under house arrest. He has also rounded up
other Hamas members.

            The political story of the week--those Republican Lewinsky-driven
anti-Clinton ads--continues to develop on the front pages. The WP
elaborates on a point first made by yesterday's NYT --that Newt Gingrich
had a hands-on role in the ad campaign. But leave it to the WSJ to
observe that for all the press hoopla, very few voters have actually seen the
ads, because so far, they have only aired in ten states.

            Tom Shales, in his WP review of the Glenn launch television coverage,
probably speaks for many when he sees the event as a magic opportunity to
escape a relentless political scandal. Perhaps the LAT is wryly doing
the same when it quotes an Angeleno's description of Glenn as a hero who has
managed to be in the American imagination for almost 40 years "without a
stain."

         
      
   
