
   
   
      
         
            Netescape

            A major business development, AOL's nearly consummated purchase of
Netscape, leads at USA Today , the Washington Post , and Los Angeles
Times . The move also gets a front-page leader at the Wall Street Journal . (According to the AP, the Journal online edition and the new Newsweek broke
the story.) The New York Times
puts the story above the fold, but leads with Iraq's latest weapons inspection
snit and off-leads with word that driven by budget constraints as much as by
the reduced threat of nuclear attack, the Pentagon is quietly recommending
unilateral reductions in U.S. nuclear warheads. Both the NYT and LAT go
top-front with the same picture of Bill Clinton: At the Korean DMZ complete
with howitzer backdrop, decked out in scrambled-eggs ball-cap and Army field
jacket, he's doing a grip-and-grin with a bunch of soldiers. Judging by his
105mm smile, he's finally enjoying the military lifestyle.

            The papers report that the AOL/Netscape deal is actually triangular, with
AOL buying Netscape for about $4 billion in stock and then licensing Netscape's
e-commerce software to Sun Microsystems, which hopes to use it as a vehicle for
disseminating its Java language as an alternative to Microsoft's Windows.

            Everybody reports that the deal could have big ramifications for Microsoft,
with USAT making the point that the deal formally bonds three companies
whose charges that Microsoft uses monopoly power to block competitors' products
have played central roles in the current anti-trust trial. Indeed, the
NYT says that the companies were emboldened to deal because of their
perception that the case would weaken MS. But USAT quotes a Microsoft
spokesman's claim that the deal would "blow an enormous hole in the
government's case," because it shows that MS' competitors have retained the
ability to change the landscape overnight--in ways that the government claims
is illegal when Microsoft tries it. The LAT and WSJ make this
point too but the Journal adds that on the other hand, the government
could argue that Netscape was driven into AOL's arms by Microsoft.

            
               USAT 's front reports that one of the highest-ranking female law
enforcement officials in the government, a higher-up at Treasury, is being
investigated to see if she used her position to steer government business to a
subordinate who is a close friend.

            The WP front covers a lawsuit in which a man is suing a woman for
becoming pregnant against his will--she had, he says,
promised to take birth control pills. The woman claims that she became pregnant
accidentally. That factual issue may be settled at trial, but it seems that
there is a larger legal issue well worth addressing. Since court findings of
paternity cost the imputed fathers eighteen years' worth of support, it seems
only fair that women be held accountable for any promises they make about
attempting to remain childless. In the absence of that, a woman's promise to
take charge of birth control and then not doing so remains the only form of
monetary fraud Today's Papers can think of that is not only not punished, but
is in fact regularly rewarded.

            The LAT 's "Column One" does a long take-out on the increasing
attempts by companies to market their products inside schools, especially
public schools. Everybody from software manufacturers (Microsoft being one of
them) to cheese companies has been finding new ways to do this, and parents
are, says the paper, finding more product solicitations coming home in their
kids' backpacks. The good deals and cut rates are often dangled as a way to
help schools get stuff they need, which is particularly attractive to school
administrators strapped for funds in an environment in which voters keep
turning down so many school bond issues. The LAT admits it
school-markets too, by handing out free papers on campuses, ostensibly to
promote reading, but also to increase the paper's circulation.

            The WP runs an AP item about the opening of the 6,400-square-foot
house about to become the home of Kenny and Bobby McCaughey and their
septuplets and their other child. The story describes such features as a 648
square foot playroom, a bathroom with a "Roman tub," and an intercom system
connecting the various parts of the house. The story says scores of businesses
and residents contributed materials, services, money and land for the new home.
Yet no money figures are ever mentioned--an interesting omission when the
typical story about welfare recipients enumerates the monthly "giveaway" check
down to the penny. The story's lucre lacunae comport well with the locals'
theories about how all this came about--it quotes a neighbor saying, "Looks
like God is going to provide all these things."

         
      
   
