
   
   
      
         
            Eight Is Too Much

            
               USA
Today leads with its poll indicating that despite Saturday's bad day at
the office, President Clinton's job approval rating hit 73 percent. The
Washington Post runs a story inside about its
similar poll findings--nearly two-thirds of those it surveyed approve of
Clinton's job performance--but leads with the warning the Clinton
administration's senior national security advisors issued yesterday to Saddam
Hussein: whenever necessary, the U.S. will bomb you again to prevent the
development or use of gas and/or germ weapons. (Note to Pentagon: Ixnay on
"Operation Himmler.") USAT fronts this Iraq story as well. Both it and
the WP cite their own polls' finding that about 80 percent of the
American people approve of the just-concluded Iraq operation. The Los Angeles
Times and New York Times
each focus on the Senate's struggle with the issue of whether or not it still
has the option of brokering some sort of resolution to the crisis besides a
trial of President Clinton. Predictably, both papers find a party
split--generally, Democrats are open to alternatives and Republicans are
not.

            According to the Post , the administration's big Iraq policy shift is that henceforth,
it will not view action by or relating to the U.N.'s weapons inspectors, nor
approval by the U.N. Security Council or any of the Allies, as required for the
U.S. use of force. It is a measure of the times that seven paragraphs in, this
story veers to Madeleine Albright's acknowledgement that she'd been misled last
winter by President Clinton's denials to the Cabinet of an affair with Monica
Lewinsky. But then the story regains its center of gravity, making the point
that the Iraq policy turn, with its open-ended commitment of forces against
Saddam, means that the Clinton administration has de facto abandoned the recent
Washington policy mantra that military deployments were okay only if
accompanied by a clear exit strategy. This should have been put high in the
piece, above the Monica swerve. Similarly, the LAT front-pager on Iraq
policy, by the estimable Robin Wright, pushes down to the 14th paragraph the
claim that Washington is now "almost irrevocably involved" until the objective
of toppling Saddam is achieved. The NYT inside piece on all this focuses
instead on the sparse details of what is currently known about damage to raid
targets.

            The NYT off-lead, assessing the damage in Baghdad, makes the point that--despite the
widely reported Iraqi claims of thousands of casualties--Western assessments of
few civilian casualties gain credence because, contrary to past Iraqi
government practice, foreign journalists have not been invited to view bombed
homes.

            
               USAT reports a U.S. first--the opening wave of strikes against Iraq
included a female Navy carrier pilot. A sign of the gradual normalization of
the once-hot-button "women in combat" issue: the paper runs the story on page
18.

            A story inside the NYT reports another first--the inaugural combat
use of the B-1 bomber. The story's headline speaks of the very expensive and
long-underused plane's "vindication," but this seems to be overselling. The
story's body quotes a B-1 officer saying that "vindication might not be the
right word," and waits until the ninth paragraph to reveal that "the Pentagon
had not yet been able to assess the damage done by the bombers' strikes."

            The LAT fronts, and the NYT runs inside, news that a Texas
woman has given birth to octuplets. Neither story's headline mentions that the
woman had taken fertility drugs. These drugs are creating incredibly expensive
and complicated births--shouldn't they be flagged as a big part of the
story?

            Both the NYT and Wall Street Journal run front-page pieces saying that the
recent dip in the national savings rate isn't necessarily bad. For one thing,
notes the Journal , to some extent, the savings rate is based on
conventions such as not counting capital gains as income that make it look
worse, and for another, says the Times , with much of the rest of the
world mired in recession, this may not be a good time to tighten our belts
anyway. The Times mentions something else that seems like it could in
fact be a silver lining in this supposed cloud: the big fear that the majority
of baby boomers will wind up working longer than they expected because they
didn't save enough for their retirement. But wouldn't that delay the huge
boomer claim on Social Security, thus giving that system more of a chance to
get well?

            While engaging in his regular drubbing of Bill Clinton, William Safire today
along the way actually gives him some very practical advice: under pain of a
Senate trial, sign a very tough censure deal, and pay off everybody's legal
fees by auctioning off the pen.

         
      
   
