
   
   
      
         
            Wye Not?

            The New York Times ,
Los
Angeles Times , and Washington Post lead with Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu's decision to give in to pressure from the Israeli parliament--upset
on all sides over the course of the peace process with the Palestinian
Authority--and stand for re-election this spring, more than a year before the
scheduled end of his term. The Wall Street Journal also runs a front-page leader on the
development. USA Today puts Israel on page 11 and goes instead with the
latest ripple in a story that's been percolating below the fold for a while:
allegations of vote-buying by the Salt Lake City Olympics bid committee in its
successful drive to land the 2002 Winter Games. What's new, says the paper, is
that former Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell (rumored to be under
consideration as President Clinton's defender in the Senate's impeachment
trial) has agreed to lead a U.S. Olympic Committee investigation into the
charges.

            Israel's move to new elections, the papers explain, is not finalized yet,
but virtually guaranteed, with the field likely to pit at least two candidates
against Netanyahu. The cause of the Netanyahu government's unraveling, the
papers say, is the U.S.-brokered Palestinian deal, the Wye accord. The Israeli
right, dominated by adamant settlers and the devoutly religious, was unhappy
with Wye, and Netanyahu's response of opting out of scheduled Israeli troop
pullbacks hurt him with the center and the left, which had come to accept land
for peace, and infuriated the Palestinians. The papers say that Wye is now in
limbo until the outcome of the new elections, even though, the Journal
reports, polls show 70 percent of Israelis support it.

            The WP , NYT , and LAT fronts report on China's handing
down of stiff prison sentences--11 to 13 years--to dissidents who'd been trying
to start China's first democratic opposition party. (The WP reports on
the sentencing of two organizers, while the other two papers also mention a
third.) The LAT and NYT report that a State Dept. spokesman
denounced the sentences. But the Chinese leadership seems unbending--the
NYT reports that in a speech last Friday, China's president and
Communist party chief, Jiang Zemin, stated, "The Western mode of political systems must
never be adopted." The papers note that this crackdown comes at a time when
unquestionably Chinese people have more personal freedom than they've ever
experienced before under Communist rule. But the LAT quotes a
professor's explanation for this stern crackdown: "The Chinese government has
always been worried about any movement that might tie people in one province
with people in another." The NYT runs a second piece inside reporting
that critics of China cited the prison sentences as proof that the Clinton
administration's policy of economic and diplomatic engagement with China has
failed.

            The Houston octuplets are continuing to get front-page coverage. But today,
it's tempered with concerns about the ethics of so fully unleashing
state-of-the-art reproductive therapy. The Post quotes a doctor saying
flatly that such extreme multiple births are not a victory for science and
warning against "exuberant therapy." And the NYT quotes another saying
the event is "a wake-up call for the medical profession." One problem emerging
via the coverage is that the fertility-enhancing technology is so expensive
that when patients have to pay for it out of their own pockets, instead of via
insurance, whether or not a pregnancy results--they pressure doctors to use
increasingly potent measures, greatly increasing the chance of high-multiple
births.

            The LAT front fascinates with reporter Elizabeth Shogren's exclusive
look into President Clinton's mindset as he holiday-partied at the
White House with friends Sunday night. Shogren, a party guest, snagged a
lengthy interview with Clinton. Highlights: Clinton believes that in 20 or 30
years, he will be vindicated. He is determined to find a quick way out of the
crisis, but is stumped about how to do that. His friends at the party were
"gloomy and distraught" and it was Clinton who was cheering them up. He has
been buoyed from recent personal advice not just from a longtime minister
friend, but also from Nelson Mandela and former House Speaker Jim Wright.
Besides Mandela's spiritual counsel against harboring hate towards your
attackers, Clinton cited a practical reason for not being more prominent in his
own defense: focusing on himself rather than his job would make his approval
ratings plummet.

            One of the reasons journalists are so despised by other folks is their bent
for comments like the one the WP 's James Glassman tosses off in his
column today: "(Rep. Dennis Hastert, a former high school wrestling coach, may
be a fine fellow, but speaker of the House?!)" Would Glassman be so quick to
criticize another wrestler-turned-politician from Illinois, with only one year
total of formal education--Abraham Lincoln?

         
      
   
