
   
   
      
         
            Open Gates?

            A gruesome refiguring of the Central American toll for Hurricane Mitch--now
revised to be upwards of 7,000 deaths--leads at USA Today ,
the Los
Angeles Times , and the New York Times .
The Washington Post leads with the news that the
Washington D.C. financial control board will re-delegate most of the local
government's executive powers--stripped from Marion Barry--back to the new
mayor chosen today. The Post 's top non-local story is that the Supreme
Court has agreed to review the criminal statute banning a wide range of
gratuities to public officials. The statute was used to convict Sun-Diamond
Growers for its largesse towards former Secretary of Agriculture Mike Espy, a
conviction that was then overturned. At issue is what exactly must the link be
between a gift and any subsequent act by the official receiving it before it
constitutes an illegal quid pro quo.

            Hardest hit by Mitch were Honduras and Nicaragua. The papers all quote the
president of Honduras' on-scene assessment: "There are corpses everywhere." The
NYT reports that mudslides were a big killer, quoting a Nicaraguan
rescue worker saying he could do nothing for the people buried in the debris he
could hear begging for help. The Times says at least five Nicaraguan
villages were "entombed" by the slides. The LAT reports that 70 percent
of Honduras' crops were destroyed. The NYT says it's 70 percent of the
country's entire infrastructure that was wiped out. By yesterday, the
LAT reports, the region was experiencing food shortages and price
gouging. USAT says that if the death count is confirmed, Mitch will end
up as the second deadliest Central American storm ever.

            
               USAT and the LAT front fresh Commerce Dept. data showing that
in September, Americans spent more money than they earned--$100.20 going out,
explains the LAT , for every $100 that came in. The papers report that
this hasn't happened in ages. ( USAT says it's been at least 50 years,
the LAT says 65.) The consensus explanation is that the roaring stock
market has made people feel more prosperous and willing to spend. The
LAT quotes this economic analysis from a man who just dropped $170 on
sweaters at the Burbank GAP: "If all the consumers keep getting more and more
into debt and keep spending, nothing bad is going to happen...."

            The NYT , and WP front the much-awaited playing in court
yesterday of the Bill Gates deposition videotape. The LAT and
USAT put the story on their business section fronts. The Wall Street Journal flags it in its front-page news box.
The NYT finds that in his confrontation with DOJ lead attorney David
Boies, Gates was "evasive and uninformed, pedantic and taciturn," ( USAT
and WSJ also opt for "evasive"), and observes that when confronted with
company e-mail he'd authored, he frequently said he did not recognize the
messages or recall the circumstances behind them. The Times and
WSJ observe that sometimes Boies' questions were met by more than 20
seconds of silence before Gates responded. The Post notes that
Gates-on-video is a staple of Microsoft trade show presentations, but in the
court tape there was this difference: Gates was a "scowling, slouching
man."

            The papers note that much of yesterday's questioning focused on whether or
not Microsoft threatened canceling its version of "Office" software for the
Macintosh as a means of forcing Apple to promote MS' Internet browser. The
Post and Journal report that at one point Boies showed Gates an
email sent to him by a Microsoft executive that said, "Mac Office is the
perfect club to use on them." The Post doesn't give Gates' account of
that e-mail, but USAT says he testified that he didn't recall receiving
it.

            The LAT front reports that the federal government has chosen an odd
way to save some money: by eliminating the only program designed to test the
ability of the nation's commercial nuclear plants to protect themselves against
terrorists. The program was established after the Gulf War and, reports the
LAT , had in its short lifespan identified serious security lapses at 47
percent of the nation's 104 commercial nuclear reactors. For instance, in one
mock attack, an agency team was able to simulate bringing about a core
meltdown. And last March, an inspector was able to smuggle a fake pistol into
the nuclear power plant in Vernon, Vermont. The reason for the shutdown? The
LAT suggests it's that the nuclear power industry doesn't like
shouldering the extra cost of participating in the security exercises.

            Back to the videotape: The WSJ makes it seem that Bill Gates may have
been influenced by another famous testifier named Bill. When asked by David
Boies if Microsoft was competing with an Apple video technology, the paper
reports that Gates answered, "Depends on what you mean by compete."

         
      
   
