
   
   
      
         
            All-Mail Voting

            On a slow news day, the Los Angeles Times leads with the quiet hope among
some Republicans that the House impeachment inquiry will die a swift death. The
New York Times goes with an affirmative action-related
piece: complaints from some parents, mostly in the white majority, that their
kids have been excluded from schools on the basis of race. And the Washington Post leads with the growing vote-by-mail
trend.

            The LAT front says that some Republicans believe that losing the
House impeachment vote would be much better than winning by a narrow margin and
sending the unpopular impeachment proceedings to the Senate (which would likely
kill impeachment anyway). The GOP is in a tough spot: The LAT cites a
recent Gallup poll which says that while 64% of Americans oppose impeachment,
68% of "self-identified Republicans" want their Congressmen to vote for it.

            According to the NYT , high schools and elementary schools are
increasingly butting heads with parents of rejected students over
race-conscious policies. The issue--whether diversity should be a selection
criterion in public schools--has not been directly addressed by the Supreme
Court, even as desegregation orders are lifted in many areas across the U.S.
Magnet schools, which accept top students yet also seek to preserve their
racial diversity, are particularly flummoxed by this issue. A spate of upcoming
court cases across the country may determine the future of race-based
policies.

            Voting by mail was once confined to the legitimately absent or the
physically impaired. Now, says the WP , it has become widely popular
among stay-at-homes. In over 20 states, voters can vote up to 21 days early
without explaining their early voting. Oregon will soon become the first state
to switch to an all-mail ballot. Alarmingly, individual candidates can bundle
their campaign literature into a vote-by-mail application (which incidentally
does not require identification). Among the downsides of mail-voting: Extra
costs and the potential for corruption--ineligible, dead, or nonexistent voters
can wriggle onto the voting rolls.

            The NYT off-lead carries another voting issue: soft money. More soft
money than ever is flooding presidential campaigns--and earlier than ever. The
soft money is no longer principally funneled through national political
parties; many candidates today have established political action committees
which are thinly veiled conduits for their own interests. Sen. Bob Kerrey, for
example, will rely on funds for the "Building America's Conscience and Kids
PAC" for the 2000 Presidential campaign.

            The NYT front hints at a coming waterloo for Yugoslav dictator
Slobodan Milosevic. The evidence is a spate of recent purges of government
leaders in the army, air force, and intelligence service. Some Washington
officials believe--nay, hope--that the purges indicate that Milosevic is
teetering. The WP also runs an item on the purges, saying that they have
rattled Montenegro (adjacent to Serbia), which fears a crackdown from Belgrade.
Both stories note that Milosevic's wife has played a key behind-the-scenes role
in the dismissals.

            The LAT fronts an interesting piece describing Iran as a low-profile,
high-volume refugee haven. Floods of Afghan refugees (and, to a lesser extent,
Kurds and Bosnians and others) have found Iran to be hospitable. However, this
has make no impact on the West; the United Nations' main agency for refugees
(UNHCR) gave only $17 million this year for Iran's 2.1 million refugees,
whereas it provided $149 million this year to handle the almost 1 million
displaced persons within former Yugoslavia.

            The WP runs an op-ed by Henry Kissinger that denounces the ineffectiveness
of America's current Iraq policy: "We win the battles, but Saddam Hussein is
winning the wars," Kissinger says. Specifically, he warns that international
support for U.S. raids cannot be "recycled indefinitely" and that the U.S. is
becoming "more captive to a fragile U.N. consensus." Rather than swallow
Saddam's bluster about inspections and sanctions, the U.S. should actively
pursue the removal of Saddam from power. Kissinger proposes not only
strengthening the anti-Saddam resistance groups, but also implementing a much
firmer policy on Iraq--i.e. actively destroying command areas and suspected
weapons sites when Saddam provokes the next crisis.

            A massive piece fronting the NYT "Money & Business" describes the
recruiting process for college seniors. In the mad scramble
for lucrative investment banking and consulting jobs, interviews can be quite
grueling. Says one unidentified student: "I walked into the interview, and
before the guy even says, 'Hi, how are you doing?' he asks me, 'What's the sum
of 1 through 100 consecutively?'" (Answer: 5050. Don't despair--the student
flubbed it also.)

         
      
   
