
   
   
      
         
            Quotations from Chairman Al

            The Los
Angeles Times and USA Today lead with Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan's
suggestion in congressional testimony Wednesday that he foresees a cut next
week in the fed funds rate, which determines the cost of money throughout the
economy. (The New York Times
puts Greenspan on its front in column five.) The big story at the Washington Post is that Newt Gingrich has publicly rejected
what the Post calls a "plea-bargain-style deal" with the White House to
head off formal impeachment proceedings in favor of some quicker but lesser
punishment such as censure. The LAT and NYT fronts also report on
these developments. The NYT leads with the pledge by Pakistan's prime
minister that he would sign a nuclear test ban treaty within the next year, a
story no one else runs on their front page. But there is a chicken-and-egg
context--the Times goes on to explain that Pakistan says it will sign
only if the U.S. lifts the economic sanctions imposed on Pakistan and India
after their surprise nuclear tests last May, but that the U.S. will not do so
until Pakistan makes a formal decision to not test its nukes. The story does go
on to point out some hopeful developments in the relationship between the two
rival A-powers: at meetings in New York yesterday, their prime ministers agreed
to resume high-level talks about the region in dispute between them, Kashmir,
and also to set-up a communications "hot line."

            Today's coverage of Greenspan on Fed rates is like all the others you've
ever read, with this difference: it's about rates going down, not up. The
likely move is said to be in response to what the LAT calls a "drumbeat
of pleas" from economists (and, it could be added, from columnists). The papers
say that the cut is likely to be a quarter point, down to 5.25 percent.
USAT quotes big-shot economist Allen Sinai's prediction that the
upcoming cut is but the first of many. The LAT points out however, that
there do not appear to be any similar coordinated cuts forthcoming from the
central banks of Europe's leading economies. By the way, USAT says a
survey it took among 49 top economists rates the chances of a U.S. recession
next year as one in four.

            The Post reports that during closed-door meetings, Gingrich signaled
his intent to expand any impeachment inquiry into Whitewater, campaign
finance abuse and technology transfers to China. The White House immediately
responded, says the Post by accusing congressional Republicans of trying
to prolong the Lewinsky matter so as to maximize gains in the November
elections. The paper describes the atmosphere around the scandal as "escalating
partisan tension."

            The Wall Street Journal has been running a good "first draft of
history" series all week on the current global economic crisis. Today's
installment, about U.S. missteps, compares the ineffective U.S. and IMF aid to
Thailand to the fatal mistakes of the "best and the brightest" in Vietnam, even
going so far as summoning Robert McNamara to explicitly make the
comparison.

            The NYT front (and an inside story at the WP ) reports that
yesterday, Hillary Clinton made a rare and particularly vigorous campaign
appearance on behalf of New York senatorial candidate Charles Schumer,
during which she characterized Schumer's opponent, Al D'Amato as a "Jesse Helms
clone." The Times says that the appearance leaves little doubt that in
the current campaign season, Hillary will fill the role that "in normal times"
would have been filled by Bill. The paper also reports that at times, the first
lady appeared "dazed and distant," especially when a reporter standing directly
in front of her twice tried to ask her a question.

            The WP reports that more than 60 leading intellectuals and artists
from around the world have signed a petition defending President Clinton
against "inquisitorial harassment by a fanatical prosecutor with unlimited
power." Signatories include Desmond Tutu, Gabriel Garcia Marquez and Emma
Thompson.

            Today's coverage reminds one that Alan Greenspan maintains the mystique of
his brilliance by a sort of Delphic vocabulary favoring oblique metaphor over
definite policy pronouncements. (Or as the Times puts it, "Mr.
Greenspan...as usual left himself some wiggle room.") Yesterday's testimony was
epic Chauncey Gardiner, featuring talk of "rain drops," "storm clouds," and
"contagion." As a result, in any newspaper article about his testimony the
directly quoted material is almost always meaningless without gobs of
explanatory text. For instance, the WSJ quotes Greenspan's comment that
"We have to bring the existing instabilities to a level of stability reasonably
shortly. I think we know where we have to go. I do not think we underestimate
the severity of the problems with which we are dealing," and then says that
investors widely took this as indicating the quarter-point rate cut. And the
Journal says that Greenspan's statement, "If we give indications to
world financial markets that the fiscal structure...is being dismantled, I
think there is a price to pay," should be translated as warning Congress that
"eating into the [budget] surplus with either tax cuts or spending increases
could rattle investors."

         
      
   
