
   
   
      
         
            Four on the Floor

            The House Judiciary Committee's approval of a fourth article of impeachment
and rejection of a censure proposal dominate the front pages of the Sunday
papers. The fourth article of impeachment accuses President Clinton of giving
false or incomplete answers to the 81 questions previously submitted by the
HJC. In its original form, the article accused Clinton of numerous,
far-reaching offenses, including making misleading statements in televised
appearances. However, Committee Republicans voted to limit the charges to the
President's 81 responses in what the Washington Post calls a "tactical retreat." The amended
article was approved by a 21-16 party-line vote. The New York Times
reports that the House will hold a floor vote on all four articles late next
week, but will likely not do the same for the Democrat-sponsored resolution for
censure. The Times quotes a White House official who says, "Impeachment
by the full House is starting to look inevitable."

            A NYT report details the current crisis faced by U.S. hog
farmers--pig devaluation. Due to a glut of pig-production, a hog (the terms hog
and pig are interchangeable, the article explains) that was selling for $118 a
year ago now fetches only $45. Iowa, the "nation's leading hog state," has been
hit hardest by the price drop. The true gluttons appear to be the nation's
retailers, who have done little to pass lower livestock costs on to
consumers.

            A Los
Angeles Times front-page piece says the U.S. military has conducted
investigations on more than 50 servicemen suspected of running marijuana and
cocaine for Mexican and Californian drug operations. Eight probes were
conducted in the past year to sniff out smugglers who likely used their access
to conveniently located military bases to avoid Mexican Border Patrol.

            The NYT Magazine drives home its theme (yes, another theme issue)
with its cover. The masthead is printed upside down at the bottom, alerting you
to the message that modern design--from toothbrushes to Web pages--aims to
catch your eye with "the shock of the familiar." The new style in Web pages is
"logical as well as luscious": more color, less confusion. In desks, it's
creative clutter (though the clean-swept desktop also has its champions). In
modern art museums, it's jumbo jets, Jeeps, subway signs, and Post-It notes. In
chairs, it's casual, cheap, and computer-designed. Also "100 Years of Stuff,"
which includes Isadora Duncan's Grecian robes, the electric fan, and Penguin
Books. At the height of a high-consumption holiday shopping season, it all
seems familiar.

            All the papers report that University of Texas running back Ricky Williams
was awarded the Heisman trophy Saturday at the Downtown Athletic Club in
Manhattan. The NYT reports that Williams, who holds the all-time college
rushing record, also plays baseball for the Philadelphia Phillies organization,
idolizes Bob Marley, and hopes to someday teach elementary school.

         
      
   
