
   
   
      
         
            The House Feels Impeachy

            The New York
Times
               , 
               Washington Post and the Los Angeles Times all lead with coverage of the
impeachment dramatics. All three papers agree that the House will almost
certainly impeach the president today, perhaps even before lunch. Iraq again
makes the front pages, as the Pentagon admits that the bombing campaign has
been less successful than hoped. Administration officials have not yet decided
when the raids will end.

            Friday's impeachment debate was predictably partisan. Republicans pledged
allegiance to the rule of law, while Democrats characterized the proceedings as
a coup d'etat . The most ribald zinger of the day belongs to Constance
Morella (R-Maryland), who says that Clinton's legacy "shall be indelibly
stained." Dick Gephardt (D-Missouri) drew bipartisan applause for demanding an
end to "slash-and-burn politics," which is interpreted as a comment on the
Hustler investigation that prompted Speaker-elect Bob Livingston to
admit infidelity, as well as the Starr investigation.

            The NYT says that, according to aides, the President is "devastated."
The Democrats are so certain they've lost, reports the WP , that they
won't bother to fly in George Miller, an anti-impeachment House member who is
recovering from hip surgery in California. All papers report that Hillary
Clinton made a statement on Friday supporting her husband. The WP
reports that Gore is entering the fray as well, saying that he's "fighting
mad." On the other side, Gerald Ford and Bob Dole--both of whom had offered
censure plans--have endorsed impeachment.

            A NYT poll shows that the GOP has the lowest approval rating it's had
in 14 years. What is more, half of the polled Americans mistakenly think the
House isn't going to impeach Clinton. After impeachment, argues the article,
the GOP's approval rating may go even lower. On the other hand, 40 percent of
those polled think Clinton should resign if impeached. The LAT runs a
news analysis piece that also suggests impeachment will erode Clinton's
support. Right now, says the NYT , 65 percent of American approve of
Clinton's performance.

            In the day's other big story, all three papers report that the Iraq bombings
have destroyed only 18 of 89 targets. Adminstration officials make no promises
about when the bombings will end. National Security Advisor Sandy Berger says
that Ramadan, the Islamic holy month that begins today, is "not an automatic
deadline."

            The WP 's sources report that the U.S. is intentionally bombing the
barracks of Saddam's elite soldiers, the Republican Guard. U.S. strategists
hope that killing these loyal soldiers will pave the way for a coup
d'etat from within the ordinary army. (The official Pentagon line is that
the bombings are not meant to destabilize the regime.)

            The WP runs two pieces describing the headaches impeachment and war
are causing TV producers. Columnist Tom Shales describes the quandary: "We
interrupt the impeachment to bring you the bombing. We interrupt the bombing to
bring you the impeachment. We interrupt the interruption to bring you a
digression ... Never mind this madness, let's get back to the insanity!"

         
      
   
