
   
   
      
         
            Still the One

            
               USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the New York Times
lead with the illegal gifts acquittal of Mike Espy, the first Clinton
Administration Secretary of Agriculture. The story is also the top national
story at the Los Angeles Times . Pictures of a happy Espy adorn the
NYT and WP tops.

            Independent counsel Donald Smaltz had prosecuted Espy--and the papers all
hold that the not guilty verdict fuels a growing consensus that the statute
under which the likes of Smaltz and Kenneth Starr operate must be at the very
least substantially amended. Referring to Espy's own remarks, all the papers
raise the question of the ineffectiveness of the OIC by mentioning that the
non-conviction took four years and cost $17 million. Nobody mentions that Starr
is on the verge of a similar low-bang-for-the-buck result, but the thought is
inescapable. The NYT quotes Espy saying that when Congress holds
hearings on the IC statute, "I would like to be the first witness."

            Since there is no dispute that Espy received some $35,000 worth of goods and
bennies from parties with interests before Agriculture and since some of those
parties pleaded guilty to making illegal gifts, it's easy for the reader to
wonder how the clean-sweep verdict was possible. The NYT and LAT
do a good job of laying out the legal complications: both explain that the usual
rules don't apply if the gift giver has a prior personal relationship with the
giftee, and the NYT also notes that the courts are still struggling with
whether or not the illegal gratuity statute requires a concrete quid pro quo
(either past or promised). There could have been another factor, which the
LAT gets into far more than the others: race. The top half of the
paper's story explains that Espy is black as were 11 of the jurors and that at
one point, Smaltz asked the judge to tell jurors that race could not be taken
into account in deciding the case. Which, the LAT adds, he declined to
do. USAT doesn't mention the racial composition of the jury until the
third-to-last paragraph. The WP waits until the second-to-last. The
NYT never mentions it.

            And none of the papers mentions the oddity of a Secretary of Agriculture
leading a continent-hopping lifestyle that included trips to the U.S. Open, and
Dallas Cowboy and Chicago Bull home games and a taste for expensive luggage and
crystal.

            Word comes today that President Clinton's lawyers intend to appear before
the House Judiciary Committee to offer a vigorous defense of their client, who
will not appear. The story off-leads at the WP , but in a sure sign of
scandal fatigue, it's below the fold at USAT and the LAT , and
runs inside at the NYT .

            According to the WP , executives at Mobil and Exxon forgot one thing
while they were crafting their merger into the world's largest corporation: to
register their new corporate Internet address. And yesterday, the two companies
discovered that a Korean entrepreneur with no connections to them had beaten
them to it. Such "cyber-squatting" is legal and can be quite profitable.
For instance, notes the Post , earlier this year, Compaq paid $3 million
to secure "Altavista.com" from a squatter.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that the chief economist of the
Conference Board says next year, Europe could overtake the U.S. as the world's
strongest economy. She thinks that while the U.S. economy will continue to grow
healthily, Europe has more unused capacity than the U.S. and its interest rates
are comparable or lower. The only big question is whether the move to the euro
common currency will create service jobs, the sector where Europe still clearly
lags behind the U.S.

            If you think the Clinton scandal has dragged on and on, consider this inside
WP story: Yesterday, lawyers for Richard Nixon's estate demanded up to
$213 million in compensation for the government's Watergate-related seizure of
Nixon's tapes and papers. The lawyers compared the value of the tapes to that
of the Gutenberg Bible and the Declaration of Independence.

         
      
   
