
   
   
      
         
            Balk in Iraq

            The New York Times
leads with Attorney General Janet Reno's Tuesday deadline to announce whether
she will appoint an independent counsel to investigate Al Gore's role in
questionable Democratic fundraising activities. The Washington Post leads with news that Iraq is not
cooperating completely with U.N. arms inspectors. The Los Angeles
Times leads with outgoing California Governor Pete Wilson's anticipated
last minute judicial and regulatory appointments.

            The NYT reports that after reviewing essentially the same evidence
concerning fund raising improprieties for two years, Reno must finally decide
whether to begin a thorough, independent investigation into possible Democratic
abuses. The primary issue for Tuesday's decision is whether Gore knew that
money he solicited in 1996 was going to be used as both soft-money, which is
unregulated and used for nonspecific party activities, and hard-money, which is
regulated and can be used to pay for re-election ads. The NYT notes that
extra pressure is being put on Reno from the House Judiciary Committee, which
has expanded its investigation to include campaign finance, and could
potentially include the AG herself--particularly her repeated refusal to
appoint a special prosecutor over the last two years. The Times does not
make clear who imposed the Tuesday deadline or what the ramifications are if no
decision is made.

            The WP lead says that UNSCOM inspectors see little evidence that the
latest standoff with Iraq has improved their ability to search for weapons.
Iraqi officials have already denied inspectors' requests for documents, calling
the requests "provocative rather than professional." Inspectors fear that Iraqi
officials plan to stall and doubletalk their way out of random weapons searches
without blatantly refusing to cooperate. The WP notes that this strategy
has effectively eroded French, Russian, and Chinese support for UNSCOM in the
past.

            An LAT Sunday Report focuses on the changing role of daughters in
China. Once viewed by parents as "a curse," Chinese women are now significantly
contributing to the economic well being of poor rural areas and gaining new
respect in the process. The piece says that the government decision to allow
women to work outside their hometowns ten years ago has prompted an increase in
prosperity in the form of money sent home by the new class of urban
workers.

            The NYT , sworn enemy of sports utility vehicles everywhere,
illuminates yet another danger that SUVs pose to fellow drivers: high-mounted
headlights. Federal regulators are concerned that the annoying glare larger
vehicles cause in your rear-view mirror at night poses a threat to driver
visibility and causes premature eye-fatigue.

            The NYT Magazine cover story marvels at the resurgence of Prince
Charles. After Diana's death, disgruntled pundits wanted to pass over the
adulterous Charles and make his son William heir to the throne. But by hiring a
PR firm to manage his image, wooing reporters with occasional jokes, and
bonding with Prime Minister Tony Blair, Charles has staged an astounding
revival. The Brits now appreciate his many good works and his affectionate
fathering. The story hints that Charles does not much like his cold parents.
The author gets a rare private interview with the prince and confirms that
Charles does have "large ears, as advertised."

         
      
   
