
   
   
      
         
            Car Wreck

            The LAT and NYT lead with the gathering GOP momentum for impeachment and the
White House's response to it. USAT runs that story as its off-lead, going
instead with President Clinton's visit to the Gaza Strip, which also gets the
biggest print at the WP.

            The main thrust of the two Times leads is that the ranks of the
Republican members of Congress declaring themselves to be firmly against
impeachment is shrinking. This despite fresh NYT polling indicating that
64 percent of Americans do not want their representatives to vote for
impeachment. The poll in today's WP offers a slightly different picture
of the electorate: yes, six in 10 Americans are against impeachment, but if the
House votes to impeach, 58 percent of them say Clinton should then resign. The
LAT runs a front-pager about its new poll likewise showing that a clear
majority of Americans oppose impeachment. The paper's lead editorial proclaims
that "A Congress so out of step with the people it claims to represent ...is a
greater danger to the Republic than all of Clinton's selfish lies."

            Both Times find the wavering of Republican Rep. Christopher Shays
particularly important, noting that Shays had long been an announced foe of
impeachment. Both report that Shays will soon have a personal meeting with
Clinton to discuss the matter. The LAT passes along a Beltway rumor
according to which Congress' lone Socialist, Bernard Sanders, was also changing
to a pro impeachment vote. The NYT says Rep. Mark Souder, another early
opponent of impeachment, is still solid, but the LAT says he's
reconsidering his position. The paper sums up the situation as trending against
Clinton, with the White House appearing to be at a loss about what to do. The
NYT says: "Republicans appeared to be moving steadily toward
impeachment."

            Everybody notes that the congressional hearts-and-minds battle seems to have
shifted away from official White House channels: to People for the American Way
radio spots, AFL-CIO-organized phone campaigns, and a Jesse Jackson-led prayer
vigil.

            The WP and USAT both report that Clinton's visit to the Gaza
Strip--the first ever by an American president--gives a powerful boost to hopes
of eventual Palestinian statehood. And both report that Clinton watched as
Palestinian representatives raised hands to overwhelmingly revoke the
anti-Israel parts of their charter. The WP version emphasizes the uptick
for the Palestinians, while the USAT take dwells more on unanticipated
obstacles to the peace process: like Israel's decision not to go through with a
planned troop withdrawal this Friday, because of recent violent protests in
Gaza.

            The NYT front continues to peck at the Clinton/China connection with
a piece claiming that federal investigators have come across new evidence about
China's 1996 political contributions. These contributions, were not, as was
originally thought, designed to influence the outcomes of particular races such
as Clinton's, but, says the paper, were part of a broad campaign to acquire
American high technology. Giving the money, investigators now think, was, in
the spirit of the American corporate lobbying model, designed to enhance the
contributors' political access so that they could more effectively argue for
China-friendly trade and technology policies. The paper notes that one
fund-raiser in this effort, Johnny Chung, now cooperating with federal
officials, pleaded guilty yesterday and was sentenced to five years' probation.
As if supporting the Times ' contention, the sentencing judge expressed
doubt about Democratic officials assertions of ignorance concerning
fund-raising abuses and said he was surprised that Janet Reno had not appointed
a special prosecutor to investigate further.

            The WSJ reports in a front-page feature that the government has a dress code
for auto crash test dummies. They are supposed to wear matching cotton shirts
and shorts and black-leather oxford shoes. This is so engineers can clearly see
how the limbs flail in a crash. Why the shoes? Because that's what people in
crashes are usually wearing. However, socks are optional.

         
      
   
