
   
   
      
         
            Landscape by Hieronymus Bosch

            Not much news as Christmas week begins. Just kidding. Bill Clinton was
impeached, Bob Livingston said he wouldn't become House speaker after all, and
the most ambitious U.S. military action in seven years came to an end. No great
mental challenges at the New
York Times , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles
Times about what to put on page one.

            Everybody leads with Clinton's impeachment, the second of a U.S. president
in history. The House voted to impeach the president for perjury before a grand
jury (228-206) and obstruction of justice (221-212) largely along party lines.
Two other impeachment votes failed: for perjury in a civil suit (defeated
229-205) and for abuse of power (defeated 285-148). Just before the impeachment
votes, a Democratic motion to bring a censure proposal to the floor also failed
(defeated 230-204), winning support from only two Republicans: Maryland's
Connie Morella and New York's Peter King.

            All three papers note that the Senate is unlikely to convict, which requires
a two-thirds vote. But R.W. Apple of the New York Times , reminding
readers of earlier predictions this year that impeachment would never pass the
House on a partisan vote and that the Democrats would suffer losses in the
midterm elections, warns: "In the toxic politics of century's end in
Washington, the inconceivable has become the commonplace." The paper reports
the surreal detail that while the House debated Clinton's impeachment, White
House strategists were holding a two-hour meeting to plan Clinton's State of
the Union speech next month.

            Livingston's decision not to assume the speakership (and to quit Congress
next year) is attributed mainly to pleading from his wife, but also to the fury
of a small band of conservative Republican members who threatened not to
support him in the January vote to choose a new speaker. The Washington
Post 's David Broder, in an op-ed piece, praises Livingston's "leadership by
example" and urges President Clinton to resign. A Post editorial titled
"A Challenge by Example" also praises Livingston and notes that the paper early
on called for Clinton's resignation, but says that for Clinton to do so now
after an irresponsible impeachment vote "would itself set a harmful precedent."
The New York Times reports that many Republicans fear that white
supremacist David Duke will run for Livingston's Louisiana seat.

            The papers pronounce J. Dennis "Denny" Hastert, the little-known deputy
whip, to be the likely next speaker, having quickly won the support of whip Tom
DeLay and majority leader Dick Armey, both of whom seem to have concluded they
themselves lacked sufficient support to win the job. The Post emphasizes
that DeLay's support is truly decisive, and that Hastert's elevation would
further expand DeLay's already-impressive power base. Hastert, a well-liked
moderate from the Chicago suburbs, is known as "the coach" because he is a
former high school teacher and coach. Not much more is said about him.

            The halt to air strikes in Iraq is reported to leave Saddam Hussein in
power, U.N. weapons inspectors less likely than ever before to return, and the
U.S. mapping a new strategy of "containment" against Iraq, with military forces
remaining in the region indefinitely. No U.S. or British casualties are known
to have occurred during the four days of attack. Defense secretary William
Cohen is quoted in the New York Times saying Saddam's ballistic missile
program has been set back "by at least a year." In a New York Times
op-ed, Ronald Steel writes, "the political fallout is likely to be more
beneficial to Saddam Hussein than to the United States." In particular, he
argues, economic sanctions against Iraq are less likely to be enforced by
member countries of the U.N. A "Week in Review" article in the Times
describes how the Iraq operation came to be named after Nazi general Erwin
Rommel: Under Pentagon protocol, the military command planning the operation
had to call it Operation Desert [something beginning with "s" or "f"]. A
spokesman for the Joint Chiefs of Staff is quoted saying, implausibly, that
"nobody" recognized the connection between "desert fox" and Rommel. The story
also says Cohen approved the name.

         
      
   
