
   
   
      
         
            State Bars None

            None of the papers share the same lead. USA Today
goes with the imminence of NATO airstrikes against Slobodan Milosevic's forces
in Kosovo, a story everybody else runs inside. The New York Times
goes with the opening on Tuesday of the FBI's national DNA database, which is
also on the USAT front. And the Los Angeles
Times lead is the National Institutes of Health's plans to dramatically
shorten the government approval process for drugs, which could mean much faster
access to new medicines, a story on nobody else's front. The Washington Post lead is the paper's latest poll results
indicating that in the wake of last week's vote to start an impeachment
investigation, public support for the Republican-held Congress and Republican
congressional candidates has dropped considerably, most of all among likely
voters and independents. The poll also indicates that support for Democratic
congressional candidates is up. The poll also finds that Clinton, now with a 67
percent approval rating, is currently more popular than before last week's
vote. The WP says the numbers offer hope to Democrats of avoiding
Clinton's impeachment in favor of some lesser punishment.

            
               USAT reports that NATO officials are scheduled to meet today in
Brussels to approve an order that gives allied military commanders the
authority to order airstrikes against Serbian forces. This means apparently,
that air strikes could come as early as today. Meanwhile, says the paper, in a
last-ditch attempt to avert bombing, U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke is still
holding talks with Milosevic. The U.N. demands Holbrooke is pressing, says
USAT , include the withdrawal of Milosevic's forces and allowing
humanitarian aid into Kosovo. One issue making the talks sticky, says the
Wall Street Journal , is how to keep the Albanian
separatists from taking advantage of any NATO show of force.

            The despair of the Albanian civilians Milosevic's troops have targeted is
everywhere in USAT 's on-the-ground front section "cover story." A woman
refugee gives reporter Jack Kelley a lock of hair she says she took from the
head of her 18-month-old godchild, slain in a massacre by Serbs last week.
"Please give it to Mr. Clinton," she tells him. "Maybe he'll decide to save the
Albanian people." In light of the incubator mythology of the Gulf War, one
hopes that USAT checked this story out before repeating it, but if so,
heaven help us.

            The FBI DNA database, the Times explains, is actually a
computerized organization of the fifty databases set up by the states. The new
system holds the promise of reducing rape and other crimes by catching
criminals earlier. The NYT does an excellent job of canvassing the
issues raised by the database, which include: What types of offenders should be
required to give samples? Should mass screening be allowed? The story points
out that the established and quite successful DNA system in Britain has opted
for a wide range of criminal samples as well as mass screening. It is
undeniably curious though, that when the paper turns to explaining how DNA can
be used forensically, the discussion is completely generic and never mentions
the most famous unchallenged DNA identification ever: that of President Clinton
via the Monica dress stain.

            The LAT front details a concrete consequence of California Gov. Pete
Wilson's decision last year to block funding for the state bar association: no
one is disciplining the state's negligent or dishonest lawyers. The California
state bar, now has, says the paper, a backlog of 6,556 unresolved complaints
against attorneys. Before the funding shut-down, the bar's L.A. office had 40
prosecutors. Now it has four.

            Readers howled in protest when this column stated last week that Ken Starr
would have been a violator of a bill working its way through Congress that
criminalizes making obscenities available on the Internet. The readers are
absolutely right: It's Congress that is the distributor of the obscenities of
the criminal referral. Starr is the publisher.

            The papers have consistently savaged President Clinton's Lewinsky stance of
apologizing without admitting. But isn't that what's going on in the following
"Editor's Note" from Sunday's WP ? "The Sunday, Sept. 20, 'Rugrats' comic
strip's depiction of Jewish worshipers and use of the Kaddish were
inappropriate and should not have appeared in The Washington Post. We have
expressed our strong disapproval to Nickelodeon, which produces the comic, and
Creators Syndicate, which distributes it. Our comics screening process failed
in this instance, and we apologize to our readers who were offended." Note the
Clintonesque use of "inappropriate" without ever saying what was wrong with the
strip. And what, pray tell, does the paper's "comics screening process" screen
*for*?

         
      
   
