
   
   
      
         
            I Dub Thee Surplus

            The first federal budget surplus in twenty-nine years leads at the New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times . The Washington Post goes with NATO preparations for airstrikes
against Slobodan Milosevic's forces in Yugoslavia. USA Today
leads with the financial markets' reaction to the Fed rate cut.

            Both Times leads record yesterday's Bill Clinton-led White House
ceremony commemorating the estimated $70 billion in the federal plus column.
But it's the WP 's inside story that rolls out a professor from some
place called Carleton College to best summarize the moment: "He came in hoping
to be Franklin Roosevelt, and ended up being Dwight Eisenhower."

            Both Times and the WP stress the partisan carping the surplus
has inspired: the Democrats want credit for passing a 1993 tax increase without
a single Republican vote, and the Republicans want credit for pressuring
Clinton in 1995 to commit to a balanced budget. The WP says that few
things irk Clinton more than not being given credit for ending permanent
deficits.

            The LAT helpfully includes some non-partisan explanations for the
surplus: the peaceful dissolution of the Soviet Union, which kept defense
spending from going higher, the moderation of health care costs, and the extra
tax revenue wrought by the stock market boom.

            The NYT stresses that for all the credit-claiming, the current budget
process is still, to put it Times ly, "untidy"--with only nine days left
before the congressional recess, the paper notes, only 2 of the 13 spending
bills required for government operations have been completed. Also, the papers
explain, the parties now disagree about what to do with the surplus--Clinton
wants to reserve it for dealing with the coming Social Security crunch,
although he wants to use some of it for keeping U.S. troops in Bosnia and to
solve the Y2K problem, while the Republicans are against that spending, but
want to allocate at least some of the surplus to tax relief.

            According to the WP lead and front-page stories at the NYT ,
USAT and the LAT , all indications are that the discovery earlier
this week of the bodies of dozens of massacred ethnic Albanians has galvanized
the U.S. and NATO into planning imminent military action--probably airstrikes--against
Yugoslavia. Nobody has pictures in the paper today to match the one of a
massacre victim that ran (in color) in the NYT yesterday.

            The USAT lead puts the dubiousness of one-day economic analysis and
the folly of giving much newspaper space to it on full display. The story's
headline and first paragraphs emphasize yesterday's 238 point drop in the Dow
and the dip of 30-year Treasury bonds below 5 percent for the first time ever,
and say that "analysts" see these developments as a flight from international
stock markets (probably the wrong word--these days, all stock markets are
international--what's meant is "overseas"). But this leaves unexplained why
this flight didn't roost in the U.S. stock market as well as in the U.S. bond
market. Also, the concerned tone of the story takes too narrow a point of
view--basically that of a stockholder or bond buyer--whereas there is good news
here too. After all, bad news for lenders is good news for borrowers--housing
mortgage rates are wonderful right now and off the Treasury yield dip can only
get wonderfuller. (The NYT front-page market piece has many of the same
tics, but at least mentions the plus for home buyers. By the way, the Wall Street Journal reports that the recent dip in new-home
sales is probably mostly due to a non-financial factor: Hurricane Bonnie.)

            A front-page LAT story reports that Hillary Clinton told "associates"
(one of whom was, according to the paper, almost surely Sidney Blumenthal) that
her husband assured her last January that he was not having an affair with
Monica Lewinsky, but was merely "ministering to a troubled young person."
Depends what you mean by "ministering."

            Another sign that the press may be ending its post-Gulf War free pass for
the U.S. military comes with today's NYT lead editorial, "The
Insatiable Pentagon," which calls the current arguments in Washington about
whether the DOD's $271 billion budget is enough "surreal." But in case you
think such criticism means the defense business is headed for a correction,
check out James Glassman's stock tip column today in the WP , in which he
states, "It's almost certain that Congress will use a good chunk of the budget
surplus for defense." Glassman goes on to note that some leading professional
investors consider such stocks as Northrop Grumman, Raytheon, and Lockheed
Martin to be excellent buys.

            The WP 's TV column notes that earlier this week, the Los Angeles City
Council passed a motion condemning the new sitcom "The Secret Diary of Desmond
Pfeiffer," a show about a black butler and personal advisor to President
Lincoln that includes cavalier references to slavery. The show has also,
reports the Post , been protested by the NAACP's Beverly Hills/Hollywood
chapter. Wonder what the LACC and NAACP position was on "Hogan's Heroes."

         
      
   
