
   
   
      
         
            Cave Mandela

            After a week of much news uniformity, lead diversity makes a typical Sunday
appearance. The Los Angeles Times lead furthers the emerging picture of
connections between Kenneth Starr's office and the Paula Jones defense team
with details on Linda Tripp's interactions with the two camps in the early days
of the Lewinsky scandal. The Washington Post goes with the effects of Thursday's
impeachment-related vote on the midterm election campaigns. The New York
Times lead apparently goes as far as it can get from the presidential
scandal--with word that the major oil companies are probably not going to build
a pipeline for Caspian Sea oil along a route that was pushed hard by the
Clinton administration. (Pushed because it would pass only through the
relatively friendly countries of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Turkey--binding them
further to the West--instead of passing through Russia or Iran.) The paper says
the oil companies have probably decided the U.S.-backed route is too expensive
to build now. Actually, according to the Times the decision does have a scandal
angle: the paper quotes one senator saying that Clinton lost the power of moral
persuasion with the oil companies because of the scandals surrounding him.

            The LAT lead reveals that contrary to standard practice, Kenneth Starr's
prosecutors did not instruct their chief witness Linda Tripp not to talk to the
Jones attorneys. Since it is now known that Tripp gave the Jones lawyers much
of the information about Lewinsky they used to elicit Clinton's problematic
statements during his deposition, the LAT wonders: "Did Starr help to pave the
way for Clinton to commit the alleged perjury that his prosecutors then
proceeded to investigate?" The paper quotes the Starr office's response: "We
had no reason to know and did not know [Tripp] was talking to the Jones
lawyers."

            The WP front also features a story about the Tripp-Starr-Jones nexus, but
where the LAT focuses on how Tripp helped Jones, the Post says she abandoned
Jones to help Starr. Incidentally, unlike the LAT lead, the Post piece does not
mention the earlier reporting by the NYT and Newsday.

            The Post lead claims that candidates across the country feel stuck dealing
with the Clinton scandal often at the expense of local issues. But the paper
also says strategists in both parties say any Republican advantage stemming
from the scandal has been eroding recently. The NYT front-pager election piece
sees a general trend toward voter uncertainty about who to blame for the
scandal, which could altogether neutralize it as a voting factor.

            The death at age 91 of Washington insider Clark Clifford, multi-presidential
advisor and late in his life a figure in an international bank scandal, garners
front-page notice at the NYT and WP and a picture-with-reefer at the LAT. In
contrast to the generally glowing obits is the piece on the NYT op-ed page by
historical biographer Kai Bird, who argues against the Wise Man Theory
Washington still clings to. Citing the Wise Men's too-long silence on the
realities of Vietnam they knew all too well, Bird argues that the likes of
Clifford have always valued loyalty over truth, and hence their wisdom has
rarely done the country much good. All this on a page long congenial to Wise
Men, even to the point in recent weeks of running scandal advice from such
card-carriers as Gerald Ford and Elliott Richardson.

            The NYT Week in Review has two real nuggets. There's the item revealing that
two black Clinton Cabinet secretaries, the late Ron Brown and (the probably
wishing he was late) Mike Espy, were required to submit urine samples for drug
tests, while two white Cabinet officers revealed they were not. (The paper adds
that White House staffers are tested, but the president is not.)

            Then there's the Times' new Johannesburg bureau chief Suzanne Daley
reporting from the field that while perhaps racism is on the wane in South
Africa, sexism is not. She regales the reader with story after story in which
South African men of all stripes treat her badly and/or assume that her husband
is the sole being in her marriage with decision-making ability and authority.
There are no joint checking accounts, and women seem to understand that makeup
and cleavage are civic duties. And there's Daley's story about what Nelson
Mandela said about her in her presence to her boss, Joseph Lelyveld, the
executive editor of the NYT: "In my day, if you had a wife who looked like
that, you would be embarrassed. In my day, a woman needed a little more meat on
her bones."

         
      
   
