
   
   
      
         
            NetanYahoo!

            The Middle East peace deal, signed yesterday after nine days of intense
negotiations, sprawls across all front pages--the Washington Post , the New York Times , and the Los Angeles
Times . The papers' tone is cautiously optimistic: They concur that the
agreement--in which Israel cedes more West Bank land to the Palestinians and
gets promises of increased security--essentially retraces the 1993 and 1995
Oslo accords. Nonetheless it lays groundwork, both personal and substantive,
for further talks.

            The deal was almost derailed at sunrise yesterday, when Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu threatened not to sign the accord unless the U.S.
released Jonathon Pollard, a well-known spy for Israel. After several more
hours of haggling, Netanyahu finally agreed to sign the accord, while President
Clinton's reported refusal to free Pollard receded to a public announcement
that he would "review this matter seriously." (Meanwhile, Israeli TV and radio
stations had already trumpeted Pollard's impending freedom. This infuriated
U.S. officials who, according to the WP , described Netanyahu in
"unprintable terms.")

            Under the agreement, Israelis will cede an additional 13 percent of West
Bank land to the Palestinians and will release 750 Palestinian prisoners. The
Palestinians, meanwhile, will take concrete measures to combat terrorism: They
will expunge anti-Israel clauses from their charter, jail 30 Palestinians
wanted in Israel for terrorism, and crack down on illegal weaponry. In an
unusual twist (which has rattled some U.S. observers), the CIA will monitor the
implementation of these provisions.

            The agreement sidesteps the most prickly points of contention, including the
status of Jerusalem, border issues, and the fate of Palestinian refugees.
Nonetheless, it represents a bold political shift for Netanyahu in particular,
whose campaign platform opposed the Oslo accords.

            The "people" dimension of the agreement almost overshadows its substance.
The WP turns somersaults because Netanyahu shook Arafat's hand
three-- three !!!--times. The physical tableau is striking: Netanyahu and
Clinton, both "tall and hale" (thanks, NYT ), beside the ailing Arafat in
his inevitable headdress and frail, bald King Hussein of Jordan.

            Clinton as always emerges the tireless warrior. A WP editorial
cynically and perspicaciously says, "It was in the cards that Israelis and
Palestinians would come to a wall, blame each other and call on President
Clinton to save the ... talks." Clinton, for his part, got the public
back-patting he craved just 11 days before the November elections.

            An interesting detail: The WP notes that the signing concluded just
16 minutes before the Sabbath (Washington time)-which sparked some controversy
in Israel, where the Sabbath was already well underway. A prominent Israeli
rabbi voiced fears that the live broadcast would tempt even devout Jews to the
television.

            The LAT fronts the latest bad-novel twist in Monday's shooting of a
Tennessee state senate incumbent: the arrest of his shady campaign opponent,
Byron "Low Tax" Looper. Looper, who is already under investigation for theft,
peculiarly disappeared from public view after the murder, and was nabbed by
police yesterday. His name will remain on the ballot, but he will undoubtedly
be trounced by a write-in candidate: the popular senator's widow, Charlotte
Burks.

            A NYT "Business" article says that champagne makers are psyched for
the Year 2000. Production is rising, and special Year 2000 champagnes (complete
with special silk ribbons and red wax seals) are headed for the market. The
price for some premier double-magnums auctioned off last year for a charity
fundraiser: $2,500 to $4,000.

         
      
   
