
   
   
      
         
            Speaker Livingston, I Presume

            The Republican struggle over who will be the next Speaker of the House leads
at the Washington Post and the New York Times .
The WP says that Bob Livingston has already gained the crucial support
of Majority Whip Tom DeLay and has received verbal support from "100-plus
members." Livingston will need 112 votes to gain an intra-party majority when
the Republican members of the House meet on November 18. The NYT says
that most of the top House majority positions will be up for grabs in the
coming days, pitting GOP personalities and ideological factions against each
other. All the papers mention Oklahoma Rep. Steve Largent as a serious threat
to take over Dick Armey's spot as House majority leader.

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with the increasing likelihood of imminent U.S.
military action against Iraq. Citing a "senior foreign policy advisor to Mr.
Clinton," the LAT says the Administration has lost hope for any Iraqi
concessions and is ready to use force "sooner rather than later." The
NYT off-lead says that the U.S. will abandon U.N. arms inspections as a
means of restraining Iraq in favor of traditional methods like sanctions and
force. The NYT piece quotes a senior Administration official's warning,
" If [Saddam Hussein] tries to use weapons of mass destruction he should know
that we will obliterate Iraq."

            The WP off-lead reveals that the FAA, which recently decided to
overhaul the way insulation on commercial airliners is tested for flammability,
received warnings about its test's unreliability as far back as 1988. The
change in fire--safety regulations-prompted in part by the crash of Swissair
Flight 111--will cost airlines over $1 billion.

            A NYT front page article reports that Sen. John Glenn landed safely
at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida yesterday aboard the space shuttle
Discovery. Glenn, whose age-related experiments required him to provide 10
blood and 16 urine samples in zero gravity, was understandably wobbly upon
de-shuttling.

            Author and Slate correspondent Michael Lewis appraises Tom Wolfe's "A Man in
Full" in a NYT book review. In a quote waiting for a paperback rear
cover, Lewis writes, "The novel contains passages as powerful and as beautiful
as anything written...by any American novelist."

            A front page WP report explores the way health-related charities rely
on media buzz to generate private donations and government funding. As a
result, says the piece, people give more money to fight breast cancer than the
equally common prostate cancer, and it's harder for poor diabetics to get
financial assistance than for AIDS sufferers.

            A NYT Magazine piece describes and denounces solitary confinement, a
punishment now inflicted on 8 percent to 10 percent of prison inmates. Out of
their cells for just one hour a day, the inmates grow slowly insane and even
more violent and unstable than when they entered prison. Many psychologists
believe the treatment is inhumane. Wardens disagree.

            A local story from yesterday's NYT makes today's WP via the
Associated Press. Apparently, the state Supreme Court has ruled that a club
can't be called adult if they let in kids. And if a club can't be labeled
adult, Mayor Giuliani can't close it down. These developments trace back to one
Manhattan strip bar's attempt to avoid Rudy's wrath by admitting minors
accompanied by adults. A lawyer for the club adds: "You could take your
15-year-old son to see the movie 'Striptease.' Why can't you take him to see a
striptease?"

         
      
   
