
   
   
      
         
            A Dollar Bill and Change for 2000

            All the papers lead with the drop in unemployment from 4.6 to 4.4 percent.
The New York Times
and the Washington Post say that November's strong employment
levels occurred despite recent corporate announcements of upcoming job
cutbacks. Huh? Today's Papers wonders why these papers think layoffs that will
happen in the next few months would have any effect on last month's employment
statistics. The Los Angeles Times points out that the Labor Department
statistics show a troublesome gap between manufacturers, whose production is
down due to overseas financial trouble, and service industries, which continue
to produce lots of jobs, but at lower wages.

            President Clinton's lawyers have requested that the House Judiciary
Committee allow them to present an expanded defense over a 3 to 4 day period
instead of the currently allotted 1 day. The NYT notes that if the
Committee allows it, this move might push the House's vote on impeachment into
next year. The WP explains that this would mean more Democratic votes
and also adds that Clinton is considering accepting a fine and censure from
Congress. Congressional negotiations are stalled over a dollar amount, however,
as Dems are proposing $300,000 and Republicans upwards of $4.5 million. All the
papers report that the expanded defense would focus on the independent
counsel's misconduct and on the definition of an impeachable offense.

            The NYT reports that a man imprisoned in Sacramento, California wants
to donate a kidney to his 15-year-old daughter--again. The father, serving time
for burglary, has already given one kidney to his daughter and his selflessness
is now causing a dilemma for local surgeons and medical ethicists. The case has
been referred to a university bioethics committee that must weigh factors such
as the Hippocratic Oath ("First, do no harm") and the estimated $40,000 a year
cost of dialysis that the prison system would have to pay. The father and
daughter had not met before the first kidney transplant, but have stayed in
close contact since.

            Bill Bradley announced the formation of a presidential exploratory
committee, meaning he'll try for the Democratic nomination in 2000. The
WP runs the story on its front, but the NYT --despite Bradley's
close ties to New Jersey and the Knicks--runs it inside with a front-page
reefer. The papers agree that, while still a long shot, Bradley poses the most
serious threat to Al Gore's nomination.

            A fascinating WP piece reports that many members of the Israeli
press, military, and government have publicly condemed the soldier who was
beaten and stoned by a Palestinian mob last Wednesday. Critics say that his
failure to defend himself by firing his weapon has humiliated Israel. One daily
newspaper's commentator asks, "...have we turned into a wimp state?" The
soldier, a 19-year-old draftee, suffered nine head lacerations, blurred vision
and hearing loss. One Israeli general says, "He should have opened fire....In a
situation like that, you shoot to kill." Such criticism has outraged many
Israelis as well, including President Ezer Weizman who notes, "People who
haven't experienced anything of this kind don't have a right to speak."

         
      
   
