
   
   
      
         
            Not So Clean Livingston

            The nation's split-screen crisis leads all around--with banner headlines
referring to both impeachment and Iraq the order of the day. The papers note
that the House impeachment debate begins this morning and presumably a third
day of military actions will soon follow. So at some point then, there will be
at one and the same time charges raining down on Bill Clinton's head and bombs
raining down on Saddam Hussein's.

            The papers report that in the first two days of the Iraq operation, there
were no U.S. casualties, and that in Baghdad, officials are claiming that at
least 25 Iraqis have died. The coverage also quotes Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs Gen. Henry Shelton's comment that targets successfully hit included
Saddam's Baghdad military headquarters and barracks there housing his security
forces. He is also quoted saying that other strikes were "not as successful."
None of the papers note the Pentagon briefing technique on display here: While
Shelton illustrated the successful hits with before and after photos, the
misses were not illustrated. It's reported that one of the Baghdad sites struck
by cruise missiles was the home of the youngest of Saddam Hussein's three
daughters. The Washington Post quotes an Iraqi official asking if her
house was one of the key structures for the rule of Iraq. Nobody explains
whether or not the building seems to have been hit intentionally.

            
               USA
Today , the New York Times
and the WP all run President Clinton's forceful response to the
suggestion made previously by senior Republicans that he ordered the airstrikes
to distract from the drive to impeachment: "I don't think any serious person
would believe that any president would do such a thing." The papers also note a
general climb-down among the Republican bigfeet from such suggestions, and
indeed, everybody carries Newt Gingrich's remarks on the House floor that "no
matter what our debates at home, we are as a nation prepared to lead the
world."

            The NYT front features a story stating that while American and
British forces have targeted military, intelligence, and communications
facilities, they have avoided hitting known Iraqi chemical and biological
weapons sites in order to avoid unleashing plumes of poisons into the air that
could kill Iraqi civilians. The paper notes the oddity of this given that one
of the stated aims of the strikes is non-proliferation. A piece on the Los Angeles
Times front offers something of an answer: The Clinton military
strategy is "containment-plus," the plan to use force whenever needed--not just
this one time--combined with financial incentives to motivate some indigenous
Iraqi force to rise out of the chaos thus created to topple Saddam.

            The papers note some international criticism. The WP says that
Russia's lower house of Parliament passed with only one dissenting vote a
resolution saying the U.S. strikes were terrorism. The NYT reports that
at the U.N., Iraq, China and Russia all called for an immediate stop to the
raids (using its time-zone-assisted later deadlines, the LAT reported
this yesterday). The WP says there were protests in Cairo, Beirut and
Jordan.

            Meanwhile, the papers report, Congress yesterday was the site of bitter
debate over whether or not the impeachment debate and vote should proceed while
our forces are fighting overseas. Everybody notes that Bob Livingston, in his
first floor speech since being chosen to be the next Speaker, claimed as
precedent the Nixon impeachment hearings, which he claimed went on when
"troops, American troops were deployed in the field in Vietnam...." No member
of Congress nor any paper but the NYT caught Livingston's mistake. But
the Times , befitting its reputation for solid historical reporting,
notes that in fact, the last American combat troops left Vietnam seven months
before the House Judiciary Committee got the Nixon case.

            Livingston's other big whoops of the day got a lot more attention. Because
of the imminent release of a Roll Call piece based on a story
Hustler is apparently working on indicating that Livingston has had
numerous affairs during his 33-year marriage, Livingston preemptively fessed
up. He suggested that his situation was different from Bill Clinton's because
his affairs were "not with employees on my staff, and I have never been asked
to testify under oath about them." Well, Congressman, just to reassure the
nation, you wouldn't mind doing that now, would you?

         
      
   
