
   
   
      
         
            Henry Errin'

            The congressional election aftermath produces the day's two lead stories.
USA
Today , the Washington Post , and the Los Angeles
Times go with Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry Hyde's submission to
President Clinton of a list of 81 questions about his conduct in matters
Lewinsky. The move, which once upon a time would have been seen as dynamite, is
now widely viewed as a pop-gun in the hands of chastened Republicans looking
for an impeachment exit strategy that won't shoot them in the other foot. And
according to the New York Times
lead, the electoral shove has come to putsch, as various Republican House
members maneuver to topple Newt Gingrich. (An inside Washington story the
WP honors inside.)

            The papers report that the questions Hyde sent to the White House focus more
on President Clinton's conduct after attention was directed towards his
possible relationship with Monica Lewinsky than on the relationship itself. The
LAT reports that Hyde's cover letter asks Clinton to respond in writing
and under oath by signing an attached affidavit. The questions range from
asking whether Clinton took an oath to defend the Constitution, to whether he
ever gave Lewinsky cigars. All the papers either quote or describe some of the
questions, but the NYT , fulfilling its tradition of supplying primary
sources whenever possible, runs the entire list of them in a separate article. Even though
everybody's story makes it clear that Hyde was asking Clinton to admit
or deny the details in the list, unlike the other papers, the
WP 's headline, "House Panel Asks Clinton to Admit Lying Under Oath,"
makes it seem that Clinton was left without a choice.

            Hyde yesterday also announced his revised plans for substantially downsized
impeachment hearings. His main witness will be Kenneth Starr, who will be
called November 19th. The LAT says the two developments taken together
"raise the likelihood that Starr's case against Clinton could be disposed of
soon." The papers somehow keep straight faces while they pass along two of
Hyde's whoppers about all this: 1) The new shape of the hearings has nothing to
do with the election results, and 2) He's calling Starr because "He's someone
everybody wants to hear from."

            The NYT reports that Louisiana congressman Robert Livingston has in recent days been conducting a
telephone campaign that could lead to him running against Gingrich for House
Speaker. In addition, the Times quotes one congressman saying there are
six Republican members besides himself who have flatly decided not to vote for
Gingrich--no small matter given the GOP's reduced edge of 12 seats. The House
Republicans, the paper explains, will cast secret ballots for Speaker on
November 18th, with the full House voting on the matter in January.

            The majors all front the news that scientists at the University of Wisconsin
and Johns Hopkins are about to publish reports of separate successful experiments in which cells culled from the very
early stages of a human embryo have, in a test tube, been grown into
undifferentiated cells that could be used to grow various kinds of human
tissue. The breakthrough is thought to pave the way for implanting cells
developed to have certain healthy properties into a patient as a way of
treating disease or defects. The WP and the NYT bring to the fore
ethical questions the new science is sure to raise: issues of genetic
engineering and harvesting embryos.

            Everybody reports that the Bureau of Labor Statistics accidentally
prematurely posted on its web site its information about the number of jobs
created last month. A surfing analyst shared the inside scoop with his clients,
thereby roiling the financial markets for a few hours. The Wall Street Journal sees a trend, reminding readers that
just last Monday, the ABC News web site accidentally disseminated false test
election results. But the paper also takes note of a model of Internet
security: the dissemination of the Starr report.

            The USAT front section "cover story" examines a classic example of
unintended consequences. The profusion of designer and customized license
plates may delight car owners, but it's frustrating police, who say the
4,800-some special plates make identifying cars much harder than it used to be.
The paper mentions a case in which a robbery victim remembered the getaway car
sported a tag with mountains on it, which would have ordinarily have been a
great tip--except that 14 states now have plates like that. And don't forget,
the paper points out, about Kansas, where the counties, not the state, issue
the license plates, meaning that any given sequence of letters and numbers
could be shared by 105 vehicles.

            The WP 's Al Kamen reports that once again "civilian" political
junkies who sent him their election predictions did a far better job than all
those "experts" on TV. Nearly 20 percent of Kamen's 150 correspondents
predicted Democratic gains in the House. Five of them were only off by one seat
in their total House and Senate calls. The occupations of the best guessers
included: Treasury Dept. program manager, intelligence analyst,
ex-congressional aide, U.S. Marshal's office staffer, and--thank
God--journalist.

         
      
   
