
   
   
      
         
            Tomahawks and Doves

            Everybody leads with the U.S. air strike against Iraq. Banner headlines
abound, with USA Today 's--"U.S. Bombs Iraq"--the biggest and boldest.
The New York Times
headline is the newsiest: "Impeachment Vote in House Delayed As Clinton
Launches Iraq Air Strike, Citing Military Need to Move Swiftly." The Los Angeles
Times 's is close behind, and is the only one that gets British
involvement into the big type. President Clinton, in a televised speech shortly
after the strikes were announced, appealed to a UN report released earlier in
the week that documented Iraq's systematic obstruction of the UN's weapons
inspection efforts in violation of promises it made last month, a report that
was the NYT 's off-lead yesterday, and was below the fold at USAT ,
but was inside elsewhere. The NYT notes that the strikes mark "a clear
policy departure" for the Clinton administration, in that the president had
previously indicated that keeping the inspection effort viable was a reason not
to engage in a major military action.

            The papers report that sea-launched Tomahawk cruise missiles and Navy
bombers were the weapons used. The NYT says 200 cruise missiles were
launched in what it termed the largest military action against Iraq since the
Gulf War. USAT says some of the strikes targeted Iraqi Republican Guard
bases in southern Iraq and that two people had died in Baghdad and 30 were
wounded as a result of hits there. The NYT also mentions the Republican
Guard and says that ambulances had been seen near one of Saddam Hussein's
Baghdad palaces. The Times forecasts that the next wave of attacks will
include B-52-launched cruise missiles and F-117 stealth attack aircraft.

            The Wall Street Journal has some particularly good detail on why the current action may be more
effective than the Desert Storm air war: it will involve a much higher
percentage of precision weapons, the cruise missiles now have satellite
guidance, there isn't the distraction of also trying to attack an army deployed
throughout the region, and the targeting is now being done off seven years of
intelligence. The Washington Post reports that according to intelligence
sources, the first wave of the strike caught Iraqi forces off-guard, before
they could get very far into their usual defensive practice of dispersing their
equipment. The Post goes on to say that the November plan that the
current operation was apparently spun out of projected 10,000 Iraqi dead, most of them combatants.
Although the stated goal is anti-proliferation of mass-destruction weapons and
enhancing regional stability, both the WP and WSJ report an
additional one: giving Iraqis a motive and an opportunity to overthrow
Saddam.

            Much is made of Trent Lott's non-support of the airstrikes. USAT
calls his stance "almost unprecedented." The WSJ terms it a "surprising
break with the tradition of congressional support for military actions once
they begin." The LAT and USAT note that Speaker-to-be Bob
Livingston said he would leave it to the American people to evaluate the
timing. (A classic example of criticizing by not criticizing.) The NYT
adds that Rep. Gerald Solomon was "furious in accusing the president of using
the Iraqi air strikes as a political foil to impeachment," and that former Bush
Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger said the operation's timing "smells to
high heaven." In their lead stories, the LAT and WP play Lott's
demurral much lower than everybody else. But once the WP broaches the
topic, it adds this quote from Dick Armey: "the suspicion some people have
about the president's motives in this attack is itself a powerful argument for
impeachment. After months of lies, the president has given millions of people
around the world reason to doubt that he has sent Americans into battle for the
right reasons."

            The NYT and WP state that planning for the mission started in
November during the last round of Iraqi intransigence. All the majors save the
WSJ omit mention of "Wag the Dog" in their airstrike news stories. This
is as it should be. If important politicians question the timing, their
questioning should be reported, and if there is evidence of suspiciousness in
the timing that evidence should be reported as well. But absent such findings,
it's irresponsible to talk about "Wag the Dog" in a news story. All kinds of
things have been portrayed in movies, but unless their connection to real
events is shown, they're not news. But at least the Journal also raises
a legitimate question relating the domestic and international situations:
"Could the U.S. handle war and impeachment at the same time?"

            At the very least it looks like the Pentagon operation-naming troops are
over-stressed. Leave it to William Safire's column to notice that the U.S. name
for the operation, "Desert Fox," was the nickname for a "Nazi-era German
general." (Meaning Erwin Rommel.)

            Everybody dutifully reports that one factor in the timing of the operation's
onset was the U.S. desire to avoid beginning an operation during the Muslim
holiday of Ramadan, which starts this weekend. The WSJ quotes an expert
on Islamic movements saying that Muslims don't restrain themselves this way. So
why should we? There's a further incoherence here that the papers don't get
into. Why is it a sign of respect for your religion to kill you before instead
of during your holiday?

         
      
   
