
   
   
      
         
            Ruff Treatment

            Everybody leads with the release last night by the House Judiciary
Republican majority of four proposed articles of impeachment, to be voted on by
the committee come Friday or Saturday. The articles charge President Clinton
with four offenses: 1) Perjury before a grand jury; 2) Perjury in a civil case
deposition; 3) Obstruction of justice; and 4) Abuse of power.

            The NYT and WP quote White House spokesman Joe Lockhart's reaction that
there's "nothing in the allegations...that brings anything here up to the
standard of an impeachable offense." The LAT quotes Jim Kennedy of the White
House counsel's office saying almost the exact same thing, although Kennedy
added the quintessential spontaneity-hating Washington complaint: the no-notice
release was unfair. The coverage adds that Judiciary Democrats responded by
tendering a censure proposal, calling for a condemnation of Clinton that he
would acknowledge by signing. And the papers report that Henry Hyde will allow
it to be brought to a committee vote. The NYT and Post note that
yesterday, for the first time, the White House aggressively embraced censure.
Both papers explain that the Democratic anti-impeachment strategy is to push
for a full House censure vote, in the hope that this will siphon some key
moderate Republican votes away from any impeachment bill.

            
               USAT and the WP report that today, Judiciary's Republican
counsel will probably present the videotape of Clinton's Jones case deposition.
The Post explains why: because Clinton has claimed that he wasn't
listening when his lawyer Robert S. Bennett denied that Clinton had engaged in
any kind of sexual activity with Monica Lewinsky, and the Republicans believe
the video clearly shows Clinton paying close attention.

            Before the advent of the impeachment articles, the committee was busy
hearing the second day of Clinton defenders. White House counsel Charles Ruff
did the heavy lifting. USAT and the LAT note that for the first
time, via his testimony, the White House promised that Bill Clinton would not
pardon himself or accept a pardon from his predecessor. The LAT and
WP give the most space to Ruff's tortured attempts to show that
Clinton's sworn denials of sexual relations with Lewinsky were not perjury. The
LAT reports that at one point Ruff argued that while Clinton misled
about this, he did not commit perjury because he did not intend not to tell the
truth. But if he misled, then didn't he intend to have his auditors end up
believing a falsehood? And isn't that just as injurious to the legal system as
perjury? If arranging to have someone killed is as bad as killing them, why
isn't arranging to have someone believe what's false as bad as lying to
them?

            In the same week that USAT revealed that management guru Stephen
Covey's own company is floundering, now comes the WSJ with a front-page feature
detailing how Wyncom, Inc., a firm that brokers the personal appearances of the
likes of Covey and Tom Peters, is in financial trouble. Recent Wyncom flops:
Spending weeks and losing half a million dollars getting just 5,250 people into
Denver's big basketball arena to hear Tom Peters, and losing $700,000 when only
2,700 folks showed up at the Georgia Dome to hear Covey and Colin Powell.

            
               USAT 's front reports on a bit of unintended technology first revealed
in the British publication The New Scientist : The Palm III pocket
organizer can intercept the signal used to open an infra-red car lock, the type
found on Mercedes and Chryslers. The stolen code, explains the paper, could
only be used once and can only open the car, not start it.

            It's thrilling to have so many smart readers. In response to yesterday's
concern in this space that the Supreme Court decision banning probable
causeless car searches after routine traffic stops would prevent arrests like
the one that snared Timothy McVeigh, Today's Papers received many
well-researched and well-reasoned letters. The point expressed by most of them
was that McVeigh was in fact arrested for gun possession after a search based
on probable cause--namely the cop thought he saw a gun bulge on him. Fair
enough, but the whole matter gets one to thinking: if probable cause is so
essential to a legal search, then how come those X-ray machines and metal
detectors you have to go through at the airport are legal? They're not just
applied to suspicious passengers. Why should travel by plane subject you to
searches travel by car does not?

         
      
   
