
   
   
      
         
            81 Questions. How Many Answers?

            President Clinton's 24-page written affirmation to the House Judiciary
Committee that he did not lie--though he misled friends and family and is sorry
as usual--leads at all papers. In responding to 81 questions posed by the
Judiciary Committee, Clinton interspersed numerous "I don't remembers" with
short statements which did not always directly answer the question.

            The New York Times writes that Clinton's responses "shed little
new light on issues surrounding the impeachment inquiry," and the Washington Post and the Los Angeles
Times concur. However, despite Clinton's terse and limited responses,
he did provide some fresh tidbits for the Committee to mull: The NYT
says that Clinton's responses marked the first time he had acknowledged
discussing methods for handling the Lewinsky matter with Dick Morris, his
political advisor, shortly after the story broke in January. Clinton also noted
for the first time, says the Times , that his lawyers and reelection
campaign had hired two private investigators, Terry Lenzner and Jack
Palladino--though Clinton insists that their investigation was not the "White
House Secret Police Operation" to scrutinize Clinton's opponents that Morris
has alleged. As an accompaniment to Clinton's statement, David Kendall
submitted a letter emphasizing that "the president did NOT commit or suborn
perjury, tamper with witnesses, obstruct justice or abuse power" and that
Clinton's response was "in good faith."

            The NYT and WP front Friday's confirmation by Exxon and Mobil
of their merger discussions (the LAT gives it the Business front). If
Exxon took over Mobil--the most likely scenario, experts say--the resultant
company could be worth $160 billion, says the WP . Though both Exxon and
Mobil stocks leaped at the news, the WP uses paragraph two to cite
cautious experts who worry that various factors--among them the "intense,
independent personalities of the two firms' chief executives"--could yet derail
the deal. The boards at each company will meet Tuesday to consider the
agreement, which would then be subject to anti-trust scrutiny by the Federal
Trade Commission. The merged company would be particularly vulnerable to
anti-trust charges in its retailing and marketing operations, says the
NYT , as opposed to the more competitive exploration and drilling
arenas.

            All papers run the predictable "It's the day after Thanksgiving and what are
shoppers doing?" stories. The WP spotlights the "early-bird" shopping
trend; the NYT likewise hones in on the bargain hunters, opining that
"the 1990s have transformed the holiday shopping experience into one giant
national hunt for deals." The LAT optimistically reports from Southland
that revved-up shoppers clogging the stores "reinforced a growing belief that
retailers will have a prosperous holiday season this year."

            An interesting New York Times "Living Arts" article ponders the
peacemaking--and warmaking--role of non-governmental
organizations. The Times attributes the increasing involvement of
NGOs to "the growing complexity of the international agenda," advanced
technology and communications, and declining government involvement in the
post-Cold War era. But how effective are the NGOs? is a question of continuing
debate--all the more pressing because NGOs lack the democratic accountability
that governments must face.

            The NYT fronts a story on Canterbury's modern-day Pardoner--whoops,
make that Pope John Paul II. To usher in the Year 2000, the Pope has declared
that anyone who quits smoking or drinking (or eating) for one day
can get an "indulgence"--a ticket bypassing purgatorial repentance and
smoothing the way to heaven. Upon reading this, TP hastily cast away the bottle
and entered a state of deep and transient sobriety. Alas, that may not be
enough--the Papal inner circle insists that it's the spirit of participation
that counts.

         
      
   
