
   
   
      
         
            Will Bill Pass the House?

            Everybody leads with the formal defense of President Clinton before the
House Judiciary committee, to be delivered not by him but for him by fourteen
academics and lawyers.

            
               USA
Today quotes Clinton spokesman Joe Lockhart saying, "It's time to make
our case. We plan to do it in a serious way." (Last minute cut of Gallagher
from witness list?) In response to the articles of impeachment the HJC is
likely to propose, the presentation will include, USAT says, arguments
that Clinton did not perjure himself, obstruct justice or abuse his power. The
other papers say the White House defense will stress the incommensurability of
Clinton's admitted actions and the threshold of impeachability, to be
exemplified, say the Los Angeles Times and Washington Post by Watergate.

            The papers say that the committee is almost certain to approve at least one
article of impeachment. Therefore, they say, the real audience for all of this
is most of all the upwards of twenty undecided House members. The WP
says David Kendall was left out of the witness package because this is now a
constitutional fight more properly fought by White House (not personal)
lawyers. The Wall Street Journal gives a more convincing reason: Kendall
grates on Republican nerves. USAT has fresh polling saying that two out
of three Americans oppose impeachment, with most favoring censure. And that's
the position taken by the LAT 's lead editorial. But, reports the
New York Times ,
Henry Hyde hasn't decided yet whether he will allow a committee vote on
censure.

            The WP says the Clinton witness list will include a law professor who
will argue that articles of impeachment approved by this lame duck Congress
would not be binding on the next Congress, to be installed in January. The
NYT op-ed page features a column
by that prof giving his argument. The LAT and NYT say that
many in Congress feel this sort of expert and theoretical testimony will be
less effective than some sort of further personal expression of regret by
Clinton. The WP says a further gesture by Clinton is still a
possibility. The Times says some Democrats have told the White House
Clinton needs to show he's more concerned about impeachment than about
protecting himself from post-presidential prosecution. (Question: Why does
Clinton need to worry about personal legal consequences--can't he just pardon
himself right before he leaves office?)

            The NYT off-lead scares with word that Iran, which wants a germ
warfare capability to match Iraq's, has had some success recruiting former Soviet scientists who specialize in this
area, by offering monthly salaries of $5,000--more than these Russians can earn
in a year. The U.S. is trying to defeat this trend, explains the Times ,
by spending money to keep Russian bio-warfare experts gainfully employed in
less volatile lines of work in their native country.

            The papers' fronts all report that yesterday, Janet Reno decided that there
is no need to appoint an independent counsel to look into Bill Clinton's 1996
fund-raising. The NYT , follows its long-time harsh stance on the matter
by calling Reno's move "obstinacy" and the conclusion of "one of the sorriest
episodes in modern Justice Department history." The WP editorial on this
says Reno is right because the campaign finance laws are vague and weak, and
notes that the anger about her decision coming from Congress is ironic since
Congress could most easily remedy this.

            
               USAT , which for over a year has reported on the small number of
minorities and women hired by the Supreme Court to be law clerks, runs as its
off-lead the official answer it finally got yesterday. (The response also runs
inside at the WP .) Chief Justice William Rehnquist, writing on behalf of
the entire Court, recognized the low numbers, but said they wouldn't improve
until the pool of applicant lawyers becomes more diverse.

            The LAT lead runs under the headline, "Defense Says Clinton Acts Pale
Next to Watergate." Isn't this an odd locution for a paper with a style sheet
so famously politically correct that it bans such non-issue locutions as "to
welsh on a bet"? After all, "to pale" means "to be whiter" and if as the
headline would have it, "whiter" means "less bad," then "white" means
"good."

         
      
   
