
   
   
      
         
            Netanyahu's Right-Hand Man?

            The New
York Times leads with the Senate's narrow rejection of a patients'
rights bill. The Washington Post leads with Congress's self-approved
extension of the budget deadline. The Los Angeles
Times goes with the problems associated with the last few days' sudden
leap in mortgage rates.

            The NYT lead, also fronted by the WP , says that the Senate
voted 50-47 to quash a health care bill backed by the Democrats. The bill would
have guaranteed access to emergency care and medical specialists and made it
easier to sue HMOs for improper denial of care. In the lead paragraph, the
NYT states the causes of the bill's demise: "heavy lobbying by the
insurance industry and of the sex scandal that has enveloped President
Clinton." (Explanation: distraction. Clinton has been too bogged down in
scandal to lobby hard for the bill.)

            But the national budget may meet a happier fate. With the unanimous 421-0
passage of a temporary spending bill, the government now has until midnight
Monday to come up with a budget package. (Today's Papers, incidentally,
approves the concept of voting oneself deadline extensions.) But even the new
deadline may not be enough time for Congress to resolve all remaining issues.
Among the sticklers: President Clinton's education initiatives; IMF funding;
the use of statistical sampling in the upcoming census; and even whether giving
contraceptives to minors requires parental notification. Only six of 13
spending bills were completed yesterday, and all unfinished measures will
probably be glopped together into one mammoth spending bill.

            The LAT lead attributes the mortgage rate rise--in some cases
amounting to half a percentage point--to the stuttering global economy. Called
the most dramatic mortage rate development since the October 1987 stock market
crash, the rise is forcing consumers across the country to pay more than they
anticipated, or to make last-minute changes of plan. However, says the
LAT , rates are not expected to rise much further.

            The NYT and the WP both run stories on the Judiciary Committee
witness selection. The WP emphasizes that Kenneth Starr may be among the
first called to testify (Chairman Henry Hyde having relaxed his objections),
but probably President Clinton will not be called. The NYT story plays
up the committee's partisan disagreements over the witness issue. Republicans
want the heavy-hitters in the scandal, while Democrats badly want Starr.

            The LAT reports that Pakistan is barreling toward "full Islamic law."
The country's lower house of Parliament Friday voted to make the Koran the
supreme law of Pakistan. Human rights leaders fear that this could escalate
into further, Taliban-esque repression. The bill must still be passed by the
upper house of Parliament.

            The NYT runs a bottom front story on last month's court victory by a
psychotic killer, Wendell Williamson, against his therapist. The North Carolina
verdict, which netted Williamson $500,000, states that the therapist did not
sufficiently follow up with Williamson after terminating their sessions, and
did not sufficiently explain Williamson's condition to him. These sins of
omission, according to the verdict, factored into Williamson's shooting of two
people shortly after the sessions ended. Psychiatrists around the country are
understandably worried; the psychiatrist in question intends to appeal.

            All papers run stories on the appointment of Israel's new foreign minister.
The tapping of Ariel Sharon, who strongly supports Jewish settlements in the
West Bank, is widely seen as a move by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu to appease his party's far right. Though the Palestinians are upset,
the appointment may conversely smooth peace negotiations: Netanyahu will have
already secured the far right, the logic goes, so he can afford to yield more
in the peace negotiations next week. Sharon has already shown himself to be
rather handy with diplomacy: He has vowed never to shake Palestinian Authority
leader Yasser Arafat's hand, and he also remarked on a previous occasion that
Benjamin Netanyahu doesn't know his right hand from his left.

         
      
   
