
   
   
      
         
            German Kohl Cuts

            The Los
Angeles Times and New York Times
lead with the German election results, in which Gerhard Schroeder defeated
16-year chancellor Helmut Kohl, a story that makes everybody's front. USA Today
leads with the Gulf Coast arrival of Hurricane Georges. The big concern, says
USAT , is the flooding that is likely when the storm hits New Orleans,
where tens of thousands of residents have taken shelter in such locales as the
Superdome and the convention center. The Washington Post leads with Mark McGwire's final total of 70
home runs, achieved via his second straight two-HR game, a story that gets
top-of-the-page-with-picture coverage everywhere.

            The LAT says that "Schroeder's policies differ little from those of
Kohl--and his election expressed a hunger for a new face more than a new
direction." The NYT sees a bigger difference, saying that while Kohl campaigned on
Germany's rise from Nazism and its role in Europe, Schroeder talked about jobs.
The paper says that strategy worked because Germans are "tired of history
lessons" and concerned that their society is fraying. The WP cites both
the "new face" and unemployment angles.

            Schroeder's Social Democratic Party polled 41 percent of the vote, but will
still need, note the papers, to enter into a coalition with another party in
parliament to rule Germany. One possibility mentioned is that the SDP will hook
up with the left-leaning/enviro Greens. Both Times mention that the
Greens have long opposed the current NATO set-up. The LAT adds that any
such coalition would have to worry about radical Greens bolting. Another
development: the successor to the Communist Party gained parliamentary strength
in the vote. The LAT says the numbers are such that Schroeder doesn't
have to enter an alliance with the neo-Communists. The NYT says he has
promised not to. There is one other recurring difference in the papers' Germany
coverage: all but the NYT render the winner's name "Schroeder," while
the Ochs Sulzberger bund foregoes that "oe" for an "o" under an umlaut.

            The sort of story that, post-Monica, has been far too scarce appears today
on the LAT front: the paper's long-time defense business reporter Ralph
Vartabedian reports that new government information out today shows that the
Pentagon still can't protect itself against embezzlement and overpayment.
According to the story, there have been a dozen cases of DOD embezzlement in
recent years, featuring such dodges as clerks creating fictitious contracts and
then honoring them--with checks to themselves. One case in the story: an Air
Force sergeant who arranged for his wife and mother to receive more $900,000.
The three accountants who tried to alert authorities to this were...removed
from their jobs. The LAT says Pentagon financial controls have gotten
weaker under the Clinton administration "reinvention of government." Of course,
the paper should have mentioned that this hardly counts against the idea of
streamlining bureaucracy--it only shows that not all reinventions are equally
good ones.

            The WP reports that with less than two weeks before the federal
government runs out of money, twelve of the thirteen spending bills remain
unsigned. The Post says that getting very little attention beneath all
the Monica mayhem are special provisions that have added billions to the
defense bill, and hundreds of millions to the veterans and housing bill and to
the energy bill, to name a few. But the paper is rather stinting on details,
compared to say, its coverage of dress stains, and runs the story on page
4.

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature explores a
worrisome unintended consequence of the pesticide strictures in the food safety
law passed two years ago: to ensure compliance, some top pesticide
manufacturers have resumed testing their products on people, a practice that, although legal,
they'd abandoned in the early 1980s. In the U.S. and Britain, scores of
volunteers are now swallowing small doses of toxic pesticides. Sometimes, the
paper reports, test subjects are told that they are ingesting a "drug" not a
pesticide.

            The Post reports that a Democratic congressional candidate in
Wisconsin has formulated and signed an "affidavit of integrity" declaring that
"he has never: committed adultery; abused his wife or children; engaged in
homosexual activity; experimented with illegal drugs; or been charged with or
convicted of a felony." Hey, where's the cigar clause?

         
      
   
