
   
   
      
         
            Stations of the Cross Examination

            The Los
Angeles Times leads with Secretary of Defense William Cohen's statement
yesterday that U.S. ground troops may have to be part of any NATO peacekeeping
effort in Kosovo, a story that also makes the Washington Post and New York Times
fronts. The WP and NYT leads go with efforts by the White House
and the Democratic congressional leadership to keep House Democrats from
supporting the Republican impeachment resolution when it comes to a floor vote
on Thursday. Both papers report that Bill Clinton has himself made calls to key
members of Congress as part of this effort, and that Al Gore is also taking an
active role. USA Today leads with the budget talks beginning today
between top White House aides and the congressional Republican leadership.
Object: avoiding a government shutdown. According to the paper, bones of
contention include: additional funding for the IMF, whether or not to authorize
population sampling for the 2000 Census, and emergency farm aid.

            Cohen's comments at a Senate hearing constitute, explains the LAT , a
shift for the Clinton administration, which till now has not publicly discussed
possible U.S. roles in any NATO deployment to Kosovo. The NYT makes the
shift seem bigger than the other papers because it emphasizes Cohen's expressed
personal recommendation that U.S. ground troops not be sent, an option other
senior officials in the administration have been leaving open, while the
LAT and WP stress that he didn't flatly rule this out.

            The papers make it clear that the response of some of the senators suggests
that the task of selling a ground deployment to the Hill may be "formidable."
Several senators, report the LAT , WP and NYT , drew the
comparison with the U.S. troop presence in Bosnia--at first said by the Clinton
administration to be only a remote possibility, but still in place three years
after the cessation of fighting there. The LAT makes it seem that such
concerns were only on the minds of Republicans, while the other two papers make
it clear they were voiced from both sides of the aisle.

            Such political resistance explains why some administration officials have
floated in recent days the idea of an all-European military ground force being
dispatched to the region, with the U.S. dominating any air effort. But, the
LAT points out, this seems unlikely to work because when an all-Euro
force was on the ground in Bosnia, there was severe tension between the
countries involved and the U.S., which didn't have ground troops at risk.
Another problem, pointed out by the Post : Boris Yeltsin sternly warned
yesterday against any NATO deployment and his Defense Minister said such a move
would plunge the world back into the Cold War.

            Buried deep in the LAT story are the numbers. To give context to the
whole discussion, they should have been placed much higher. It seems that NATO
planners are considering 25,000-35,000 soldiers, and under one plan, even
60,000.

            The WP off-lead recounts the psychological consequences of Japan's economic mess. The
country is seeing a big rise in suicide, depression, insomnia, over-drinking,
over-smoking and ulcers. Most stunning stat: At least 50,000 Japanese are
expected to be hospitalized this year after trying to kill themselves.

            The WP runs a front-page look at Ken Starr's McLean, Virginia church by the paper's religion
reporter, Hanna Rosin. It turns out Starr's place of worship is a 12-steppy,
New Agey kind of a deal, emphasizing recovery from various addictions.
Apparently, Starr gets lots of support from fellow congregants. The story
quotes one fellow parishioner's request that members pray for Starr: "I have a
friend who is going through hell right now...I believe he is in trouble with
the world because he desires to represent Christ well in the task to which he
has been called."

            The NYT front and the Wall Street Journal inside describe AT&T's latest move
to fight the erosion of its long distance business by downscale dial-around
services like MCI's 10-10-321--it's introducing its own downscale dial-around
service, called Lucky Dog. Ads for the new service will feature Larry Hagman
and the cast of "The Jeffersons." But there's one thing they won't feature: any
indication that the company is owned by AT&T.

            The WP 's Al Kamen points to an odd passage in an anti-drug pamphlet
with a foreword by Sen. Orrin Hatch. The book claims to help parents look for
the warning signs that their children are using marijuana or other drugs. These
signs include, says the pamphlet, such obvious ones as staying out all night
and unexplained needs for money. But there's also this unobvious one: Beware
your child's "excessive preoccupation with social causes, race relations,
environmental issues, etc."

         
      
   
