
   
   
      
         
            Why Johnny Can't Need

            
               USA
Today , the Los Angeles Times and the New York Times
lead with Slobodan Milosevic's promise to withdraw his forces from Kosovo in
the face of threatened NATO airstrikes. The Washington Post lead covers Congress' latest moves in its
attempts to arrive at a budget, stressing the tentative approval by key House
and Senate Republicans of President Clinton's requested $18 billion for the
IMF. The death of the gay student who was kidnapped and beaten in Wyoming grabs
front space at the NYT , LAT , and USAT , and is the subject
of the NYT 's lead editorial, which points out that Wyoming, like nine
other states, has no hate-crime laws.

            The papers report that even though Milosevic agreed to back out of Kosovo,
NATO yesterday authorized airstrikes against him that could begin in four days
if he doesn't actually do that. They also report that in the meantime, about
2,000 airborne and ground-based allied inspectors--including some American
civilians and, say the LAT and NYT , some Russians--will verify
that Milosevic's Serbian troops have indeed pulled back, allowing Albanians to
return to their homes. If this doesn't happen, the NATO air plan to be
implemented would begin with cruise missiles and progress to a full bombing
campaign. The LAT says that each stage of the plan could be flown only
after being approved by NATO's ambassadors (something the NYT says is
not clear) and that only military facilities would be targeted. The NYT
account stresses more than the others the resistance of the Russians to the
airstrike plan.

            The WP reports that House Republicans have extracted something in
return for infusion of fresh U.S. billions into IMF coffers: 1) a promise by
major IMF contributors to push the agency to require above-market rates and
reasonably short repayment periods for its loans (to lessen high-risk borrowing
in aided countries); 2) a requirement that the IMF release written summaries of
its board meetings and other major documents within three months. The paper
says that the White House and the Hill are close on a number of the remaining
budget issues, including a Clinton plan to spend $1.1 billion to hire 100,000
new teachers. But since agreements have not yet been reached, Congress passed
another short-term funding bill-- the third since October 1st--to tide the
government over for a few more days.

            Another budget story on the Post front addresses the thirty or so
line items that appear in print for the first time in the $250 billion defense
bill Congress just passed--so-called "virgin births." The list this year,
reports the Post , includes $250,000 to study the tactical applications
of caffeinated chewing gum.

            The papers report that the Nobel Prize in Medicine goes this year to three
Americans who discovered that nitric oxide (not, the papers admonish, nitrous
oxide, which is laughing gas), known best as an air pollutant, is also produced
in the body, where it regulates blood pressure, nerve firing, and immune
responses. The Post waits until the third paragraph of its story to
mention that nitric oxide is central to the process of getting an erection and
as such is a key element in the workings of Viagra. At the NYT ,
erections make the second paragraph, Viagra the fifth. At the LAT Viagra
makes the second paragraph, erections the 18th.

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature cites a
strong consumer trend: the young children of boomers have buying habits that formerly were
associated with adolescents. The piece quotes a finding that while
aggregate spending by or on behalf of children 4-12 roughly doubled every
decade between 1960-1980, in the 1990s, it has tripled. The money goes, says
the Journal , to such surprises as fitness clubs and personal trainers,
Delta Airlines pre-schoolers fliers club, and Liberty Financial's mutual fund
for children, which features a quarterly coloring book and a savings and
investing bingo game. One suspicion-raising feature of the story: the three
cities mentioned in vignettes are all upper-upper-end nearly-pure-white towns
within a radius of fifty miles of Los Angeles.

         
      
   
