
   
   
      
         
            Hyde Still Seeks

            Impeachment politics dominate, with the House Judiciary Committee's decision
to expand its inquiry into President Clinton's fund-raising activities leading
at USA
Today , the Los Angeles Times and New York Times .
The Washington Post goes instead with today's
announcement that Exxon and Mobil will indeed merge.

            Judiciary will probably, the papers report, vote on party lines to issue
subpoenas today bearing on prior Dept. of Justice investigations into Clinton's
1996 fund-raising. FBI Director Louis Freeh and Charles LaBella, former head of
DOJ's fund-raising investigation, will probably be ordered to testify, and
their superior, Janet Reno, will be ordered to turn over memos they wrote to
her. Another subpoena will probably go to Clinton himself, requiring that he
ensure that Reno comply with the committee's request. The LAT plays the
Clinton subpoena high, putting it in the headline and in the first sentence.
The NYT also plays it high. USAT is a bit more offhand,
mentioning the subpoena of the memos and of Freeh in the subhead, but holding
off until halfway through the story before placing the president's subpoena
third in a list of bullets. The LAT notes that previously, separate
House and Senate committees investigated Clinton fund-raising without
uncovering illegality by high-level Clinton administration officials, but goes
on to quote a Judiciary Republican source saying that only 20 percent of
LaBella's memo has been reviewed by Congress, and that the GOP members believe
the other 80 percent contains strong evidence of illegal Clinton
fund-raising.

            The papers all report that despite Clinton's being invited by Henry Hyde to
appear before the committee, his spokesman yesterday said he won't be coming.
The NYT quotes presidential press secretary Joe Lockhart saying of any
appearance by his boss that "It won't add any new information and can be put in
the category of a stunt." But the LAT says Lockhart made this
comment not about Clinton, but about Judiciary's plan to take testimony today
from two convicted perjurers.

            The NYT lead lays out the political dilemma voting for impeachment
instead of censure presents to House Republicans: Voting for impeachment will
probably produce a party line House vote, which will impair the GOP's ability
to work with Democrats on other issues. And will make censure, which is more
likely than impeachment, look like a Democratic victory.

            The WP explains that Exxon's purchase of Mobil will rejoin two of the
biggest pieces of the Standard Oil empire broken up by the government nine
decades ago, and will leave just three corporations with control of vast oil
reserves and tens of thousands of gas stations. The Post agrees with the
view expressed in a NYT piece yesterday and in the USAT off-lead
today: the merger will cost more than 10,000 jobs ( USAT says it could be
12,000).

            The LAT 's "Column One" tells of what it calls the abortion debate's
cause celebre, the first murder prosecution of an abortion doctor in California
in nearly twenty years. Dr. Bruce Steir is charged with knowing that he botched
an abortion but failing to have his patient admitted to a hospital. Later that
day, during the long drive back to her home, the woman died. Given that the
California Medical Association found no basis for criminal charges, the
association and many pro-choice advocates fear the case is an example of what
may well become the newest weapon against doctors who provide abortions:
selective criminal prosecution. (One quibble: The piece describes Steir as a
"veteran of 40,000 procedures." Why not write that he "had performed 40,000
abortions"?)

            The LAT front reports that new studies show that although AIDS was
slow in coming to South Africa, that country is now the place on the planet
hardest hit by the disease. The infection rate there is now one new person per
minute. But AIDS denial and ignorance in the country is widespread. In a survey
of 1,000 people in the black township of Soweto, the paper says, 70 percent
believed they were at little or no risk, even though nearly two-thirds said
they never used a condom.

            The Dow had a 217-point drop yesterday, but the papers keep the story off
the front page. Are the papers getting the point that spilling a lot of ink
over a market going one way so soon after spilling an equal amount on a market
going the other way is more than a little ridiculous? Today's Papers can only
hope--and adds that papers should also quit announcing the raw point totals of
market moves in headlines. The percentage of the move is much more
meaningful.

            The Wall Street Journal cites the doubling of Sharper Image
stock on Monday as a symbol of how investor excitement can be triggered by
Internet angles--the company says its web sales have tripled in the past year.
But, the paper reports, web sales only account for 2 percent of the company's
revenue. And this should indeed sober everybody up fast, because let's face it,
have you ever seen anybody actually buy something in a Sharper Image store?

            Al Gore has gotten a lot of coverage about how he raised "soft money" for
the DNC, but a small item today in the WP 's "The Reliable Source" tells
you something about how he spends it. And it's not exactly saving the planet or
reinventing government. The Gore family holiday photo greeting card was billed
to the DNC at a cost of $110,000.

         
      
   
