
   
   
      
         
            Yesterday's Papers

            The New York Times leads with President Clinton's push for a
new International Monetary Fund strategy to avert further global economic
turmoil. The Washington Post 's lead forecasts that during Monday's House
Judiciary Committee proceedings, more grounds for the impeachment of President
Clinton will be added to the 11 counts currently pending. The Los Angeles
Times leads with the story that preoccupies everyone's front: the
latest act in the Lewinsky circus, namely the 4610 pages of evidence released
yesterday by the House Judiciary Committee.

            The new three-volume set of documents includes excerpts from Linda Tripp's
taped conversations with Monica Lewinsky and grand jury testimony from Vernon
Jordan, Bettie Currie, Bruce Lindsey, and other key figures. With so many fresh
details, it is hardly surprising that each paper emphasizes a different aspect.
All papers note, however, that the new evidence does more to disclose the
details we've all been wondering about than to substantively change the
investigation.

            The papers also agree that the tapes portray Tripp as a manipulator, which
plays into White House hands. (From the NYT analysis: The "friendship"
between Lewinsky and Tripp seems "less a real friendship than a temporary
alliance between two women obsessed with Bill Clinton who often do not even
seem to like each other very much.") The LAT highlights the improbable
assertions by Betty Currie, President Clinton's secretary, that despite hiding
in the Oval Office bathroom during one of the Clinton-Lewinsky encounters
(according to a synopsis of Tripp's account), she remained uncertain about the
nature of the encounters: "I had a feeling, but I had nothing to base it on
other than a gut." The WP fronts a story about strenuous efforts by
Jordan and Lindsey to persuade Clinton to settle the Paula Jones lawsuit after
Lewinsky testified. As all papers note, Jordan strongly denied that his
job-search on Lewinsky's behalf was an attempt to get her to lie in the Jones
case.

            Citing "an informed source" throughout, the WP lead says that
Republican investigator David Schippers' new impeachment counts against
President Clinton will involve accusations of witness tampering, obstruction of
justice, and making false statements under oath (as distinguished from more
serious and difficult-to-prove perjury charges). Of the 11 counts already set
forth, one which relates to executive privilege will be dropped, because
Schippers views privilege as the domain of the judicial not the legislative
branch. Schippers' presentation will be countered Monday by Democratic
investigator Abbe Lowell, who will downplay the gravity of Clinton's
offense.

            The NYT lead story, also the off-lead at the WP , describes
Clinton's proposal that the IMF distribute preemptive emergency lines of credit
to countries that show relative economic stability but nonetheless could
succumb to panic swings. (The NYT observes that Clinton's "hasty
presentation . . . suggested the idea had been cobbled together
quickly"--perhaps to deflect attention from Starr's new releases.) Clinton's
words came on the same day as the release of a Labor Department report showing
that fewer jobs were created and unemployment rose incrementally during
September--developments which raise some fears that the Asian malaise is
spreading to the U.S. Clinton's IMF proposal contains a number of weaknesses,
as the papers point out. First, these "lines of credit" are as-yet vaguely
defined and may not differ significantly from current IMF policy. Second and
more crucially, the IMF needs to collect its money before it can activate such
a plan. The U.S. (among other debtor nations) still owes the IMF $18 billion.
Approval for the payment is mired in the House, where Republicans are staunchly
opposed to additional IMF funding.

            And now for some comic relief: The NYT Arts section reports that
French literary great Marcel Proust has just joined company with Asterix and
Tintin. His 12-volume classic Remembrance of Things Past has been remade
into a French comic book, which has been selling like mad(eleines). All 12,000
first-run copies were scooped up in three weeks. This naturally has sparked a
heated debate in France, where attempts to "democratize Proust" affront French
custodianship of high culture.

            Anyone sending mail to Russia is out of luck. The NYT front page
reports that almost all of the country's mail service has shut down because
railway companies and some airports are demanding $13 million in back pay from
the post office. Predictably, the post office is owed approximately that same
amount by the government. Hey, Russia, it's email time!

         
      
   
