
   
   
      
         
            The Kindest Cut

            The Washington
Post
               , 
               Los
Angeles Times , and USA Today lead with the Fed's decision to reduce key
interest rates by one-quarter of a percentage point. This is the third such cut
in two months, and the Fed promises that it will be the last--though financial
analysts aren't so sure. The New York Times sets the scene for Thursday's impeachment
hearing.

            All the major papers report that the rate cut will stimulate consumer
spending by lowering the cost of home equity and credit card loans. All papers
also report that consumer spending, however, is currently at healthy levels.
Why cut rates? The LAT --alone among the majors--makes it clear to the
layperson that the Fed's move was directed at the bond markets. Certain U.S.
businesses are having trouble selling bonds, indicating that investors are
worried about financial crises abroad. The rate cut is meant to reassure
anxious Wall Streeters that the hale and hearty U.S. economy will remain immune
to international crises.

            Most quoted experts aren't convinced by the Fed's prediction that further
rate cuts won't be necessary. The Wall Street Journal reports that 16 of
18 experts surveyed last week by a macroeconomic forecasting firm expect rates
to be lowered yet again.

            On political (i.e. Lewinsky) beat, the papers lead with the news that, on
Thursday, Kenneth Starr will spend two hours detailing a White House pattern of
obstructing justice in matters including, but extending beyond, the Lewinsky
affair. The White House will have 30 minutes to question Starr.

            How will Starr play on TV? Some quoted sources note that he's a seasoned
appellate lawyer, others stress his lack of experience with matters political.
(It's a classic round of the DC "expectations" game--Starr's most modest
reviews come from his friends.) The WP reports that the GOP hopes
Starr's performance can "energize the lagging drive" to impeach President
Clinton.

            Papers also report the popular reaction to yesterday's release of the Tripp
tapes. Lewinsky--dubbed a "zaftig little rascal" by the hometown LAT --is
generally perceived as childlike, weak, and sort of, like, stupid. Tripp is
said to be a meatier character--genuinely caring at times, staggeringly
manipulative at others.

            The lead international story at the WP is that Kosovan rebels have
begun to regroup now that the Serbs have left. The NYT and WSJ
lead with the Knesset's ratification of the peace memorandum finalized at Wye,
Maryland last month.

            The WP runs "Surgery on Self in South Atlantic Saves Sailor's Life--Via
Satellite E-Mail, Boston Physician Assists Injured Man Competing in Yacht
Race" as a front-page feature. The solo sailor--a former Russian
commando--almost died, but is now in Capetown and intends to continue the race.
Readers who admire a stiff upper lip will be impressed by excerpts from the
doctor-patient correspondence. A sample: "My right elbow does not look good.
Some yellow spot in the middle of red, and it feels like dead. Waiting for your
help ... Have been sitting on the bloody cabin floor almost completely naked
... watching as my life drop by drop leave me."

         
      
   
