
   
   
      
         
            Watch on the Potomac

            The papers all lead with the first day of the White House's defense before
the House Judiciary Committee. The journalism consensus is that the panels of
Watergate-era Judiciary members, academics and ex-special prosecutors
constituted a deepening of the scandal's heretofore ditzy discussion. One
Washington Post headline refers to a "day of
dialogue." The New York Times
sees a "sober debate." The Los Angeles Times says that compared to Kenneth
Starr's committee appearance, yesterday's session was "much more sober and
substantive." The Post says that yesterday, the president's legal team
"offered its most comprehensive rebuttal."

            Huh? As the LAT notes, the day featured Democratic Rep. Zoe Lofgren
saying that one reason not to impeach was that it would be bad for the economy,
while Republican Rep. Asa Hutchinson cited as a pro-impeachment consideration
President Clinton's use of the word "intimate" when he should have said
"sexual." And at one point, says the Post , Republican Rep. Howard Coble
responded to witness Fr. Robert Drinan's assertion that vengeance was
motivating GOP conservatives by saying, "If anybody thinks vengeance is
involved, I'll meet them in the parking lot." That's the current state of
congressional deliberation--challenging a 70-plus priest to a duke-out. The day
proved once again that there is no hearing in a congressional hearing. They
should call these things congressional talkings. The papers agree that the real
targets of the discussion are the House's 12-20 moderate Republican undecideds.
But if so, then call those folks into executive session and leave the rest of
us alone.

            The USA
Today front carries word that Tuesday the Supreme Court ruled
unanimously that, absent indications of additional criminal activity, police
cannot automatically search a car after making a routine traffic stop. The
story is also carried inside at the WP . The papers note that the
decision is a surprising exception to the Court's trend in recent years of
upholding and widening police conduct especially in the area of searches.
Neither story mentions one notorious criminal who might never have been caught
had this decision come down a few years ago--Timothy McVeigh, initially held
because of a gun found in his car after he was stopped for driving without
plates.

            The LAT front carries a stunning medical result published in today's
JAMA , sure to add fuel to the second-hand smoke debate. Examinations of
53 San Francisco bartenders made before and after the implementation last
January of California's public indoor smoking ban show, says the medical
journal, a substantial post-ban lessening of respiratory troubles as well as of
eye, ear, nose and throat problems. The changes were detected less than two
months after the ban began. (Hats off to the LAT for putting the number
of bartenders high up.)

            A congressional staffer tells the Wall Street Journal "Tax Report" he has to speak off the
record because "I get in a lot of trouble if I'm quoted, especially if the
quotes are accurate."

            Last week, former Secretary of Agriculture Mike Espy was acquitted of
charges that he illegally accepted gratuities. But according to the WP 's
"The Reliable Source," he's still really into legal gratuities. It seems that
Espy's special prosecutor Donald Smaltz had 18-carat gold watches made for his
staff (let's hope that this was done out of Smaltz's pocket and not his office
budget), and Espy is quoted in the Post saying, "I surely would like a
watch. I think I earned the watch."

         
      
   
