
   
   
      
         
            Bare Market

            The New York Times
and Washington Post lead with the House Judiciary
Committee's decision to grant President Clinton's lawyers two 9 AM-to-midnight
sessions this week to make their case against impeachment. The Los Angeles
Times puts that story on the front but leads with the ever-worsening
relations between Israel and the Palestinian Authority on the eve of President
Clinton's Middle East trip. The big bone of contention is whether or not Israel
is abiding by its Wye promise to free Palestinian political prisoners. Another
is whether President Clinton's visit to Palestinian-ruled Gaza will have the
full trappings of a visit to an independent state. USA Today
goes with upcoming statistics from the Centers for Disease Control suggesting
that the food-poisoning bacteria E. coli--usually associated with inadequately
cooked hamburgers--may be causing twice as much illness as previously thought.
USAT 's off-lead is another scientifically based second look at U.S.
life: New computer-assisted studies match up DNA left at violent crime scenes
surprisingly often with the DNA of known burglars, indicating that contrary to
traditional dogma, burglary is a good predictor of violent crime.

            The NYT and WP leads communicate almost exactly the same
information: The tart letters back and forth between Judiciary and the White
House. The likely schedule of events, culminating in the committee vote Friday
or Saturday. Tom DeLay's judgement that the House floor vote will be close, but
will produce an impeachment bill. Both say that until last week the impeachment
tide had ebbed considerably but that Clinton's answers to Judiciary's 81
questions made it rise again. Both have Rep. Christopher Shay's quote about
those answers: "I mean he still doesn't get it....He still doesn't tell the
truth." Both have Trent Lott saying that if the House votes to impeach, the
Senate will put Clinton on trial quickly. The two stories are near twins because they both reflect the standard
no-shoe-leather m.o. for many a Monday Washington story: Watch the Sunday chat
shows.

            The LAT follows yesterday's lead about the FDA ignoring warnings
about a diabetes drug now implicated in 33 deaths with a top-front effort today
revealing that the man responsible for the federal government's largest study
of diabetes, which included administration of that drug, was at that time also
on the payroll of the drug's manufacturer, Warner-Lambert, as a consultant. The
paper says that according to legal experts, this seems to be a crime under
federal conflict-of-interest law.

            The "cover story" in USAT 's "Money" section checks in on what
happened when management yoda Steven Covey merged his firm with rival Franklin
Quest. According to the paper, there's hardly been one effective habit on
display, much less seven. The company's stock is but three dollars above its
six-year-old initial offering price, and sales of its business consulting
products and services are flat. Meanwhile, there have been time-consuming
wrangles between the two partners over such significa as the dress code and the
company logo. One observer quoted sums up the situation this way: "It's proof
that the great business gurus know how to run everyone's business but their
own."

            The WP front features a story about Y2K survivalists. In the
fourteenth paragraph, the Post stops to explain something: "the Y stands
for 'year,' and 2K is shorthand for 2000."

            Today, some poor soul (two actually) at the Wall Street Journal has to write about Scottish Power's
expected announcement that it has agreed to acquire PacifiCorp, yadda yadda,
but elsewhere in the paper, another reporter lucks out. Today, the
Journal 's Asra Q. Nomani is an island of lust in a sea of lucre, filing
a long, long, look at the slow, slow-sex industry known as Tantra. There are
some of the usual trappings of a financial story, but most of the multiples
here aren't P/Es. For instance: "Known as 'Shara,' Ms. Seabrook slips off a
white-gauze sarong from over her white G-string bikini as she climbs on a
massage table to straddle the table with Ms. Clarke's live-in boyfriend, Evan
Sarver, 30, a Web designer, who sits naked, his face just inches from hers."
Who cares what the market does today?

         
      
   
