
   
   
      
         
            Slobodan But Surely?

            The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times lead with details of Slobodan Milosevic's agreement with
NATO concerning Yugoslavia's Kosovo province. The Washington Post goes with Judiciary Chairman Henry Hyde's
comment Tuesday--apparently driven by his desire to finish by the end of the
year--that he might narrow the impeachment inquiry by consolidating or dropping
some of the 15 potential charges described last week by his committee's chief
investigator. USA Today leads with a new poll it conducted together with
CNN and Gallup that apparently indicates House incumbents now stand a better
chance of re-election than at any previous time during the 1990s. The paper
calls that a "good sign for Republicans." (The paper waits until the tenth and
last paragraph of the story to reveal that the poll sample was but 1,004
adults.) But a front-page NYT story says Republican incumbent members of
Congress seem to have instead taken to heart other recent polls suggesting an
emerging anti-Republican backlash inspired by the House's initiation of an
impeachment investigation--no Republican House candidate, says the
Times , is currently running a commercial mentioning the Lewinsky
scandal.

            The NYT says the crux of the Kosovo accord is a force of 2,000
on-the-ground international observers and NATO reconnaissance flights designed
to monitor Milosevic's withdrawals of police and troops. The other key element,
reported high by the NYT and the main thrust of the LAT lead, is
Milosevic's commitment Tuesday to local elections for Kosovo. If the detail
about the inspectors seems familiar, that's because yesterday's USAT and
LAT said they'd been agreed to, whereas yesterday's NYT said
merely that Milosevic appeared ready to accept a monitoring force.

            Both Times suggest that free elections would result in Kosovo's
outright independence. And both papers note that the principal Albanian
separatist group wants nothing less. The NYT quantifies the situation,
noting that in Kosovo, ethnic Albanians outnumber Serbs nine to one. Both
papers observe important loose ends of the emerging deal that could unravel it.
The NYT reports that the American negotiator Richard Holbrooke did not
persuade Milosevic to allow the international war crimes tribunal to have
jurisdiction in the region, and the LAT passes along the concerns of
some analysts that the Serbs might take some observers hostage, thus boxing out
NATO's ability to deter Milosevic via the threat of airstrikes. The LAT
quotes a NSC spokesman's response: the Serbs wouldn't want to interfere with
the observer force because some of is members would be from their patron-state,
Russia.

            The LAT illustrates its Kosovo story with a top front picture of a
dead five-week-old baby. Just five or ten years ago, it was possible for
Americans to advance to a pretty ripe age before ever seeing a dead body. But
not anymore--not if they get a newspaper. Readers are invited to notice how
often nowadays the main front-page picture of their paper depicts death.

            The LAT and USAT fronts run stories about the arrest for
spying of a former Army sergeant who served as a codebreaker, allegedly for
selling (for $60,000) the identity of Soviet sites to be nuked by the U.S. if
the Soviet Union started a nuclear war. The accused spy had been living in
Germany after retiring from the Army in 1991, but was tricked back to the
United States by someone working with the FBI--said by USAT to be a
retired FBI agent--posing as a Russian spymaster. The LAT notes that
this is the latest in a long string of espionage arrests of mid- and low-level
military intelligence personnel, and the paper suggests these have been
facilitated by U.S. access to Russian intelligence files.

            In the wake of the Wyoming anti-gay murder, and President Clinton's
resultant call for beefed-up hate-crime laws, the ink is flowing about their
advisability. George Will, in the LAT , Michael Kelly in the WP , a
NYT op-ed by a law professor and the Post 's lead editorial all
question whether such laws further the cause of tolerance and suggest that they
represent a threat to the sanctity of prote cted, even if contemptible,
personal thought and speech. The NYT 's Frank Rich carries the ball
somewhat for the other side, arguing in his op-ed that Republicans paved the
"road to Laramie" by demonizing gay people.

            Due to technical problems, last night's column erred in saying that
Tuesday's NYT led with Kosovo. It led with the Japanese passage of a
banking rescue and reform bill.

            The WSJ "Tax Report" states that according to a recent Harvard study,
Connecticut ranked number one in the list of deficit states whose taxpayers
send more money to Washington as taxes than they get back as spending. Second
place was New Jersey, followed by Illinois, New Hampshire, Nevada, and
Michigan. New Mexico topped the list of surplus states, followed by North
Dakota, Virginia, West Virginia and Mississippi.

            Today's No-Duh! Headline, from the WP front page: "Impact of Market
Turmoil Felt Beyond Wall Street."

         
      
   
