
   
   
      
         
            SS Coupes

            Three of the leads address a common theme: strengthening patients' rights.
USA
Today leads with a new proposal by the federal government that would
solidify patients' protections against being refused hospital treatment on
financial grounds. The New York
Times goes with word that President Clinton will propose expanding
Medicaid and Medicare to allow those with disabilities to continue receiving
benefits even if they work. And the Los Angeles
Times lead states that the next Congress is well positioned to pass new
controls on managed health care plans. The Washington Post leads with a focus on the latest industrial
giants to be suspected of profiting during World War II from the Nazis' use of
slave labor--Ford and GM.

            
               USAT explains that new Health and Human services regulations coming
out this week would make it clear that hospitals cannot delay care while
awaiting coverage approval from a patient's insurance company. The paper says
it's unclear how many cases there have been of this sort of insurance-based
"dumping," but adds that during the 1998 fiscal year, HHS noted a total of 54
dumping cases. The story says that hospital officials insist they already treat
all emergencies, and that the real, continuing problem not addressed by the new
guidelines is what to do about patients who present at emergency rooms for
routine primary care.

            The Times says the Clinton disability proposal--similar to a bipartisan bill that
didn't make it to a floor vote in this Congress--is designed to correct the
feature of current law under which the disabled usually have to choose between
working and keeping their health insurance--particularly perverse in the many
cases when it's precisely the insurance that provides the therapy and/or
medicine that allows the person to hold a job. Currently, eight million
disabled people of working age receive more than $50 billion a year from Social
Security and Supplemental Security Income, says the paper, and fewer than 1
percent of them work.

            The LAT cites a signal reason why prospects for federal health care
reform are looking up: the new Republican House leadership looks more favorably
on it than Gingrich and company did. Indeed, Speaker-elect Bob Livingston was a
co-sponsor of a defeated bill that would have allowed a patient to sue an HMO
for damages when the plan's withholding of authorization was linked to harm he
or she suffered. Some such provision is likely to be revisited, says the
LAT , in this next Congress. One vote-getting compromise mentioned is
that patients would be allowed to sue their HMO only after they've exhausted
all the plan's internal administrative appeals.

            The Post says some of the information in its Ford/GM story was first revealed in a 1974 congressional
inquiry, but is relevant again now and is being augmented with additional
evidence because of new class-action suits being filed on behalf of former
slave laborers, in the wake of recent similar and successful legal moves
against Swiss banks. There is no question that both companies had large German
subsidiaries, nor that these subsidiaries provided ample slave-labor-produced
materiel to the Nazi war effort. GM was the largest producer of trucks for the
German Army and Ford was number two. The primary issue to be litigated, says
the Post , will be how much knowledge and control the automakers had with
respect to their German operations after Pearl Harbor. Virtually none, say the
companies. Still, a jury will probably be interested to learn that as late as
the summer of 1938 both Henry Ford and his GM counterpart received the highest
Nazi medal. One defect in the story: It says that Chrysler's role in the German
rearmament effort in the thirties was "much less significant" than that of the
other two companies. But a little elaboration is required--after all, Chrysler
is now joined at the balance sheet with longtime German auto colossus
Daimler.

            Online advertising, reports a front-pager at the Wall Street Journal , appears to be taking off. Some say
more than 80 percent of the Net's 1997 ad slots went unsold, but first-half
1998 U.S. spending for cyber ads totaled $774 million, double the year before.
Plusses of the new ad medium: It's excellent for start-ups, where on-line
commerce is often stressed, and on-line sites seem more accommodating to
advertisers than print or broadcast, especially regarding old-line
church-and-state issues about blurring the line between editorial and
advertising content. Big negative: Still-high per-consumer-reached costs.

            There's a curious lapse in today's effort by the WP 's generally
excellent media reporter Howard Kurtz. Kurtz somewhat breathlessly reports that
Suzanne Daley, South African bureau chief of the NYT , was mortified when
right in front of her, Nelson Mandela made a sexist remark about her to her
boss, the Times 's Joseph Lelyveld. But this is hardly a scoop and in any
case, not Kurtz's scoop. He neglects to mention that the story was published
more than six weeks ago over Daley's byline in the NYT .

         
      
   
