
   
   
      
         
            Where the Elite Meet to Delete

            USAT leads with the movement of U.S. naval forces towards the Persian Gulf,
apparently positioning for a strike against Saddam Hussein, a story that is
played on the WP front above the fold, but inside at the other majors. The LAT
leads with a report that 36 state attorneys general are very close to a $200
billion settlement of the health cost claims they've raised against the major
cigarette manufacturers, a story that the WSJ flags in its front-page news box.
(The Journal says the deal could end up involving 46 states.) The NYT
leads with an exclusive: that during the recent Wye negotiations, the director
of the CIA vowed to quit if convicted spy Jonathan Pollard was freed as part of
any deal reached between the Palestinian Authority and Israel.

            According to the USAT account, some of the Iraq scenario is quite
familiar: A dire threat to Saddam (this time issued by Secretary of Defense
Cohen), President Clinton conferring with national security staff and several
foreign leaders, and talk of Tomahawk cruise missiles as the likely weapon.
But, notes the paper, there is a new wrinkle too: the State Department has
ruled out any last-ditch negotiations. The paper doesn't mention another one:
unlike past stare-downs, this time neither France nor Russia is openly
resisting U.S. military action.

            The LAT lead explains that the proposed tobacco settlement doesn't
provide as much regulatory restraint nor as much money as the failed federal
tobacco bill would have, but also offers the industry less protection from
other lawsuits. In return for the billions and a ban on cigarette billboards,
transit ads, and logoed merchandise. the bill would end most suits seeking
recovery of Medicaid funds spent by the states on smokers. The deal would, says
the paper, even provide money for tobacco-friendly states like Kentucky and
North Carolina that haven't filed such suits. The settlement might be announced
as early as next Monday.

            The NYT lead says that before CIA director George Tenet took his
stand regarding Pollard, President Clinton was seriously considering releasing
him. The paper adds that Tenet's vehemence was a direct reflection of the
intelligence community's depth of anger towards Pollard despite his conviction
for spying for a friendly power. The paper notes that Pollard stole more
top-secret documents than almost any other spy in American history (it would
have been nice if the Times had said who had taken more), a take
measurable in cubic yards, plus it is still unknown if any of them ended up in
unfriendly hands.

            The WP lead is a peek at the special alternative medicine issue of
JAMA that's being published today, the first such issue by a mainstream medical
journal. According to the story, an estimated 83 million American adults used
some sort of alternative medical treatment last year, up 47 percent over 1990.
This mainly reflects the medical habits of baby boomers, most of whom said they
pursued the alternative therapies more to prevent future problems than to treat
current ones. The Post says Americans spent $27 billion on alternative
treatment last year, most of it not reimbursed by insurance. What seems to
work: A traditional Chinese therapy, moxibustion, which involves burning an
herb next to the big toe, proved safe and effective for stimulating fetal
movement to avoid breech deliveries; Yoga-style stretching helps combat carpal
tunnel syndrome; and traditional Chinese herbs alleviate irritable bowel
syndrome. Ineffective: chiropractic spinal manipulations did not seem to help
with tension headaches; and acupuncture didn't do any better than placebos in
the treatment of AIDS-related nerve damage. USAT covers pretty much the
same ground in its front-page "cover story," although adding that insurance
coverage of non-mainstream treatment is on the rise.

            A front-page WSJ feature on the current upsurge in home buying notes
a troublesome undercurrent. Yes, the increase in low-down-payment home loans
has meant opening up home ownership to more low-income families and to more
Hispanics and blacks. However, this new class of homeowner, being more
financially strapped, might have a much harder time retaining homes through any
significant downturn.

            A front-page NYT piece identifies the real lesson corporate America
is taking away from the Microsoft trial: old e-mail can be a minefield of legal
liability. High-tech firms, long based on the free-flow and candor that e-mail
encourages, are having second thoughts. For instance, with an eye towards the
courts, employees are now encouraged, says the paper, to say "fair competition"
not "slaughtering" when talking of business strategy. And to dump old e-mail
whenever possible. The Times reports that Amazon.com recently offered
free lattes to employees who quickly expelled from their e-mail all files not
required for ongoing business or by law.

            The WP reports that the recent DNA test revelation that Thomas
Jefferson almost certainly fathered a child with one of his slaves has
energized an Illinois family's previous claim that it is descended from a
liaison between a son of George Washington and one of his slaves. The family is
now searching for known Washington descendants for the same sort of genetic
testing used in the Jefferson matter. The story doesn't say whether the
Illinois family members view themselves as white or black. But if you think
about it, if this sort of testing became a trend it would be a good thing no
matter what the apparent race of the testers. If they are black, discovering a
relationship to a Founding Father would tend to replace feelings of alienation
often felt by minorities with feelings of proud connection. If they are white,
discovering a blood relationship to a slave would tend to stimulate empathy for
blacks. Either way, society wins.

         
      
   
