
   
   
      
         
            Saddam Spared

            New developments in Iraq continue to dominate all papers' fronts. President
Clinton announced Sunday that Iraq had "backed down" and that weapons
inspectors would return to Iraq as soon as Tuesday. Clinton finally called off
the possibility of attacking Iraq at 3:30 a.m. Sunday morning; on Saturday
morning, as the papers reveal, Clinton had merely postponed the attack for 24
hours while his advisors assessed Iraq's alleged concessions. Two additional
letters from Iraq convinced Clinton to stow the missiles and give the
inspections another chance. However, the Administration remains wary. As
USA Today
emphasizes in its lead, the U.S. says it stands "ready to act" if Saddam
Hussein breaks more promises. The Washington Post notes that the extra troops in the Persian
Gulf won't go home immediately--they will stay in the Gulf or head to bases in
Europe.

            Clinton issued five criteria for judging Baghdad's compliance. Among the
conditions: Inspectors must have "unfettered access" to weapons sites, and Iraq
must turn over all documentary evidence of producing weapons of mass
destruction. Clinton also indirectly endorsed the overthrow of Saddam Hussein,
calling him "an impediment to the well-being of his people and a threat to the
peace of the region and the security of the world." This caused Iraqi Deputy
Prime Minister Tariq Aziz to snap back on CNN that Clinton's remarks were "a
flagrant violation of the Security Council resolutions as well as international
law."

            The WP fronts an insider's guide to which Clinton advisors voted for
what on Iraq. Apparently, National Security Advisor Sandy Berger held out for
postponing the strike, while Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, Defense
Secretary William Cohen, and Gen. Henry Shelton, chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, favored gong ahead with the attack on Saturday morning. The
Post didn't know Vice President Gore's position. Clinton's concern about
possibly killing 10,000 Iraqis (a "medium case scenario") in the face of Iraq's
overture won out. The New York Times front page ventures the comparison between
Clinton's restraint in the Iraqi crisis and John F. Kennedy's performance
during the Cuban missile crisis.

            The Wall Street
Journal fronts a story on the thriving U.S. drug industry and why drugs
are ever more expensive. Drug sales rose 16.5% this year as drug companies hone
their marketing savvy, and prices for many generic drugs have increased 10% in
the last year. Part of the high prices can be attributed to soaring costs for
clinical trials--up to $150 million a year--and new, expensive chemical
ingredients for drugs. But, says the WSJ , profit is the principal
factor--plus which, unlike other industrialized countries, the U.S. has few
drug price regulations in place. Among those hardest hit by the rising prices
are companies whose health care plans must absorb inflated prescription drug
prices, and uninsured patients. As the boomers age, the Journal notes,
the need for more drugs will exacerbate the cost problem.

            Former Vice President Dan Quayle has an op-ed in the NYT that can be
(and is) summarized in exactly one sentence: "There is simply no Constitutional
basis for Congress to censure a President."

            The Los Angeles Times fronts
a story (carried inside elsewhere) of Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's
tiff with Malaysian government. While in Malaysia for an economic conference,
Albright visited the wife of a Malaysian political leader who is jailed on sex
and corruption charges. Exasperated by Albright's perceived affront to
Malaysia, the country's Minister of Trade commented, "Maybe when I go to the
states, I would like to meet Ken Starr."

         
      
   
