
   
   
      
         
            Self Serbice

            The top news is divided between the upcoming midterm election and the
situation in Kosovo. USA Today leads with its new poll finding the Republicans
and Democrats in a virtual dead heat in their contest for Congress. The
New York Times
goes with the eruption of a financial squabble between Democrats campaigning
for seats in the House and Senate on the one hand and the White House and the
DNC on the other. The Washington Post and the Los Angeles
Times lead with Slobodan Milosevic's carefully conducted withdrawal of
Serbian forces from Kosovo province in the face of today's NATO airstrike
deadline.

            The USAT lead states that the paper's latest sampling gives the
Republicans a 2 percent edge among likely voters, which is within the poll's 4
percent margin of error. (And the margin of error is given in the second
paragraph, although the number of adults in the sample is in the 13th
paragraph.) According to the paper, 47 percent of those surveyed say policies
proposed by the GOP Congress would lead the country in the right direction,
while 70 percent say President Clinton's policies would lead the country in the
right direction. The paper takes this to mean voters like the balance of a
Democrat in the White House alongside a Republican-controlled Congress. (Of
course, there are two other possibilities left unmentioned: 1) a significant
number of people think the two parties are leading the country in the same
direction, and 2) voters are incoherent.) USAT provides further
interpretation when it quotes a GOP pollster's comment, "A few weeks ago, this
election looked like a baked Alaska. Now it seems to be more like rice
pudding," and finds this to mean "Voter excitement has dimmed."

            The Times lead details "unusually bitter" feelings expressed by
several Democratic candidates desirous of eleventh-hour cash that the party
high command is instead putting money into erasing party debt and the launch of
Al Gore's presidential campaign. Candidates apparently also feel that party
officials have discouraged donations by making dire predictions of a loss of as
many as 25 Democratic House seats. The comment Rep. Charles Rangel is quoted as
directing towards the Democratic party chairman, Roy Romer, sums up the mood:
"Keep your money and shut up your mouth."

            The WP and LAT leads (and the NYT off-lead) say that
over the weekend a detailed negotiating session between Milosevic and top NATO
officials resulted in the Serbs' pledge to withdraw 4,500 police troops and
two-thirds of the Yugoslav army units. The paper says that as of early Tuesday,
a U.S. diplomat reported up to 4,000 troops had left the area. The Post
also says that at one point NATO caught some Serb tanks heading in the wrong
direction. But once confronted, the Serbs turned them around. The LAT
says Milosevic "has probably done enough to escape airstrikes for now...." In
the wake of the pullback, the NYT notices a harbinger of the region's
next problem: the reemergence of Albanian freedom fighters.

            The Wall Street Journal front-page news box and USAT 's
"Money" front report that the government has sued Time Warner, charging that
the company has misclassified hundreds of full-time employees (many of them
writers and photographers) as freelancers, wrongly denying them benefits in the
process. The Journal notes that the suit marks the first time the
Clinton administration has officially weighed in on the increasingly
contentious issue of holding down employment costs by outsourcing work to those
not considered full-time. The paper says the government's move could extend
well beyond Time Warner, and mentions another company that might get
cross-haired: Microsoft.

            A week and a half into the Microsoft trial and a paper has finally done a
piece on the oddity of Bill Gates not testifying in person. Even though he is the
personification of the company, an inside WP story observes that defense
lawyers might have viewed him as so "prickly and combustible" as to undermine
his own case. The paper quotes one lawyer who once questioned the world's
richest man live: "At one point he just started screaming, saying that what the
[FTC] staff was doing to his company was socialistic....[T]hen he got angrier
and called it communistic."

            Several readers found yesterday's mention of the LAT lead story about
how California was lagging in its share of federal education funds a bit brisk.
They were right. The piece posed a number of issues that cried out for further
attention. It stated that ranking 31st in federal funds per pupil meant that
somehow California was not getting its "fair share." Well, ideally every
state's per pupil amount should be the same, and failing that, one should
expect fair per pupil spending to follow something like a bell-curve
distribution, with most of the states over time clustering around the middle of
the pack. So 31st really isn't that bad. And is it right for a paper to promote
local interests that hard anyway? Shouldn't the LAT ask first if for
instance, the kids in Mississippi need the money more?

            All the papers report that yesterday, a computer problem halted trading at
the New York Stock Exchange for about an hour. The papers give precise accounts
of the standstill with one glaring exception: none mentions the brand of
computer that failed. Is this lazy reporting or a gentleman's agreement not to
hurt any computer company's stock price?

         
      
   
