
   
   
      
         
            The House Budges

            The House's passage Tuesday night of the $500 billion federal spending bill
leads at USAT ,
the LAT and the WP . The papers report that the Senate is expected to
approve the bill today. The NYT leads with the continuing Mideast talks, stashing the
budget story inside. The Times says the participation by Jordan's King
Hussein appears to have created some optimism. The paper also reports two
sticking points: 1) the Israelis want to put a specific number of
Palestinians-including some Palestinian Authority cops-on trial for terrorist
attacks against Israelis, and 2) the Palestinians are insisting that safe
passage rights for their people between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip extend
to making the trip in private cars, not just mass transportation. All the
majors' fronts except the LAT 's report Day 2 of the Microsoft trial, at
which the company's lawyer made his opening statement, comparing the government
to 19th century Luddites going around smashing machines with sledgehammers.

            The papers all note what a kludge the budget process has become. For
instance, the NYT points out that the House bill incorporates numerous
policy decisions that Congress never debated. And they all tick off examples of
its extremities. The LAT , for example, reports that it includes
legislation to carry out the Chemical Weapons Convention (previously passed by
the Senate, but not implemented) as well as a measure to keep the world safe
for airborne peanuts. Ritually, everybody but USAT mentions some of the
bill's physical dimensions--the WP gives the most stats of this sort:
weight=40 pounds, height=16 inches, and the number of pages=3,825. This sort of
thing reeks of press-released pre-packaged "color"-space-consuming and
boring.

            All the papers mention that Newt Gingrich dismissed critics of the bill as
perfectionists. But USAT never explains that it was the G.O.P.'s
hard-core conservatives who were complaining. The WP does mention this, but
it's the LAT and the NYT that play the point high, explaining
that by the conservatives' lights, the bill spends too much and cuts taxes too
little. The NYT even goes out of its piece saying that the vote revealed
a severe split in the Republican Party that may be hard to patch up.

            The LAT budget story notes a last-minute deal in which Sen. Alfonse
D'Amato won approval of a provision requiring health insurance companies to
cover post-mastectomy reconstructive surgery, and explains it this way: D'Amato
was trying to undercut his election opponent's strong support among women
voters. This is a bit brisk for a news story: Isn't there any chance that
D'Amato is concerned about women not being able to afford reconstructions?

            The NYT front and the WSJ front-page business news box report that according to
the latest government figures, the U.S. foreign trade gap for August reached
the highest level-$16.77 billion-recorded since the present method of
calculation was adopted in 1992. The Journal says a government analyst
estimates the deficit is actually now the biggest since December 1985. The two
papers attribute the weak exports and strong imports behind the gap to the
global economic downturn.

            The LAT fronts high a story about the emerging tension between the
makers of legal, medical and financial software on the one hand, and lawyers,
doctors and investment professionals on the other, as the software nibbles away
at the professionals' traditional turf. The piece reports that in Texas, a
committee of lawyers is trying to ban self-help legal software via a statute
barring anyone--or anything, the paper wryly notes--from practicing law without
a license. One of the attacked programs, Quicken Family Lawyer, features Arthur
Miller, who while not a member of the Texas bar, is a professor at Harvard Law
School.

            The paper notes that the power of the Internet will only expand professional
software's reach. An example the LAT gives is the recent spate of web
sites that facilitate the sale of Viagra to those logging on and filling out a
questionnaire. In telling this story, the paper makes an interesting choice:
deciding to publish the web address for one Viagra site. This is tantamount to
free advertising. Does the LAT also intend to start publishing the phone
numbers of lawyers and doctors in stories about them?

         
      
   
