
   
   
      
         
            Viagra Falls

            The New York Times
and Los
Angeles Times lead with the latest developments in the federal budget
wrangle. The NYT headline says a final agreement is near, while the
LAT 's says the process is stalled over party differences. (Over their
front-page budget stories, both the Washington Post and USA Today
sport end-in-sight headlines.) But hey, it's Washington--they're both right.
The WP leads with the FAA's recommendation yesterday that, because of
newly discovered fire hazards, the insulation be replaced on almost all of the
world's airliners. Running FAA/insulation as its off-lead, USAT goes
instead with a story tipped yesterday on the LAT front--the feds
charging fugitive Eric Robert Rudolph, already wanted for an Alabama abortion
clinic bombing, with the 1996 Atlanta Olympics bombing. The paper notes that
federal authorities are concerned that Rudolph is being helped to evade arrest,
possibly by anti-abortion sympathizers.

            Taken together the two Times summarize the to-the-moment budget state
of play: IN: the $1.1 billion education initiative, originally proposed by
President Clinton as exclusively for hiring new teachers, but as per GOP
desires, local school districts will now retain the flexibility to use the new
money not just for hiring, but also for recruitment, testing, and training of
teachers; a $6 billion disaster assistance measure for farmers; grants to help
the needy pay heating bills; $950 million towards a national anti-missile
defense system; and $18 billion for the IMF. OUT: Billions for fixing up
dilapidated school buildings, and national student testing. STILL UP IN THE
AIR: How to conduct the 2000 Census, what to do about pornography on the
Internet, whether or not to require federal health insurance to cover the cost
of contraceptives, and whether or not to keep international family planning
organizations from using U.S. funds to influence abortion laws; and whether or
not to spend $10 million to promote overseas tobacco sales.

            The LAT usefully reminds the reader of a list of items that long ago
fell off the budget bandwagon: a tax cut, new tobacco regulations, a bill of
rights for managed care patients, and campaign finance reform. The NYT
stresses the political angles available now for each party: the coalescing
budget will allow Republicans to argue that they care about more than Monica,
while allowing the Democrats to claim that President Clinton is still
politically relevant.

            The WP and USAT stories about the FAA move point out that the
combustibility of insulation is thought to be a cause of the Swissair crash off
Nova Scotia that killed 229 people. The stories note the switch to safer
insulation can be done during regular maintenance, and that it will cost
billions, and that the FAA will eventually make it mandatory.

            
               USAT 's front section "cover story" reports that since adopting the
one-outfit-fits-all approach through the eighth grade, the Long Beach,
California public schools have seen a 91 percent drop in assaults, thefts,
vandalism and weapon and drug violations.

            Both the WP and NYT run stories inside reporting on the latest
statistics compiled by the Alan Guttmacher Institute, which indicate that the
nation's teen pregnancy rate has dropped considerably in
the 1990s. The Post headline says it's the lowest in 23 years. The
NYT header says 20 years. Both papers report that the stats indicate a
shift among teenage women away from the pill and towards injectable
contraception like Norplant and Depo-Provera, especially among blacks. Both
papers say these medications are attractive to those who only have sporadic sex
and have trouble with consistent contraceptive planning. This is a little
code-wordy. Do the papers mean that the girls in question forget to take their
pills? Then they should say so. The NYT further mystifies by citing as
an added explanation that Depo-Provera is especially appealing to some
teenagers "because it is impossible to detect." How do you detect an ingested
birth control pill?

            Many readers responded to yesterday's comment here that a USAT story
about the upcoming congressional elections buried mention of its polling sample
of "but 1,004" people. It has been pointed out to Today's Papers that this is
actually a somewhat larger sample than occurs in many newspaper polls, and is
plenty large to be accurate to within a few percentage points' margin of error.
Further, in a very interesting letter, USAT 's director of polling points
out that although his paper usually delays mentioning the sample size until the
last paragraph or so of a story, since USAT doesn't use jumps off the
front page, these mentions usually occur much earlier in stories than do
similar references in papers like the NYT that do jump. These are all
good points. Today's Papers would suggest two things: 1) putting the sample and
margin of error information in the subheadline instead; 2) Doing a story some
time explaining how nationwide elections can be reliably predicted by talking
to fewer people than you see at the mall.

            The Wall Street Journal reports that Viagra sales have er, come down. Reasons cited: the cooldown of
media hype, fear of side effects and managed-care's crackdown on reimbursement.
A men's health official is quoted saying that one factor appears to be the
Disney effect: men aren't interested in an hour-wait for a two-minute ride.

         
      
   
