
   
   
      
         
            Government Shutdown? No, Government Shut Up!

            The Washington Post leads with yesterday's partisan
spitballs: President Clinton declared that congressional Republicans are so
scandal-frenzied that that they haven't yet passed the appropriations measures
necessary to start the new fiscal year. Republicans immediately issued
retaliatory fire. The New York
Times leads with a Census Bureau report that the ranks of Americans
without health insurance swelled by 1.7 million last year. The Los Angeles
Times leads with Hurricane Georges' 100mph whirl through the Florida
Keys, a story also carried on the WP and NYT fronts. Despite 300
deaths in the Caribbean, no casualties have yet been reported in Florida.

            The NYT lead says that 16.1% of Americans (43.4 million people) are
uninsured, the highest number since 1992. The number of poor who are uninsured
held steady, while the middle class suffered a hit. This development is
surprising, the Times notes, because the economy is so robust. Among the
possible explanations for the trend: Fewer people are on welfare, which is an
automatic gateway to Medicaid coverage; small businesses, which dominate the
new-job sector, often do not provide health insurance; and costs associated
with health care and health insurance are increasing.

            The WP lead (mirrored in a NYT front-page article) reports
that an "invigorated" Clinton averted a federal shutdown--the new fiscal year
starts next week--by signing a temporary funding measure Friday. Clinton used
the opportunity to castigate Congress for putting "partisanship over progress,
politics over people" and dallying on important issues. Senate Majority Leader
Trent Lott quarterbacked the Republican counter-attack, calling Clinton's
remarks a "gratuitous slap" from the "Fundraiser-in-Chief," a reference to
Clinton's imminent departure for a three-day fundraising trip.

            Acrimony spewed fast and fierce yesterday. The LAT off-lead peddles
the paper's telephone interview with Newt Gingrich, in which the House Speaker
called for the President to waive his attorney-client privilege and cooperate
with the impeachment inquiry. Gingrich lashed out against "the level of
arrogance and duplicity by this White House. To this day, they haven't told the
truth."

            In more Lewinsky developments, reported all around: Another batch of Starr
documents is headed to the Government Printing Office for release to the public
late next week. Edited versions of the taped conversations between Linda Tripp
and Monica Lewinsky will also be released sometime thereafter.

            The NYT and WP both run inside stories, albeit with different
slants, on Germany's down-to-the-wire race for Sunday's elections. The
NYT emphasizes that the two main parties--Helmut Kohl's Christian
Democrats and Gerhard Schroeder's Social Democrats--have fundamentally
identical platforms. Since both pledge to continue Germany's strong social
programs, support the introduction of the euro, and implement tax reform, the
election may come down to German voters' personal opinions of Kohl. But do the
voters themselves know what they think? Not yet. The WP says that one in
five German voters remain undecided. The WP article sketches out
possible post-election coalition arrangements.

            The WP reports inside that the Pentagon called Friday for a review of
all military Internet sites which are accessible publicly. While not catalyzed
by any particular event, the Pentagon's action reflects a variety of security
concerns, including the online availability of personal data about
servicemen.

            Now, a royal example of how to decline a gift: The WP Style "Names
and Faces" column reports that Auckland University's Injury Prevention Centre
donated a pair of panties to Queen Elizabeth. Not just any panties, mind
you--they had special hip-protector inserts for the 98-year-old Queen Mother.
The gift was returned to the university with a note of polite refusal from the
Queen Mother's lady-in-waiting--thank you, but the gift was too much of a
"personal nature" to accept.

         
      
   
