
   
   
      
         
            Keeping Abreast of the Voters

            Tomorrow's elections dominate. USA Today
leads with its latest poll indicating that many races are too close to call.
The New York Times
goes with a nationwide look at candidates' last-minute attempts to motivate
voters, in a campaign that at this late date, the Times says, still
lacks a national theme. The Los Angeles Times goes with the last frantic hours
of California's gubernatorial and Senate candidates. The Washington Post gives much of its front to election
coverage as well, but leads with Hamas' threat to do battle with Yasser
Arafat.

            
               USAT reports that according to its plus-or-minus 5 percent poll of
1,105 likely voters, 49 percent said they preferred the Democrat in their local
congressional race and 45 percent preferred the Republican. Today's Papers is
thrilled to note that the paper runs the preceding information about margin of
error and sample size in the first few paragraphs.

            The NYT lead also comments that polling shows many races to be very close. Besides the very tight
congressional races, the paper says at least five Senate races (New York, North
Carolina, Kentucky, Nevada and Wisconsin) and ten gubernatorial contests
(Maryland, Nevada, Hawaii, Georgia, South Carolina, Massachusetts, Minnesota,
Iowa, Ohio and Rhode Island) could easily come out either way. The Times
passes along some of the more incendiary last-minute phone, radio, and leaflet
election messages such close races give rise to. Such as this from a Missouri
Democratic Party radio appeal targeted at blacks: "When you don't vote, you let
another church explode."

            In a state where media-based campaigns are the standard, even the LAT
seems stunned that California's two senatorial and two gubernatorial candidates
threw millions into last-minute ads. The paper says the Democratic candidate
for governor, Gray Davis, spent $1 million just for TV time on Sunday and
today. The other major effort seems to be going into attending church--all but
one of the four major candidates "publicly sought divine intervention."

            Yasser Arafat, having tried to show the Israelis he's serious about
upholding his end of the just-concluded peace accords by arresting scores of
Hamas members, is now, reports the WP , being threatened in a Hamas leaflet with violent retaliation. The
NYT pass at the story, running inside, includes this not-quite-Miranda
warning from Arafat's chief of police, "If anyone from the Qassam Brigades [of
Hamas] gets near a police officer, shoot him in the legs!" Meanwhile, the
Times adds in a separate story (an Agence France-Presse dispatch) that,
not to be out-thugged, the head of the Syrian- and Iranian-backed terrorist
organization, Hezbollah, speaking at a rally in Beirut, told a large crowd that
getting rid of the peace deal requires killing not just Israeli soldiers and
settlers, but also Arafat.

            
               USAT and the LAT front Clinton administration warnings to Iraq
that it could face a U.S. or allied military strike if it doesn't reconsider
its weekend decision to shut down the UN's weapons inspection effort. The
NYT runs the story inside.

            
               USAT 's front section "cover story" is a close look at the growing
problem of Web sites that sell prescription medications to loggers-on. The
paper says that medical boards in every state view the sites as illegal or at
least not meeting accepted standards of medical care. The story reports one
countermeasure the Federal Trade Commission has put into play: the
establishment of a "teaser sting site" (one of a dozen relating to various
spurious health claims and get-rich-quick schemes) that promotes fake impotence
and sex aids but leads to nothing more than a warning that such e-commerce is
dubious. Unlike a USAT story earlier this year on sex sites, today's
story contains no Web addresses. A policy change?

            The WP 's Al Kamen reports that in the sheriff's race in Storey
County, Nevada, a much-prized voting bloc is working women. And he means
working women. The county contains two legal brothels staffed by a total of 195
licensed prostitutes.

            The day after Nicholas Lemann's NYT Magazine cover story articulating
how the national conversation has been utterly taken over by the concerns of
the comfortable, the Wall Street Journal offers a front-page story on a
previously unappreciated grave national crisis: the difficulties involved in
shopping for furniture. The story's hard-luck cases include:
people with a $50,000 car and Armani suits but shabby furniture, a woman who
was able to drive home her 1998 Jeep Grand Cherokee the day she saw it, but
twice has had to wait twelve weeks for furniture ordered at Pottery Barn, and a
management consultant who despite having hired a decorator and ordering $70,000
worth of furniture including a hand-carved entertainment center, has still only
received one of the pieces. There is no indication in the story that some
people can't afford furniture and don't have houses to put it in.

         
      
   
