
   
   
      
         
            Augusto Seizure

            The Washington Post lead and the Los Angeles
Times top non-local story report Britain's arrest of former Chilean
dictator Augusto Pinochet. The New York Times
leads with Republicans' waning hopes that Flytrap will mean big gains for the
GOP on Election Day.

            The NYT lead says that strategists sense a pre-scandal atmosphere as
elections draw near. Republican hopes of gaining more than a dozen House seats
and the magic number 60 in the Senate are slim. Democrats may even go on the
offensive-Democratic campaigns are waiting anxiously on poll results for a
Washington State candidate whose commercial attacks his opponent's
participation in the impeachment proceedings.

            The WP lead story, which makes the fronts at all three weekend
papers, reports that British officials arrested a convalescing Pinochet
yesterday in a London hospital and will extradite him to Spain. The NYT
says that although Chile has called for the release of the 82 year-old former
military strong man (and permanent Chilean Senator) on grounds of diplomatic
immunity, Spain and Britain have "shrugged off the protests." Pinochet has been
accused, among other things, of atrocities against Spanish citizens in Chile.
The NYT also notes the impending legal struggle's implications for
future attempts at international prosecution of human rights violators.

            A NYT Week in Review article examines the legitimacy of McCarthyism
in light of information recently recovered from Soviet records. Sensitive
documents dealing with American foreign policy and the Manhattan Project were
given to the Soviets and may have accelerated the development of a Soviet
nuclear bomb by several years. One historian hypothesizes that if FDR had died
during his third term, two likely Soviet agents would have been front runners
for Secretary of State and Treasury Secretary.

            A Post Outlook piece says that the British agree: the United Kingdom
will not exist in 20 to 30 years. The union's dissolution, while welcomed by
the culturally confident Celts, may produce an upper lip-testing identity
crisis among the English, who lately find themselves better known for soccer
hooliganism and tainted beef than for bus stop queues and dead fish handshakes.
While the NYT ran a similar article last Wednesday, the Outlook piece
delves deeper into the historical and political background of the crumbling
union.

            The New York Times Magazine features a special issue on the business
of sports. A story frets that media giants' purchases of sports teams will
change the way games are played. Who'll stop Fox (owner of the Los Angeles
Dodgers), Disney (Anaheim Angels), and Time Warner (Atlanta Braves) from
forcing star athletes to play when it will boost ratings on their own networks
or from altering rules to make sports more TV friendly?

            Several Times Magazine stories explore fan loyalty. In one, Baltimore
Orioles fans sound off to the O's owner, demanding cheaper tickets and more
dedicated players (the owner is noncommittal). In another, a New York Knicks
fan complains that her courtside seats have shot up in price even as the team
declines. Other stories profile a superagent winning mammoth contracts for his
baseball player clients, a rookie quarterback learning how to play the
endorsements game, and NBA Commissioner David Stern, who micromanages the
league's image, coordinating everything from media coverage to promotional
"sock giveaways."

         
      
   
