
   
   
      
         
            Taking Stock in America

            The top story at USAT, the NYT and the WP is Benjamin Netanyahu's home-front
political battles arising from his just-signed peace deal with Yasser Arafat.
This is also played above the fold at the LAT, which leads with the paper's own
study revealing that despite being the most populous state, California stands
31st in per capita share of federal education spending.

            The papers report that as soon as his plane landed in Israel, Netanyahu
began vigorously defending the Wye deal with Arafat. According to the coverage,
he portrayed the agreement as his success at getting the very best possible out
of the land-for-security Oslo peace process he inherited from his Labor
predecessors. Everybody quotes him saying, "We have closed the holes of the
Swiss cheese created by Oslo." The NYT quotes his direct pitch to
militant Israeli settlers: "You are us and we are you. We love you."
Koo-koo-ka-choob.

            The NYT and WP say Netanyahu could face a no-confidence vote
this week, while the LAT doesn't give a time frame, and USAT says
it's today. In view of the no-confidence threat, the WP notes the oddity
of Netanyahu's Labor slam, since it's the doves who may save his government,
with conservative settlers expressing great disaffection. All this political
intrigue, even though, as the papers report, about three-quarters of all
Israelis approve of the accord.

            The NYT and LAT include in their lead stories reporting on
unrest among the Palestinians as well. The two papers note that violent clashes
broke out in the Palestinian-controlled city of Ramallah, resulting in the
death of one Fatah member, after Palestinian security forces, pursuant to the
new agreement, raided the Fatah headquarters there, confiscating documents and
weapons and making five arrests." The NYT notes that Palestinian
lawmaker Hanan Ashrawi was a witness to the death, but the WP quotes her
only on the general political situation and doesn't seem to know about
this.

            The NYT front continues the sprawling series on adoption it started
yesterday. One of the main points of today's installment is that the demand for
white American-born infants is so great that even though it is not legal to bid
on or buy an adopted child, there has arisen an entire network of
adoption-related intermediaries who sell various kinds of access to
child-bearing women. In effect, the paper states, today there is only the
thinnest line between buying adoption services and buying a child.

            The story of the upstate New York abortion doctor murdered in his home
continues to garner a lot of coverage. The LAT runs a front-page
encomium, while the WP reports inside that for quite some time, he had
received phone and written threats. The NYT reports on the manhunt for
the sniper and also that the Georgia-based computer programmer who hosts an
anti-abortion web site called "The Nuremberg Files," where the doctor's name
had a line drawn through it shortly after he was murdered, denies any advance
information about the shooting. The NYT lead editorial has this reaction
to the crime: "If an armed police officer has to be stationed outside every
abortion provider's home and office, 24 hours a day, let it be done."

            It's well-known that convicts paper the legal system with suits, briefs and
motions to spring themselves, but a WSJ front-page feature reports on a
prisoner who has put the same kind of energy into stockholder suits and makes a
decent income from it. Over the past three years, says the Journal , one
convicted tax cheat has taken in more than $30,000 making (dubious) allegations
of stockholder fraud against various corporations. All this without owning any
stock in any of the companies.

            In the aftermath of the recent revelation that a celebrated 19-year-old
writer on "Felicity" is actually thirty-two, the LAT front reports that
according to a new study from the West Coast branch of the movie and TV writers
union, writers under age thirty--most of them white males--are increasingly
dominating TV and movies. Since it is obvious that studios will want to
immediately correct this grievous social injustice, Today's Papers feels
compelled to confess that it is a black woman over fifty.

         
      
   
