
   
   
      
         
            Y2K Bombshell

            
               USA
Today 's lead is that the Pentagon office responsible for the safety and
security of the U.S. nuclear stockpile falsified reports certifying its ability
to deal with Y2K problems. The Washington Post goes with the finding of American experts
that Russia's economic crisis has left its stocks of uranium and plutonium
increasingly vulnerable to theft and diversion. The New York Times
leads with word that because most states are behind schedule in their attempts
to eliminate Y2K problems from their computer systems, it's likely that some
people receiving welfare and other anti-poverty benefits will have their
payments and/or services interrupted. The Los Angeles
Times leads with the goings-on at the China/Japan summit in Tokyo
(which is also fronted by the WP , and carried inside at the NYT ),
where leaders of the two countries agreed to deeper economic, environmental,
and social ties, but haggled over the form and wording of Japan's official
apology for the brutal acts it committed against China during World War II.

            
               USAT says the DOD Inspector General concluded that despite its claims
to the contrary, the Pentagon's "Special Weapons Agency" never performed the
required tests on three of its five essential computer systems. Also, it's
revealed that overall the Pentagon got a "D-minus" grade for its Y2K efforts
from a House oversight committee. The paper quotes the DOD Y2K czar saying
nevertheless that "there's very little real mischief going on here."

            The Post lead quotes an American nuclear security expert saying that
the Russian economy is the world's greatest proliferation
threat--since the ruble was devalued last summer, the government has
slashed the salaries of nuclear plant workers and guards, which means not only
fewer people protecting the nukes but also more people prone to the temptations
of selling them. Several other authorities, including a Clinton administration
policy maker, agreed. But the nukemeisters on the other side display to the
Post the same lack of alarm USAT finds at the Pentagon: "I am not
particularly worried," says Russia's atomic energy minister.

            The NYT lead reports that according to the General
Accounting Office, only one-third of the 421 computer systems used nationwide
for the major health, welfare and nutrition benefit programs are ready for the
year 2000. The piece goes on to quote a White House official with Y2K
responsibilities complaining that the problem is wrongly viewed as merely an
information technology issue, and a California official who warns, "If social
services are disrupted, you'll have more than computer problems. You could have
civil disturbances..."

            The LAT lead says that the Japanese delegation finally issued an
unsigned document that refers to some of Japan's prior expressions of remorse
about China, but stops short of actually apologizing. But the document does
contain one breakthrough: the first official Japanese reference to the
"invasion" of China. The paper explains why Japan is hesitant to go further
than this: it fears Chinese demands for compensatory damages.

            Yesterday's LAT front reported that Exxon and Mobil were in serious
merger talks (a story that today runs on the front at the NYT and
USAT ), and today, the LAT 's front says most energy experts
conclude that such a merger would be good for oil and gas production worldwide,
thus benefiting consumers. The resulting company would have an increased
capability to develop new oil deposits. A Wall Street Journal front-page feature er, refines this
point, saying that Mobil brings with it a far more aggressive approach to
exploration.

            The WP reports that after a long fallow period, the CIA is recruiting
again. The Agency has narrowed its focus to 66 colleges and universities with
which it either has or intends to develop, close ties. The list includes, says
the Post , Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard, Cornell,
Maryland, Virginia, Virginia Tech, Howard, Grambling, Brigham Young, Texas
A&M, Texas, Michigan, Ohio State, Purdue, Stanford and Berkeley. (What
happened to those traditional spook stomping grounds, Yale and Princeton?)

            That USAT story about Y2K and nuclear weapons control includes the
definitive Washingtonthink quotation. Despite the revelations, the co-chairman
of the Senate Y2K committee definitely sees a glass half full: "There aren't as
many people lying to us as there used to be."

         
      
   
