
   
   
      
         
            From On Hyde

            The papers are dominated by the political reactions of the White House and
its critics to Saturday's House Judiciary vote forwarding articles of
impeachment to the full House. Most of the leads report that Republican
congressional leaders (the Washington Post specifies Tom Delay, Dick Armey and Henry
Hyde; the Los Angeles Times , New York Times
and USA
Today cite Hyde) have called for Clinton to resign and then have
Clinton's remarks in Israel rejecting the suggestion, saying the possibility
has never even crossed his mind. And all but USAT have Clinton's renewed
denial that he committed Lewinsky-related perjury.

            All the papers save USAT cite worsening House prospects for the White
House, with the LAT quoting Rep. Charles Schumer as saying the odds for
impeachment are now "quite strong." One factor that all the papers note:
Speaker-designate Bob Livingston's pronouncement Saturday night that he thinks
a censure alternative should be kept from House consideration. This would
remove a non-impeachment option that would have still allowed members to
criticize Clinton. The WP and LAT say that House Democrats are
planning various procedural moves to try to force censure before the House
anyway. USAT cites fresh polling--with nice high mentions of sample size
(865) and margin of error (4 percent)--indicating that popular opposition to
impeachment has slipped 7 percent in the past week.

            The NYT has some unusually harsh language from Republicans. Tom DeLay is quoted
saying, "I'm suggesting the President of the United States cannot be believed
and I think it's reflective in his foreign policy....Saddam Hussein knows it
and that's why he jerks his chain all the time." And the Times has Rep.
Billy Tauzin saying, "You see he's lied to me personally on a very serious
matter," referring, says the paper, to the energy tax in the 1993 budget deal.
The paper explains after these quotes that "Clinton has never been well liked
in Congress."

            The NYT front-page pic of Clinton touching Yitzhak Rabin's headstone
reveals the president's thousand-yard stare, and the LAT reports that
Clinton looked fatigued and that by the end of his day in Israel "his eyes had
narrowed to slits."

            Both the NYT and LAT fronts do "man-in-the-street" stories
about public sentiment regarding impeachment. The NYT 's is focused on
Canton, Ohio and the LAT 's on Abilene, Texas. And of course, both pieces
quote a colorful array of characters on both sides of the question. Now, what
do these pieces really accomplish? At least the NYT has the excuse that
Canton has been an uncanny bellwether of presidential prospects in several
elections. But still, such pieces are utterly random and anecdotal. Polls are
bad enough, but these pieces are basically bad polls.

            A Wall Street Journal front-page feature describes a
stunning reason why nuclear proliferation may finally have become unstoppable:
the radical availability now of the raw computing power nuclear weapons
programs require. The story convinces right off the bat, with the dean of
Stanford's Engineering school explaining how you could craft a supercomputer
with a couple of thousand bucks and a ten-minute trip to Fry's Electronics. After all, the paper
points out, the entire U.S. nuclear arsenal was designed on computers running
at or below the speed of most current PCs. According to the Journal ,
under newly loosened export regulations, China has procured nearly 300
high-speed computers, some of which have "ended up in the wrong hands."

            The WP reports that David Boies, Dept. of Justice lead attorney for
the Microsoft case, has since last April been charging the government only $50
an hour, compared to his regular fee of $550 an hour. If Boies lowered his fee
in order to keep his share of work on the case, would that be illegal?

            In case you're wondering who exactly Henry Hyde thinks he is, consider what
he says in the NYT in response to the claim that the American people do
not support impeachment: "Look, if Jesus Christ had taken a poll, he would
never have preached the gospel."

         
      
   
