
   
   
      
         
            Third Way, Twice Tony

            The New York Times and the Los Angeles
Times lead with the House's passage of an $80 billion tax cut package
which is unlikely to pass the Senate or be approved by President Clinton. The
Washington Post runs the tax-cut story below the fold and
leads instead with an extraordinary first-person epic that recounts a harrowing
500-mile trek through Taliban country.

            The tax-cut measure, approved by a 229-195 vote, is opposed by most
Democrats, who are concerned that it would cut into the surplus set aside for
social security. "I insist that we reserve the entire surplus until we have
seized this historic opportunity to save social security," President Clinton
commented from California. The NYT and LAT , picking up on
Republicans' arguments, detect possible hypocrisy in Clinton's position: the
President has previously sought to dip into the budget surplus to fund, among
other things, the peacekeeping mission in Bosnia, increased embassy security,
and farm relief. House Speaker Newt Gingrich used the Saturday session to point
out that Congress is working on real issues. "We are not in California on a
fund-raiser," Gingrich pointedly remarked.

            The WP 's lead leaves the impression that the Afghan people resent
many of the Taliban's practices, particularly the mandatory veils for women and
the ban on music. Girls, officially forbidden to attend school, are often
covertly educated at home by their parents. The article also showcases
Afghanistan's devastation: Roads are still pockmarked with "jagged craters
gouged by Russian bombs and anti-tank mines," and refugees from the Taliban's
sweep struggle to survive in malaria-infested camps.

            The LAT front page carries a long historical narrative about the
U.S.'s deliberations, in the early- to mid-1960s, over whether to bomb China to
derail its development of nuclear weapons. The article's main source is newly
released State Department documents about U.S. policy toward China under
President Lyndon Johnson. Among other things, the piece says that President
Johnson (and President Kennedy before him) sounded out the Soviet Union on
heading off China's nuclear capabilities, but the Soviet Union flatly ignored
the overtures. China tested its first nuclear bomb in 1964.

            The NYT off-lead gives a gripping play-by-play drama of John
Meriwether's fateful last few weeks and months. Meriwether is at the helm of
the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management LP, which was recently bailed out
by a coterie of bankers and brokerage firms. Among other details the
Times describes the tense atmosphere at the rescue board meeting in the
Fed conference room, in which rival firms were persuaded to take highly unusual
collective bailout action.

            The NYT reports inside that seven southeastern Europe nations,
including Italy, Greece, and Turkey, agreed Saturday to establish a
multinational southeastern Europe defense force. This force, however, may be
more symbolic of military partnership than effective in providing real military
assistance to troubled areas such as Kosovo.

            The op-ed columns do battle over the Third Way. "Hardly a week passes
without a public figure in Britain, Germany, or the United States hailing the
coming of the Third Way," laments Tony Judt in an NYT piece.
Bingo, Tony! The op-ed page in today's WP "Outlook" features a piece by none other than British Prime Minister Tony Blair,
entitled "Third Way, Better Way." Quick primer on the Third Way: Blair says it
is a union of democratic socialism and liberalism ("Our approach is neither
laissez-faire nor one of state interference"). Judt uncharitably likens it to
vague triangulating, falling somewhere "between Communism and capitalism. TP
leaves it to the reader to judge the victor.

         
      
   
