
   
   
      
         
            Augusto Justice

            The New York Times
and Washington Post lead with the ruling by Britain's
highest court that Augusto Pinochet must remain under arrest in England
subject to extradition elsewhere because his status as an ex-head of state does
not confer legal immunity. The Los Angeles
Times leads with another in its series of important stories about the
abuse of inmates in the California state prison system--this one reporting an
investigative panel's conclusion that two dozen fatal or serious inmate
shootings at the state's most notorious prison were not justified. Dr. Jack Kevorkian's arrest yesterday in connection with the
euthanasia broadcast last Sunday on "60 Minutes" makes the fronts of the majors
putting out editions today.

            The WP reports that all five Law Lords ruled that a former head of
state, unlike a sitting one, has but limited immunity: he or she can be forced
into court to answer for actions that are not part of the legitimate function
of government. This finding prompted, the Post reports, Pinochet's
lawyers to observe that their client is therefore vulnerable to prosecution
only because he stepped down in favor of a democratic government. But the
crucial ruling, both leads report, was the lords' 3-2 decision that torture and
hostage taking are not legitimate government functions. Therefore, they
explain, the Pinochet matter will be disposed of in a British court when Spain
presses its extradition request, unless the Home Secretary, Jack Straw, decides
otherwise. The Post says the early betting is that Straw will not
intervene. On the other hand, both papers note that former Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher, appreciative of Pinochet's pro-British stand during the
Falklands War, has already publicly appealed for his release.

            The Post says the Pinochet ruling is a watershed in human rights law,
and the Times says it marks a potentially significant broadening of the
powers of prosecutors to pursue those charged with crimes against humanity. The
LAT refers to the development as "a wake-up call to tyrants around the
world."

            Although Kevorkian claims to have presided over 120-plus mercy suicides, in
this most recent case, he directly caused death. And indeed, as the papers
point out, he openly admits he took this extra step to encourage a legal
showdown. The papers report that in filing a first-degree murder case against
Kevorkian, the county prosecutor said that the consent of the dying man was no
legal defense. In a separate NYT story about the legal ins and outs of
the case, some lawyers are quoted making the following argument against a
murder verdict: Murder requires malice, the disregard for human life. Therefore
a homicide undertaken out of regard for life cannot be murder. But the
Post and LAT make it clear that it's not just murder at issue,
reporting that Kevorkian is also being charged with violating Michigan's
brand-new ban on assisted suicide.

            The NYT and WP run inside stories reporting that according to
a human rights group, a recent crackdown by China against Protestant congregations that
do not formally accept the leadership of the government has resulted in the
arrest of seventy church members. The Times says one leader of such a
church, shot while fleeing police, is now the subject of a nationwide manhunt.
The Post says another was beaten with a wet rope and a nightstick, and
says the authorities are using heavy fines as a prime weapon in this campaign
of suppression. The paper also usefully points out that China recently signed a
UN document protecting religious freedom.

            Do you feel the need for a new government sex scandal? Relax, the Navy has
dropped anchor. The NYT and WP , following up a story in
Wednesday's Washington Times , report that a Pentagon admiral has been
accused of improperly steering military contracts to the firm owned by the
woman he was committing adultery with. Although the admiral is named in both
stories, the woman is not. This seems unfair.

            A story inside the WP suggests Linda Tripp may not be convicted in
Maryland of illegally recording her conversations with Monica Lewinsky. First,
Maryland requires showing that Tripp knew she was breaking the law when she
taped, and second, Tripp's immunity agreement with Ken Starr means the tapes
she gave him cannot be used by the Maryland prosecutor. So he has to find other
copies.

            An AP story running in both the Post and the NYT reports that
last week a Boston man who suffered a heart attack became the first person on a
domestic flight to have his life saved by a defibrillator, a device only
recently available on U.S. airliners. The man serves on the Boston Public
Health Commission, where he has promoted the installation in office buildings
and malls of...defibrillators.

         
      
   
