
   
   
      
         
            Forgetting the Present

            George Santayana predicted
an unfortunate fate for those who cannot remember the past. What would he say
about political leaders who cannot even remember the present?

            Take, for example, President
Clinton's promise in his Democratic Convention speech--repeated more than once
in Sunday night's debate--that he would offset the harsh effects of the
recently passed welfare rollback by giving "businesses a tax credit for every
person hired off welfare and kept employed." What a can't-miss idea. The very
words fairly glow: "tax credit," "businesses," "off welfare," "employed."

            Trouble
is, we already have such a tax credit--it just got renewed as part of the
minimum-wage bill, and it's a proven failure. The Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (a k
a the Work Opportunity Tax Credit) has been a ghastly disappointment ever since
it was enacted in 1978. Early analysis showed that most employers using it
didn't hire more or different people. Instead, they simply got their
accountants to review personnel records at year's end to see who among recent
hires might qualify for the tax credit.

            Tighter rules have, presumably, curbed that abuse, but far
more damaging findings emerged from a couple of controlled experiments in
Dayton, Ohio, and two cities in Wisconsin. To their surprise and dismay,
researchers found that when eligible job seekers (welfare recipients and other
categories of "disadvantaged" workers) were sent off to potential employers
bearing in hand the tax credits or vouchers that labeled them as high-risk
cases, they were less likely--far less likely--to find jobs than if they just
applied on their own. And that was back when the tax credit was considerably
more generous than it is now. From these and other studies, says Brookings
economist Gary Burtless, who participated in many of them, "we can safely
conclude that sending someone out in the market saying, 'Hire me, I'm for
sale,' is a bad idea."

            For that
matter, so are all the efforts to engineer social and economic behavior through
the tax code of which Clinton is so enamored--the embellished tax preferences
for buying and selling homes, having a child or putting one in day care,
sending the kids to college or going back yourself, saving up for a nursing
home, and so on. There's so much evidence on this point that in 1986, both
parties in Congress agreed that tax subsidies are, at best, an inefficient way
to promote desired behavior, since most of the money goes to pay for things
that are going to happen anyway. At worst, they are a complete rip-off, since
they are almost impossible for the IRS to monitor. Congress gave the tax code a
much-needed cleanup job, with lower rates as the reward, and everyone promised
they wouldn't junk it up again.

            
But that was 10 long years ago, and no one
would expect a politician to remember that far back. Let's return to the
forgotten present.

            
Attention-deficit disorder is also afflicting the Dole team. On the campaign
trail, Dole was still calling for the misbegotten Homemaker IRA a
week after it had passed into law. Dole has apparently not forgotten his own
past record on taxes--he correctly, if ineffectually, pointed out during
Sunday's debate that his 1982 tax bill was not a true tax hike, as normally
understood, but primarily a canceling of corporate tax breaks not yet in place
and crackdowns on cheaters to collect taxes already owed. (He did fail to note
that the Social Security bailout of the early '80s, about which he also bragged
repeatedly, included a large tax increase.) But Dole's grasp of specifics
seemed a lot less secure when it came to defending his current plan to
cut taxes by some $550 billion over the next six years while still balancing
the budget. (Clinton also managed to forget the incredible elements in his own
seven-year budget-balancing plan, as he touted it repeatedly during the
debate.)

            The architects of Dole's tax plan argue that critics have
paid far too much attention to the relatively modest "supply-side" feedback
effects counted on to pump up tax collections by promoting growth and reducing
tax avoidance. The real guts, they contend, lie in the promised budget cuts,
which, since they amount to a mere nickel out of every dollar of cut-able
programs over the six-year period, are surely an easily achievable target.

            A mere nickel? Piece o' cake.
Or at least you might think so if last week's action in Washington escaped your
attention. Congress and the president indulged in a round of mutual
self-congratulation over their agreement on an appropriations package for the
new fiscal year. "You guys did such a great job," President Clinton told
congressional leaders as they finished up on their work, "You should really be
proud."

            Gee, and
they didn't have to close down the government even once. Just one small detail
that might have given Dole and his illustrious advisers a moment's pause: The
appropriations measures, while restrained by recent standards, nonetheless
weigh in at probably $16 billion over the target the GOP Congress set for
domestic discretionary spending only a year ago. The Republicans will argue the
shortfall isn't that big, because they are going to cover some of it by onetime
savings: dipping into the bank insurance funds--never mind the S&L
collapse, that was eons ago--and, of course, selling off part of the broadcast
spectrum-- the most oversold commodity since the Brooklyn Bridge. Didn't anyone
remind them that Dole had already reserved the spectrum sale to help pay for
his tax-cut plan?

            
A $16 billion discrepancy may not seem much
when measured against the total budget, with all its sacrosanct or unavoidable
obligations. But it's a significant shortfall if you are sufficiently
present-minded to recall that Congress (and the president) have separately
committed themselves to mammoth--and almost entirely unspecified--cuts in the
magical year of 2002, when the budget is to alight, if only for a moment, on
balance. And it is on top of these cuts--before the first small step of which
the Congress and the president just blinked--that the additional Dole cuts are
to be made, an amount totaling close to 40 percent of the vulnerable part of
the budget. Assuming the bare-bones basic functions of government are to be
maintained, where then will be the room for any border-control guards or
anti-terrorism measures, or Head Start or education grants or peanut subsidies
or national parks, or disaster relief--let alone the enhancements that Congress
deemed so necessary this October?

            No
doubt--as former Congressional Budget Office Director Bob Reischauer points
out--with all the election-year pressure on Republicans to show they really
aren't so bad and the temptation for Clinton to show his newfound muscle, the
final appropriations package isn't bad. That is, as Reischauer quickly adds,
"if budget balance is your prime desire and you believe that cuts in
discretionary spending are the way to go."

            But that, of course, is the real and present issue that
neither congressional party addressed, transfixed as they and the media are by
the fantasy budgets offered on the campaign trail by their respective
standard-bearers. A budget is not a mere political prop: Whether by design or
inadvertence, it's the end product of politics, the actual blueprint for
government's role in society.

            This budget makes some
big--if dubious--choices, if only implicitly. The Pentagon gets an extra $9.4
billion this year (with more to come) for weapons systems and other sundries it
doesn't want, only a few weeks after another set of committees decided to cut
$21.2 billion from programs for the needy over this and the next two years. But
most important choices were not made. Social Security's problems won't be
manifest until the next century, but it would be both easier and kinder to
start making modest reforms now. Medicare, on the other hand, is exploding
right now. So, for that matter, is the world's population. But overseas
family-planning programs, despite minor restoration, were left at a funding
level more than a third below that of a few years ago.

            Political leaders are often
faulted for living in the past or ignoring the future.

            We'd be lucky if ours simply
got a firm hold on the here and now.

         
      
   
