
   
   
      
         
            What Lincoln Bedroom?

            Your task today is to study
the adjacent photograph carefully, then to locate the notorious Lincoln
Bedroom. This is neither a trick question nor an implausible request: The
Lincoln Bedroom (this is a hint) is in the White House, and that's just what
you are looking at--a photograph of the White House interior taken by National
Park Service photographer Abbie Rowe in 1950.

            Abe
Lincoln's room has, of course, become Washington's most infamous place to sleep
in under the Clinton administration, surpassing in moral infamy even Dick
Morris' room at the nearby Jefferson Hotel. Many unworthy people have been
allowed to spend the night with Abe's memory, fat-cat campaign contributors and
the president's Hollywood buddies among them. It has become a case of History
Defiled.

            Ken Bode, moderator of PBS' journalists round-table,
Washington Week in Review , spelled out the case for defilement right
after the story broke that big-time campaign money would get you booked
overnight with Honest Abe. This is the room, Bode told viewers, where Churchill
planned the strategy that won the war, the room where Europe's fleeing crowned
heads found refuge. Bode's implication--and it underlies all the countless
portentous references by the press corps to the room's classless guests--was
clear: This is political sleaze at its lowest, with Clinton putting a price tag
on the presidency and auctioning off our national integrity and memory in the
process.

            Now, back
to the photograph, and to our search for that room. You will, by now, have
noticed that the White House interior is filled with a mesh of steel girders
holding up the exterior, and that the sorts of things that are usually said to
make up a room--a floor, a ceiling, doors, a complete set of walls--are
missing.

            
Where are they? Well, by the time this photo
was taken, most of these things were probably in a landfill in northern
Virginia; that's where much--though not quite all--of the original White House
interior went around midcentury. The fact is that the White House's guts barely
predate Eisenhower. This doesn't get Clinton off the hook, but that's not our
text. More interesting are the rules of the Washington memory game. The Park
Service's pictures of a totally gutted White House have become a kind of
forbidden imagery, evidence of something that none of us seems to want to
remember happened, because it seems to snap--by our own hand--a rare link to
glory. Some pictures are allowed to speak their thousand words because we like
what they have to say; some pictures are silenced. This is one.

            It is
hardly a secret that the White House interior became a structural replica under
Truman: It was about to collapse. The floor in Margaret Truman's room had
actually broken under the weight of her piano, and Harry Truman himself was
directed to sleep in the comparatively sound Lincoln Bedroom (if indeed it was
Lincoln's bedroom; he may have used it only as a study), lest he find himself
one morning in the Red Room downstairs.

            The place was closed for about a year and a half. Work
there was widely reported, and thousands of pieces of the presidents'
house--old bricks and bits of wood--were openly sold as souvenirs. There are
some significant cues to remembering all this, especially the attempt on
Truman's life by Puerto Rican nationalists that occurred at Blair House--where
the Trumans had to live during the reconstruction--and cost one Secret Service
man his life: Giant memorial plaques are affixed to the fence in front of Blair
House telling this story to anyone who hasn't heard it.

            Nor are
the Park Service pictures documenting the work all that rare. Our own
photograph--featuring a man bulldozing new basements that will house, among
other things, the executive atomic-bomb shelter--was reproduced full-page in
David McCullough's 1992 best seller, Truman , which came out in an
election year in which both major candidates were doing Truman impressions. The
thorough McCullough devotes 12 pages to the details of the renovation, down to
the number of old bricks (95,000) trucked to Mount Vernon for reuse there.

            
Yet, the myth of White House continuity keeps
resurfacing--Jacqueline Kennedy's famous television tour doubtless played a
role in establishing it. When it was revealed a while back that Franklin
Roosevelt had installed listening devices in the Oval Office, a workman from
those days told reporters how he'd drilled the necessary holes in the floor
under FDR's desk, adding, in a phrase that was reported without comment, that
those holes were "probably still there." Of course, the many thousands of White
House visitors every year line up to see where John Adams' wife hung the
laundry, where Lincoln lay in state, and where Churchill slept--not to see
restorations of those locales.

            
McCullough writes that "by the standards of latter-day preservation," the
dumping of the White House interior represents "a needless and tragic loss."
Still, it is obviously a historic place, and not just because the famous
exterior remains (as do the mantelpieces, chandeliers, and paneling that were
later reinstalled). The Lincoln Bedroom, for example, contains none other than
Lincoln's own ornate bed (if indeed he ever slept in it; questions have been
raised about that, too), the one for which Calvin Coolidge's wife labored two
years to make a sufficiently large quilt. On the other hand, the President's
Box at Ford's Theatre contains the chair in which Lincoln was sitting when
Booth shot him, and no one would argue that Ford's is anything but a replica.
(For that matter, Lincoln's church on New York Avenue was rebuilt itself as a
near-replica some years ago, too; rather a lot of Lincoln's city is
architectural Potemkinism.)

            Beds, chairs, and pews are where history rests its aging
bottom in Washington. Indeed, the capital has been having a continuing debate
about its past--what to revere and what to demolish--for years now, and has
destroyed a good many places with real claims to historical value, places as
old as the White House, with bricks from the same brickyard. The deciding
factor in what stays and goes, apart from "charm," is often the same: Who is
associated with it? Where does it rank in the Great Man Theory of Tour Bus
History? Indeed, as the capital ages, its history is increasingly becoming
whatever associative past you can conjure up as ornament, reward, or
weapon.

            Lincoln's association with
the idea of the room makes the room historic, even if there's not much there.
So, secondarily, does Churchill's. But in fact, Churchill was reportedly ill at
ease in the Lincoln Bedroom; he is said to have often moved himself across the
hall in the course of the night. Why? Because while there was an unrenovated
Lincoln Bedroom, there was also said to be a Lincoln Ghost. Truman himself
encountered him, he wrote, in the form of mysterious knocks on the door and
receding footfalls. Dutch Queen Wilhelmina, one of wartime Europe's refugee
crowned heads, fainted upon meeting Abe, or so she said. But then she is also
reported to have heard Andrew Jackson's ribald laughter coming from her bed in
the Rose Bedroom.

            Abe's spirit has been pretty
quiet since the midcentury restoration. But no matter. By now, we've turned the
White House itself into a kind of clanking ghost of presidents past, its very
rooms suffused with the great spirits of those who slept there. Once conjured,
it throws its looming shadow over the unworthy and undeserving who dare
trespass. Well might they tremble.

         
      
   
