
   
   
      
         
            George F. Will

            George Will has a book
coming out this week. This normally would not qualify as news, since George
Will always has a book coming out and it is usually disappearing quietly into
the back catalog of the Conservative Book of the Month Club ( The Woven
Figure: Conservatism and America's Fabric, 
               1994-1997 ; The
Leveling Wind: Politics, the Culture, and Other News, 1990-1994 ;
Restoration: Congress, Term Limits, and the Recovery of Deliberative
Democracy [1992] ...).

            But this
week's book is news, because this week's book is about baseball. When Will
writes about baseball, America pays attention. Men at Work: The Craft of
Baseball (1990), his first baseball book, outsold his 10 other books
combined. It is also the best-selling baseball book ever. Will's new volume,
Bunts: Curt Flood, Camden Yards, Pete Rose, and Other Reflections on
Baseball , collects 20 years of his columns and essays on the sport.

            Will, who was supposed to be the Walter Lippmann of this
conservative era, finds himself in a curious position. He writes a twice-weekly
column that appears in nearly 500 newspapers and a biweekly column for
Newsweek . He also appears every Sunday morning on ABC's This
Week . His pinched, professorial face may be the most recognizable mug in
journalism. His starchy tenor is certainly among its most recognizable voices.
Yet Will's views aren't news anymore. His columns don't shape national policy
and aren't heeded by Washington's power brokers. He's no big deal.

            Will titled his latest book
Bunts because "bunts are modest and often useful things." Will himself
has become a bunt. Why this has happened has less to do with Will than it does
with the state of the newspaper column.

            The middle
50 years of this century were a golden age for newspaper columnists. When
Lippmann launched his column in 1931, he had no competitors. Journalism was
smaller, politics was smaller, and the power elite could be reached easily
through a few newspaper op-ed pages. Lippmann and a few colleagues (Joe Alsop,
especially) were more than just columnists; they were national actors, both
shaping and reflecting popular opinion. When they spoke, Washington
listened.

            
In the early '80s, Will seemed poised to assume
the Lippmann mantle. Born in 1941, he had jumped from Kennedy Democrat to
Goldwater Republican while a student at Oxford in the early '60s. After a few
years teaching political science, Will entered journalism in the early '70s as
Washington editor for the National Review , making his name as one of the
first conservatives to call for Nixon's impeachment. In 1974, the Washington
Post gave him an op-ed column. A TV gig, Newsweek column, and
Pulitzer Prize soon followed. William F. Buckley Jr. had preached the
conservative gospel to a relatively small following. Will, syndicated in
hundreds of papers, was the first conservative columnist to reach a mainstream
national audience. Will became opinion journalism's enfant terrible ,
slashing the dearest liberal icons and pushing a hard-right foreign policy. (He
was more terrible than enfant : Will never had anything youthful
about him.)

            Ronald
Reagan's election propelled Will to national fame. He was pegged as the
journalist who would popularize the new conservative age. Nancy Reagan lunched
with him; Ronald Reagan called him to chat. (His closeness to Reagan got Will
.) His column was perceived as Washington's official opinion. He was fluent in
all media: His columns were stylish and eloquent--they were greased up with
quotes from dead Englishmen--and they made readers feel smarter. His orotund
style translated surprisingly well to television, where--even as a
40-year-old--Will managed to exude an aura of ancient wisdom (the bow tie and
priggish manner helped). The Wall Street Journal labeled him "the most
powerful journalist in America."

            But Will was not destined for Lippmannian omnipotence. The
first limit on his influence was that he was not quite as much of a Reagan
courtier as he was made out to be. often clashed with Reagan policy, and he was
a savage George Bush critic. (He tagged Bush a "lap dog.") More importantly,
journalism wouldn't permit another Lippmann. When Lippmann wrote, columnists
were new and few. By the '80s, America was inundated by opinion. The TV talk
shows diluted the influence of columnists. So did other columnists. Will, who
was the mainstream conservative columnist in the '70s, found himself
outflanked on the right by William Safire, Pat Buchanan, Robert Novak, and
Charles Krauthammer. He was just one smart voice among dozens.

            Like
everyone else on op-ed pages, Will became just a columnist, a twice-weekly
habit. Now, after 24 years of punditry, he has settled into the role of the
institutionalized wise man of journalism, mining quotes for our edification.
(In just two minutes of our conversation he squeezed in Pascal, Aristotle, and
John Stuart Mill.) On television, he can be relied on consistently to connect
the Topic of the Day to first principles, to forsake the cheap quip for a
larger point. And despite having written 2,500 newspaper columns, he (usually)
avoids the dull mediocrity that mires so many regular op-ed writers (Anthony
Lewis, Ellen Goodman ...). Will is not totally predictable. During the
past four months, he's written about subjects ranging from Puerto Rican
statehood to the Unabomber to the rape of Nanking, and only sparingly about
Flytrap. His newspaper prose may not be deathless, but it's not as lifeless as
the piled-up clichés that pass for the average column. He is, in short, still
above average. That is: He is mostly, rather than entirely, forgettable. (All
columnists wish we could be so lucky.)

            
Will says he is comfortable with his place on
the margins. He thinks Lippmann's influence has been "wildly exaggerated." He
never aspired to be a Lippmann and rejects the idea of Government by Columnist:
"I don't want to live in a country blown about by gusts of wind raised by
journalists. National policy should not be directed by Jovian thunderbolts from
Washington journalists. That is not the way a great continental nation should
live." ("A great continental nation"--I love that phrase, but what the
hell does it mean?)

            But there
is one place where Will's journalism does seem to matter, where he does toss
thunderbolts: baseball. Men at Work and the columns in Bunts are
fresher, less rococo, less pretentious, than his political columns. In Men
at Work , Will found a smart new way for an average fan to think about the
game. Instead of indulging in the usual teary nostalgia about baseball (that
means you, Ken Burns), Will considered it as a craft, explaining exactly why a
manager calls a hit-and-run now and not on the next pitch, how a pitcher sets
up his fastball, why a shortstop moves in a step for one kind of double play
and out a step for another. Not terribly analytical about his politics, Will is
a trenchant rationalist when it comes to hardball.

            Will's baseball writing is so good, in fact, that he's even
being mentioned as a candidate for baseball commissioner. His name has been
floated in the past few weeks, as it was in 1989 and 1994. He is a long shot:
He lacks business experience, and he alienated owners with his pro-player
stance during the strike. Will demurred when Larry King asked him about the
commissioner's job last week, and he gave me spin when I asked: He still likes
writing his column, he says, and "it's presumptuous to talk about accepting
something that has not been offered." Which is not exactly a "No." Commissioner
Will--it's an appealing idea: He negotiates contracts, he stifles owners, he
builds ballparks, he quotes Walter Bagehot.

            And given
that his columns are ephemera, why shouldn't Will give them up for his true
love? He's been opining for 25 years. He hasn't much changed America. Maybe he
should step aside and let someone else take over the routine. No one would care
that much. After all, he's just a newspaper columnist.

            
               Just how
cozy were Will and Reagan? If you missed our previous links, click to read
about 1) how Will's relationship with the Gipper and 2) the between Will's
views and Reagan's policies.
            

         
      
   
