
   
   
      
         
            Henry Louis Gates Jr.

            Ever
since the media first noticed Henry Louis "Skip" Gates Jr., professor of
Afro-American studies at Harvard, he has held their attention and affection. He
may now be the most famous literature professor in America, and it's easy to
understand why. Besides being , Gates is a force for good in the world. Known
by fellow scholars for his theories linking the Afro-American literary
tradition to the African vernacular and for his excavation of forgotten
masterpieces of black literature, he caught the public's eye in 1992 when he
published several salutary and well-reasoned articles criticizing the
inflammatory anti-Semitic rhetoric of certain black nationalists. The all-star
department he's built at Harvard over the past seven years (it includes
philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah, sociologist William Julius Wilson, and
philosopher Cornel West) has helped elevate "Afro-Am" from relative marginality
to one of the most thrilling and visible disciplines around. At The New
Yorker , where he is a staff writer, he has produced several strong pieces
of literary journalism on subjects as varied as Harry Belafonte and the
declining importance of loyalty.

            Gates does so many things at the same time that you have to
wonder how he makes sure all of them meet the same high standard. The answer
is, he can't. In 1997 alone, according to his c urriculum vitae , he wrote
four long pieces for The 
               New Yorker , published one book, and
edited two more. He also supervised doctoral dissertations, taught two
undergraduate courses, ran Harvard's W.E.B. Du Bois Institute for Afro-American
Research (raising funds, balancing budgets, recruiting professors, planning
conferences), served as director of editorial content for a publishing imprint
he co-founded, was a consultant on Steven Spielberg's Amistad , scripted
and hosted a Frontline documentary on the black bourgeoisie, and
developed a six-part BBC-PBS documentary on Africa--the entire continent. He
continued as an editor of Transition magazine; the Black Periodical
Literature Project; the Zora Neale Hurston Library series; the 30-volume
African-American Women Writers, 1910-1940 ; and the 2 million word
Encyclopedia Africana . Nominally, at least, he sat on the board of
editors of 29 other journals and on 82 advisory committees for museums,
theaters, institutes, literary prizes, and universities.

            Gates
works very hard. Most days, he starts writing at 5 a.m. A 9,000-word New
Yorker profile that would take most journalists weeks or months flows
effortlessly from his pen. An incisive piece on Louis Farrakhan was reported
Monday afternoon, written Tuesday, edited Wednesday, and closed Thursday. Gates
drafted his 216-page memoir, Colored People (1994), in six weeks, though
thought the final result reflected the hasty composition.

            
But hard work alone doesn't explain Gates'
output. He also understands a fundamental maxim of capitalism: Don't do
yourself what you can pay others to do for you.

            It is a
time-honored perquisite of senior professorship to have students act as
minions, fetching books from the library and doing grunt research. Many
scholars have figured out how to turn this somewhat feudal tradition into an
industry. In the 1980s, for example, Yale Professor Harold Bloom served as the
"editor" of 160 anthologies of literary criticism, even though it was graduate
students (and a few undergraduates) who actually waded into the library and
picked out the selections. But Gates pushes the envelope. He may be the only
academic with a self-designated "chief of staff" who handles day-to-day details
and deals with reporters. An assistant edits his writing. Another conducts
research, keeping him abreast of the latest developments in hip-hop and digging
up quotes for New Yorker pieces. Dozens of other writers and editors are
hired to help produce his various projects. To put together one volume,
The 
               Dictionary of Global Culture , for instance, Gates used 32
research assistants and 32 fact checkers, in addition to 27 writers. (For this
piece, I spoke with 17 current and former Gates employees.)

            The project Gates considers his most important is also his
most lucrative to date--the Encyclopedia Africana , co-edited with
Appiah. Originally conceived by Du Bois, the Encyclopedia is intended to
be the definitive guide to Africa and the African diaspora. Gates says it will
be the factually unassailable foundation upon which Afro-American studies will
grow to maturity. It is designed to trounce, once and for all, the fictions
promulgated by Afrocentrists (they hold, among other things, that Jews ran the
slave trade and that Egyptians were black). To finance the Encyclopedia ,
Gates reportedly cut a $1 million deal with Microsoft to put out a CD-ROM;
signed a book deal with Civitas, the imprint he co-owns; and formed a
partnership with music mogul Quincy Jones.

            A closer
look at how Gates, et al., are putting the Encyclopedia together,
however, raises the question of whether reference works benefit from a Gatesian
pace. Writers have been told to hit a 500 word a day quota. Editors, at times,
have had to groom 7,000 words a day. Their pay depends on it. The results are
unimpressive. According to some of Gates' deputies on the project, Microsoft
execs grouched that the first 150,000 word batch of entries they received was
poorly organized and badly written. Gates later confessed to Microsoft that he
had made an appalling discovery: Nearly one-third of the entries had been
plagiarized wholesale from other reference books. (For the record: This
magazine is owned by Microsoft. However, no Microsoft employee spoke to me
about Skip Gates' project. My information comes exclusively from current and
former employees of Gates himself.)

            
The Encyclopedia is due out in stores
next February. Gates says he has become much more involved in editing the book
so as to avoid further anomalies. According to some who have worked on the
project, however, his main concern still seems to be meeting Microsoft's
deadlines. He has described the Encyclopedia to his colleagues in
classic Microsoft terms: If Version 1.0 contains bugs and glitches, not to
worry. You let readers point out problems, then try to get Version 2.0
right.

            With an
electronic encyclopedia, a process of constant revision may have its
advantages--unless you're among the customers for Version 1.0. But print is
less flexible. The last large-scale reference work Gates co-edited, also with
Appiah, was The 
               Dictionary of Global Culture , published last
year. The book was meant to be the multiculturalist rebuttal to E.D. Hirsch
Jr.'s controversial The Dictionary of Cultural Literacy (1988); the idea
was to highlight the accomplishments of non-Western societies and their
contributions to Western culture. But it was too weirdly conceived and poorly
edited to do all that. As a response to Hirsch, it is irrelevant, appearing
long after most had forgotten Hirsch's book. It is also filled with easily
dismissable . As a reference work it fails, because entries are shorter and
less informative than most entries for the same subjects in even the
Encyclopedia Britannica . And it is .

            Why would Gates allow the publication of such a book with
his byline and photo on the dust jacket? He had no idea it was so bad. After
coming up with the idea for the project and appointing an "associate editor" to
run it, he says, he was only minimally involved. According to those who edited
the Dictionary , Gates read entries only just before they were sent to
press, then looked closely only at items within his area of expertise, such as
the Harlem Renaissance and Hurston. The book's introduction was drafted by
Appiah.

            Gates'
29-page CV is packed with other projects to which he devotes scant energy.
Between 1992 and 1998, for example, he contributed not a single word to 28 of
the 29 magazines where he is listed as an editor. He does none of the line
editing of articles for Transition , even though it proclaims his
editorship in ads. For the 40 volume Schomburg Library of Nineteenth-Century
Black Women Writers he edited, he appointed others to put together the
books and write their introductions. Ten other editors helped put together
The 
               Norton Anthology of African American Literature , even though
it was his byline that appeared on the cover.

            
The activities cited here would not be unusual,
or even objectionable, if Gates imposed strict quality control standards upon
them. Members of scholarly journals' editorial boards rarely edit; they are
guarantors of the journals' intellectual integrity--which is to say, they're
figureheads. And if Gates didn't edit the anthologies himself, his name
nonetheless lent credibility and, therefore, enhanced funding prospects to
deserving projects. Reference books are perforce feats of organization, not
individual scholarship.

            The problem is, the work
that comes out of his scholarly chop shops isn't nearly as good as it should
be. And even if it were, there is something dishonest about marketing under
Gates' signature work that is produced mainly by his assistants. At worst, he
is amassing credentials, fame, and wealth on the basis of others' uncredited
labor--once considered a scholarly sin. At best, he is severely diluting the
brand name that is Henry Louis Gates Jr.--a brand name based in large part on .
This is bound to hurt both his own reputation and that of the enterprises he
believes in so sincerely.

            So why
does Gates produce at such a frantic pace? A profile in the April issue of
Boston Magazine hinted it was for the money; the magazine put Gates'
annual income at nearly $1 million. He denies both the amount and the motive.
He clearly is driven by a kind of missionary zeal: "I think that these projects
will make a difference to people and the field of Afro-American studies. I am a
canon builder," he told me. Another explanation may lie in his brilliance: He
comes up with more ideas than he can handle, and he lacks the discipline not to
overextend himself. "By impulse, I am an entrepreneur," he says. "If I weren't
in the academy, I could be a CEO. Quincy Jones is my hero. I have a picture of
Vernon Jordan on my wall, right over one of John Hope Franklin." It's an
appealing image for a professoriate that has long been accused of being out of
touch and moribund--the consummate schmoozer combined with the eminent scholar.
One just wishes the results looked more like scholarship.

            
               If you
missed the links in the piece, click to read , a of Colored People ,
about the in the Dictionary of Global Culture , a short in the
Dictionary , and a recap of the for original scholarship rests.
            

         
      
   
