
   
   
      
         
            Marcus Welby Wasn't So Great

            Not long ago, I was
listening to an NPR talk show on which the moderator and his guest bemoaned the
passing of the well-beloved family doctor, whose kindly manner and personalized
attention once graced the healing arts. The guest, George Anders, author of a
new book, Health Against Wealth , described the ways in which
health-maintenance organizations and other forms of penny-pinching managed care
are causing the "breakdown of medical trust."

            Anders offered upsetting
details: A child's mysterious life-threatening disease misdiagnosed; terminal
cancer patients denied last-ditch bone-marrow transplants; doctors who watch
bottom lines instead of blood pressures; nurses who scan spreadsheets instead
of bedsheets ...

            When suddenly, there leapt
to mind the memory of a holiday party a generation ago in a fashionable
neighborhood of the nation's capital:

            A kindly
white-haired gentleman sidles up to an ample hostess. "Come on, Kitty," he says
in his soft Southern drawl, "A little toddy's not going to hurt you."

            The woman in question was my mother-in-law, whose
alcoholism was then in remission. The prescribing gentleman was her doctor, a
practitioner much in vogue in old-time Washington society.

            An
atypical example of the sage practitioners of yore, you say. And indeed, my
husband and I spurned the courtly generalist for an up-to-date internist,
highly recommended by a more senior associate at the top Washington law firm my
husband had joined. And our switch came not a moment too soon. My thyroid, the
doctor advised, was dangerously low. Medication and frequent check-ups (covered
by our insurance, as routine physicals were not) were advised.

            
This struck me as slightly odd. I didn't fit
the sluggish, overweight profile of the low-thyroid sufferer. But I paid the
visits and took the pills and ignored the occasional heart palpitations that
troubled my sleep. My doctor was most attentive--he even visited me at home
when I came down with chicken pox--though more out of curiosity than
solicitude, he admitted, adult chicken pox being so rare.

            As time
went on, I met more and more fellow patients of my internist. A striking
number, usually women, turned out to share my low thyroid. For men, the favored
diagnosis seemed to be gout. Gout? In a 20ish man who never frequented a club
in Pall Mall, drank no brandy, squired no acres, rode to no hounds? Well, who
were we to judge?

            Of course, we, with our fine educations and scholarly
honors, were a lot better equipped to judge than the average American consumer.
And I will warrant that our doctor--keenly attuned to the income-enhancing
potential of well-insured diagnoses as he was--was probably far better trained
than the average practitioner in his cohort. He probably did us no lasting
harm. When I finally fled to the excellent, still younger internist who remains
my doctor, he took me off the thyroid pills immediately, and the palpitations
vanished.

            Which
brings me to the "to be sure" paragraph, as they call it in our trade. Most
individual practitioners were--and still are--impeccably honest, devoted to
their patients and incredibly hardworking. And many of them, my doctor
included, are chafing under the book-keeping requirements and restrictions on
their professional discretion that are prominent features of the new medical
regime. Adjustments in managed care need to be made--and under pressure from
consumers and their representatives in Congress, they are already being
made.

            
Nevertheless--the "nevertheless" paragraph
ineluctably follows the "to be sure" one--it would be a mistake to try to turn
back the clock. Remember that only one generation before my remembered holiday
party, most people didn't have health insurance at all. If they got sick, they
scrounged up the few dollars the doctor requested and received care that, while
sympathetically tendered, probably wasn't worth much more than they paid for
it. If granny needed an operation, there went the tuition for junior's college.
Then employer-provided health insurance proliferated, and the government waded
in with generous coverage for the elderly through Medicare and
first-to-last-dollar coverage for the poor through Medicaid. More and more
people demanded more and more care and, thanks to science and technology, that
care was far more likely to be efficacious.

            Congress
having failed to include conforming amendments in the Medicare/Medicaid
legislation to repeal the laws of supply and demand, medical prices soared.
Nobody minded much as long as somebody else was paying the bill (true, the
economists warned in their dreary way that costly benefits get shifted back to
workers in the form of lower wages, but who listens to them?). As companies
found themselves increasingly squeezed between the demands of workers and
stockholders, however, they started pressuring their insurers, who passed that
pressure on to hospitals, doctors, and other providers.

            Only a few years ago--three to be exact--managed care was
the prescription of liberal reformers for an over-stressed health care
system. By standardizing practice, the reformers argued, wasteful care would be
curtailed without sacrificing--perhaps even while improving--quality. Indeed,
managed care was the primary engine relied upon by the Clintons' health-reform
plan to generate the savings that would finance universal coverage at no net
cost. Now, as the movement toward managed care has accelerated to a full
gallop--and health-care costs, once thought unreinable, have slowed to a
walk--managed care has become the bugbear of liberal critics. "Don't let the
philosophy of Gingrich ... push your parents into the gas ovens of managed
health care," warned one especially overwrought Democratic challenger in the
fall elections.

            How dire
is the threat? A 1995 review of various evaluations of managed care, in its
several variants, found no large differences in the average quality of such
care as compared with that provided to patients in typical fee-for-service
indemnity plans. Patients in HMOs, for example, tended to get somewhat better
preventative care (including early cancer detection) and somewhat less
satisfactory care for complicated illnesses where methods of treatment are not
well defined. HMO clients were especially satisfied with the lower premiums
they typically paid.

            
No doubt an energetic investigator can dig up
horrible cases (though most of Anders' don't pass the outrage threshold since,
in the end, the patients got the care they sought). But what about all the
horrible cases that flourished under the old system? Anders devotes a whole
chapter to examples of "shoddy care" in states, primarily Tennessee, that have
steered their Medicaid clients into HMOs. But if Anders had wanted to find a
carload of cases that move well beyond the shoddy into the truly horrific, he
need only have consulted the regular Medicaid Fraud Reports put out by the
National Association of Attorneys General. These I have perused with sick
fascination for more than a decade. The mildest of the reported cases--most of
them the products of our traditional system of loving care--involve the simple
theft by doctors, dentists, nursing homes, chiropractors, and the like of
thousands, often millions of dollars (or sometimes drugs) from federal and
state governments. The more colorful cases involve the infliction of torments
on helpless patients that would excite the envy of Pol Pot.

            Back in the 1960s when
Medicaid passed into law with scant attention, a few brave analysts dared to
suggest that the poor might be better served at far lower cost if the money
were spent on developing well-staffed, multidisciplinary health clinics in
chronically underserved inner cities and rural areas--sort of like, well, HMOs.
Good heavens, snorted the conventional wisdom: That would be to create two
classes of care in this country, one for the well-off and one for the poor! And
so we consigned many of the needy to care that would be flattered to be called
second-class: to the "Medicaid Mills" or to poorly trained solo practitioners
or to wait in long lines at hospital emergency rooms till the harried staff can
find time to treat their kids' runny noses.

            Nor, to
return to the start of our story, is it only the poor who were often ill-served
by the kindly and not-so-kindly vagaries of our old-time health system. So, as
the chorus of complaints about "managed care" swells to cathedral-filling
volume, it's worth remembering that much of what we like to remember never
was.

            

               References
            

            Anders, G. (1996).
Health against wealth: HMOs and the breakdown of medical trust . Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Co.

            Congressional Budget
Office. (1995, February). The effects of managed care and managed
competition . CBO Memorandum.

            Miller, R.H., Luft, H.S.
(1994, May 18). Managed care performance since 1980: A literature
analysis . JAMA, 271, 19, 1512-1519.

            Nelson, L., Gold, M., et.
al. (1996, November 7). Access to care in Medicare managed care: Results
from a 1996 survey of enrollees and disenrollees . Mathematica Policy
Research.

         
      
   
