
   
   
      
         
            The Weinsteins

            Everyone agrees: Tina
Brown's new deal with Harvey Weinstein is a model of New Media--oh, let's use
the word--synergy. There will be a mass circulation magazine, TV shows, books,
movies based on magazine stories. It will all be hot, modern, a hone to the
cutting edge.

            Harvey,
46, and his brother Bob, 43, run the prolific and profitable independent movie
studio Miramax. While they may work in TriBeCa, drink Diet Coke and eat day-old
pizza for breakfast, and wear mostly black, the brothers don't fit the
archetype of the New Media honcho. They hark back to another, very different
model of businessman: the 1930s studio mogul. Like Louis B. Mayer, William Fox,
and Jack Warner--the eastern European Jews who invented Hollywood--the
Weinsteins are chutzpah personified, imperious and megalomaniac. This is an age
when more and more studio chiefs are anonymous number crunchers and dealmakers.
But Harvey and Bob run their studio as a fiefdom, imposing their will on
directors and stars. Miramax might as well be called Weinstein Bros.

            They are emperors with a discerning eye. They invite the
charges of pretentiousness by calling themselves arbiters of "taste" and
"highbrow." But any moron can produce a Tarantino knock-off or a bit of Italian
dreck and call it an art house masterpiece. The Weinsteins actually deliver.
Miramax has been the driving force behind some of the most acclaimed films of
the last decade: sex, lies, and videotape ; The Piano ; Pulp
Fiction ; Clerks ; Red ; Il Postino ;
Trainspotting ; The English Patient ; and Good Will Hunting .
It has won five Palmes d'Or (the Cannes Film Festival's top prize) and
more than 100 Oscar nominations.

            As the old
moguls came from petit bourgeois immigrant families, so do the Weinsteins.
(They named the company for mother Miriam and father Max, a diamond cutter.)
After dropping out of college, the brothers operated a second-run theater in
Buffalo, N.Y., and promoted rock concerts. In the '80s, they began distributing
small budget films no other company wanted. Miramax took off in 1988, when a
British investor poured money into it. The Weinsteins graduated from merely
distributing--buying made movies and shopping them to theaters--to actually
making movies from scratch. (Distributed movies still constitute about half of
their output.)

            
The Weinsteins' entry into movie making came at
an ugly moment in cinema history. Hollywood was stagnating in the late '80s.
Video sales were cutting into box office, and big studio execs were ever more
cautious. They wedded themselves to focus groups, obsessed over demographics,
and relied heavily on formulaic action adventures. With the exception of Orion
Pictures, Hollywood studios retreated from the accessible, carefully crafted
dramas that had built the film industry.

            Happily,
the Weinsteins were a return to form, filling the niche vacated by the major
studios and bucking the car chase, machine gun boilerplate. The brothers
possess an old-fashioned, very personal notion of product. They make movies the
way they want. Most studio heads rely on vice presidents and vast development
offices: The Weinsteins read scripts and buy films themselves. Harvey won the
nickname "Scissorshands" because of his tendency to chop movies in the editing
room.

            Only in the '90s did the brothers begin to reap big
returns. In 1996, they grossed $250 million in domestic box office receipts. In
1997, they raked in $419 million. A key to their success: They're cheap. Like
the old moguls, they cut corners and insist on staying within budget. Where
studios spend an average of $40 million to make a movie, Miramax spends $12
million. When producing a movie, it eschews expensive stars. Instead, it uses
novices (Matt Damon, Good Will Hunting ) or revives washouts (John
Travolta, Pulp Fiction ). In their distribution deals, the Weinsteins
find genuine bargains. Last year they bought Kevin Smith's Chasing Amy
for $250,000 and grossed $12 million. The Japanese film Shall We Dance?
came to them for $300,000 and earned $9.5 million. Miramax's success has
attracted buyers and spawned imitators: Disney bought Miramax for an estimated
$60 million in 1993 and kept the Weinsteins at the helm under a sweet contract.
Meanwhile, Fox, Sony, and Universal have launched art house subsidiaries.

            For all
their superb taste, the Weinsteins really cash in on schlock. Like their '30s
antecedents, the brothers rely on B-grade genre pics to generate the revenues
to pay for artier films. Miramax's subsidiary Dimension Films, run by Bob, has
made a handful of sci-fi and horror pics aimed at teens, such as Scream
2 , From Dusk Till Dawn , and Mimic (a giant-bug flick). Last
year's five Dimension films brought in nearly the same amount as the 20 art
house films Miramax released.

            
The Weinsteins don't rely on business school
strategies. They are hustlers. Their aggressive marketing machine beats any in
Hollywood. (Witness their ubiquitous, clever advertising on behalf of
Trainspotting and The Crying Game .) They promote shamelessly,
pioneering the practice of calling Academy Awards voters to sway their votes.
One of their standard devices to garner attention for a film is to pick
high-profile brawls with the Motion Picture Association, as they did over X
ratings initially given to the films Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down! ,
Clerks , and Kids . All went on to make small fortunes at the box
office.

            They are
similarly aggressive with the press. An example: When Harvey got wind that
Time magazine planned to reveal the plot twist in The Crying
Game --that a character is a transvestite--Harvey called a Time
editor 18 times in a single day, unsuccessfully demanding that Time not
run the detail. Never mind that the movie had been out for months and that a
Best Supporting Actor Oscar nomination had already been awarded for the
portrayal of the female character.

            Stories of the brothers' arrogance and brutality are
legendary. Variety reported that Harvey once locked a producer in a
Cannes hotel room until the producer sold Miramax the rights to distribute his
film. In 1993, Fortune magazine named them among the 70 toughest bosses
in America. Fortune reported that one former employee claims Bob fired
him for making an error at a company softball game. (The employee was later
rehired, and Bob denies the charge.) There was even a support group, Mir-Anon,
where the studio's former executives commiserated over wounds inflicted by the
brothers.

            Will Tina tame these tough
guys? In many ways, she seems the ideal match for them, and not simply because
she's an expert at massaging egos. Tina and the Weinsteins all have highbrow
pretensions but feel no shame in embracing pop culture. They all love
attention. But can the Weinsteins, who like being the only cocks of the walk,
tolerate a partner as famous and visible as they are? Will Tina's notorious
lavishness irk the frugal duo? Will the snazzy partnership produce nothing more
than a TV newsmagazine with Tina as the talent, as Variety has
suggested?

            Who knows? But perhaps
history is on the Weinsteins' side: It took jerks like the old-time moguls to
bring film to maturity. Maybe it will take jerks like the Weinsteins to bring
in the golden age of New Media.

         
      
   
