
   
   
      
         
            Marion Barry

            Critics of Marion Barry--and
who's not one--have been saying for years that his Washington, D.C., is like a
Third World capital--squalid, dangerous, and corrupt. The District has never
seemed more like a banana republic than in the past few weeks. Barry, America's
mini-Suharto, has dragged it into an embarrassing, protracted drama: It is in
rack and ruin, he had overstayed his welcome, everyone wanted him to leave, and
he wasn't sure he wanted to oblige.

            From the
beginning of April until this week, the mayor toyed with his city about whether
to seek re-election to a fifth term this fall. Largely ignored during his
current term, Barry was at the center of attention again. His Hamlet act had
the city on edge, and he loved it. His press conferences were packed. The
Washington Post launched a daily "Barry Watch" column. National media
were calling. His every hint--and he dropped lots of them--was parsed for
significance. Each week was supposed to be the week he announced his decision
but, having the time of his life, Barry kept putting it off.

            Now, with his usual excruciating/exquisite sense of timing,
Barry has followed Indonesian President Suharto's retirement announcement with
his own. The inevitable comparisons to that dictator aside, Barry probably
picked the right moment to bow out: He's on top again--briefly. A Tuesday
Washington Post poll found that Barry is the front-runner for the
Democratic primary, attracting 29 percent of voters, nearly twice as many as
his closest competitor.

            For those
who still can't believe the ex-crackhead was re-elected once, this survey was
unfathomable. How could he be ahead? (I won't begin to justify all the bad
reasons for Barry's popularity--race resentment, patronage, etc.--but will try
to explain one good one .) Even for Washingtonians who had forgiven Barry his
crimes, the prospect of another campaign appalled. The post-comeback Barry
hasn't much changed his ways: He still favors racial rhetoric and
Congress-bashing. (And he may not have shaken his worst old habits: The Last
of the Black Emperors: The Hollow Comeback of Marion Barry in a New Age of
Black Leaders , a new biography by longtime D.C. journalist Jonetta Rose
Barras, alleges Barry may have bought drugs during his current term. It also
alleges he made sexual advances toward male staffers. Barry has called the book
"garbage.") The same Post poll that found Barry would win the 1998
Democratic primary also found that the vast majority of
Washingtonians--two-thirds--preferred he not run.

            
But Barry is a political creature: Why would he
skip a race he thought he could win? The answer is that the Mayor Barry of 1998
is not the Mayor Barry of 1985. There is no good professional reason for him to
hold office. He's scarcely mayor of anything. Since Barry returned to the
office in January 1995, the District power structure has devoted itself to
emasculating him. Within a few months of his inauguration, the Barry-loathing
Republican Congress installed a Control Board to oversee the city's shaky
finances. Congress and the Control Board soon stripped the mayor of authority
to issue contracts or manage budgets. Last year, they usurped his control of
the city bureaucracy, removing departments of public safety, welfare, health
care, public works, and basically everything else that matters from his
supervision. Barry was left with the dregs: recreation, libraries, the Office
of Aging. (The transfer of power has been good news for the city, which has
erased a huge deficit and begun to stem the exodus of middle-class
residents.)

            Barry does still get to
revel in the trappings of mayorhood. He continues to flounce around Washington
like the emperor he once was. He has a limo at his beck and call. His personal
security force included an incredible 30 officers until Congress forced
him to halve it last year. A crowd of flunkies and yes-women surrounds him.
Barry still issues self-aggrandizing statements in which he takes credit for
things he didn't do and announces "initiatives" that will never be initiated.
And he still takes grand foreign tours on which he behaves as if he is visiting
royalty. (This week: Taiwan.)

            "Losing
the actual power bothers him, but I don't think it's as big a deal as the aura
of power," says a longtime friend. "It's not just the limo, because anyone can
have a limo. He is the Mayor . He really enjoys being The Man."

            But Barry recognized that the trappings of power were
tenuous, too. If he had been re-elected, Congress would have probably punished
him by cutting his salary; eliminating the security guards who remain; and
stripping him of the few, pathetic agencies he does control.

            Not having
lost his sharpness, Barry understood the emptiness of his position. If
re-elected, he would be a nonentity, and Marion Barry cannot stand to be a
nonentity. So why not hand the job off? Congress will be more likely to return
home rule and rearm the mayor if Barry is gone. Besides, he has nothing left to
prove. He already has made the greatest political comeback in U.S. history. The
Post poll predicting a Barry primary win allows him to quit with a bang,
not a whimper: "He can go out saying, 'See, they still love me. I told you I
would win. Bye ,y'all,' " says Barras.

            
Barry's friends and local business leaders have
been trying for months to find a way to let him exit with honor--to give him a
gracious payoff in exchange for his decision to step down. It's a good idea.
Barry has been a public servant--of a sort--and America traditionally finds
respectable retirements for its former leaders. Pols spend their dotage as
think tank "scholars" or consultants or part-time lobbyists (see: Bob Dole) and
are trotted out periodically for sage commentary. Even if Barry doesn't quite
deserve the same, Washington deserves not to have its ex-mayor disgraced.
Barry's retirement team has talked to local universities and historically black
colleges about a position for him. He is also planning lecture tours and
shopping a memoir.

            And there
is even talk that Barry will be hired as a top executive by a local business.
Given his track record as the District's mayor, you might want to sell your
stock in that company.

            
               If you
missed the sidebar about the one good reason to support Barry, click .
            

         
      
   
