
   
   
      
         
            The New Courtney

            Courtney Love used to say
that Alanis Morissette had killed alternative rock with her carefully crafted
brand of faux angry-girl rock. I'd argue that Courtney put the nail in the
coffin herself Oscar night. Two years ago the widow of Kurt Cobain and "Queen
of Grunge" threw a post-Oscar party in a yellowing thrift-store gown and tiara,
the embodiment of rock-star glamour. This time, as the star of The People
vs. Larry Flynt , she'd had her famously scraggly hair blown out into a
variation on the straight little Anna Wintour bob. Her face, applied by
celebrity makeup artist Kevin Aucoin, had lost that jolie laide quality that
used to make her so compelling. And she was wearing a tasteful dress by Gianni
Versace--Versace, a man who built his empire dressing the very same
past-their-prime stars (Sting, Jon Bon Jovi, Elton John) in opposition to whom
alternative rock arose. She presented the award for best makeup, of all things,
and played it completely straight, talking in the measured mid-Atlantic accent
that her new friend Sharon Stone seems to adopt when she wants to sound
cultivated. Sulky Barbra Streisand--who refused to sing her Oscar-nominated
song because she herself hadn't been nominated for anything--came off as a
bigger rebel than Courtney that night.

            There are
rock-world observers who never considered Courtney a rebel, who dismissed her
as a marginally talented opportunist who married well and whose stock rose
precipitously after her husband committed suicide. The daughter of
long-divorced parents--a mother who is a New Age therapist and a father who was
a Grateful Dead hanger-on--Courtney left home while in her teens and blew a
meager trust fund traveling the world. She lived in London, Minneapolis, Los
Angeles, and Alaska, and always managed to hook up with powerful figures such
as film director Alex Cox. She worked as a stripper. She pursued Cobain
relentlessly, convincing a record label that was wooing her to fly her to a
Nirvana show so she could meet him. By the early '90s, before anyone in the
mainstream knew who she was, she was already such a legendary social climber on
the indie-rock scene that an Olympia, Wash., band called itself "Courtney Love"
just to get on her nerves.

            All this deepened the luster of her image. In an age in
which agents and publicists once again monitor a star's movements as
religiously as they did in the 1950s--when Rock Hudson was forced to marry his
secretary to forestall rumors that he was gay--Courtney was an imperious and
slightly unhinged anti-celebrity, physically incapable of keeping her mouth
shut. Once, at a concert in Los Angeles, she turned to the industry-heavy VIP
section and threatened anyone who "fucked with" her former manager Janet
Billig, who had just been named vice president of Atlantic Records. She punched
Kathleen Hanna of the riot grrrl band Bikini Kill backstage at Lollapalooza,
and referred to her as "ratface." She was kicked off America Online for making
remarks that were too unladylike. A few years ago, she chased another rival,
singer/songwriter Mary Lou Lord, down Sunset Boulevard after Lord showed up
uninvited at the after party for one of her shows.

            But her
fans--the primarily female, vaguely cerebral, post-boomer listeners like me who
made her band Hole's album Live Through This go platinum (that is, sell
1 million copies)--admired Courtney in the face of evidence that she was
something of a trial. She was a less-than-fit mother with a drug habit,
which was unfortunate (she has since stopped using drugs). The backlash against
her on that score still seemed misogynous. How many drug-addled male rock stars
with children have been taken to task for the same behavior? Not Keith
Richards; not John Lennon; not Aerosmith's Steven Tyler, who didn't even
acknowledge his daughter Liv Tyler until she was in her teens. Leaving behind a
trail of babies conceived with groupies has long been a key to guy-rock
mystique.

            
Like Madonna, Courtney had a brain and was not
afraid to use it. But Courtney seemed much more real and more pertinent than
Madonna, whose strength and sexuality appear, by comparison, cold and
calculating--a power-suited '80s enterprise, with little range for
contradiction. "I want to be the girl with the most cake," Courtney sang on
Live Through This . It was a perfect expression of the kind of
cut-and-paste feminism young women I know practice, which makes room for
self-destructiveness and fashion magazines and La Perla lingerie and fury.
Onstage she'd prop her leg up on the monitor and wail into the microphone like
any guy. Offstage, she'd announce that she had got a nose job, lost weight, and
dyed her hair blond because she knew that that was what it was going to take to
make people pay attention to her. It wasn't just idolatry we felt; it was
anxiety, memories of the times when she was so strung out at a show that she
had to be carried offstage by her manager while the crowd shouted "slut" and
"whore." Three years ago, when Hole played its first New York show after
Cobain's death, every rock critic in town showed up to see if she'd pull it
off. (She did.)

            In order
for The People vs. Larry Flynt to qualify for insurance coverage during
the shoot, Courtney had to prove her sobriety by peeing into a cup once a week.
One can understand her desire, then, to continue proving to the world that
she's no longer a loose cannon. And a girl is certainly entitled to make
herself over. In fact, now that mainstream artists like Sheryl Crow have
adopted the trashed-out slutty look, it was probably canny of Courtney to
rethink her style. And there may not be a lot of room for subversion at the
Academy Awards, where Cuba Gooding Jr. gets a standing ovation just for
gleefully evading the 30-second acceptance-speech rule.

            Afriend of mine who knows Courtney says she's still the
same old feisty cuss once the cameras are off, but that just means she's
getting good at separating her public and private personas, at being the kind
of slick movie star whose opinions stay within well-demarcated boundaries.
Under this new regime, we have a Courtney who, amazingly, has nothing she wants
to share with us about Gloria Steinem's old-school-feminist attack on the movie
and on Larry Flynt, with whom she has become friends. A Courtney who told
Premiere this fall: "The welcome that I get from grown-ups in the film
industry is so nice. I'm used to going to the mall and having a kid in black
lipstick scream at me, 'I love you! I didn't kill myself because of you!' Or,
'You suck!' But a grown-up in his 50s, in a suit, being nice? I melt."

            If Courtney abandoned Hole
tomorrow to be an actress it would be a shame, but not a tragedy--she's a good
actress too. It's not as if she's sold out, because any major-label rock star
who claims to have managed not to is self-deluded. But while she's obviously
not a talent on the order of Pablo Picasso or Norman Mailer, she does have an
outsize, nasty personality, and women aren't offered that spectacle very often.
It's odd to watch a woman who named her daughter for the notorious Hollywood
rule-breaker Frances Farmer purring at a pat on the head from the Hollywood
phonies she would formerly have laughed at. But as she herself once sang, "I
fake it so real I am beyond fake." It may be that the artificial construction
that is the new Courtney is the realest Courtney yet.

         
      
   
