
   
   
      
         
            Sen. John McCain

            
               
                  The
Man Who Should Be King
               
            

            
               It is this arm, this
right arm, that North Vietnamese torturers worked over for days in a hellhole
called the Plantation, till it was broken and bruised and lacerated. It is this
arm, this right arm, that is still stiff, still scarred, still bent. And it is
this arm, this right arm, that the avaricious barons of tobacco, who sell death
and call it commerce, think they can twist, think they can break, think they
can make reach out to them, open-palmed.
            

            
               But, you see, they don't
understand that this arm has a man attached to it. And they don't understand
that the man is Sen. John McCain, who is allergic to their blandishments and
threats, just as he is allergic to the cozy, sleazy compromises of this dark
city, just as he is allergic to the mendacious hypocrisies of politics as it is
practiced in late-20 th century America. For Sen. John McCain is the
last _____ (man of honor, hero, honest man, saint ...) in American politics.
And perhaps, if we are very lucky, he is our next president ...
            

            Political
journalism, like all professions, depends on the formula--the ritual "Newt is
doomed" or "Clinton will survive anything" stories. During the past year, there
has been a significant addition to the Washington media formulary: the John
McCain profile. It can be boiled down to this: He was our bravest Vietnam
prisoner of war. Now he's the only senator courageous enough to tell the truth.
He is battling evil cigarette lobbyists and Senate money-grubbers. He may lose,
but he won't quit. In 2000, he'll run for president. We don't deserve someone
this honorable. Vote for him.

            Esquire, the New York Times Magazine , Vanity
Fair , Time , and countless newspapers have sanctified the Arizona
Republican in this way. Mike Wallace has said he would consider quitting 60
Minutes to aid a McCain 2000 campaign. As far as the national media are
concerned, McCain can do no wrong. When his tobacco bill was shot down, the
New York Times declared the defeat would only burnish his reputation.
When he got caught telling a dumb, nasty about Chelsea Clinton--the kind of
crack that might cripple the career of someone else in Congress--he apologized
immediately, was forgiven by the president, and the love-in continued. (Click
for a brief sidebar on how McCain uses apology as a career strategy.)

            It's easy
to understand why McCain has been anointed the media's favorite presidential
hopeful. He is irresistible. In a Senate populated by grasping automatons, he
behaves like an actual human being. Probably because of his five and a half
year imprisonment, he is impatient with the euphemisms and lies of politics.
(Bob Dole once said of him, "You spend five years in a box and you're entitled
to speak your mind.") McCain cracks jokes, dishes dirt, and generally mocks the
hypocrisies and failings of his colleagues (and himself). The more his
colleagues spin and position themselves, the better he looks.

            
McCain also has the appeal of the maverick. The
press loves Republican traitors, and McCain's willingness to buck his party
bosses on campaign finance and tobacco makes great copy. (If he were a Democrat
leading the fight against tobacco and campaign corruption, no one would care.)
There is something heroic about a politician who seems to act against his
immediate self-interest.

            McCain benefits, too, from
the general swoon about his history. He is an awesome man. He doesn't need to
talk about the war: Reporters, most of whom never served in the military, are
paralyzed by him. His indisputable bravery and honor inoculate him against
charges of base motives.

            And he
makes himself phenomenally accessible. According to Arizona reporters, he's
ill-tempered and vindictive toward the local press; but he charms the socks off
national reporters. He interrupts family vacations to appear on cable news and
rises at ungodly hours on foreign trips to do TV interviews. He has a knack for
flattering reporters. Other politicians obviously stage-manage media
encounters. McCain, by contrast, is transparent. He confides in reporters. He
holds conversations with his children in front of them. He asks them for
advice. (Tip to pols: No. 1 way to ensure a favorable article is to ask the
reporter for advice.)

            But the McCain hagiography is not harmless. It misleads the
American people, and it will disserve him if he does run for president. He
isn't just an honorable, truth-seeking hero, a selfless iconoclast. He's a
schemer, a politician, a calculating populist who has built his career on sexy,
attention-getting issues. He is opportunistic. He arrived at a convenient time
in the tobacco fight: He had no strong feelings about the evil weed, and he
became the tobacco scourge only when Republican leaders asked him to shepherd
the bill through the Senate. He adopted campaign finance reform only after he
was tarred in the Keating Five scandal several years ago. Others who've devoted
years to campaign finance and tobacco have watched McCain get credit as the
heroic martyr, the patron saint of lost causes.

            What's
more pernicious about the coverage is that it confuses the qualities of a
crusader with those of a president. McCain is often praised as an independent
legislator, but no one ever points out that he's a rather ineffective one. He
is unpopular in the Senate. Some of his Republican colleagues dislike him for
selfish reasons--they envy his popularity and resent his outsider stances.
("His colleagues feel he's a showboat and a camera hog," says University of
Virginia political scientist Larry Sabato.) But they also dislike him for good
reasons. McCain resists the political horse trading that underlies legislating:
He has said he has no plans to modify the tobacco bill to get it passed. (Well,
why not?) Similarly, he infuriates senators with grandstanding attacks on pork,
being a master at publicizing and eliminating other senators' sweetheart
projects. He does not recognize quid pro quo politics.

            
This naked, righteous populism makes McCain a
superb advocate on campaign finance and tobacco. And there is certainly
something romantic in the notion that America needs an honorable, truth-telling
president like him. But there is also something foolish in it. McCain is a
contrarian, someone whose life is defined by lonely opposition. He was a pilot,
not a platoon leader. He resisted his captors alone and endured years in
solitary confinement. At the Naval Academy, McCain was nicknamed "Punk," and
that's what he is. He suspects authority and challenges orthodoxy. It's why
he's a great story and a great troublemaker.

            It's also
why he would make a lousy president. Being president is not about bucking
authority, it's about being authority. It's not about resisting coercion, it's
about coercing, and bargaining, and sucking up, and twisting arms, and telling
little lies. John McCain thinks that's beneath him. So he should stay in the
Senate and continue to make trouble.

            
               If you
missed McCain's awful joke, . This describes McCain's penchant for
apologies.
            

         
      
   
