
   
   
      
         
            Bringing Up Mother

            Parents have long been a
terrible disappointment to the child-care community. When questioned, they
persistently fail to express dissatisfaction with their current child-care
arrangements or even much difficulty in finding such care. Yet, with equal
persistence, experts keep proclaiming a child-care crisis.

            The
latest hue and cry has been raised in regard to the 1996 welfare-reform
legislation that aims to send millions of welfare mothers into the labor force,
and their kids, presumably, into surrogate care. Critics of the new law argue
that suitable care is in short supply. (For an example of the concern, see
Peter Edelman's "Dialogue" in Slate with Mickey Kaus.) Yet past experience
suggests that parents who want to work can and will find child care that suits
their needs.

            Way back in 1968, when custodial care for kids first became
the causists' favorite cause célèbre , the federal Children's Bureau and
Women's Bureau jointly issued the findings of a survey they had conducted. The
study, said the foreword, "clearly indicates how urgent is the need for
large-scale expansion of day care services." If so, you would have a hard time
telling it from the data presented. When questioned, mothers of 92 percent of
the children covered said they thought their child-care arrangements were quite
satisfactory.

            This clash
of perceptions is accounted for by the fact that most of the children in
question, 98 percent to be exact, were not being cared for in the type of
setting the researchers favored--a licensed day-care center, nursery school, or
like facility. Most were being cared for by relatives, friends, or small-scale
care providers. Some 8 percent were "latch-key" children who were expected to
look after themselves. These, moreover, were the days when federal planners set
utopian standards for acceptable care. When the Department of Health, Education
and Welfare decided to set up its own center for employees' kids, it found it
could not meet the requirements for windows and outlets per square foot,
nutritionists and therapists per square child, and so on.

            
More than two decades later, parents and
policy-makers are still disagreeing. In 1990, the last year in which a
comprehensive survey was done, 96 percent of parents said they were satisfied
(79 percent were "very satisfied") with their care arrangements. Sandra Clark,
a researcher at the Urban Institute, notes that parents may be embarrassed to
admit they leave their kids in questionable settings. And for many
"working-poor" families, day-care expenses are an enormous burden. But even
when parents were asked if they would prefer other arrangements--and who among
us resists betterment?--only 26 percent answered yes.

            But it is
not only child-care advocates who have been frustrated by the research
findings. Last week brought disappointing news to another faction in the
day-care battle: those who deplore the whole institution as harmful to the
nation's children. No doubt to the annoyance and disbelief of day-care
opponents, such as the Rockford Institute and the Center on the Family in
America, a study newly released by the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development found that day care does not hinder a child's intellectual
development. Nor, except for a small effect for very young children in long
hours of care, does it affect their emotional bond with their mothers.

            Many more children, of course, are in licensed centers than
was the case in 1968. Current center capacity is estimated at some 5 million
kids. Still, the 1990 survey found only 28 percent of preschoolers with working
moms were in center care. Another 20 percent were in licensed day-care homes.
As you would expect, higher-income mothers are more likely to use relatively
expensive center care than are the working poor; but, thanks to government
subsidies, the "non-working poor"--i.e., welfare mothers--are almost as likely
as middle-class working mothers to have their youngest kids in centers.

            Center
care is not, however, a guarantee of quality. Nor is price. Quality, the Urban
Institute's Sandra Clark points out, is not an easy thing to measure. Still,
according to the new study, the quality of the care does matter--especially
whether the caregivers talk and interact with the children frequently. A flurry
of recent research, recently reported in a Time magazine cover story, points to the importance of
early stimulation in the later development of a baby's brain. (And with a
quarter of high-school seniors being rated functionally illiterate on standard
reading tests, it seems pretty clear that some additional stimulation is
needed.) Yet many centers, especially those neither serving higher-income
families nor competing for government subsidies, are plagued by poorly trained,
low-paid staff; high turnover; and insufficient supervision.

            
And here is where the disappointing parents
come in again. Testifying before a Senate committee in 1995, the University of
Michigan's Sandra Hofferth reported that her studies show that while parents
claim to care about quality, in the end they opt for "price and convenience."
Researchers Suzanne W. Helburn and John R. Morris reached a similar conclusion
in a 1995 study of the market: "A major cause of the mediocre quality found in
the child care industry--both center and family care--is the lack of demand for
it." They recommend finding a way to "alarm parents so they ... confront the
conflict between adult fulfillment versus children's developmental needs."

            All three
of these experts, and others besides, point to a misdirection of federal
resources. The government does provide direct day-care subsidies to 1.1 million
low-income children (the four main programs currently spend about $2.3 billion
a year, in addition to about $4 billion for Head Start), and some of those
subsidies come with quality strings attached. But the largest single federal
day-care subsidy is the Dependent Care Tax Credit, which now distributes more
than $2.7 billion in tax rebates annually, mostly to middle- and higher-income
families. And, Helburn and Morris point out, since tax credits can be used for
any kind of care the parents choose--and parents being the way they are--tax
breaks are "not good tools for ensuring good quality." (They may not even be
good tools for buying day care. When the government in 1989 started asking
parents to provide the Social Security number of their putative day-care
provider, claims for credits dropped markedly.)

            From this perspective, the recently passed welfare reform
could be a blessing to some kids. Advocates worry that if substantial numbers
of welfare mothers are pushed into jobs, centers might be swamped by demands to
serve as many as a million added kids. That probably won't happen. David Butler
of the Manpower Development Research Corp., which has been the prime evaluator
of welfare-to-work programs, points out that planners have routinely
overestimated the amount of formal child care needed for such projects. And the
new law also exempts from participation any mother with children under 6 for
whom affordable, accessible, and suitable care cannot be found. On the plus
side, the reforms will increase federal money for child care by more than $600
million a year. If states take advantage of the various incentives provided
them (though few probably will), total federal and state support could expand
from about $2.8 billion annually to almost $5 billion, according to Urban
Institute estimates. States will also be freed from the hodgepodge of
regulations that currently cause gaps in coverage as mothers move among home,
training, and work.

            If many more welfare parents
do find and hold jobs, their children might well benefit from the
intellectually stimulating care many of their mothers cannot provide--if that's
the sort of substitute care they actually get. Still, as last week's National
Institute study points out, whatever effect day care has on kids is swamped by
the impact of their own families. Kids with well-educated, emotionally stable
mothers and secure economic circumstances tend to do fine, whether their
mothers work or not. Others not so lucky in their parents or homes often do
not. As Urban Institute senior fellow Isabel Sawhill notes, "we license day
care centers, but we don't license parents." Perhaps we should.

         
      
   
