
   
   
      
         
            Hunter S. Thompson

            The release of the movie
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas and its attendant publicity have revealed
what may be a surprising fact to some Americans: Hunter S. Thompson is
alive.

            Thompson
so belongs to a bygone era that he probably should have had the good sense to
die along with it. Years of self-destructive living have taken their toll, but
he remains with us--60 years old, mumbling, shambling, drunk, stoned, and
addled. Thompson is a useful icon to have around: For right-wingers, he's a
visible casualty of '60s sybaritic excess; for rebellious kids, he's a
token--or is that toke?--of nostalgia for more exciting times.

            The implied question in most criticism of the Fear and
Loathing movie is: Why on earth did we ever think this crap mattered? The
book and movie chronicle Thompson and his lawyer's drug-fueled invasion of Las
Vegas in 1971. Critics have admired the film technically but have deplored
Thompson's vision. Fear and Loathing 's psychopharmacological obsession
is dated and dull, further proof that drugs are not only destructive but banal.
The two lead characters are vicious, crude, solipsistic, and adolescent. All in
all, it's a bad memory of a silly time in American history, a relic of a
national embarrassment.

            But the
criticism does injustice to Thompson. Now is the worst possible moment for a
Thompson revival. This is a tranquil era, and considered in tranquility,
Thompson is indeed a horror. His writing seems archaic and crude, and its
self-indulgence seems stunning even in an age of memoirs. Thompson is often
compared, unfavorably, with his New Journalism comrade Tom Wolfe. Wolfe is
undoubtedly a better writer than Thompson, but he's also an easier writer.
Wolfe has worn well because his detached irony suits us. His cool style is
ours. Wolfe responded to his lunatic age with bemusement. Thompson responded to
it with ferocity, and ferocity is not comfortable these days.

            
Between 1967 and 1973, when Thompson was , he
wrote with crazed, out-of-control, phantasmagoric violence. But he was living
in crazed, out-of-control, phantasmagoric, violent times. A nation that had
been placid suddenly raged with race riots and assassinations, manipulated by a
crooked, villainous president and trapped in a terrible war. Thompson, an
idealist, was appalled. He reacted to madness by writing (and behaving) madly.
A quarter-century later, the prose looks deranged, and it is. But it came by
its derangement honestly.

            
Thompson's first gonzo piece--the mishmash of raw notes and vitriol that became
his trademark--was a feral account of the Kentucky Derby. It was not intended
to run in raw form, but--according to the most appealing account--Thompson was
so horrified by the Kent State massacre, which occurred while he was writing,
that he was unable to make his notes into a coherent piece.

            Thompson's notoriety has also overshadowed his fine early
style. Hell's Angels and the two Fear and Loathing ( Las
Vegas and On the Campaign Trail '72 ) books seethe. His words club
and bully. Thompson's screeds and ad hominem attacks are worthy heirs to H.L.
Mencken. As much as any writer of his generation, Thompson shook American
political writing from the coma of the '50s. His savage, profane descriptions
of Nixon, his mockery of Lyndon Johnson and Hubert Humphrey, his
characterization of any enemy as a "Nazi" or "the fourth Reich" or "the sixth
Reich" enlivened (and, yes, debased) political debate. (Click for a couple of
examples.) When Dan Burton calls Clinton a "scumbag," he owes a tip of the cap
to Thompson.

            But if the young Hunter is
being rejected too easily, the elderly Hunter is being welcomed too kindly. In
a certain segment of lefty society, Thompson has become a much revered elder.
The current image of Thompson is that of a hilarious, endearing old goat who's
coasting out his three score and ten. He doesn't merit such niceness. Thompson
has more than just squandered his talent (what prodigy doesn't?), he has
betrayed himself. He's a romantic who has become a cynic. He was once filled
with passion. Now he fakes it for money.

            (Thompson,
of course, is not the only '60s vet who is disillusioned. But he gave no
quarter to anyone who disappointed him, so he certainly doesn't deserve any
quarter from us now.)

            
Today, Thompson is part Beavis, part whore. He
still behaves like an adolescent moron. He's a freakish Peter Pan--the juvenile
delinquent who wouldn't grow up. He ignites kegs of dynamite in his Aspen,
Colo., backyard. To ring in the new year in 1997, he reportedly blew up a
Cadillac. He gropes female guests, watches porn, drinks monstrously, smokes
more, and uses drugs. There's something unbearably sad about a 60-year-old man
who still takes drugs.

            
Thompson's real problem isn't that he indulges himself, it's that he's lazy.
(He once called himself, with a flash of perfect insight, a "mean, lazy
hillbilly.") Thompson used to be a fabulous reporter. He reported masterfully
on the '72 campaign and the Hell's Angels. He exaggerated and lied, but he was
there --he befriended weirdos and freaks, made common cause with the
dregs of society, stirred trouble, listened. At some point in the '70s,
Thompson realized he didn't need to bother. He was a celebrity. Thompson's
writing retreated from the outside world. He hasn't had a new thought for 20
years. A shocking number of his recent articles are based on something he saw
on television.

            Thompson is no longer Hunter S. Thompson: He performs a
Hunter S. Thompson routine. ( Doonesbury 's Duke character is not the only
Thompson cartoon. Thompson himself is a Thompson cartoon.) He works himself
into a fake froth; does some calculated, halfhearted gonzo writing; then
collects a fat check. He has become as repetitious, pontificating, and slothful
as the worst D.C. pundit--as ridiculous as the political reporters he mocked in
Fear and Loathing: On the Campaign Trail '72 . Thompson poured acid on
Nixon because he honestly believed Nixon was a devil. He pours acid on Clinton
because, well, that's what someone pays him to do.

            
Editors--though fewer and fewer of them--still shell out top dollar for this
Hunter S. Thompson routine. Colleges still pay for his slurred, mangled
"speeches." His books are still, astonishingly, best sellers (even his wretched
new ones). Apparently there are enough 18-year-old book buyers in the first
flush of marijuana to keep Hunter in tequila and narcotics for the rest of his
life.

            
In 1967, a 14-year-old kid wrote Thompson a fan
letter saying that Hell's Angels had inspired him to join a motorcycle
gang. An alarmed Thompson replied by telling the boy to do his own thing, not
imitate others, and warning him about what was wrong with the Angels: "The best
of the Angels--the guys you might want to sit down and talk to--have almost all
played that game for a while and then quit for something better. The ones who
are left are almost all the kind who can't do anything else, and they're not
much fun to talk to. They're not smart, or funny, or brave, or even original.
They're just Old Punks, and that's a lot worse than being a Young Punk. They're
not even happy; most of them hate the lives they lead, but they can't afford to
admit it because they don't know where else to go, or what else to do. That's
what makes them mean."

            That is
what Thompson is today: an Old Punk; not smart or funny or brave or even
original. And he sure doesn't know what else to do.

            
               Click to
read about Thompson's glory days and for two of his political profiles.
            

         
      
   
