
   
   
      
         
            Government and Volleyball

            
               A mere
40 years ago, beach volleyball was just beginning. Now it is not only a sport
[but] in the Olympics. ... And there's a whole new world of opportunity opening
up that didn't even exist 30 years ago or 40 years ago, and no bureaucrat would
have invented it. And that's what freedom is all about.
            

            --House Speaker Newt
Gingrich, addressing the Republican Convention.

            Not much
has changed over the last 40 years on the small island off the coast of Maine
where I have vacationed most summers of my life. A few things have been
lost--the inn burned down (though few outside the insurance company mourned its
loss), as did the little grocery store (much mourned when the milk supply runs
low and the harbor lies a foggy three miles distant)--but not much has been
added. The farmhouse, the shingled cottages, the library, and the chapel seem
as immutable, in their slightly shabby Wyethian perfection, as the sea that
sparkles behind them.

            Yet this year there was something new: a beach-volleyball
net. It stands firmly moored on the white sand beach that lies a few yards to
the west of my sister's cottage and fewer than a hundred yards from my own.
I'll admit that when I first spotted the net, I failed to grasp its symbolic
importance. I thought it was something of an eyesore. Only later, with the
benefit of Speaker Newt Gingrich's GOP Convention instruction (see above), did
I come to realize that what we had here was no less than the fulsome gift from
a mature Freedom to the island's youth. Sure, it sags a bit by Olympic
standards, but it stands, nevertheless, as a symbol of what the human spirit
can achieve when free from the oppression of Big Government.

            Of course,
the volleyball net didn't just wash in with the tide. The tiny island
government that decides such things voted money to sink the concrete pilings
that support the net's posts and to purchase the needed equipment. And the
Ladies Improvement Association provided personpower for the erection effort.
But these are small bureaucracies, more akin to the voluntary associations that
fall on the positive side of the GOP's freedom/slavery divide. Still I wonder:
Even if larger governments, like, for example, San Diego's, don't actually put
up the nets, surely they regulate their placement on beaches and other public
places.

            
Now I don't doubt for a moment that if you put
a group of bureaucrats around a conference table, the chances of them coming up
with sensible rules for beach volleyball, much less the seminal concept, are
zilch. More likely they would invent a bunch of rules for keeping the players
from spraining their ankles or getting their toes cut by pieces of glass hidden
in the sand or contracting tetanus from rusty nails stuck in driftwood.
Actually, you know, there are rules sort of like that. My sister, who is
something of an amateur expert on beaches, tells me, for example, that pursuant
to Maine's Natural Resources Protection Act (Coastal Sand Dune Rules, Chapter
355), the state government sets standards for beach cleaning--though more with
an eye to protecting the beaches than the beach-going public. Some might think
that these rules, whether aimed at pristine dunes or uncut feet, also advance
the cause of beach volleyball.

            It occurs to me further that
the beach itself might not have been able to accommodate this monument to
freedom were it not for the fact that, a few years back, my sister took it upon
herself to consult some experts, among them actual bureaucrats, about the
erosion that then threatened it. These experts, notable among them Stephen M.
Dickson of the Maine Department of Conservation and L. Kenneth Fink of the
Darling Marine Center in Walpole, Maine, quickly fingered the culprit: the
concrete sidewalk, erected some 75 years ago by an island benefactor--one Mr.
Stanley of Steamer fame.

            The
sidewalk, they counseled, caused the sea to erode, rather than build, the
important dune that, with its beach grass and surrounding "berm colonizers,"
protects the beach and the north end of the island. And so the sidewalk went
and the dune swells with each passing year and the beach grass slithers in the
wind. Beach-volleyball fans everywhere should surely rejoice at the collective
action that, at the cost of some individual freedom, to be sure (mine, for
example, as, with sand-filled shoes, I struggle to navigate my grocery-laden
cart along the dirt track that is now the only access to my cottage), has
preserved another venue for their sport.

            Come to think of it, it's just possible that no sport
benefits more from bureaucrats than beach volleyball. To begin with, if
governments at every level hadn't intervened, beaches everywhere might have
been incorporated by the wealthy into Gatsbyesque estates, like those that
denied most of the North Shore of Long Island to hoi polloi. All four finalists
in the recent Olympic men's beach-volleyball championship (as well as two
members of America's other top-ranked men's team and two from the most
successful U.S. women's team) grew up playing on California's spectacular
public beaches. And while the more aggressive types of beach maintenance
activity have fallen into disfavor among coastal geologists in recent years,
those beaches, like the East Coast's, have been the recipients of billions in
taxpayers' dollars spent collectively by local, state, and federal
bureaucracies, from the Squirrel Island Village Corp. to the Army Corps of
Engineers.

            Nor does government support
for beach volleyball stop at dune's end. All six of America's top-ranking male
players got their higher education thanks to the splendid network of colleges
and universities that their home state maintains. While in college, they honed
their skills playing regular volleyball--not a sport that pays its own way on
campus. And though today's top-ranking players earn six-figure incomes from
their prizes and commercial endorsements, many of the great players of tomorrow
may even now be benefiting from government's biggest covert subsidy of sports
and the arts--unemployment insurance (and perhaps the occasional food
stamp).

            So let me draw a slightly
different moral from the saga of beach volleyball as it has evolved in our
times: If, as Speaker Gingrich says, the price of volleyball is eternal
freedom, still it may take a village to raise a volleyball net.

         
      
   
