
   
   
      
         
            Vietnam's Most Harrowing Photo: From Guilt to Grace

            By Charles
Paul Freund

            
               (932 words; posted
Thursday, Nov. 21; to be composted Thursday, Nov. 28)
            

            One of photography's most
terrible strengths is its power to accuse. The ability of imagery to forgive,
to reconcile, is a good deal more circumscribed--but then, that is true of
expression itself. Guilt will be borne; grace is fleeting.

            Yet, both guilt and grace
shared space on front pages and TV screens a few days ago; they came together
in the face of Phan Thi Kim Phuc, who, after 24 years of mute and frozen
accusation, stepped forward at this year's Veterans Day ceremony in Washington,
D.C., to lay to rest that portion of a painful past that she has carried in her
own face.

            Anyone old enough to
remember the imagery of Vietnam would surely have viewed the pictures of Kim at
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial through Nick Ut's harrowing, Pulitzer
Prize-winning photograph of children fleeing a napalm attack on a village
outside Saigon. That 1972 photo has lost none of its dark horror over the
years. It still transforms its viewers into witnesses; it still asks of them
the same fearsome question: What have you to do with this?

            Kim, 9 years old in 1972,
had taken shelter with others in a pagoda when the American military ordered
the South Vietnamese air force to attack her village of Trang Bang because it
had been infiltrated by enemy forces. The pagoda was hit, killing, among
others, two of Kim's brothers. Terrified survivors streamed onto the highway,
where photographer Ut snapped them. Kim is naked, screaming in fear and agony,
in the center of the image.

            In fact, the image tells
little of this story. It is not a picture of a military attack and its
aftermath; it is a picture of terror. We know this is war: The presence of
soldiers tells us that. And we know something has just happened, because we see
black smoke obliterating the horizon. But what? Terrified children are running
down a hellish highway that disappears behind them into a smoky vanishing
point, a highway that seems to run through a barren and burning plain.

            What can they be running
toward? Perhaps they see something down the highway, behind us. But there is no
anticipation of sanctuary to be found in their faces. If it is succor toward
which they run, they will have to run forever.

            Especially disconcerting is
the naked girl in the middle of the highway. It isn't clear to us why she is
naked; perhaps the force of an explosion has blown away her clothes. Is she
injured? We can't quite tell. Oddly, she is the only one in the image looking
back at us. And we are the only ones looking at her. Indeed, the very act of
staring at her nakedness seems to only intensify her humiliation. There is a
dimension to her unending scream that seems to be in reaction to our very act
of witness. The effect is deeply disturbing.

            Ut's was not the only camera
present; the sequence exists on film as well. Because it is more dreadful
physically, the film is less potent emotionally. (The same is true for another
of Vietnam's most famous images: Eddie Adams' photo of the gun-to-temple
execution of a Viet Cong.)

            Vicki
Goldberg, in her book The Power of Photography , describes the full,
filmed sequence:

            
               [T]he naked girl and
the others ... ran toward us rather slowly, like people finishing their run.
They passed the camera, it followed from behind. The girl's back and arm were
seen to be completely covered with black patches of burned skin, no longer
resembling flesh. American soldiers gave her a drink and poured water over
her.
            

            That is a level of atrocity
from which most viewers must recoil. Furthermore, the filmed sequence closes
out the event, and gives viewers an opportunity to shrug it off. Ut's photo is
of a crowded highway winding eternally through hell, and it won't let you
go.

            Goldberg reports that the
picture ran on front pages throughout America. Benjamin Spock, who chose the
photo to speak for him in the 1994 exhibition "Talking Pictures," certainly
echoed many of its viewers when he wrote simply, "[I]t horrified me," and
credited it with confirming his opposition to the war.

            The image was, of course, an
important piece of atrocity propaganda for the North Vietnamese, who were
themselves responsible for significant suffering both before and after they
attained power. Like all such atrocity material, it undermined the morale of
the side responsible for the pain it depicted. But the political manipulation
of imagery doesn't delegitimize its content. The pain here is only too real;
Kim still suffers from her wounds.

            In fact, Kim herself became a
prisoner of this image. As she told National Public Radio, her desire to study
medicine was thwarted by officials who wanted her to remain available for media
interviews that stemmed from the photograph's worldwide fame; she herself had
become a propaganda exhibit. Eventually, she was able to study in Cuba, and
during a visit to Canada she and her husband asked for--and were
granted--asylum.

            "If I could talk face to
face with the pilot who dropped the bomb," Kim said during her remarkable
appearance in Washington, "I would tell him we cannot change history, but we
should try to do good things for the present. ..."

            A little girl, naked and in
pain and with burned arms outstretched, staggers toward us down the middle of a
highway. A quarter-century later, she reaches us. Who would have expected that
when she finally covered that last patch of pocked road, she would offer her
hand in grace?

         
      
   
