
   
   
      
         
            Mea Culpa

            
               A
proposal to lure people into the District by slashing federal income tax rates
for city residents got its second big boost in as many days yesterday when
Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott joined House Speaker Newt Gingrich in
endorsing it.
            

            --Washington Post, July
16, 1996

            Forgive me, reader, for I
have sinned. I confess that I harbor a belief that contradicts much that I have
held dear over the years, that leads me to reject well-established economic
theory and practice, that has earned me the understandable scorn of my Slate
colleagues. I confess: I favor a substantial federal income-tax break for the
citizens of the District of Columbia.

            So strongly, moreover, do I
cling to this heretical belief, that when one of my colleagues suggested I
write a column attacking the district's tax remission on well-accepted economic
grounds, I objected (devotion to a free and fair airing of contrary opinions be
damned). Such narrow-minded accountancy, I argued, would destroy the fragile
political consensus on Capitol Hill that might actually produce a timely
rescue. (Yes, yes, I stole the central theme of this column from a subordinate.
Another 200 days in Purgatory.) And finally, oh Grand Inquisitor, it will not have escaped your soul-piercing gaze
that, as a resident of the District of Columbia, I stand personally to benefit
should the tax cut be enacted.

            And yet I
do not repent.

            Of course I know most economists believe that local tax
breaks do nothing to stimulate overall economic growth. My files are as full as
any policy wonk's with scholarly studies demonstrating that using tax lures to
attract jobs and taxpayers often ends up robbing not just Peter, but Paul as
well. Obviously, much of the "growth" generated by such a break is merely
stolen from other jurisdictions--leading them to offer breaks of their own in
an ultimately futile "race to the bottom." Less obviously, the new citizens and
businesses may be a bad deal. Meeting their needs may require, for example, new
roads and schools, without the extra tax revenues needed to pay for them.

            Nor does
my heresy blind me to the inefficiency of tax transfers in affecting behavior,
economic or otherwise. I will not deny that it has been shown that as much as
70 or 80 percent of a tax "incentive" often goes to pay for activity that would
have taken place anyway. As for the pious hope that the Internal Revenue
Service will be able to police the new tax breaks--to assure that all claimants
are truly residents of the district and that the nation's capital has not
become a flagrant tax haven--well, the IRS has a better chance here than in the
Cayman Islands.

            
Surely you know, argue my colleagues, that
Congress could just give as much money directly to the district government as
the area would gain from a federal tax break--at a fraction of the cost to the
rest of the country. Well, this is where I start falling off the train. We're
talking, after all, about a city government that--with an annual budget of
about $5 billion and a shrinking population--runs schools that cannot shelter,
much less educate its children; cannot mend its roads or keep its drinking
water potable; cannot police its own police force, let alone its streets or
jails; cannot care for the sick, or elderly, or homeless. A government that
cannot resist the importuning of any special interest or union, that lacks both
the will and the talent to reform itself. What would make anyone think that
giving more money to that government would fix anything?

            The only thing that will
save the district is more residents and more businesses able not only to pay
more taxes, but to take a lively interest in how they are governed. And only
tax benefits, big ones, will persuade them to move into an ill-governed,
crumbling capital city. Yes, they will come initially at the expense of other,
especially neighboring, jurisdictions. But the areas around the capital have
long prospered at the expense of the capital. Their commuters benefit mightily
from the services provided by the district, yet pay no taxes to support those
services. The surrounding areas cannot ultimately flourish without a vibrant
core. Moreover, the district, unlike other cities and because of its unique
constitutional origins, cannot annex its fleeing middle class. Nor can it claim
the voting representation in Congress that, in America's historical tradition,
has been considered the essential trade-off for taxation.

            That is
why there is grumbling, but little organized opposition in Virginia and
Maryland to the tax grant to the district--worth perhaps $700 million a
year--that is gathering bipartisan support in Congress. Still, you may ask, why
should the residents of East St. Louis or Detroit provide tax breaks to the
district when they have so many problems of their own? Why should they allow
the district's residents to enjoy a federal tax rate of, say, 15 percent, when
they themselves may face rates close to 40 percent? Because it's the nation's
capital, and because it's a good investment.

            No, I do not profess that the tax breaks will pay for
themselves in no time at all. How could I, when I have so often written that
they will not? But the "supply-siders" are quite right when they say that
economies are not a zero-sum game. Is it too large a leap of faith to believe
that the right incentives, ones that capitalize on the comparative advantages
of people or locations, can reap positive returns not just for the direct
beneficiaries, but for the larger society?

            Here is a beautiful city, one
that ought to make any American proud. Its well-tended (by the federal
government) parks, monuments, mansions, embassies, and museums can compare with
those of any city in the world. Paris or New York it is not, but its downtown
streets have a polyglot vitality they lacked only a few decades ago. Its
neighborhoods are filled with solid housing and well-kept gardens--and not just
in the wealthy enclaves. You can have a park in your backyard (as I do) and
still make it to work in 15 minutes (if you keep a sharp eye out for the
potholes). It would be nice if more of the newcomers were artists, artisans,
and producers, rather than lawyers and lobbyists, but head for head, I'll stack
up Washington's intellectual capital against any competitor's. A timely
expenditure of tax revenues might just work wonders. And even if the costs were
a dead economic loss to other jurisdictions, surely there are gains in national
pride for recompense.

            I confess that I cannot prove
I am right in my belief. Costly error or painful recriminations lie on either
side of my position. The money might, after all, be wasted on windfalls. On the
other hand, it's also possible that the tax incentives would miraculously repay
the federal coffers many fold. In either case, my knees are ready. If Paris is
worth a mass, Washington is worth a .

         
      
   
