
   
   
      
         
            Oscar Wilde

            Even Oscar Wilde, perhaps
the greatest of all self-promoters, couldn't fault the hype job being done for
him these days. The biopic Wilde opened in New York last week. Two weeks
ago, The Judas Kiss , a play about Wilde's doomed love affair with Lord
Alfred Douglas, debuted on Broadway, starring Liam Neeson as Wilde.

            This is
the Wildean moment. In the last year, bookstores have been glutted with
mass-market issue: Oscar Wilde's Guide to Modern Living ; Wilde the
Irishman ; The Oscar Wilde Reader ; Andre and Oscar ; Oscar
Wilde (by his son Vyvyan Holland); and The Wilde Album (by his
grandson Merlin Holland). Besides The Judas Kiss , Wilde's life is the
subject of three other major new plays, several one-man shows, and an opera. As
for Wilde's own work, there is the usual spate of theatrical productions, as
well as at least four planned films of his plays and novel.

            Normally this kind of wretched historical excess (e.g.,
Wretched Titanic Excess) should be deplored and stifled. But in Oscar
Wilde, the celebrity culture has finally found a subject worthy of this
superfluity, someone complicated and challenging enough to endure the excess
and more. Wilde once wrote, "I was a man who stood in symbolic relation to the
art and culture of my age." He is now a man who stands in symbolic relation to
the art and culture of our age.

            For most
of this century, Wilde was simply a cartoon figure, a bon-moting smart aleck.
"I can resist everything except temptation." Ha ha ha! "There is only one thing
in the world worse than being talked about, and that is not being talked
about." How droll, Oscar, how very droll! Wilde said that he "summed up ... all
existence in an epigram." And that is exactly how he has been perceived--as the
cool, cruel master of aphorism. His plays were produced and his quips were
plagiarized, but he himself remained a one-dimensional figure in the popular
culture.

            
That has changed during the last decade and
especially the last few years. The revival ignores the art for the sake of the
man, recognizing that Wilde himself is at least as interesting as his
one-liners. Requisite quote: "I put my genius into my life. I have put only my
talent into my works."

            So why is
the man suddenly so popular? One reason is that this is an age of memoirs:
Wilde, who self-consciously made his own life a work of art, is an evocative
symbol for self-involved literature. Literary nostalgia also explains the
obsession with him. Between 1895 and 1900, he endured three trials, was jailed
for two years, published his most famous poem, and died: The 100 th
anniversary of each event has been (or will be) much commemorated. Wilde's
combination of stylishness and tragedy lends itself perfectly to overcostumed,
overwrought Merchant-Ivory-style drama.

            But there are two more important reasons why this is a
Wilde time: homosexuality and celebrity. The rise of gay studies and increasing
acceptance of gay themes in popular culture have made a Wilde resurgence
inevitable. (This decade, not his, is the gay '90s.) Wilde's homosexuality was
ignored for decades, then glossed over. When he was first claimed as a gay icon
a generation ago, he was explained too simply as a martyr: A vicious British
society destroyed him because it was too intolerant to accept
homosexuality.

            The 1990s
Wilde provokes because he is not simple at all. In an era obsessed by identity,
sexuality, and ambiguity, Wilde is one of the most puzzling cases. His life
raises very modern questions about what homosexuality is and how much sexuality
should define identity. Wilde is the "ur-homosexual," as scholars put it, yet
he never saw himself as homosexual. In fact, it is only after his trials--and
partly because of his trials--that people began to be classified as
"homosexual" and "heterosexual." (For more on Wilde's enduring role in shaping
gay identity, click .) Wilde was not only not explicitly gay, he was
happily married and the father of two children. He had sex with men
infrequently, and only late in life. To appreciate the complexity of his
sexuality, consider the current crop of Wilde plays: The Judas Kiss
focuses on his love affair with a man, Gross Indecency focuses on his
denials of his love affairs with men, and The Secret Fall of Constance
Wilde focuses on his love affair with a woman.

            
Often called the first person famous for being
famous, Wilde foreshadowed our modern celebrity obsession. At a time when
realism and authenticity were in vogue, his life was a stylized performance
designed to grab attention. In the early 1880s, before he had written anything
worth mentioning, he made his name as London's great young aesthete. He mooned
around the city carrying flowers, and threw himself at the feet of actresses.
Gilbert and Sullivan parodied him in Patience . He then got himself sent
on an American lecture tour to drum up publicity for Patience 's U.S.
production. He wore outrageous clothes and quipped his way across the States.
(On arrival in New York: "I have nothing to declare except my genius.") His
lectures about interior decorating were mobbed. He also milked his fame
brilliantly after he'd achieved commercial success. He is undoubtedly the only
canonical writer to endorse "Madame Fontaine's Bosom Beautifier," a
breast-enlarging cream.

            Just as
his rise prefigured modern ideas about celebrity, so also did his fall. Wilde
was the first mass-media celebrity criminal. The English gutter press, which
was just developing a wide audience, whipped up public hatred toward him over
his sex crimes and made him a pariah. Wilde scholars note his sex scandal is
curiously evocative of Clinton's: A spectacular public figure denies sexual
indiscretion (in the face of overwhelming evidence) rather than risk
challenging conventional morality.

            One thing is missing from the revival: subversiveness.
Wilde himself was endlessly transgressive, always finding a new way to jab
Victorian complacency. He made vicious fun of the English bourgeoisie in plays
such as The Importance of Being Earnest . The same bourgeoisie packed
London houses and made him a fortune without realizing the joke was on them.
It's impossible today to realize how shocking The Picture of Dorian Gray
was to 1890s readers. And even Wilde's decision to endure prison rather than
flee was a rebuke to England's inhumanity.

            But there is very little
wildness in today's Wilde. The books, plays, and movie are extremely couth,
extremely respectable. Even a decade ago, a movie about Wilde and his gay
affair would have been considered remarkable: Today, it's a cliché. At the end
of the 19 th century, "gross indecency" could not even be described
in court. Today, you can throw it on the screen and no one even notices. The
challenge for Wilde lovers at the end of the 20 th century is this:
Find a way to appall.

         
      
   
