
   
   
      
         
            The Republican Presidential Hopeful

            After his excruciating
performance in the 1996 Republican presidential campaign, Lamar Alexander
should have had the grace to disappear quietly into the Tennessee backwoods.
But here we are, a full 900 days before the 2000 election, and Alexander
is running again--airing ads in Iowa, fund raising, pandering, mounting his
high horse, and doing all the other unappetizing things a presidential
candidate must do.

            Alexander, who has been
campaigning for president more or less nonstop since 1993, is the very model of
the Republican Presidential Hopeful, or RPH, but he's hardly alone. With no
Republican heir apparent, the 2000 race promises to be the wildest GOP primary
in a generation. There are, by my count, two dozen Republicans considered (at
least by their own estimation) viable 2000 candidates. is the full list.

            And an
astonishing number of them are already engaged in all-but-official campaigns,
desperate quests to become an "early favorite." The will-be candidates are
competing fiercely for donors, staff, volunteers, endorsements. (A caveat: Not
all the potential candidates are pre-campaigning. George W. Bush and Elizabeth
Dole, for example, have carefully avoided any presidential posturing.)

            So who is the RPH? What are defining qualities?

            
               The RPH is not easily
deterred. Anyone who would spend three years of his life pursuing an office
that he has no reasonable hope of winning must be irrepressible. The RPH isn't
bothered by the fact that he's been routed before (Alexander, Alan Keyes, Pete
Wilson, Pat Buchanan, Steve Forbes, Jack Kemp); that he's the most hated man in
politics (Newt Gingrich); that he's a national joke (Dan Quayle); that hardly
anyone outside his home state has heard of him (John Ashcroft, Bob Smith,
George Pataki, Tom Ridge, John Kasich, Tommy Thompson); that most voters will
confuse him with an S&L crook (Frank Keating, the governor of
Oklahoma--he's never heard of you, either); or that he might not get elected if
he were the next-to-last American alive (Gary Bauer).

            
               The RPH
pretends he isn't actually running. It's tacky to be campaigning for
president in the first half of 1998, so--even though everyone knows he's
going to run--the RPH generally insists he isn't a candidate. He has devised a
number of lies and half-truths to convey this. "It's not something I'm thinking
about right now" (Rudolph Giuliani). He won't decide until "1999" (Quayle),
"for another year" (Kasich), until "after the 1998 elections" (lots of them).
It's just an "exploratory committee" (Keyes). It's "very premature" to talk
about it (Pataki). "I'm extremely flattered by the speculation," but a worthier
candidate will certainly come along" (Bauer). "My focus is entirely on the
state of ______" (Christie Todd Whitman and other governors). Instead of
appearing to be the grasping pol he is, the RPH exudes the impression that he
won't run unless the American people plead for his candidacy. Rare is the
politician who doesn't hear that plea.

            

               The RPH says he has a real job, but he
doesn't. Some RPHs do actually work for a living: Sitting governors,
members of Congress, Dole, and Bauer all hold real jobs. But often the RPH has
a simulacrum of a career, the kind of work that is an excuse to spend every
waking minute campaigning. (That means you, Keyes, Alexander, Quayle, Kemp,
Buchanan. Would you dare say your job is "professional presidential
candidate"?)

            The RPH claims he is working
for the good of America or the Republican Party or both. What, exactly, does
this "work" consist of? Much of it is giving speeches. (Forbes has made nearly
300 over the last 18 months.)

            The rest
of the RPH's work is running his political action committee or "grass-roots"
advocacy group . This group has a magnificent, patriotic name: Campaign for
a New American Century! Live Free or Die! Solutions America! Spirit of America!
(Click to play a game: Match the RPH to his group.) The RPH's group has
ambitious goals: to advocate the flat tax (Forbes); to draft "an agenda for a
new American century" (Alexander); to "build and strengthen the Republican
Party" (Quayle). In fact, the group has only one real purpose: to raise funds
and promote the RPH before official campaigning (as well as official fund
raising) begins in 1999.

            What does the RPH believe in? Well, the RPH has
Principles-- . The RPH is high-minded. He frequently quotes Ronald Reagan.
He especially enjoys taking a bold public stand against his party: This
distinguishes him as a statesman who won't sacrifice principles for expediency.
It also guarantees a bit of favorable press. Ashcroft regularly berates the
Republican Congress for having "cut and run" rather than having tackled tough
moral issues. Forbes periodically slaps Republicans in Congress for
compromising: "Get real or get out!" is a Forbes slogan. Keyes makes a habit of
denouncing the GOP: for expanding government, for approving treaties, for not
impeaching Clinton, etc. And the RPH often slams fellow Republicans for not
doing enough to ban abortion.

            The RPH who must legislate or
govern (Gingrich, Kasich, Bush) is quieter about his principles--probably
because he actually has to live by them. There is no such check on the
unemployed RPH.

            
               The RPH
has a multipoint tax plan (usually at least four points, often 10). The RPH
generally believes in the flat tax, which should be set at 17 percent.
(Quayle--that tax-and-spend liberal--would set it at a whopping 19 percent.)
The RPH might also believe in eliminating the income tax (Keyes), slashing the
income tax and raising tariffs (Buchanan), or rejiggering the tax code to save
taxpayers $985 billion (Ashcroft, by abolishing taxes on inheritances and on
Social Security benefits, among other measures). The RPH does not much
elaborate on how he would balance the budget after his cuts.

            

               The RPH is a writer. The RPH has hidden
literary talents. You can't turn around in a bookstore without knocking over a
pile of (unsold) RPH books. Click for a list of them and another mix-and-match
game.

            The publication of the RPH
book is followed by the book tour, which leads to the next fact about the
RPH:

            
               The RPH likes to
travel--to New Hampshire and Iowa. Gingrich recently toured to promote
Lessons Learned the Hard Way . He found himself signing books in
Manchester, N.H., and Des Moines, Iowa--undoubtedly because those cities are
famed for their interest in great literature. Forbes, Alexander, Ashcroft,
Kasich, and John McCain have also recently visited New Hampshire. Forbes,
Alexander, Ashcroft, Smith, and Keyes have stopped off in Iowa. Kemp has
traveled to Iowa at least seven times. And the pressing business of New York
took Pataki on a 12-city tour through the South and the West.

            The RPH
will also travel to any place where a few dozen Republicans have gathered. Last
summer, the "Midwestern Republican Leadership Conference" in Indianapolis drew
eight RPHs. A similar meeting in Biloxi, Miss., this year also attracted eight
hopefuls. Even the recent summit of the Harris County, Texas, Republicans
managed to pull in Quayle, Forbes, Keating, Ashcroft, and Bauer. If you held a
family reunion, you could probably get Ashcroft, Keyes, and Forbes to give
stump speeches at the barbecue.

            

               The RPH trolls for endorsements. The RPH
knows he needs support from the opinion-making class to win in 2000. The RPH
has almost certainly appeared on Evans & Novak . If he's lucky, the
RPH has been championed by a pundit: Cal Thomas just wrote a paean to Quayle.
Kasich won a full-throated cheer from the New York Times Magazine .

            There is
one endorsement the RPH seeks above all: Ralph Reed's . The RPH longs to
sign the former Christian Coalition boss as a campaign consultant. Quayle,
Kemp, Forbes, Alexander, Bush, Kasich, and Ashcroft have already met with Reed
and kissed his ring.

            
Perhaps the most important--and certainly most
ridiculous--element of the pre-campaign is the early polls . Never has so
much been made of such flimsy numbers. Ashcroft got a media boost when he
finished first in a survey of Christian Coalition state chapter leaders. Forbes
fans tout his top finish in a straw poll of Conservative Political Action
Conference members. There have been national news stories based on straw polls
of a few hundred party loyalists in Mississippi, Texas, and the Midwest.
Recently, a 234-person phone poll by a New Hampshire TV station made
headlines.

            There is a discouraging
lesson in the polls for the RPH. Bush has finished first, easily, in every poll
except the Christian Coalition's and CPAC's. He is also one of the few RPHs who
eschews the pre-campaign. He's running for re-election as governor this fall,
and he doesn't want Texans to worry that he'll skip out on them midway through
his second term (which, of course, is exactly what he'd like to do). So Bush
has no PAC and no book. He hasn't traveled to Iowa or New Hampshire, and he
avoids most GOP conferences. Instead he's just governing and campaigning in
Texas.

            This
should frighten the daylights out of the RPH. Perhaps all the scheming,
posturing, speechifying, and money-grubbing in the world can't help the RPH.
Perhaps Republican voters really want to reward the doer--not the campaigner,
not the pre-campaigner.

            
               If you
missed the full list of Republican Presidential Hopefuls, click . You can also
test your RPH knowledge with these quizzes about RPH and .
            

         
      
   
