
   
   
      
         
            NAFTA Math

            When the Clinton
administration releases its analysis of the impact of the North American Free
Trade Agreement this month, NAFTA critics will seize on the data. They'll point
to the 125,000 American workers "certified" by the U.S. Department of Labor as
having lost their jobs because of the agreement as evidence of the treaty's
dangers. They will be pointing in the wrong direction.

            A Wall
Street Journal reporter recently examined some of these job-loss cases and
found that most had little or nothing to do with NAFTA. Like the 500 unionized
workers in the Pabst brewery that moved from Milwaukee to a non-unionized plant
in La Crosse, Wisc. Or the unionized employees of a Memphis toilet tissue mill
that sold out to a non-union company, which reopened the mill on the same
spot.

            The Labor Department responds that it is not to blame for
the sloppy way in which Congress, seeking to soften union opposition to NAFTA
in 1993, drafted the NAFTA monitoring rules. The law, for example, does not say
that the closing of a brewery (or other plant) has to be directly attributable
to NAFTA-induced trade in order for the displaced workers to be eligible for an
extra year of unemployment benefits and other "adjustment" assistance. It
requires only that imports of beer (or whatever) from Canada or Mexico
increased during the relevant period. Nor does it matter whether, as in the
case of a Smith-Corona factory, the employer had already planned to move the
operation to Mexico; all that counts is that the move was made and that it cost
U.S. jobs at some time after NAFTA became law.

            Officials
also point out that many of the certified NAFTA "victims" drew little or no
benefits. Instead they retired, found other jobs--or applied for regular Trade
Adjustment Assistance, a larger, older, and also much-abused program. Most
workers (who have traditionally been resistant to government efforts to
"adjust" them) prefer regular TAA to NAFTA aid because TAA rules, which require
workers to sign up for retraining in order to get cash, are more laxly
enforced. (In fact, the only advantage NAFTA benefits have is that they may be
claimed when jobs are lost to plant relocations, whereas TAA is restricted to
job losses related to higher imports.)

            
As a result, the NAFTA benefits program, while
growing, still costs less than $30 million a year. But, the Labor Department
cautions, the low usage level doesn't mean that harm hasn't occurred. Many
workers injured by trade are likely to be employed by small, non-unionized
companies and either unaware of the trade benefits, which unions actively
peddle to their laid-off members, or in service jobs that are not covered.
Still, while these exclusions may bolster the job-loss claims of the NAFTA
attackers, they are hardly an advertisement for the equity of the "adjustment"
they embrace.

            Even if
it were possible to find and help every worker directly or indirectly hurt by
trade pacts, why should they have a larger claim for public help than those
whose jobs are lost to technological change? Or to shifts in consumer taste,
lousy management, an overpriced dollar, or domestic competition? Government did
not create trade. It created trade barriers. When it removes them, should it
incur a special obligation to the formerly protected?

            In any case, NAFTA foes can make no credible job-loss case
on the basis of Labor Department certifications. They may find some comfort,
however, in the aggregate trade statistics. Last year, Canada ran a $21 billion
trade surplus with the United States. Mexico, once a net importer of U.S.
products, chalked up a $17.5 billion export surplus with the United States
(while running a roughly equivalent trade deficit with Asia and Europe, from
which it imports large quantities of machinery and partially processed goods
for final manufacture in Mexico). This year the numbers are projected to be
roughly the same, though Mexico's U.S. surplus is expected to shrink
somewhat.

            But the
net U.S. deficits are only a small part of a larger picture of growing
hemispheric integration. Since the pact, the total volume of trade among the
NAFTA countries has grown substantially, with partially fabricated goods and
parts moving back and forth across borders before reaching consumers. In
addition to efficiency gains, these flows have helped Mexico recover from its
near-death experience in early 1995, when an orgy of import buying led to the
collapse of the peso and the flight of investor capital. Since then, austerity
has curbed Mexican buying of European luxuries, and higher tariffs have helped
stem the influx of cheap Asian textiles and footwear that threatened its
low-end industries. However, the primary engine of Mexican recovery, as
Mexico's NAFTA minister in Washington, Luis de la Calle, stresses--and the main
hope for spreading internal prosperity, in which the United States has a large
stake--has been export growth, with the United States the principal buyer.

            
Even for trade-worriers, NAFTA must be rated a
small-potato concern. The Canadian and Mexican trade surpluses are piddling
compared to the nearly $200 billion total trade deficit the United States will
likely incur this year. Or even compared to the $54 billion surplus projected
for Japan (which, despite its poor-mouthing, continues to enjoy much higher
growth and lower inflation and unemployment than the prideful United States).
Still more striking is that China--which buys only one-sixth as much from
America as Japan does--is expected to ring up its own $54 billion trade surplus
with the U.S. market. The American consumer should, of course, be grateful for
the opportunity to buy all these fine goods on the credit thus extended. And
trust that our foreign creditors will remain willing to invest their surplus
dollars in U.S. securities and other assets and to reinvest the proceeds from
those investments within our borders in a kindly fashion. But should that
willingness ever falter, one thing is sure: No "worker adjustment" program will
be able to measure the harm, much less assuage it.

         
      
   
