
   
   
      
         
            Bill Moyers

            Bill Moyers broadcast his
latest PBS documentary this week, Close to Home: Moyers on Addiction ,
five and a half sobering hours about alcohol and drug addiction. It was an
oddly appropriate subject, because Moyers' shows themselves are a kind of
addictive drug. After watching a Moyers documentary, you are likely to be--for
no rational reason--in a warmhearted, benevolent, slightly euphoric mood: I
feel better for having watched this . Moyers is a glass of chardonnay before
dinner, a small toke on a marijuana joint.

            It's easy
enough to mock Moyers, America's secular televangelist. He is, after all, the
person who gave America the mythmeister Joseph Campbell, the men's movement
guru Robert Bly, and the oppression poet Maya Angelou (now, Bill, would you
please take them back?). Moyers is capable of turning almost any subject
into liberal squish: In his hands, the book of Genesis is a story of family
dysfunction ( Genesis: A Living Conversation ), and drug addiction is a
disease for which addicts bear no responsibility.

            Moyers is terminally earnest, and more cynical journalists
(that is, all of us) tire of his lectures on our frivolity. An ordained Baptist
minister, he adores sermonizing about his seriousness of purpose. (Click for
some examples.) His TV manner can be unbearably ingratiating. He does not
address his audience as much as hypnotize it. His gestures are too soothing
(click to view my favorite). His Texas drawl and folksy eloquence are
overpowering--like drinking a gallon of sweet, warm cream.

            Moyers
also gets hit for making money off public television. Foundations and
corporations give him millions to produce documentaries. He brilliantly markets
for-profit spinoffs: His companion books for the Campbell, Genesis, poetry, and
mind-body medicine series have all been best sellers. It's hard to see what's
so offensive about this commercialization: Why shouldn't Moyers make a fortune
off his books and videotapes? Just because he's on PBS doesn't mean he should
be a monk.

            
Moyers' smug piety does not diminish his very
real achievement: He has spent his life trying to bring moral seriousness to
television. When Moyers quit as Lyndon B. Johnson's press secretary, he could
have made a fortune anywhere. (Compare him with fellow LBJ confidante Jack
Valenti, who has been buck-raking and power-playing for 30 years.) But Moyers
believed he would best serve the public as a TV educator, a teacher in what he
calls the "biggest classroom in America."

            To that end, he spends hours
documenting political, artistic, and spiritual subjects that other TV news
dismisses in minutes. He tackles big issues--the world's great religions, evil,
poetry--and often explains them eloquently. He has done more than anyone on
television to popularize little-known scholars. Yes, that includes Campbell,
but for every interview with someone like him, there is one with a Mortimer
Adler, the philosopher who used Moyers' show to try to explain Aristotle.

            
(Conservative critics have complained that Moyers is pernicious because he is
faux high culture. Moyers offers the simulacrum of knowledge. When people watch
Adler explain Aristotle, they are being diverted from real thought. They are
watching television rather than actually reading philosophy. This seems to me
an ungracious snipe: The time spent watching Adler probably would have been
spent mooing over Ally McBeal , not studying Aristotle.)

            Moyers' political documentaries, too, address difficult
issues clearly, if one-sidedly. Liberals cite his Iran-Contra TV essay as a
model for great television. Documentaries on the CIA, the rise of religious
fundamentalism, and the minimum wage are much admired, too. And for all his
tendencies to liberal hackdom, Moyers did make The Vanishing Family: The
Crisis in Black America in 1986. It linked black family decline to bad
social welfare policy years before most Democrats acknowledged the issue.
(Moyers, incidentally, is one of the culture's best Zeitgeist
indicators. Click to read more.)

            Moyers'
grand public-spirited ambitions do often fail. Many of his broadcasts during
the Reagan and Bush years reflexively reinforced liberal nostrums. Some of his
recent spiritual documentaries have degenerated into New Age banalities. But at
least he keeps trying. And whether or not a documentary succeeds, Moyers always
serves as a tonic to television's mad rush. Moyers' documentaries are
languorous, even soporific. But his long, unhurried interviews crack his
subjects wide open: They talk to the camera as they would with an old friend.
Their frankness is a tribute to Moyers' genuine warmth and empathy. (Lesson:
The thoughtful chin-grab works.)

            
Which brings us to Moyers' one real
shortcoming. He rejects confrontation. He opens people up by agreeing with
them. Moyers was an aide to the most political and confrontational of
presidents, but he is the world champion of consensus, the patron saint in the
church of Deborah Tannen. Moyers gathers the faithful. His shows are more
700 Club than Crossfire . His guests almost always share Moyers'
belief about the topic at hand. If you watched the addiction series, for
example, you heard little about other popular views of addiction, e.g., that
addicts should be forced to take responsibility for their actions, not coddled
into victimization.

            Moyers'
kind of journalism seems designed to place this thought in the viewer's mind:
No right-thinking person could ever disagree with all these nice, smart
guests.

            
"Knowledge is a violent, bright, hot thing, but
you would never know that watching Moyers," says Laurence Jarvik, author of
PBS: Behind the Screen and a Moyers critic.

            Moyers'
defenders say that television has enough strife elsewhere (very little of it
illuminating) and that it's important that the airwaves offer a civil forum
like Moyers'. There is lots of truth to that view. But I can't help wishing
that Moyers would sometimes apply his keen mind to confronting those who
disagree with him. Compare Moyers with 60 Minutes , whose
rough-and-tumble, ambush journalism is the antithesis of his. 60 Minutes
prods, provokes, and fights with its subjects. After a great 60 Minutes
segment, viewers shake their heads in anger and disbelief. After a great Moyers
show, viewers nod in agreement. Which is better journalism?

            
               If you missed the
discussion of Moyers' self-righteousness, click . If you missed the discussion
of Moyers' gift for Zeitgeist , click .
            

         
      
   
