
   
   
      
         
            Welfare Scare

            You have a reasonably soft
heart. You wouldn't feel comfortable seeing little kids begging in the streets,
or stepping over the bodies of old folks gasping in the gutters. Maybe you read
the Atlantic Monthly article by Peter Edelman, a former
Clinton-administration official, who called the welfare-reform law signed last
fall by his former boss "terrible legislation." Edelman says the result will be
"more malnutrition and more crime, increased infant mortality, and increased
drug and alcohol abuse." You don't defend the previous welfare system--who
could?--but you wonder: Are the scaremongers right?

            How
worried should you be? Here's a quick review of what is--and isn't--likely to
be truly troublesome as the great welfare-reform experiment begins.

            

               1 States that are too "kind." Some
folks' worries are the opposite of Edelman's. They fear that the welfare system
won't change enough.

            The new welfare law abolishes
the current federal welfare-entitlement program, Aid to Families With Dependent
Children, and replaces it with block grants to the states. States have to
create replacement programs that set limits (five years) on how long most (four
out of five) families can get welfare, and ensure that half the families still
on the rolls in 2002 have at least one (part- or full-time) working member.
States also have to contribute 75 percent of the money that they used to spend
on AFDC to the new Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) program--the
so-called Maintenance of Effort (MOE) requirement.

            Beyond
that (and a bunch of other eye-glazing rules and exceptions to exceptions that
will keep federal regulation writers off the dole), states are basically free
to offer whatever combination of cash and services they think is best.

            
So what are states likely to do? One option
is--nothing much. If a state really wants to maintain the status quo, it can
probably get away with it. Welfare law has long been loaded with requirements
that states must cut fraud on the rolls, move recipients into jobs, provide
necessary service, blah, blah, blah. The requirements go unmet. The governor
makes a few calls to the White House or Capitol Hill. Eyes are averted.

            Moreover, the new law, for
all its seeming toughness, allows states plenty of leeway if they want to be
generous. And welfare consultants are already showing the way. States are free,
for example, to redirect the money that they used to spend on matching federal
AFDC grants (about 45 percent of the total) to provide help for families who
have lost their "temporary assistance" coverage. The new law also provides an
incentive for states to use their own money to continue grants to families that
exhaust their five-year eligibility.

            Not so
long ago, states like New York, Massachusetts, and California might have
brazened it out. But times have changed. Most states have already toughened
their welfare programs under waivers granted under the old pre-reform rules.
Some of these waivers are for more generous programs, but others are just as
tough as the new law.

            
               2 States that are too mean. So how nasty might states
get? Some were pretty mean already. People tend to forget that under the old
rules, states got to set the key parameter--the benefit level. AFDC payments
ranged from 11 percent of the official poverty line in Mississippi to about 65
percent in New York's Suffolk County. (This doesn't count food stamps,
Medicaid, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and federal aid for housing, home
heating, child care, and so forth, which will still be available.) At least in
theory, Mississippi now could replace even its small cash contribution with the
proverbial "bus ticket North." Not likely, perhaps, but worth watching out
for.

            
               3 A shortage of money. Under the old rules, the federal
government would match the money states spent, according to a formula that took
account of state need and benefit levels. The new rules cap federal welfare
payments at the 1995 level (with some allowances for rising unemployment and
other contingencies). For now that's a windfall for all but a couple of states,
since welfare caseloads have dropped by almost 10 percent nationally since
1995. But what if times get tough and caps start to pinch? Well, the Food Stamp
program has long been capped--supposedly--yet Congress has never failed to
provide extra funds when governors needed them.

            
               4 A lack of "suitable" jobs. Welfare advocates are
already complaining that recipients will be pushed into "dead-end" jobs. But
successful job-program operators have learned a key lesson since the last time
we had this argument (back in Jimmy Carter's day): Most jobs in this
economy are "dead end." People who work hard and build a good record move on to
better jobs. And the labor-market success of millions of unskilled immigrants
in recent years makes it hard to sustain the case that only highly trained or
educated workers are in demand--at least for the moment.

            

               5 Incapable workers. What about welfare
parents who, in practice, just cannot hold jobs (or perform other "work
activities") as the new law requires they do after two years on the rolls?
Maybe they have low mental or physical abilities. Maybe they are drug or
alcohol addicts or have multiple family or behavioral problems--or maybe they
simply have a bad attitude. Nobody really knows how big a problem this is, and
the extent will surely differ from area to area. But we won't know till we push
the limits.

            Many states are already
finding that a simple shove can have surprising results. Wisconsin's ambitious
(and relatively expensive) welfare reform has cut its caseload by more than
half. Massachusetts put in a tough program in November 1995 and has seen its
welfare rolls drop to the lowest level in 23 years. Oklahoma's welfare rolls
have dropped by 17 percent over the last year, even though it has only talked
about tougher rules.

            Healthy
job markets surely helped, but the economy has boomed at other times with
little effect on welfare. State officials think many potential recipients
simply got the message that times have changed, and found jobs on their own.
Moreover, credible studies have shown that many families have hidden income. A
recent study from California's Public Policy Institute, for example, found that
nine out of 10 teen-age welfare mothers in the state have income sources other
than AFDC. Reporters across the country who have set out looking for early
horror stories have returned with articles that are, on the whole, remarkably
upbeat.

            

               6 Not enough training and supportive
services. The new law is pretty tough on training. Only short-term
job-readiness or search assistance, on-the-job training, or a maximum of 12
months of vocational training count as "work activities"--though recipients who
are working part time can take other classes in their spare hours. But training
programs have a dismal record. Some have even been shown to impede movement
into jobs. Los Angeles County, for example, was having no luck with its
basic-education GAIN (Greater Avenues for Independence) program until, two
years ago, it shifted the focus to getting jobs. The result: a 160 percent
increase in job placements and big benefit savings.

            As for
"supportive services," in Massachusetts, at least, most of the special jobs set
aside for welfare recipients have gone unfilled, and there has been no
increased demand for medical help or child-care assistance.

            

               Two things you really should be alarmed
about (both of which President Clinton now proposes to remedy):

            People between the ages of
18 and 50 who have no kids lose food stamps after six months if they aren't
working or in training. That might not sound so tough. Street-level trafficking
in food stamps has got out of hand, and it's time for another round of cleanup
and streamlining. And many of the people in question are real
deadbeats--drunks, addicts, and the like. But that's just the point. Food
stamps are the last resort, the pittance that a rich country doles out to even
its least "deserving" citizens. Of course, this new requirement, like many
others, is "waivable," and many big cities have already got--or applied
for--dispensation.

            Legal immigrants who are not
yet naturalized (unless they are refugees, seeking asylum, have worked here 10
years, or are veterans or in the military) lose both food stamps and benefits
they might be receiving from the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program for
the aged and disabled. Most immigrants are supposed to have sponsors who stand
ready to make sure they do not become public dependents. Yet the number on SSI,
especially, has soared. Putting some teeth into sponsorship requirements for
future entrants, as the new law will do, is reasonable. But pulling the rug out
from under people who may have no practical recourse is unfair. And unlike the
cutoff for childless food stampers, this requirement can't be "waived"
away.

         
      
   
