
   
   
      
         
            Tina Brown

            
               Schadenfreude being
the house religion of the New York magazine world, this has been a particularly
satisfying week for glossy mag writers and editors. New Yorker Editor
Tina Brown--who essentially invented magazine "buzz," perfected buzz, made buzz
high art (and made high art buzz)--is becoming buzz's victim.

            This is the moment that
loyalists to the Old New Yorker have been eagerly anticipating for six
years. Every day brings new evidence that Brown is no longer--to use a
Tinaism--hot. Condé Nast Publisher Steve Florio just removed his brother Tom
from his position as The New Yorker 's publisher, then appointed a
replacement without consulting Brown. Steve Florio and New Yorker owner
S.I. Newhouse Jr. also declined to name Brown as The New Yorker 's
president, a job she reportedly coveted. Recent articles have exposed the
magazine's sorry financial shape: The New Yorker , which Brown promised
in 1992 to make profitable by 1997, lost $11 million last year, and its ad
sales are stagnating during an economic boom. In November, Newhouse dropped
Brown's husband, Harry Evans, the other half of New York's most formidable
media couple, as head of Random House, raising speculation that Brown and Evans
are out of favor with King Si. Now New York media are speculating (without
evidence) that Newhouse may not renew Brown's contract when it expires July
1.

            (Even
non-Tina news is being turned against Brown. The publication of two new books
about former editor William Shawn has inspired another round of pompous elegies
for the grand old New Yorker .)

            Who would have thought it--the queen of spin is losing a
spin war. "You live by buzz, you die by buzz," says an ex- New Yorker
editor, with malicious glee. It's not that anything has actually changed
at The New Yorker in recent weeks, but there is a perception that Brown
and the magazine are stumbling. And as Brown knows as well as anyone,
perception matters.

            Brown,
after all, is print media's greatest showman. The daughter of a film producer
and a publicist, she packages her magazines like movies and promotes them like
a flack. Her formula: She overpays star writers, gives them top billing, and
relies on striking covers to attract readers. As the 25-year-old editor of the
Tatler , Brown transformed a stodgy British society magazine into a
sassy, nasty, attention-getting one. Brown's critics say she revived Vanity
Fair simply by publishing slobbering celebrity stories. That's not fair to
her: Everyone published slobbering celebrity stories in the '80s: Brown's
genius was to combine them with superb investigative, political, and feature
writing, then wrap it all in a salacious cover that you just had to
open.

            
She brought that gift for spectacle to The
New Yorker in 1992. Her re-creation of the magazine is a familiar tale: She
inherited from Mr. Shawn--by way of Robert Gottlieb--a tired, unread weekly.
(Requisite example of dreariness: the multipart series on grains.) In no time
flat, she turned it into the most talked about magazine in America. She
supplemented the already prodigiously talented staff with her own snazzy hires.
Her magazine pandered to celebrities and petted moguls, but it also ran the
best-written, best-edited features in the industry. Topicality reigned: In the
old days, you couldn't tell what year an issue of The New Yorker was
published; now you could tell what day it was published. The magazine, which
had been self-effacing to the point of reclusiveness, suddenly was brilliantly
packaged and promoted. The chattering classes began chattering about it and
haven't stopped since.

            What is
the price of Brown's methods? A civil, slow-moving magazine became a chaotic,
ill-tempered one. Brown is capricious. She charms the editors, writers, and
advertisers she needs but frosts underlings. Her buzz production is endless.
There are three full-time PR staffers at The New Yorker , as well as
several full-time event planners. The magazine relies on parties, conferences,
and stunts--Roseanne as guest editor--to generate heat. It's not that Brown's
uninterested in beautiful or ambitious writing--she publishes plenty of it--but
she cares most about attention-getting.

            The old New Yorker was whimsical, often fatally so:
Writers were expected to indulge their own peculiar interest and damn public
opinion. Brown's New Yorker seems poll-tested. If you are writing about
what's hot, then you are writing about what everyone is writing about.
Brown's magazine is predictable and getting more so the longer she is there: Of
course it devoted "Talk of the Town" to Sinatra when he died. Of course it
wrote a suck-up about Michael Jordan during the NBA playoffs, a suck-up about
Robert Redford for the release of The Horse Whisperer , a suck-up about
Warren Beatty for Bulworth . (Click for another reason Brown favors
celebrity.) A magazine that was once entirely, and bizarrely, different from
other magazines--often to its detriment--is now much the same as them. (Click
for another important way in which sameness has affected The New
Yorker .)

            Despite
her current woes, no one really expects Brown to leave The New Yorker .
Newhouse can't afford not to renew her contract. To dump Brown now, amid all
the bad financial news, would be an acknowledgment that he picked wrong in
1992.

            
Nor is Brown likely to quit. She was reportedly
offered a job producing a weeknight version of 60 Minutes , but there are
no signs that she's interested. She has too much pride to surrender in the
middle of the battle. As an old friend of hers puts it, "She would only quit if
she could quit in triumph, with everyone acknowledging that it is the best
magazine in the world and that she is the best editor and with the magazine in
the black."

            "In the
black"--that is the real key to understanding what's going on at Brown's
magazine. The New Yorker that Newhouse bought in 1985 was profitable.
But having shelled out $168 million for the magazine, Newhouse was not
satisfied with the measly $5 million a year it was earning. He set out to
impose the Condé Nast model on The New Yorker : expand circulation and
raise ad rates.

            The move to Condé Nastify the magazine worked, sort of.
The New Yorker began offering . Brown did her job: producing buzz to
fuel circulation. The number of subscribers soared from about 450,000 in the
mid-'80s to around 800,000. The magazine hiked ad rates accordingly, pricing
quirky advertisers out of the magazine in favor of big national ones. Ad
revenue increased but not enough to cover enormous new costs: Recruiting new
subscribers by direct mail, printing more magazines, and mailing more magazines
are tremendously expensive operations.

            Brown and
Newhouse's New Yorker is squeezed between newsweeklies and glossy
monthlies. The market for general-interest weekly magazines has long since
dried up: Look and the Saturday Evening Post are dead. Brown has
tried to remake The New Yorker as an upscale newsweekly, but its 800,000
paying readers can't match the 4 million that Time offers its
advertisers. The magazine can't compete with monthlies either. Vanity
Fair and its advertisements have a full 30 days to be seen by readers.
The New Yorker has a seven day window.

            
The New Yorker has fought back with special
issues--massive tomes about race or Hollywood or the future. In 1997, its six
double issues and three other special issues accounted for 35 percent of the
magazine's advertising pages, according to Advertising Age . The double
issues save The New Yorker postage and printing costs, and their
advertisements have 14 days to reach readers.

            But the magazine is still
losing money, and Brown seems trapped. She has staked her career on
profitability. The New Yorker could probably make money as a bimonthly
or monthly (ideas that have reportedly been floated within Condé Nast). But
Brown and Newhouse probably would not accept that tarnish on their reputations:
They don't want to be the cretins who killed America's last great weekly. The
magazine could also break even by raising subscription prices and shrinking the
number of subscribers. That too would look terrible on Brown's CV.

            Brown has
always had an outsized ambition, and now she is imprisoned by it. She and
Newhouse have traded a small, weird, profitable magazine for a big, flashy,
unprofitable one. And now they don't seem to know what to do with it.

            
               Click to
read why Brown likes celebrity stories. If you missed the sidebar about The
New Yorker 's moral authority, it is. And is an anecdote about the
magazine's cheap subscriptions.
            

         
      
   
