
   
   
      
         
            Budget True and False

             

            You can't believe everything
you hear about the balanced-budget deal. You can't, because so many of the
claims are contradictory. Enemies agree, friends disagree. The Democrat in the
White House calls the five-year plan a historic breakthrough. The Republican
leaders of Congress agree. But House Democratic Leader Richard Gephardt calls
it "a budget of many deficits--a deficit of principle, a deficit of fairness, a
deficit of tax justice and, worst of all, a deficit of dollars." Writing in
Newsweek , conservative David Brooks hails it as a triumph for
conservative values; a few pages later, conservative George Will condemns it as
a betrayal of conservative values. And so on. Who's right?

            
               
                  A
Deficit of Dollars?
                The overarching purpose of a balanced-budget
agreement is, presumably, to balance the budget. Yet the deal rests on various
assumptions, and the likelihood that all of them will work out is small.

            1) The deal presumes an
economic scenario more roseate than any envisaged since the first Reagan
administration. Now, unlike then, we have already enjoyed more than six years
of uninterrupted growth. Unemployment and inflation together are lower than
they've been for three decades. Some say this shows the economy has reached a
new plateau of long-term prosperity. Others say this suggests the good times
can't last much longer. The deal makers contend that the budget deal itself
will promote growth and so create additional savings. But five more years? Over
that period, your guess is as good as Alan Greenspan's.

            2) Even if the good times
keep on rolling, the promised retreat of red ink depends on Congress and the
president devising--and sticking with--a tax-cut package that includes both
sides' favorite giveaways but still costs less than $85 billion over five
years. (According to a "side agreement," it must also cost less than $165
billion in the next five years after that.)

            3) On top of this, someone
must find more than $300 billion in spending cuts and other deficit reducers,
most of them now suggested in only the broadest outlines. More than 80 percent
of the cuts in non-defense programs are to come in the last two years. Indeed,
total spending cuts are supposed to jump by $50 billion in the last year of the
plan--which also happens to be an election year. By contrast, in the next two
years--the only two years this particular Congress and president control--the
budget deficit will actually increase as a result of the deal.

            4) Miscellaneous
implausibilities: The Bureau of Labor Statistics is supposed to recalculate the
Consumer Price Index to save about $15 billion in inflation adjustments over
the last three years of the plan. The forces of nature are supposed to avoid
any multibillion-dollar calamities such as the recent Grand Forks, N.D., flood.
Doctors and hospitals serving Medicare and Medicaid patients are supposed to
absorb $130 billion in payment cuts (without fundamentally altering the
system). Someone must be found to pay more than $26 billion for the unused part
of the broadcast spectrum. And, of course, lots of fraud, waste, and abuse is
to be rooted out on all sides.

            
               
                  A
Deficit of Principle or a Principled Conservatism?
                Liberals charge that
President Clinton sold out his core constituency by agreeing to deep cuts in
domestic spending. True? This depends on which you think is more important: the
spending increases Congress enacts now--or the spending cuts it
promises to enact five years from now. By the first measure Clinton did quite
well, securing GOP agreement to more than $30 billion over five years in new
spending for children, immigrants, and the elderly. (That's in addition to $35
billion in subsidies for college kids--though Clinton disguises these as "tax
cuts.") Domestic non-entitlement spending over the next five years will be just
about what Clinton requested in his January budget--though that budget won him
scant applause within his party.

            But the deal promises a huge
whack at "unprotected" domestic spending in 2001 and 2002--everything from
courts, prisons, and parks to highways, housing, and the weather bureau. This
is what excites the conservative Brooks. By leaving Medicare, Social Security,
and other entitlements unreformed, he argues, when a recession hits, Congress
will be forced to all but dismantle the remaining part of government--"all the
things liberals love." Of course, this assumes that Congress won't just forget
about balancing the budget instead.

            
               
                  A
Deficit of Tax Justice or a Deficiency of Tax Cuts?
                Part of the side
deal Clinton made with Congress obliges him to sign a bill cutting capital
gains and estate taxes "even if it is not the bill I would write." It is not
yet clear how Congress and the president can squeeze all the tax goodies each
insists upon into a $135 billion bag (and come up with an honest $50 billion in
new revenues to bring the net price down to $85 billion). So there is no way
yet to know for sure who wins and loses. But capital-gains and estate-tax cuts
of almost any sort will surely favor the well-to-do in the long run. (In the
short run, higher-income taxpayers may pay more taxes, not less, if a capgains
rate cut leads them to sell more assets than they otherwise would have done.)
Clinton's college breaks will be of primary benefit to middle- and upper-middle
class taxpayers. The "per child" credit will be broadly distributed--though not
to the poor (who pay no taxes, so can't use the credit). However it all shakes
out, those who benefit most from the tax breaks almost surely will lose least
from the spending cuts.

            Social conservatives seem
fairly content with the tax package, since it includes their cherished
$500-per-child credit. But "supply-side" conservatives dismiss the tax cuts as
"minuscule." The net $85 billion cut, they note, is less than 1 percent of the
taxes the government expects to collect over the next five years. And, if the
inflation-adjustment rules are changed, that will raise taxes as well as trim
spending.

            
               
                  A
Drain on Defense?
                Under the budget deal, by 2002, national defense will
consume about $273 billion a year compared with $267 billion now. Inflation,
however, would turn that into a 9 percent cut in annual purchasing power. This
doesn't seem unreasonable when you consider that our political and military
leaders have shown themselves increasingly reluctant to put either our troops
or our expensive weaponry at risk. On the other hand, the Pentagon feels it
must buy ever more elaborate and costly weapon systems--in part to counter the
weapons we sell so freely to others. Hard-line conservatives argue, moreover,
that the real measure of lost resolve is to be found in the fact that military
spending will fall to less than 3 percent of gross domestic product by 2002. At
the peak of the Reagan Cold War buildup in the mid-1980s, defense claimed about
6 percent of GDP.

            Of course, the magnitude of
the threats faced by the United States bears no fixed relation to the size of
our economy. Today, our GDP, adjusted for inflation, is twice as big as it was
in 1972. Have the threats to our security doubled since then?

            Looked at another way,
during the 40 years of the Cold War, Brookings Institution defense experts
calculate, the United States spent about $320 billion a year on defense,
measured in today's dollars. Under the budget agreement, it will spend the
equivalent of $250 billion a year, or 22 percent less. Meanwhile, the Soviet
Union has disintegrated, and its former minions are queuing up to join NATO.
That ought to save the Pentagon at least a quarter on the dollar.

            
               
                  The
Bottom Line . Is the budget agreement, on balance, more likely to reduce
the deficit--or to increase it? The answer depends on which you count as more
important: the tax cuts and spending increases Congress is pledged to enact
this very year, or the spending cuts it vows it will embrace in years to come.
You might want to keep in mind that back in the budget deal of 1993, Congress
voted to cap spending through 1998. As part of the so-called balanced-budget
deal that passed both houses last week, Congress canceled those caps.

         
      
   
