
   
   
      
         
            Nerd vs. Nebbish

            You can talk about
globalization, the sexual revolution, or the civil rights movement. But one of
the greatest upheavals of the century is the liberation of the nerd. Many have
noted the rise of the Silicon Valley programmer and the iconification of Bill
Gates. Few have placed these developments in context. Nerds, once defined as
squares and losers, now also lord over Washington (Newt Gingrich, Al Gore) and
Hollywood (Steven Spielberg, Quentin Tarantino).

            Just as
the women's rights movement revolutionized male-female relations, so also has
this movement created its own turmoil. With the advent of the power nerd, we
can no longer say for certain what makes a nerd a nerd. Or, to put it another
way, what now separates the nerds from the nebbishes? The time has come to
reassess and redefine the loser.

            Nobody--not William Safire, not the Oxford English
Dictionary --has concretely pinned down the origin of the word nerd .
One theory traces it to a throwaway passage in Dr. Seuss' lesser-known 1950
children's book If I Ran the Zoo . Another considers it a variation of
the 1940s put-down nerts to you , as in "nuts to you." A third derives it
from turd .

            Whatever
its origins, the appellation rose to prominence in the 1950s, the High Age of
Conformity, when boomers employed it to condemn the most conformist of the
conformists, the squarest of the squares. And the phrase conjured up a specific
image: the greasy, pocket-protected teen in thick, horn-rimmed glasses.

            
Clearly, the unstylish, klutzy bookworm has
existed throughout history. (Einstein is an obvious example of a nerd who
predated the term.) But nerdiness became well defined only after the birth of
its opposite--coolness--during the prosperous postwar era, as the middle class
expanded to include vast new segments of the population. These new
constituencies adopted bourgeois values, among them a fixation with
fashion--what's cool and what's not. Nerdy was not.

            But the
popular understanding of nerdiness--that a nerd is an uncool person--doesn't
stand the test of time. In particular, it doesn't survive the 1980s, an era the
New York Times deemed was characterized by "nerd chic." By the middle of
the go-go decade, fashion magazines touted the popularity of nerd
couture--plaid plants, horn rims, and oxford shirts buttoned all the way to the
top. Further, witness the proliferation of '80s teen movies valorizing nerds:
Revenge of the Nerds , Weird Science , and Real Genius , to
name a few. Underlying this transformation of the nerd's image was a
transformation of the nerd's economic status. With their entry into new
high-tech industries, many nerds suddenly became millionerds.

            Let me posit a more durable definition than the nerd-cool
opposition: Nerdiness is connoisseurship gone awry. The essential
characteristic of nerds is that they lack a normal understanding of style and
social graces. The essential reason they get this way is that as youths they
channel their mental energies into a particular area--film, computers,
politics--at the expense of learning social conventions. Nerds may or may not
carry their adolescent obsession into adulthood, but the scars of their
obsession remain palpable. (Note: Rare is the person who becomes a nerd later
in life. Bill Clinton, for instance, may have developed an unusual passion for
policy in his 20s, but it never interfered with his social being.)

            The
popular parlance conflates nerd with nebbish . But the overlap
between the two concepts is not large, more on the order of this:

            
While one could build a Nerd Hall of Fame,
nebbishes are almost always anonymous. By definition, nebbishes are whiners,
lacking self-confidence, generally inept, and on the losing end of social
transactions--all characteristics that work against their ever achieving fame.
The only famous nebbishes are fictional characters: George Costanza, Isaac
Bashevis Singer's Gimple the Fool, George McFly in Back to the Future ,
and virtually anyone played by Woody Allen or Rick Moranis.

            Other attributes: 1)
Nebbishes are necessarily schlumpy, never handsome or physically robust. 2) The
term is usually applied to men--often implying effeminacy. But it would not be
inaccurate to describe a woman as a nebbish or as nebbishy. 3) Few nebbishes
are actually nerds or intellectuals--some Woody Allen characters excepted. They
lack the nerd's enterprise and obsessivesness. By contrast, many nerds can be
handsome (Gore) or self-confident to the point of arrogance (Gates,
Gingrich).

            At the
heart of the nerd-nebbish divide is pity. Nebbishes are too pathetic to warrant
actual disdain. They are too easy a target. On the other hand, nerds evoke
envy. We hate them because they are smarter, or more studious, or more focused
than we are. Nerds are genuinely threatening.

            It is no accident that the word nebbish originated
in Yiddish, a language without a nation that is spoken by a people repeatedly
beaten down by pogroms and thus in a good position to empathize with nebbishes.
So, to pose the obvious question: Is there something inherently Jewish about
the nebbish? According to the great Yiddish linguist Max Weinreich, Jews
appropriated the word nebbich from their Slavic neighbors in the
11 th century. Indeed, other European nations with similar histories
of subjugation maintain similar words. In Ukrainian, for instance, the word
bidni refers to an unfortunate, pitiable soul. Italian has
poverino . The fact that nebbish made it into English owes much to Jewish
Borscht Belt comedians becoming '50s TV stars.

            Nebbishes will never ascend
to the heights of nerds. There will be no Revenge of the Nebbishes , no
nebbish liberation. A nebbish could never gain real power. More easily, one can
imagine nebbishes banding together to promote a nebbish agenda, kvetching that
they are systematically discriminated against, demanding Nebbish Studies at
universities, and complaining that history textbooks treat them as losers. But
only a schmegegge would ever bet on a nebbish.

            
               (Thanks to Charles Paul
Freund for lending his erudition.)
            

         
      
   
