
   
   
      
         
            Polar Politics

            The bark beetle is eating
the spruce forests of Alaska. Clump by clump, acre by acre, the tall trees turn
brown and drop their needles. Already whole swatches of the lush Kenai
Peninsula look drought-struck. Soon, it is expected, the beetle will masticate
its way north into Denali and onward to the Arctic Circle.

            No one
knows why the bark beetle has suddenly proliferated. Everyone agrees that the
bugs must have their meal. Spraying the roughly 150-million-plus acres of
America's last great wilderness preserves is simply impractical.

            The loggers see opportunity in this. Why not clear-cut the
threatened stands before the wood is pitted? The environmentalists see peril.
The young spruce trees clinging to their dying parents' skirts are seemingly
immune to the beetle's incursions. In not too many years, they, and the aspen
and other sprinkled hardwoods, will restore the forest's verdure. Lumber cut
many years ago bears witness to earlier infestations. (The door to the sauna
cabin at the lodge where I stayed during a recent visit to Kachemak Bay is
etched with beetle tracks.) Yet the wilderness restored itself. Clear-cutting
will destroy healthy and unhealthy trees alike, allow grass to take root, and
impede reforestation for decades to come.

            It is
scarcely worth asking where the state's congressional delegation stands on the
issue. The two U.S. senators and single representative--strategically seated on
key committees--unambiguously represent the corporate interests that, absent
federal resistance, would log, mine, and drill every corner of the nation's
largest land trust. They know that they can rely on their constituents'
reflexive resistance to any form of federal intervention, save one. That sole
exception to the libertarian orthodoxy is made in the case of federal
money.

            
Oil money and federal largess--funds available
either in full or at the most favorable matching rates for roads, military
bases, parks, refuges, the Coast Guard, native affairs, and the full gamut of
social-welfare benefits--allows the state to eschew both an income tax and a
sales tax. (According to a new report, Alaska ranks second among states in
total federal spending per inhabitant, receiving 42 percent more than
the average state. So much for rugged individualism.) Meanwhile, the state can
reserve the proceeds of its vast North Slope oil-revenue trust fund to be doled
out per capita to every person resident in the state for more than a year. (If
you have a large family, an aversion to work, and a tolerance for winter
darkness, Alaska may be the place for you. Indeed, while welfare rolls are
plummeting in the contiguous 48, they are still on the rise in Alaska.)

            This is
not to say that the residents of Alaska are indifferent to the natural values
of their inheritance. The state's growing eco-tourism industry harbors many
"enviros" who regard the fragile bounty of their land with a quiet pride that
has less to do with ownership than with stewardship. The enviros, in their
well-cured L.L. Bean blues and olives, are an outwardly cheerful bunch. They
are never cold or tired or just plain out of sorts. They would rise before
dawn--if the sun, which lingers obscenely above the horizon during the summer
nights--would only set. Their vices are few--they enjoy an occasional glass of
wine or beer, and now and then one may overindulge in chocolate-spiked trail
mix. But they would prefer to be trekking across the wildflower-pocked tundra,
wading through 35-degree glacial muck, spending hours -looking, or exploring
tidal pools for sunflower stars and brittle stars, spiny sea urchins, mussel
worms, anemones, and blennies, as curious and brightly colored as any on a
tropical coral reef.

            The descendants of the sourdoughs (four of whom, early this
century, first one of Mount McKinley's two 20,000-foot peaks, dragging with
them a pine pole, an oversized American flag, and a bag of stale doughnuts)
are, of course, less refined in their sensibilities. So, too, are many of the
adventurers, loners, and losers who have migrated to the state in their
footsteps. (Life in Alaska has its seamy side. A story making the local papers
in recent weeks concerned a 2-year-old who was asphyxiated when his uncle tried
to force oral sex on him. You may wonder why the child had been left in the
care of an uncle who was on probation for having broken the leg of another
toddler. But the child's mother had fled north, his father was in jail in
Washington state, and his grandmother--also on probation for an unnamed
offense--was otherwise occupied. Oh well, all families have their
troubles.)

            Yet, as
Allen Smith, the Wilderness Society's regional director, points out, voters
rejected by a 3-to-2 margin the "sport" of aerial wolf shooting in a
referendum, overturning a vote in the state Legislature. When only half the
expected number of sockeye salmon returned to Bristol Bay to spawn this summer,
more Alaskans began wondering if unrestrained exploitation might, in the end,
destroy the schools that lay the golden eggs. Farther south, angry Canadian
fishermen blockaded an Alaskan ferry to protest their low catch of sockeye,
which, they say, have been impelled northward to the colder Alaskan waters by
unknown factors (global warming?).

            
But because they have no direct financial stake
in their government, many of the state's voters are relatively indifferent to
its pursuits. This leaves the political field wide open for the developers,
their politically active employees in Anchorage (where more than 40 percent of
the state's population resides), and their dogged lobbyists in Juneau and
Washington, D.C.

            And when money is at issue,
there is no contest. While 70 percent of Americans consistently tell pollsters
they oppose extending oil and gas drilling and other development in the Arctic
National Wildlife Refuge, 70 percent of Alaskans favor it. Even the Alaskan
native population, many of whose members still subsist by hunting and fishing,
is divided according to the traditional interests and financial stakes in the
potential revenues. The Gwich'in, "the people of the caribou," oppose
development of the Arctic coastal plain, to which the caribou migrate to breed.
But since the Gwich'in opted out of the 1971 Alaska Native Claims Settlement
Act, they stand to make no profit from new drilling. The Inupiat Inuit, who
hunt whale, seal, and fish, favor development on the coastal plain--but not
offshore continental shelf drilling.

            Meanwhile, the convoys with
their vigilant wolf escorts migrate north each spring, the grizzlies flourish
along the salmon rivers, and the moose munch in Anchorage's suburban backyards.
Along with the red fox, marmots, otters, beavers, ground squirrels, Dall sheep,
whales, sea lions, bald and golden eagles, tufted and horned puffins, and
myriad lesser fauna, they participate with quiet dignity in the great cycle of
eat and be eaten. The enviros watch them with mixed pleasure and concern. They
know that while the bark beetle is self-limiting, humankind is not.

         
      
   
