
   
   
      
         
            Edgar Bronfman, Edgar Bronfman

            The Edgar Bronfmans, senior
and junior, are always great theater, and never more than in the past few
weeks. Edgar Bronfman Sr.--in his role of Aged Wisdom--has just published
Good Spirits: The Making of a Businessman , a memoir brimming with
self-congratulatory tales of his business acumen and generosity. (When he's not
patting himself on the back, he has no trouble finding people to do it for him.
Thanks to his relentless and ongoing pursuit of Nazi-loving Swiss bankers,
admirers have dubbed him, only half-jokingly, the "King of the Jews.")

            Edgar
Bronfman Jr. (Youthful Folly), meanwhile, has been busy running Seagram--the
Bronfman-managed liquor conglomerate--into the ground. Three years ago, he
liquidated Seagram's $9 billion stake in DuPont to buy the entertainment giant
MCA (now Universal). April has been a horrific month for Universal. Three of
its top executives were sacked last week. It has released flop after flop
( The Jackal , Primary Colors , Mercury Rising ), and there is
no relief on the horizon: Universal doesn't have a summer blockbuster to
compete with Godzilla and Armageddon . Edgar Jr. keeps promising
that Universal will turn fabulous profits in the next few years, but no one is
buying. Hollywood is overflowing with rumors that someone--anyone--is planning
to buy Universal away from Seagram and run it properly. Seagram stock, dragged
down by Universal, is stagnating through the biggest bull market in history.
(DuPont stock, on the other hand, has more than doubled in value since Edgar
Jr. sold Seagram's DuPont interest: This has cost Seagram's shareholders more
than $9 billion.)

            Usually a few billion dollars in the bank inoculates you
against bad press, but Edgar Jr. has been designated the movie industry's
official idiot--a 42-year-old child who's squandering his family (and his
shareholders') fortune on romantic Tinseltown fantasies. There is a feeling
that any real media mogul--Michael Eisner, Barry Diller, Sumner
Redstone, Rupert Murdoch--could eat Edgar Jr. for lunch and still have plenty
of room for dessert.

            A certain
aura of creeping decay does surround the Bronfmans, and it is tempting to view
them as a study in dynastic decline. Sam Bronfman, the family patriarch and
Edgar Sr.'s father, was an utterly implacable businessman, the Atilla of
liquor. The child of Russian Jewish immigrants, Sam bought Canadian
distilleries and seedy hotels during the '20s, then cashed in on American
Prohibition. He supplied bootleggers and gangsters with booze: Meyer Lansky was
a customer. When Prohibition was lifted, Sam was one of the most powerful
distillers in North America, and for the next 30 years, he bullied employees
and terrorized rivals to make Seagram an international liquor powerhouse.

            
The first-generation Bronfman was
entrepreneurial and ruthless. The second generation was managerial and
generous. Under Edgar Sr., Seagram expanded overseas and extended itself into
real estate and oil. Sound financial practices and organized marketing
campaigns replaced Sam's seat-of-the-pants management. Sam had concentrated
power in himself; Edgar Sr. learned to delegate it.

            Edgar Sr.
also made the Bronfmans the most celebrated name in Jewish philanthropy. Since
the late '70s, he and his brother Charles have been distributing their fortune
to Jewish causes, endowing professorships, buildings, and scholarships in the
United States and Israel. (I challenge you to find an American student who
studied in Israel and received no Bronfman aid.) He also appointed himself the
Jewish ambassador to the world. He paid off the World Jewish Congress' debt,
took over its presidency in 1981, and used it as his platform for action. His
wealth and fame were an ax. He pressured Soviet leaders to release Jewish
dissidents. He and the WJC exposed Kurt Waldheim's Nazi past in the mid-'80s.
Edgar Sr. harassed and condemned the former U.N. secretary-general so
effectively that Waldheim tried to sue him. For the last three years, Edgar Sr.
has been hunting Swiss bankers who profited from Nazi evil and Jewish sorrow.
He recruited Sen. Al D'Amato to hold hearings on Swiss misdeeds, persuaded the
Clinton administration to investigate, and eventually forced the Swiss to pony
up $7 billion to compensate Jewish victims.

            If there is a defining quality of the third generation, it
appears to be self-indulgence. Edgar Jr. skipped college for showbiz, using his
family money to open doors. The doors should not have opened: He produced a
couple of bad movies and wrote even worse songs. He also eloped with an
actress. In his mid-20s, after a movie flop, he returned to Seagram as heir
apparent. Edgar Jr. soldiered along there during the '80s. He was a competent
liquor executive, but his love of Hollywood never wavered.

            Then his
father handed him the company. According to Good Spirits , Edgar Jr. felt
DuPont was a "boring investment." (Though DuPont supplied most of Seagram's
profits, Seagram had a minority, not a controlling, stake in the chemical
company.) Edgar Jr. wanted to be in movies--an information business, not a raw
materials one. First, he bid for Time Warner, amassing 15 percent of its stock
in an aborted takeover. In 1995 he closed the romantic but costly Universal
deal.

            
But the saga of dynastic decline is not quite
so simple. The father is not quite the icon he seems, and the son is not quite
the flake. Edgar Jr. is mocked for his playboy instincts, but it's Edgar Sr.
who has been married five times to four different women. Edgar Jr. is the
Hollywood mogul, but it's Edgar Sr. who is bullying and grandiose. Edgar Jr. is
soft-spoken and self-effacing. Edgar Sr. deplores the assimilation of Jews as a
"silent Holocaust," but he barely observes the Jewish religion, married three
non-Jews, and named his son after himself, a major Jewish no-no. Edgar Jr. is
pilloried for dragging a liquor company into the film industry, but Edgar Sr.
did it first. He tried to take over a movie studio in the late '60s and even
ran MGM briefly.

            Critics,
obsessed with Edgar Jr.'s infatuation with movies, have missed his real
Hollywood problem. Edgar Jr.'s failing is not that he's too romantic about the
movies but that he's too rational about them. To wit: Earlier this month, he
outraged the industry by proposing that theaters charge higher prices for more
expensive movies. Why, he asked, should you pay the same amount to see a $2
million movie as you would to see a $200 million one? Analysts and movie types
hooted with derision--that's "like charging for a piece of art based on how
much bronze or paint was used," sneered one.

            Edgar Jr. wants to treat movies like any other product: If
a movie costs more to produce, you should charge more for it. From a CEO's
perspective, movies are unreliable: No one can predict if a film will make $100
million or lose it. Studio share prices are erratic because there are no
guaranteed earnings: A studio that makes a killing this year may get killed
next year. People in Hollywood accept this instability as the cost of doing
business.

            Bronfman doesn't, at least
not yet. Most of his moves at Universal--such as his $100 million
"re-engineering" project--seem directed toward making movies behave like, well,
liquor. He wants to find the secret rational formula that will connect movie
costs to movie revenues. It's an impossible task. The formula doesn't exist.
Movie audiences will always be more fickle than whiskey drinkers, and movie
directors will always be less reliable than whiskey blenders. So Edgar Jr. will
fail in Hollywood, but when he does, it won't be the failure of a romantic. It
will be the failure of someone much less interesting: a businessman.

         
      
   
