
   
   
      
         
            NRA President Charlton Heston

            By my reckoning, Charlton
Heston has played: a CIA director, two prophets (Moses, twice, and Brigham
Young), two saints (Thomas More and John the Baptist), an admiral, two generals
(as well as six captains and three majors), a cardinal (Richelieu), two kings
(Macbeth and Henry VIII), and three presidents of the United States (Andrew
Jackson, Thomas Jefferson, and Franklin Roosevelt's voice).

            So the
National Rifle Association, which elected Heston president this week, can be
forgiven for mistaking the actor for a real commander. NRA leaders believe the
patriarchal Heston will polish the gun lobby's lousy public image while
galvanizing its red-meat-and-gunpowder members. "Hey, Moses is on our side,"
gloats NRA Executive Vice President Wayne LaPierre.

            At 73, Heston does remain an awesome presence--tall,
grandfatherly, astonishingly handsome, his voice as magnificent as ever.
(President Heston has already employed that godly bass to great effect. His NRA
speech produced a that's being played and replayed on newscasts.) Heston's
ascendance seems to be filling some conservatives with what-if regret. Why
didn't he run for office when he was in his prime?

            Heston's fans are falling
victim to Celebrity Identification Disorder, the same malady that causes people
to write letters to soap opera characters. Heston periodically says, "I am not
Moses," but his admirers don't quite believe it. He's been associated with
extraordinary men for so long that they assume he must be one.

            In fact,
Heston embodies a very different, more mundane, but still admirable ethos. The
defining quality of his career is competence, not genius. He was never a
romantic lead, but he was Hollywood's superstar during the epic's brief heyday.
Since the late '50s, however, he has enjoyed the most workmanlike career of any
actor in Hollywood. He has made a prosperous living by playing, with slight
variation, the same role for 50 years: the hero with a stick up his rear
end.

            
Heston is the Volvo of Hollywood actors: never
brilliant, never awful, always reliable. He has appeared in more than 80
movies, countless TV films, dozens of plays. He is always first on the set.
He's unfailingly polite to co-workers and respectful to directors. He never
misses work because of illness. Appropriately modest, he credits his success to
his "physical equipment" rather than his talent: his height and good health, as
well as that voice, that jaw, and that nose. Heston
researches his roles assiduously, memorizing Old Testament passages to play
Moses and reading all Michelangelo's letters to play him.

            Unlike
many actors of his generation, Heston has cheerfully adjusted to senior
citizenship. He accepts lesser parts in bad movies ( Call of the Wild )
and worse television ( The Colbys , a short-lived, dreadful Dynasty
spinoff). He has become a hired-gun narrator, the guy you buy when you need
God's voice. Heston's signature characters (Moses, Ben-Hur, El Cid) always took
themselves seriously, but Heston doesn't. He has played self-mocking parts in
Wayne's World 2 and Bud Light ads. He is a pro, a hack, the guy whose
highest value is that he gets the job done.

            Off-screen, too, Heston leads an unremarkable life. He has
been married for 54 years and is extremely close to his two children. He lives
quietly on a (well-armed) Los Angeles estate, eschewing parties for history
books and his journal (author of three memoirs, he is an excellent, funny
writer).

            And his
activism is a steady hobby rather than an obsession. He's an enthusiast, but
also a dilettante. In the early '60s, he was a staunch civil rights advocate.
In the early '80s, he advised Ronald Reagan on National Endowment for the Arts
funding. He has condemned the nuclear freeze movement, obscene rap music, and
overpopulation. In every case Heston has been effective without being
monomaniacal. (His rhetoric, admittedly, is not always restrained. He denounces
political correctness with froth-at-the-mouth language that would be hilarious
if it weren't so nasty. Click for a couple of examples.)

            
Heston has even had moderate instincts about
gun rights. Until recently, he hasn't spent much time pushing the Second
Amendment. After Robert Kennedy's assassination in 1968, he endorsed strong gun
control legislation, and as recently as last year he declared that AK-47s are
"inappropriate for private use." (Heston's "softness" on gun rights was an
issue in his NRA election, but he has quieted critics by backing off his
earlier statements and hewing to the NRA's official line. He recently said that
a Washington state initiative to require trigger locks was "written by
Satan.")

            All this
is to say: Those who liken him to Reagan misunderstand Heston. It is an easy
comparison. Both are Democrats who converted to conservative Republicanism.
Both are actors who involved themselves in politics. Both served as president
of the Screen Actors Guild. Both are marvelous speakers.

            But here is the critical point about Heston: He never
grabbed the ring. He declined invitations from Democrats and Republicans to run
for the Senate in California and resisted efforts to draft him into the 1988
presidential race. He was an actor, is an actor, and will always be an actor.
His life is comfortable, and he sees no reason to change it.

            It's true
that Heston the activist has accomplished more than most private citizens ever
hope to. But he has never done what his characters would have. The
extraordinary man, the man who believes he can change the world, hungers for
the power to do it and pursues that power relentlessly. Reagan had that hunger
and changed the world. Heston has all the "physical equipment"--brain, voice,
good looks--but not the hunger.

            That's why the NRA presidency is the perfect job for him.
It's a ceremonial position, a grand title with few responsibilities attached.
He will not actually run the NRA. His job is to give speeches, to be a symbol,
to act presidential. And there's no one who acts presidential better than
Charlton Heston.

            
               If you
missed Heston's NRA sound bite, click . You can read some of his ornery
comments about political correctness .
            

         
      
   
