
   
   
      
         
            Putin It Nicely

            On New
Year's Eve, Russian President Boris Yeltsin abruptly resigned, leaving Prime
Minister Vladimir Putin as the country's acting president. Everyone expects
Putin to win the presidency outright in the upcoming elections. But what kind
of man is Putin? His detractors say he's a KGB spy, a believer in centralized
power, and a ruthless prosecutor of the war in Chechnya. And what do his
defenders say? That each of these vices is really a virtue.

            
               1.
He's a spy. Critics point to Putin's 15 years in the KGB, calling him a
"KGB spy," "KGB agent," and "KGB colonel." One antagonist says Putin was dubbed
"Stasi" (the name of the former East German secret service) for wielding
behind-the-scenes power. Detractors use these terms to portray Putin as a Cold
Warrior who can't be trusted with Russia's nukes. On television this weekend,
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and National Security Adviser Sandy
Berger lent credence to this theory by arguing that Putin has "two strands": on
one side, his KGB years, and on the other, his years as a "democratic reformer"
in St. Petersburg.

            
Putin's allies reject the two-strands theory. They argue that his KGB
experience actually reinforced his interest in economic liberalization. As
Putin's spokesman explained on Meet the Press , "Mr. Putin worked in the
West. That's a very positive point. … The people in the KGB, in some way,
prepared perestroika … because they were very open and they knew the exact
situation in the economy, inside Russia, and what was happening outside."
Putin's former mentor in St. Petersburg, ex-Mayor Anatoly Sobchak, told the
New York Times , "He is a convinced supporter of the market economy. … He
knows the western model of economic and political life not as an outsider but
from the inside."

            This
counterspin is already making headway. Putin returned from his KGB service
"steeped in Western business knowledge," says the Times . On This
Week , Times Washington bureau chief Michael Oreskes noted that
according to Putin's colleagues, "In his years as a KGB agent in Europe, he
learned a lot about Western business practices, and that may be exactly what he
needs to understand to solve" Russia's economic problems.

            
               2.
He's a socialist. American skeptics worry that Putin might wield too much
state power over the economy and society, thereby undermining both capitalism
and democracy. Putin, however, sees the state as the protector of honest
capitalism and true democracy. "Any attempt to exceed the limits of the law and
Russia's Constitution will be decisively crushed," he warned in his New Year's
Eve message. "Freedom of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of the press,
the right to private property--all these basic principles of a civilized
society will be reliably protected by the state."

            
Putin's Russian allies, and even his enemies, agree that the chief threat to
freedom in Russia today is too little power in the central government, not too
much. But how can they make this case to the world's most powerful lender, the
United States, in terms we can understand? By comparing Putin to former
American presidents. "Putin has a wonderful opportunity to become for Russia
what the Roosevelts are for America," Sobchak told the Times . The
Times buys this analysis: "Theodore Roosevelt took on entrenched
monopolies, helping small businesses to thrive and competition to flourish.
Franklin Roosevelt reworked the federal government to aid the poor, improve
education and create a less crash-prone financial system." Both men "amassed
state power over the government and economy to shape the capitalistic system
that exists today."

            
               3.
He's a strongman. Critics call Putin "cruel," a "dictator," and a "Russian
Pinochet" who might suspend civil liberties to whip Russia into shape. They're
particularly outraged by "Putin's War" in Chechnya. George W. Bush says he's
"troubled" that Putin owes his popularity to the Chechen war. Bill Bradley and
John McCain demand economic sanctions against Russia for its "brutal" assaults
on Chechen civilians. On Meet the Press , Tim Russert said Putin had
called the Chechen rebels "dark-skinned people who must be annihilated" and had
warned that "they will be found in latrines and killed." Furthermore, Russert
noted, "His first official visit … was to Chechnya giving hunting knives to the
Russian military."

            To
make nice with Putin, U.S. officials have begun to rephrase complaints about
the war. When asked about Russian "atrocities," they express regret about
Russia's "actions." But they also frame the war as an unfortunate expression of
a trait that could serve Putin well in other pursuits. When asked about Putin's
vow to "annihilate" the Chechens, Albright called Putin "very determined" and
"action-oriented." The media, too, have begun to use positive adjectives to
describe Putin's conduct of the war: "aggressive," "tough-minded,"
"determined," "decisive," "uncompromising," "no-nonsense."

            How,
according to Putin's supporters, will these traits make him a good leader?
First, he can halt Russia's slide into chaos. Putin frames the Chechen war as a
struggle to rein in "terrorism" and "the breakup of Russia," a rationale for
which Berger and Albright express sympathy. Second, he can confront cronyism.
Critics portray Putin as Yeltsin's pawn, installed by Yeltsin's daughter and
other cronies to safeguard their financial interests and shield them from
prosecution for corruption. By underscoring his image as a fearless strongman,
Putin defies this critique. He began by "firing" Yeltsin's daughter, eliciting
oohs and aahs from the world press, even though everyone expects her to stay on
as an informal adviser. In view of Russia's endemic corruption, American
pundits are reconsidering whether a strongman president is such a bad thing.
"Does he have the power and the will to take on the robber barons?" asked
George Stephanopoulos on This Week . "Will he tax them? Will he crack
down on them? Will he clean them up?"

            Third, a ruthlessly
efficient leader can win a ruthlessly efficient election and craft a ruthlessly
efficient economy. Arguing for a quick end to the Chechen war, both Albright
and Berger appeal not to Putin's mercy but to his political interests. "He now
faces an election in three months," says Berger. "If the costs become too high
for the Russians … this could become an albatross around his neck in March."
Never mind morality. When asked whether the United States should oppose loans
to Russia because of the war, Berger replies, "It's a premature question …
because the predicate question is whether they get the economic reforms in
order," at which point "we'll have to look at what's in our national interest."
Here is an argument Americans can understand: We should judge Russia's
president the same way we judge ours. "The test for Putin," says Berger, "is
the economy, stupid."

         
      
   
