
   
   
      
         
            The Naked Truth

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My 15-year-old son and I have always been very
close. We've been a source of strength for each other ever since my husband
died eight years ago. However, a recent humiliating experience now threatens
that close bond. One weekend, while I believed my son was away with his best
friend, I was trying on some swimsuits for an upcoming vacation. I was checking
them out in the mirror, and I like to think that, at 45, I look pretty damn
good.
            

            
               While naked, I went
to get something from the kitchen, and who did I see but my son standing there!
His weekend had been cut short, and he had let himself into our apartment. With
my hands full, I couldn't even cover myself up. Fortunately, he ran from the
room right away, but not before seeing me in all my naked glory. Since then
he's hardly spoken to me. He doesn't even look at me when he comes home from
school. I want to talk to him about this, but what could I say?
            

            

               --Thalia
            

            Dear Thal,

            You say that even his
mother has one of these and two of those. You weren't vamping him, after all,
and both of you made a swift effort to end the scene. He wasn't even supposed
to be there, which you might point out to him. The fact that your household has
been just the two of you since he was 7 years old may mean that he's had to
wrestle with his Oedipal feelings that his little-boy wish for his father to be
removed was granted. You might also ask him why he thinks there's been a change
in your relationship. Try to bring up the uncomfortable encounter, and tell him
he is making much too much of it. With luck, the very act of discussing it will
defuse the situation.

            
--Prudie, rationally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I'm a 20-year-old college student living in a
major city, and a few months ago I moved into an apartment building mostly
occupied by adults. Recently I asked a neighbor how I could keep my plants
alive when I went home for three weeks. I didn't want to give anyone a key to
my apartment, but wanted to know if there was another way. She told me that she
would water them and, in fact, already had a key that the previous resident had
given her!
            

            
               The neighbor is friendly and seems trustworthy.
She asked for a contact number for me, in case something happened in the
building--like a water leak--so I feel that she has good intentions. The
problem is that I don't want any neighbors having a key to my apartment. I also
do not wish to offend her by asking for the key back.
            

            
               Should I let the
matter slide; should I ask the manager to change the locks; or should I ask for
the key back?
            

            
               --Thanks,
            

            

               Looking for the Key to Keeping Safe (Sorry for the bad pun.)
            

            Dear Look,

            As for wanting someone to water your plants without
using a key to get in, your only hope is to engage one of those building
climbers to crawl in from the outside--but then that person would still
be inside your apartment. If you are dead set against anyone gaining access in
your absence, you might ask someone if he or she would be willing to let you
move your plants to their apartment for the three weeks.

            As for the neighbor
having your key given to her by the old tenant, the woman should have coughed
it up the minute you moved in. If you decide she is a neighbor you would like
to have your key, that's one thing, but if you decide she is not the one--or
that no one is--by all means ask for it back. Tell her it's nothing personal,
but the setup made by the previous tenant is now moot, and you've made other
arrangements. There is no reason for you to feel shy about this. It is your
apartment and your key.

            
--Prudie, securely

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie ,
            

            
               As a writer, I feel
for "." As a simple matter of course, as soon as a manuscript is completed, its
author should formally register it with The Gummint. The copyright to anything
she writes is hers the moment she writes it, paperwork or no, but registering
it gives added benefits--including a vast escalation of penalties if someone
swipes her work. If she sent her one and only one copy of her novel to what
amounts to a total stranger, her best course of action would be to go out and
treat herself to a fabulous lunch. Then she should go home, stand in front of
the biggest mirror in her house, and say to herself: "I promise never to tell
my hairdresser to make me look like a picture I've torn out of People
magazine. I promise never to buy a secondhand car from a friend or family
member. I promise never, ever, under any circumstances to allow there to be one
and only one copy of my manuscript on the planet."
            

            
               
--Creative in Cambridge
            

            Dear Create,

            Your suggestions for a
fabulous lunch plus copyright tips were soothing and useful. You are absolutely
right, by the way, about finding hairdos in People magazine. Prudie did
that once and looked like a very old 12-year-old.

            
--Prudie, nostalgically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Since I have just recently started reading your
advice column, I am not completely sure what your views are on sexual
orientation. Since that is a large part of this question, I will ask you to
disregard this question if you consider homosexuality immoral, wrong, Satan's
work, etc., etc. I've heard it all. However, if you are a rational person with
an open mind, please read on.
            

            
               I am a 20-year-old
homosexual who is engaged to my lover, Chris. We have been engaged for four
months. The union is planned for next year. Because of our engagement, we both
wear very nice diamond rings. At work, I am often pestered for details about
"the woman." I really see no need to come out at work, as it could well alter
my career for the worse. What should I say to these nosey people who ask for
details?
            

            

               --David in Akron, Ohio
            

            Dear Dave,

            You are lucky that the beloved has a gender-neutral
name! Just say to the next busybody who asks, "I am engaged to a fine person
named Chris, and I make it a practice to keep my work and my personal life
separate. I know you will respect my wishes."

            As for Prudie's views on
sexual orientation, she believes everyone ought to have one ... a sexual
orientation, that is. At some point she hopes that you might feel free to live
in the open with no expectation of career-damaging consequences or disapproval.
As for Satan, Prudie does not believe he exists. Well, maybe he did show up
once--at her first wedding--as the groom.

            
--Prudie, liberally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               You answered a several months ago regarding my
little sister, my designated maid of honor, being a nightmare to deal with. She
has since apologized profusely (my mom showed her the letter) and has sought
psychological help to deal with her misplaced anger. In a world as cynical as
it is impersonal, I wanted to thank you for your help. You've really made a
difference in my life, and I thought that you ought to know that the work you
do has value.
            

            
               Best wishes for the
New Year!
            

            
               
--Tamara
            

            Dear Tam,

            Prudie thanks you and
thinks your letter is a wonderful way to close out the old year and welcome the
new. She wishes for her readers solutions, resolutions, and every now and then
moments of joy.

            --Prudie, millennially

         
      
   
