
   
   
      
         
            No. 361: "Lit Crit"

            
               "Oh, I can't stand
that. You could get diabetes reading them, couldn't you?" Who said this about
what? (Question courtesy of Adam Bonin.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 360)--"Our Epic":
            

            

               The '50s begot Happy Days ; the '60s, The Wonder Years ;
the '70s, That '70s Show ; and the '80s, Freaks and Geeks . In 20
years, the 1990s will be distilled into a set of reductive clichés and
processed into a TV sitcom. Give the one-sentence pitch for that show.
(Question courtesy of Tim Carvell.)
               
            

            "World
Television presents: DECADENT BROKER! Which indulged largely, but did
not know New Revolution was soon occurring. (So sorry for it was more than one
sentence.)"-- Daniel Kahn
            

            "Two
young Internet geniuses, who happen to be married, one a male WASP from
Harvard, the other an Asian gal from MIT, rich beyond belief from cashing out
of an IPO, start a company delivering frozen embryos--and hire an Indian guy in
a turban as receptionist. The mix-ups, the lawsuits, the laughs never
stop!"-- Barbara Lippert ( Jon Delfin had a similar answer.)

            
"Then Came Klebold : A teen-ager travels from town to town, registers in
the local school, gets involved in the lives of the students, then shoots
them."-- Jon Delfin
            

            
"Jerks and Smirks . Politics in the '90s."-- Steven Davis
            

            "TV?
In 20 years we won't need any stinkin' TV. Cybercitizens will be hard-wired,
and entertainment as we know it will be in the form of IPOs."-- Carrie
Rickey (similarly, Matt Sullivan )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Before plunging into TV 2000, let's take a moment
to look back at TV 1999, Friday night, around midnight.

            When the ball fell, a huge sign was illuminated and
transmitted on every network: 2000 Discover Card. The new New York and its new
Times Square thus achieved a complete capitulation of the civic to the
corporate, and was proud of it.

            Giddy with delight over his imposition of midtown
martial law, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani showed up on every channel. Manhole covers
welded closed; trash cans removed; mailboxes locked; 8,000 cops; five police
helicopters--it was like Christmas in Tel Aviv, except for the part about any
known threat. But it must be admitted, the festivities were unmarred by
terrorist bombings or elephant stampedes.

            The usually fatuous Tom
Brokaw outdid himself when he rated the century--it was a tough one, he
blathered, with two world wars, the atomic bomb, and the Holocaust, but there
was also the triumph of the space program. I'm sure 6 million murdered Jews and
30 million dead Soviets would agree that the space shuttle more than made up
for mass death.

            
               Putin on Airs
Extra
            

            Analysts list several
priorities of Russia's acting president, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin. Which
of the following are actually on his to-do list?

            1. Create a streamlined and corruption-free
bureaucracy.

            2. Put a Russian astronaut on moon by 1970 with
cool time machine.

            3. Install a merit system for hiring and rewarding
government workers.

            4. Ensure smooth transition by cultivating image as
lovable womanizing drunk.

            5. Increase investment and improve productivity in
Russian economy.

            6. Construct theme parks exciting enough to attract
Cuban raft boys.

            7. Build a more powerful judiciary.

            8. Work for closer ties between Moscow and the
country's regions.

            9. Make Moscow's homeless simply disappear, New
York-style.

            10. Develop new
political parties open to professional wrestlers, anti-Semites, and fat-faced,
billionaire, egomaniac know-nothings.

            
               Answers
            

            1, 3, 5, 7, and 8 are
authentic Putin plans.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            E-greed, guns, and presidential infidelity.

         
      
   
