
   
   
      
         
            Candidates Cagey on Net Issues

            
Records show former Sen. Bill Bradley collected more campaign funds in Silicon
Valley through the third quarter of last year than any other presidential
candidate. The Democratic contender also netted more contributions over the
Internet than anyone else, surpassing $1.2 million.

            But
where does he stand on the issues that are of importance to the growing number
of Internet users and workers who depend on cyberspace? And, furthermore, will
it matter to the electorate?

            While
Bradley has been mum on some of the key Internet topics, other candidates are
betting that digital issues will matter to voters. This week, Sen. John McCain,
R-Ariz., started taking out campaign ads touting his support for permanently
extending a moratorium on Internet taxes and protecting children from
pornography and other online content. The candidate is betting that some of the
growing number of Internet policy issues will resonate with voters. (He's
pushing his anti-tax messages in tax-free New Hampshire; the anti-porn ad has
been airing in conservative South Carolina.)

            
Experts agree that the year 2000 contest is a new frontier. Never before in the
history of presidential politics have candidates felt the pressure to adopt a
high-tech platform, speak out about protecting privacy over the Internet, or
sign a pledge vowing they will forever oppose Internet taxes. Though, clearly,
none of these issues yet ranks with election-deciding topics such as economic
depression, war, or tax cuts.

            "We
believe that Internet users are the soccer moms of the 2000 election," said Ron
Nehring, director of national campaigns for Americans for Tax Reform, which
asked all presidential candidates to sign a declaration opposing any Internet
taxes. "Just as soccer moms were the constituency everyone was trying to reach
in the 1996 election, Internet users will play the same role this year."

            The
Internet tax issue is a complicated one. It pits the interests of dot-com
companies that don't want to be burdened by collecting taxes on behalf of some
7,500 different sales-taxing jurisdictions against the interests of states and
municipalities that rely on revenues to fund schools, law enforcement, and
public works projects. A congressional commission is expected to recommend a
national policy in April. There are essentially three options: Ban sales taxes
on Internet purchases, leave the status quo (in which case it only matters
where the Internet company is located), or give states the ability to go after
sales taxes from out-of-state Internet companies.

            
Republican candidates Steve Forbes, Orrin Hatch, and Gary Bauer have signed the
no-tax pledge, and McCain's campaign has indicated he will also sign. Texas
Gov. George W. Bush has declined. While he favors a three-to-five-year
extension of the current moratorium, he wants to await the recommendations of
the congressional commission. Democrats Bradley and Vice President Al Gore have
also declined to sign the pledge. Both have said publicly that they want to
await the commission's report and that they are also concerned about the
potential drain on state and local tax revenues if a ban on Internet sales
taxes is made permanent.

            "The
vice president supports finding a solution to these issues that allows the
Internet and e-commerce to flourish without stripping states and localities of
their ability to educate children and fight crime," said an administration
official. The Bradley campaign declined to comment.

            
Nehring predicted the issue could unite a block of Internet voters: "It's a
galvanizing force that will serve to activate Internet users on a political
issue."

            But
some skeptics disagree that any Internet issues will sway the electorate at
large. "The issue of export controls on encryption technologies, or even the
tax issue, is not broad-based enough," said Michael Cornfield, a professor at
George Washington University's Graduate School of Political Management. "One
possible exception is if there's a 'privacy Chernobyl.' If there is some
disaster involving a lot of peoples' privacy, that is the one issue where the
Internet would be on the agenda on a mass level. … If that happened, I think
all the candidates would be forced to take a position on the issue."

            
Several candidates already have taken public stands or made statements about
whether or not they believe the government needs to ensure that consumer
privacy isn't violated by online companies. Statements from Gore, McCain,
Bradley, and Bush indicate they favor holding off on any general privacy
legislation to allow industry to "self-regulate" by posting privacy policies
and developing guidelines to ensure that consumers understand how their
personally identifying information will be used. Most of the candidates, with
the exception of Bush, who hasn't yet taken a stand, also say that certain
records, including medical and financial information, should be protected by
legislation. The privacy of children under 13 is already protected under
federal law. Forbes, in a speech last month titled "The Future of Privacy,"
went further, saying he would shut down all federal medical databases and end
the Internal Revenue Service "as we know it" by imposing a simplified flat
tax.

            Not
all the candidates are closing the door on more general privacy protection
legislation in the future. "For the current period, we believe industry
self-regulation is the way to go," said Tim Adams, a technology policy adviser
to the Bush campaign. "But we don't rule out regulation in the future if
industry fails to do a good job of policing itself."

            
Privacy advocates say they believe the candidates are supporting industry
self-regulation in order to appeal to industry interests, as opposed to the
general population. "Privacy could clearly be one of the critical issues of the
first campaign of the 21 st century," said Marc Rotenberg, executive
director of the Electronic Privacy Information Center. "While a lot of the
money is in self-regulation, a lot of the votes will be with legislation."

            The
pursuit of contributions from the high-tech community is one of the reasons
that some candidates have gone to great lengths to develop a high-tech
platform. The problem is that in order to appeal to this constituency, many of
the candidates have adopted postures that are eerily alike. Most of the major
candidates favor loosening export restrictions on encryption policy. Most favor
an international ban on tariffs on Internet purchases and services. Most favor
forgoing federal regulation at this time in favor of allowing the marketplace
to ensure that consumers have a choice of Internet service providers for
high-speed Internet services.

            Where
some of the candidates differ is in support of federal efforts to bridge the
"digital divide." The Gore camp rightly takes credit for fighting for a federal
surcharge on telephone service, with the funds going to help wire public
schools and libraries for Internet service. In fact, opponents labeled the
program "the Gore tax," but even Bush supports the program, although his
advisers say he might make some changes. Forbes, on the other hand, would
repeal the surcharge, which has helped provide wiring and Internet service for
thousands of schools and libraries to date. McCain, in 1998, publicly
criticized the program, saying it "will fail to give schools and libraries the
level of funding they had been led to expect. It will fail to stop the
inexcusable waste of money on the fund's administration. And it will fail to
keep consumer's bills from going up yet again."

            The
McCain camp clearly believes that South Carolina voters will be swayed by his
support of efforts to keep children away from online pornography and other
potentially offensive Internet content. He's tapped Republican South Carolina
Rep. Lindsey Graham to stump for him in an ad running through a laundry list of
McCain's accomplishments, including his fight against Internet porn. McCain has
been an ardent supporter of the controversial Child Online Protection Act,
which seeks to criminalize Web sites that "knowingly" make harmful material
available to minors. The act is currently under consideration by a federal
appeals court. He's also proposed legislation that would mandate filtering
software for public schools and libraries that receive federal funds. The Bush
campaign says it would support the McCain filtering bill, which has not yet
become law.

            
Another issue that has candidates staking out positions is the prosecution of
antitrust charges against Microsoft Corp. This is also an issue on which the
Forbes campaign has taken a different position from the other candidates.
Forbes has chided the government for pursuing the case. Hatch, who hauled Bill
Gates before a Senate hearing, has been raising campaign funds from executives
at some of Microsoft's rivals. Bauer cited a federal judge's recent ruling that
Microsoft has a monopoly in desktop personal computer operating system software
as a victory for the little guy. Most of the other candidates have tried to
tread the middle ground: The Bush and Gore camps have said they will stay
silent on the issue because it is a legal matter and up to the courts, not the
executive branch.

            Gore,
during a highly publicized November visit to the Microsoft campus, told
employees he wouldn't discuss the case. But he did say, "If competition is
valuable, which I think it is, then antitrust laws have a place in embodying
the values of our country. If dominance in one area is used to prevent that
competition in another area, that's wrong."

            Internet proponents say
they are convinced that Internet issues will matter this time around. "Internet
issues are going to be extremely important," said Jerry Berman, executive
director of the Center for Democracy and Technology in Washington, D.C. "The
electorate could very well become very concerned about privacy, protecting kids
from bad stuff on the Net, preventing fraud on the Net, … and protecting the
free flow of information both here and abroad."

         
      
   
