
   
   
      
         
            Shakespearean Follies

            
               Subject:
Culturebox's Rusty Shakespeare

            
               From: 
               Guatam Makunda
            

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Thu Dec
23

            Judith Shulevitz needs
to brush up on her Shakespeare as well, I'm afraid. Fluellen's statement in
Henry V , Act IV, Scene VII is, in full:

            Kill the poys and the
luggage! 'tis expressly
against the law of arms: 'tis an arrant a piece of
knavery, mark you now, as can be offert; in your
conscience, now, is it not?

            To this statement Gower,
another soldier, replies:

            'Tis certain there's
not a boy left alive; and
the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha' done
this slaughter: besides, they have burn'd and
carried away all that was in the king's tent;
wherefore the king, most worthily, hath caused every
soldier to cut his prisoner's throat. O, 'tis a
gallant king!

            This then prompts an extended comparison on the
part of Fluellen of Henry V and Alexander the Great. Thus, Fluellen's
condemnation was for the French slaughter of the boys in the English
baggage train--a slaughter conducted, apparently, by French soldiers who fled
the battle. This is what Fluellen and Gower think provoked King Henry's command
to kill England's French prisoners, and both soldiers fully approve of that
command.

            John Keegan's excellent book The Face of
Battle also looks at the issue and concludes that his command was well
within the norms of warfare for the period. Henry V is, in fact, Shakespeare's
archetype of the perfect Hero-King precisely because of his Machiavellian
qualities (which certainly are present)--Henry understands, as he explains
during his tour of the army before Agincourt, that the moral demands upon a
King are very different from those upon ordinary men.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Re:
Culturebox's Rusty Shakespeare

            
               From: Judith
Shulevitz

            
               Re:  ""

            
               Date: Tue Dec
28

            Guatam Makunda has a point. I did misread the
passage. But he (or she) is wrong to conclude that I thereby vitiate my larger
argument.

            First things first. I stand corrected: Fluellen is
in fact referring to the French slaughter of the English servants. But I submit
that there's a good reason for my having misread the text on the fly.
Fluellen's remark follows immediately Henry's order to his men to kill their
prisoners, which would have scared anybody in Shakespeare' audience who knows
anything about war: The side whose captured soldiers have been murdered
invariably retaliates by killing the men it has captured, and the men ordered
to slit their prisoners' throats understood that. I think Shakespeare
means for us to confuse the two for a moment, until Gower replies and
we know where we are.

            Fluellen does not then go on to compare Henry to
Alexander the Great, exactly. Fluellen, in the great tradition of the
Shakespearean Fool, uses the comparison to make Henry out to be an ass.
Fluellen first compares Henry to Alexander the Pig , is corrected by
Gower, defends his malapropism, then goes on to say that the reason Alexander
and Henry are alike is they both kill their friends! (Henry, of course, killed
Falstaff metaphorically by cutting him to the quick.) Obviously, we are meant
to laugh at Fluellen's nonsense, but still. When a Shakespearean fool mocks a
king, intentionally or not, we have to sit up and take notice.

            As for Keegan and The Face of Battle ,
Guatam Makunda inadvertently makes my point for me: Keegan would not have had
to weigh in if there wasn't a raging debate about the rightness or wrongness of
Henry's actions.

            Is Henry the archetype of the Hero, Machiavellian
or otherwise? I would argue that Shakespeare did not create archetypes. He
created characters. Indeed, he may have created Character itself. What makes a
Shakespearean character is his roundedness, his moral complexity, his good
sides and his evil sides, all mixed in. As Harold Bloom puts it, Shakespeare
more or less invented our modern notions of psychology. Is Henry all good? Hell
no. Is he all bad? No, not really, but he's out there, and Shakespeare knew it.
My point was simply that he's not an exemplary role model, and it's ridiculous
for business executives to think that Shakespeare had handed them a road map to
the unproblematic exercise of power.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Moneybox's
Faulty Logic

            
               From: Silas
Dogood

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Wed Dec
22

            Moneybox thinks the stock market doesn't reflect
the health of the overall economy because "just" 48 percent of Americans own
stock. Using this reasoning, and bearing in mind that in 1929 less than 10
percent of the populace owned stock, we may be assured that the crash of '29
and the Great Depression were only coincidental and not causally linked. Uh
huh.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: A Trifling
$1 Trillion

            
               From: gbh

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Wed Dec
22

            The net worth of the U.S. household sector has
increased by close to $20 trillion in the last five years. If the "wealth
effect" still follows the rule of thumb outlined by Moneybox--5 cents in
consumer spending for every dollar of wealth created in the stock market--that
means a boost to consumption of $1 trillion. That would account for about a
third of nominal GDP growth over the past five years. Sounds pretty
consequential to me. Plus when you consider that the savings out of income is
close to zero, the old 5 percent number is undoubtedly low.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: What
L.A. Times Scandal?

            
               From: 
               Epicurus
            

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Wed Dec
22

            Chatterbox, like David Shaw in his interminable
piece in the Los Angeles 
               Times , never makes it clear why the
revenue-sharing arrangement between Staples and the newspaper was such an
egregious violation of journalistic ethics. Dumb, maybe (as Chatterbox points
out), but where is the attack on integrity? The ad side of all newspapers is
constantly trying to get the ed side to say nice things about those
advertising. In this case, though, the advertisers in the "special issue" of
the LAT magazine were companies other than Staples. And the
Times writers were never pressured to do puff pieces.

            Yes, the Times , almost unwittingly, was an
instrument for Staples to engage in a kickback scheme--i.e., Staples leaned on
contractors and vendors to pony up for ads for which they got some return. But
this breach is more an offense by Staples. The LAT was on the hook for
support already. But again, the writers were free to write what they wanted, so
why is the staff there so exercised (which they became only after the
WSJ and NYT started knocking their conduct)?

            One more point: Chatterbox says the LAT
participated in a bad business deal. Perhaps. But he should take into account
that the LAT also has a corporate commitment to downtown L.A. and that
through its continuing expansion, the paper as well as the town would benefit.
Enlightened self-interest and all that.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Free
It's a Wonderful Life !

            
               From: Mike
Gebert

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Tue Dec
28

            Your discussion of the copyright status of It's
a Wonderful Life is correct enough, but I think you're wrong to regard the
current Republic Pictures copyright (rooted in its underlying copyright of the
musical score) as a settled legal concept. It's true no one has challenged
it--but would you want to be the station manager at the UPN station in Provo
who took on NBC's exclusive rights in court? In fact, the seemingly farfetched
act you suggest would liberate the movie. Removing the music track is not so
farfetched at all; the 1939 movie Love Affair has been released on
video with its score replaced for exactly that reason. Surely It's a
Wonderful Life would be even more worth the trouble, if any video
distributor thought they could do it without immediately facing a battalion of
high-priced lawyers.

            This same legal gambit has been used for years in
the world of classic film distribution. When the balance of power among public
and private parties was fairly even, the private copyright never stood up for
very long. A famously shady and litigious film distributor once tried to gain
control of, among other things, D.W. Griffith's Birth of a Nation
(long since public domain) by buying up the rights to the Thomas Dixon novels
it was loosely based on; he was pretty much laughed away by his rivals.

            
               (To reply, click here .)
            

         
      
   
