
   
   
      
         
            No. 360: "Our Epic"

            
               The '50s begat
Happy Days ; the '60s, The Wonder Years ; the '70s, That '70s
Show ; and the '80s, Freaks and Geeks . In 20 years, the 1990s will be
distilled into a set of reductive clichés and processed into a TV sitcom. Give
the one-sentence pitch for that show. (Question courtesy of Tim
Carvell.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
359)--"Peril? Us?":
            

            

               Government officials and industry experts have begun to caution
Americans about "speed creep"--meaning?
            

            "That
goddamn Ralph Nader and his shifty eyes."-- Francis Heaney
            

            
"Antonyms. Watch out for antonyms."-- Tim Carvell ( Floyd Elliot
had a similar answer.)

            
"Internet pharmacist."-- William Vehrs
            

            "I
knew that Jim Carrey liked to run around nude, but I didn't realize he had
become such a menace to our highways."-- Barbara Lippert (similarly,
Tim Annett )

            "The
Einsteinian possibility that the third millennium will arrive sometime next
month."-- David Finkle
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Paying little attention
to the preparations for various grand public ceremonials, I've only just
noticed that this is the final News Quiz before the Earth plunges into the sun
and is destroyed. (Although why that should lead Seattle to cancel its all-nude
fertility ritual is unclear.) It's been a great planet. I particularly enjoyed
your colored sky; a nice choice, blue, popular, everybody likes that blue. Also
evolution, very entertaining. That was some fun watching how the giant
two-headed lizard's constant bickering among itself eventually led to its
extinction, a lesson for us all and especially for my Uncle Morty and Aunt
Bernice. And so when I gather up my soil samples and Ms. Judy Davis and return
to my home planet, I'll particularly miss those things and the News Quiz
participants. Happy New Year, everybody.

            
               So Where's the Problem
Answer
            

            Transportation engineers fearfully refer to
gradually going faster and faster on the highway, flouting the speed limit, as
"speed creep," and it is, well, accelerating.

            In 1980, 4.9 percent of interstate drivers exceeded
the 65-mph limit; in 1992, that number rose to 23 percent. On much of I-80 and
I-280 in New Jersey, fewer than 10 percent of drivers obey the 55-mph limit. In
Utah, people routinely drive 10 to 20 miles an hour faster than a decade
ago.

            Curiously, as speeds
have increased, the highway death rate has decreased, declining by 11 percent
since 1995, when the federal government abandoned the national 55-mph speed
limit. So one wonders why "speed creep" is reported as a problem rather than
good news: Safer faster driving saves time and lives?

            
               Metaphors of War
Extra
            

            Which of the following are from recent New York
Times articles and which are a clever ruse, like those cardboard tanks the
English built in World War II to trick Germans looking for plywood tanks?

            

               1.
"Buchanan Starts Push Through Reform Party Hedgerows."--Pat Buchanan is engaged
in the state by state, meeting by meeting political organizing required for a
losing presidential bid.

               2. "A
15-Month Labor Dispute Turns Into a War of Attrition"--Charles Hurwitz, who
controls a Spokane aluminum factory, locked out his workers. Although he has
been implicated in cutting California redwoods and in the collapse of a huge
Texas S&L, Hurwitz was not involved in the siege of Stalingrad but probably
wishes he had been.

               3.
"Tobacco Company Turns Big Guns on Foes"--Phillip Morris has acquired Russian
surplus artillery and intends to shell the Justice Department. "We sell a legal
product and believe in the Second Amendment. And several of the Ten
Commandments," declared a company lawyer.

               4. "If
retail is war, then the students of Providence Place Academy are the first
cadets in the country to have their boot camp on the field of battle."--Kids
attend school in a mall, work at crappy stores for no pay, because … well, I'm
not sure why.

               5. "In
Outpouring of Venom, Mexico Lawmakers Battle Over Budget"--If I understand
economics--and I don't--our southern neighbor is governed by some kind of
poisonous snakes who aren't getting along.

               6.
"Giuliani Proposes Martial Law"--"And I'm not speaking metaphorically," he
declared from his bunker beneath City Hall. Something to do with the search for
yet another new schools chancellor.

            

            
               Answers
            

            1, 2, 4, and 5 are
authentic journalistic clichés.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Creepingest garment: underwear. Creepiest person:
Donald Trump.

         
      
   
