
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=630250921-01071999>The Coming World Government</SPAN>

            
               
                  New
Republic
               , Jan. 17
            

            The
cover story celebrates the coming of world government. Political
globalization is catching up to economic globalization, as evidenced by the
multinational WTO protests in Seattle. The new debate isn't over whether to
have world government but over what type of world government we should have. A
single planetary authority is unlikely; instead, institutions such as the WTO
will mediate international disputes and weaken national sovereignty. …
An essay blames the media's ignorance of technology for its
Y2K doomsaying: "Maybe newspapers should hire a few more nerds."

            

               
                  Economist , Jan. 8
            

            A
column outlines the dangers of the Alan Greenspan
cult. The blind worship of the fabulous Fed chairman, who was just nominated
for another term, means that: 1) if he does make a mistake it will be terribly
magnified; and 2) investors are boosting stock prices to absurd levels because
they are relying on Greenspan to tell them when they've gone too far. …
A piece whacks Britain's much-vaunted millennium
celebration as "low farce." The giant Ferris wheel didn't work, the "river of
fire" was a dud, and the Millennium Dome is disappointing. … The cover
editorial echoes the widespread opinion that Vladimir
Putin's career as spy and bully bode ill for his presidency. (For

                  Slate
               's analysis of how Putin has tried to burnish his image, see
William Saletan's ".")

            
               
                   New York
Times Magazine, Jan. 9
            

            The
cover story marvels at the placebo effect and wonders whether we should allow
doctors to prescribe placebos. Sugar pills work in 35 percent to 75 percent of
patients, and fake surgery can improve health as much as real surgery. The real
lesson of the placebo effect: When doctors are attentive, confident, and
comforting, patients feel better--often regardless of how they are treated.
Placebos could be a bridge between the cold efficiency of modern medicine and
the unscientific comforts of alternative therapies. … An essay contends
that the flat tax will become a 21 st -century cause because we live
in a "one-click world." Americans want simplicity, even if the price is some
unfairness. … An actress who has played in the traveling cast of
Cats for 10 years (!) is interviewed. She doesn't like cats.

            
               
                  Time ,
Jan. 1, and Newsweek , Jan. 10
            

            Very similar millennium
commemoratives. Time 's cover shot is Times Square; Newsweek 's is
the Eiffel Tower. Both run gobs of photos of celebrations around the world.
Here is Time 's. Both cheer the absence of
terrorism and computer catastrophe. Time 's cover wrap-up mentions the most peculiar New Year's party: a
New York event where the Internet millionaire host tried "to coordinate six
fornicating couples into simultaneous orgasms at midnight." …

               
                  Newsweek
                says that minor Y2K inconveniences may pile up
in the coming months, especially among small businesses. It also warns that
many computers may crash on Feb. 29, a peculiar leap day. (Usually, years that
end in "00" are not leap years, but every 400 years, they are. Got it?)

            A Newsweek

               package on the $2.5 billion self-help industry says
that female baby boomers are its leading customers. A social stigma is still
attached to most self-help programs: Stephen "Seven Habits" Covey is the only
guru who has won mainstream respectability. … 
               Time 's Boris
Yeltsin article reveals that Kremlin strategists had been plotting his
resignation for nearly a year to ensure the election of a loyal successor.
Acting President Vladimir Putin is "more realist than ideologue." The former
KGB agent realizes corruption threatens Russia's economy, and unlike Yeltsin,
he is focused on his presidential duties. … In a Time 
               remembrance , Bill Clinton claims Yeltsin "earned the right to
be called the Father of Russian Democracy."

            
               
                  The New
Yorker , Jan. 10
            

            A book
review criticizes the new liberal wisdom that children will be scarred for life
if their first three years aren't stimulating. Kids are extremely resilient,
and their emotional and intellectual development can be normal even if their
early childhoods are distressed. Only children who suffer the most severe
deprivation are permanently damaged. … A piece lionizes Ed McBain (real
name: Evan Hunter), America's first great cop novelist. For 40 years, McBain
has been a lively and gritty chronicler of New York City life and helped
inspire TV cop shows such as Homicide , NYPD Blue , and Hill
Street Blues .

         
      
   
