
   
   
      
         
            Flash! Net Ignores Steamy Rumor!

            Has
the Internet abandoned its role as the leading incubator of political
rumor?

            
Judging from the Net's nonchalant treatment of a steamy story alleging recent
infidelity by a presidential candidate, the answer could be yes.

            In its
Jan. 4, 2000, issue, the National Enquirer has a story about a woman who
claims to have had an 18-month affair with one of the leading contenders.
(Although the Enquirer named both names,

                  Slate
                will not do so. We want to be able to tell the
story of the story without being accused--reasonably--of just using that as an
excuse for telling the story itself.) Ms. X, described by the Enquirer
as a "stunning Playboy model," claims to have had eight sexual
encounters with the candidate in at least two states between December 1997 and
June 1999.

            Ms.
X's story has little apparent credibility. The Enquirer itself
concludes--19 paragraphs into its story--that "while her story may have the
appearance of truth, it's false--although [she] vehemently defends it."

            Rarely
has the falsity or unverifiability of a spicy political rumor been an
impediment to its widespread distribution on the Web. But Matt Drudge has taken
very little interest in the tale of the candidate's alleged affair. And it's
next to impossible to find Ms. X's story mentioned anywhere on the Net. Even
two sites devoted to full-time bashing of the candidate have thus far been
silent about the Enquirer story.

            One of
the major candidate anxieties of the 2000 presidential race has been that the
unchecked proliferation of political rumor on the Internet would force
mainstream media outlets to cover stories that were unchecked, or even
irresponsible. For example, this summer the Wall Street Journal and
other venerable media outposts ran stories on mere allegations of cocaine use
by George W. Bush--without any corroboration--largely because the stories had
become so widespread on the Internet.

            And
it's not hard to imagine Ms. X's story being picked up by, say, the Drudge
Report , a British tabloid, and then the Washington Times --a
time-tested spin cycle for dirty political rumors, particularly when they are
damaging to Bill Clinton.

            So
far, though, there's been silence. One minimizing factor might be the fact that
the story appeared in the publicity netherworld between Christmas and New
Year's. And Ms. X's story seems to have less supporting evidence than, say,
Gennifer Flowers' 1992 tale about Clinton, which was backed, however sketchily,
by tape-recorded telephone conversations (a technology that would later revisit
the Clinton presidency).

            But
clearly some of the Web's indifference to the Ms. X story is attributable to
the gulf between the Web and the tabloids. The Enquirer 's Web site
has posted the cover of the issue containing Ms. X's allegations, with a big
coverline hyping the "smear," but the Web site doesn't offer a click-through to
the story itself.

            The
Enquirer 's print circulation is a little over 2 million; it is part of
American Media, a tabloid chain with annual revenues of approximately $300
million. In mid-1999 it was bought by the New York investment firm Evercore
Partners.

            
Although both the Enquirer and its sister Star have Web sites,
they do not use them to push their dirt. That's probably because tabloid
readers are not the nation's most wired demographic; regardless, if the
tabloids don't post their stories in a timely fashion, would-be Web publicists
have nothing to link to.

            For a
time, Drudge straddled the divide between Web and checkout-line cultures,
making the national press corps regularly scramble to cover a tabloid item. But
if Drudge passes on a particular story, there are few other columnists--in
print or on the Web--who have the inclination and audience to break a tabloid
tale out to mainstream readers. (The New York Post 's "Page Six"
gossip column ran a lead item on the Enquirer story on Christmas
Day.)

            Some
might argue that Drudge--whose politics, while difficult to define, are
generally right of center--is pulling punches to favor the GOP. But Drudge was
out front this summer reproducing stories about Bush's property having a
racially restrictive lease, a tale that received wide Net play but little
mainstream attention.

            
Drudge's relationship with the tabloids has lately soured a bit. In January
1999, Drudge trumpeted the details of a Star investigation into a
13-year-old boy whose mother--a black prostitute--claimed that Bill Clinton was
the father. But that investigation, despite Drudge's serial hype, determined
the woman's claims to be false. Since then, many tabloid publishers have come
to see Web gossip sites as both nuisance and competition.

            It may
be, too, that Internet rumor sites are a highly precise barometer of public
opinion. That is, they are ignoring the notion of a candidate's girlfriend
because, in the post-Monica political climate, few Americans believe that, even
if true, the allegations have any political significance.

         
      
   
