
   
   
      
         
            Millennium Blues

            When
newspapers tried to capture the spirit and meaning of the millennium
celebrations, they generally ran into trouble. Britain's Sunday newspapers
tried very hard indeed. The Observer
said that during the biggest party on the planet "most of
its [6] billion souls stopped, if for one second, to remember that they were
alive together, on Earth, the beautiful accident." There was much more in this
vein until the conclusion: "[W]e had been there, and we had seen each other
being there. All six billion of us. We were there, and we were together alive,
and it was good to be alive." The Sunday Times said the turn of the century "was a
moment of universal communality and aspiration. It was a moment when 1,000
years of peace suddenly seemed to be a human possibility." The Independent
on Sunday complained in its main front-page story that it had almost
nothing to report but good news.

            More
soberly, Asahi Shimbun of Japan ran an editorial Sunday pointing out that communality isn't all that it
might be. Noting that the wealth of the world's three richest men is greater
than the GNPs of the 48 poorest countries in the world combined, it said that
economic globalization benefits only the developed world. "Unless the imbalance
is rectified and people in poor countries come to live stable lives, the
connections among different people cannot be said to be a genuine network of
people," the paper said. In one poor country, Albania, an opposition newspaper
summed up the state of the nation at the millennium in the gloomiest possible
terms. The daily Albania said the nation's post-Communist dreams of
democracy have been dashed by a corrupt political "mafia," which has terrorized
and impoverished its citizens. "At the end of this millennium, Albania seems
miserable, bloody, abandoned, and--what is worse--believing that its shattered
hopes cannot be restored," the paper said.

            One of
the main millennium stories around the world has been the failure of the Y2K
bug to bite. As the Toronto Globe and Mail put it on New Year's Day, the year 2000
"dawned catastrophe-free in region after region of a watchful world." The paper
said, "As of early this morning, no planes had fallen from the sky, no nuclear
reactors melted down, no power grids collapsed. Computer glitches were scarce,
terrorists seemed to take the night off, and Armageddon failed to begin.
Civilization, such as it is, survived." In Australia Monday, the national daily
the Australian
voiced fears that the Australian government, which spent billions
of dollars on Y2K prevention, might have succumbed to hysteria generated by the
computer industry. It quoted Anthony Finkelstein, a professor of software at
University College London, as warning more than a year ago: "The public was
ignorant, the IT consultants were drawn by the lure of filthy lucre, the
science policy experts were seized with a mad-cow effect in which their advice
ceased to be rational, the nutcases were declaring the end of the world and a
sensible, empirically founded approach to risk was lost."

            In
Russia, the daily Segodnya said Friday that Russia was generally safe
from Y2K because most of its computers had been purchased in the mid-1990s when
the problem was already understood by software producers ("Thus, the technical
backwardness of Russia played to its advantage for the first time"). The paper
quoted a former head of the Russian communications ministry, Aleksander Ivanov,
as blaming the scare on Western intelligence services whose "crafty plan" was
to install new computers with spying facilities in Russian government
institutions. When Russia refused to give the Western technicians all the
computer information they wanted, they had pronounced the country
"ill-prepared" to deal with the millennium bug.

            Many
newspapers, however, highlighted a warning by Bill Gates of Microsoft that
there may be computer glitches further down the line, and the Times of London led its
front page Monday with the news that the bug had "affected a computer at the
main uranium storage site for the US nuclear arsenal. … The exact nature of the
malfunction at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory's Y-12 nuclear weapons plant
was not disclosed because the computer controls a classified function," the
paper said. As the millennium euphoria began to evaporate, the Italian papers
led Monday on chaos and transport paralysis in Rome as 3 million people invaded
the city for the start of what the pope has called its jubilee year. In the
London press, there was criticism of the organization of the British millennium
celebrations, especially--in the letters page of the Guardian --of the
lack of public toilets along the Thames. "Elegantly dressed women had to squat
and urinate in shop doorways because there were no facilities," one
correspondent wrote.

            Queen
Elizabeth II, who had been criticized for not crossing her arms to hold hands
with her husband Prince Philip and Prime Minister Tony Blair for the singing of
"Auld Lang Syne" in the Millennium Dome, was vindicated Monday by the tabloid
Daily Mirror ,
which said that arms are not supposed to be linked until the last verse of
Robert Burns' poem, which starts "And there's a hand, my trusty fere [friend]."
The president of the Burns Federation explained, "It's no use singing 'There's
a hand' if you already have a hand." In Paris, Le Monde reported Sunday that
half a dozen false messiahs were taken to hospital in Jerusalem for psychiatric
tests.

            In an editorial
Monday, the Israeli daily Ha'aretz called for the resignation of President Ezer Weizman
after his office confirmed a newspaper report that between 1988 and 1993, when
he was a member of the Knesset and a government minister, he received gifts of
money totaling $453,000 from French millionaire Edward Sarusi. "Weizman must
step down as president now, not later, because he lacks the uprightness
required of a public figure, and even now does not understand what he did
wrong," the paper said. "If the president of the state does not pay the price
for his actions, it will no longer be possible to demand proper conduct from
other public servants. The role of the president is a symbolic one, and the
symbol has to be a role model, not a symbol that engenders opprobrium."

         
      
   
