
   
   
      
         
            No. 358: "Foto Fun"

            
               I give the
picture; you give the caption.
            

            
               Compose a
newspaper-style caption for the actual Reuters news photo shown
below.
            

             

             

            Send
your answer by 9 p.m. ET Monday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Tuesday's Question (No.
357) "2, 4, 6, 8, Who Do We Indoctrinate?"
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           Federal District Judge Solomon Oliver
Jr. said it "had the effect of advancing religion through government-sponsored
religious indoctrination." What
did?
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "The
Crusades."-- Annie Driscoll
            

            
"Express lanes at highway toll plazas for those who know Jesus as their
personal savior."--Ross Frellick
            

            "A
plan to teach school students to cry 'Please God, no!' before being shot by a
classmate."-- Beth Sherman
            

            "Did
you know that all of our presidents who weren't Masons were assassinated?
That's indoctri-friggin-nation for ya!"-- Al Cloutier
            

            "An
Alabama schoolteacher's announcement, just prior to lunch, that 'Everyone can
go outside for recess. Except the Jews, who have to sit inside and watch
Davey and Goliath over and over and over again.' "-- Tim
Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            As many News Quiz
participants asserted, ours is a very observant, very Christian nation, so
please be sensitive to the displays of religiosity that are so common this time
of year, often with elaborate lighting. One caution: People get cross if you
swipe the baby Jesus out of their nativity scene, even if you replace it with
something better, like a live monkey. Ask any kid what he'd rather see,
illuminated plastic figurines or monkeys, and that kid is going to say,
"Monkeys! Where's my present?" Sure, it's easy to decry the commercialization
of the holiday, like putting trousers on all the figures in the nativity scene,
adding a big electric sign that flashes: "Jesus Wore Khakis," and pocketing
some pretty sweet change from the Gap. But monkeys are generally nonprofit, and
yet my damned neighbors have threatened to call the cops if I set one foot on …
well, enough about me. Except that I'd like to take this opportunity to wish
you all season's greetings. A little impersonal, I know. How I wish I could
visit each of your houses, when nobody's home, and go through your stuff. But
the sentiment is no less heartfelt for all that. So Merry Christmas, everyone,
and have a banana on me and my pal Popo!

            
               What Would Jesus™
Answer:
            

            Cleveland's school voucher program is
government-sponsored religious indoctrination.

            Judge Oliver ruled Monday that giving children
tax-financed vouchers to attend that city's parochial schools violated the
Constitution's separation of church and state.

            Ninety-six percent of
the students receiving vouchers attend parochial schools, among them St.
Patrick's, whose student handbook lists its No. 1 objective of education: "to
communicate the gospel message of Jesus™."
Voters Guide: As a senator, Bill Bradley voted for school vouchers. During
Sunday's TV debate, he weaseled out of that decision by calling it "an
experiment in terror" (except for the words "in terror"). "And besides, I was
so drunk that year, I never knew what the hell I was voting for," he did not
add.

            
               One More Inverted
Headlines Extra
            

            "Vermont Court Insists on
Human Disease

            U.C.
Study Links 'Mad Cow' Strain to Gay Partner Rights"-- Andrew Solovay
            

            
               Corporate
Christmas Ongoing Extra
            

            Nothing captures the
spirit of this blessed season like a mass mailing from a vast commercial
enterprise. Participants are invited to devise holiday cards from any
well-known corporation, along these lines:

            
               Outside:
Santa gasses up the sleigh at an ExxonMobil station.

            

               Inside: Happy holidays from our remaining employees!

            
               Outside:
His sack on his shoulder, Santa tiptoes into Canada past dozing Mountie at
border station.

            
               Inside:
Santa passes out cartons of cigarettes to appreciative lumberjacks.

            

               The message: Tax-Free Greetings From Your American Friends at
Philip Morris.

            Replies to run Tuesday,
Dec. 28.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Wan nation under God.

         
      
   
