
   
   
      
         
            A Maze in Grace

            
               Subject: "New Age"
Isn't So New

            
               From: Max

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Tue Jan 4

            
               Another Fraygrant wrote :
            

            

               There is a very beautiful
cathedral in France--I believe in Chartres--that has a huge labyrinth on the
floor. It was covered until recently when a new, more liberal Bishop took over
the area. It was interesting to see something "New Agey" in such an old
institution.

            

            I have seen these old mazes on church floors and
they are beautiful. Too bad Culturebox used the words "New Age" in the column.
If she had simply said "spirituality" then everyone would be much calmer in
their criticism.

            It seems to me that this maze idea is simply a
focusing device, like a rosary or lighting a candle, which symbolizes something
significant to us. It's just a "thing" we use to help us feel closer to God.
Why all the hub-bub?

            Personally I feel closer to God when I'm gardening
and tending "His" planet. Is that wrong, too?

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Pundit
Central vs. Bob Novak

            
               From: Brian

            
               Re:
""

            
               Date: Mon Jan 3

            Why is Robert Novak's indisputably accurate
assessment on the effects of centralized government in the 20 th
century labeled "self-parody"? How can the Pundit Central hack imply that
centralized government has been a huge net plus when millions have died
directly at its hands, and when common freedoms and civic involvement have been
declining in liberal democracies as a direct result of this conglomeration of
power? Sounds like the usual liberal tactic of attempting (desperately) to
deride what you can't really disprove.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Re: Pundit
Central vs. Bob Novak

            
               From: Michael
Brus

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Tue Jan 4

            Obviously totalitarian governments, both right and
left, have killed millions this century. And surely government in the United
States today is too large, or at least inefficient. (Jonathan Rauch's new book
Government's End documents
this quite well.)

            But Novak's absurdity lies in linking totalitarian
programs of extermination to onerous regulations in contemporary Europe and the
United States. Surely there is a qualitative difference between a police state
and a sclerotic republic. (Do you really think it's just a slippery
slope from Sweden to North Korea?)

            Remember, Shields asked him to name the "greatest
catastrophes of the 20 th century." Novak responded with a
conservative buzzword ("big government"), and tried to use real catastrophe to
further his own agenda.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            

               [Michael Brus writes "Pundit Central" and is Slate 's
Fraymaster.]
            

            
               Subject: The Dog
Who Ate Peanuts
            

            
               From: 
               Steve Miller
            

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Thu Dec
30

            
               Another Fraygrant wrote :
            

            

               Mark Alan Stamaty is to be
forgiven for rejecting Jean Shepherd's critique that Snoopy ruined Peanuts--as
a cartoonist, Stamaty has been influenced on a much deeper level by Schulz than
the average reader. I found his paean to the strip very moving.

            

            Indeed, Christopher Caldwell, in his 
brilliant piece in last week's N.Y. Press, contends that it was
Schulz's "calamitous artistic misjudgment" that allowed Snoopy and cuteness to
overwhelm the "left-field" magic that characterized the early strip. I think
that, once the billion-dollar merchandizing juggernaut was well underway,
Schulz got fat and happy. Snoopy and Woodstock--unlike Charlie Brown and
Lucy--represent the relatively banal inner life of a successful middle-age man.
As Schulz's own angst disappeared, his strip's meaningfulness did too.

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject: Fish's
Frivilous Pen

            
               From: 
               Terry Clark
            

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Mon Jan 3

            Stanley Fish is a fun writer, but don't take him
too seriously. He's the Robin Williams of literature--an inspired gabber who
couldn't turn off his inspirations to save his life. If he wanted to, Fish
could talk biscuits and gravy into a thrilling subject we would all take sides
on. Professor Fish is simply (!) a good talker who writes well. That's his
gift. He's like the lawyer in Walden , who amazed the Indian because
while he worked hard at making baskets and blankets, and yet remained poor,
"the lawyer had only to weave arguments, and, by some magic, wealth and
standing followed." Fish is that lawyer, and most of the rest of us are the
Indian.

            Now, words can have powerful effects on us
Indians--the more so if you have a serious talker and a serious subject. Then
again, words aren't everything (as, Fish cheekily delights in pointing
out).

            Sometimes, when I read Fish (his frightening
"Mission Impossible" essay, for example), I get swept up by his great gift, and
am ready to move the family to the woods to avoid the end of the world. But
then I smell the Fish. Ah, Stan! It's just you and your words again!

            
               (To reply, click
here .)
            

            
               Subject:
Hollywood's Opening-Night Strategy
            

            
               From: David
Snow

            
               Re: ""

            
               Date: Wed Dec
29

            I just happened to have finished Monster:
Living Off the Big Screen by John Gregory Dunne when I read this article.
The author is a screenwriter. He makes the following point:

            The reason that opening weekend grosses are so
important is that the distributing studio bases the advertising budget on the
opening weekend grosses. Thus a feature that opens poorly doesn't get
advertised as much as one that does well. It's the criterion they use to keep
themselves from throwing money at something that is likely to fail. Although
word of mouth sometimes works, for a feature to do well in the long run it
almost always needs advertising. Thus a poor opening gross is a self-fulfilling
prediction of failure.

            
               (To reply, click here .)
            

         
      
   
