
   
   
      
         
            Tabloids' 1999 Secrets Exposed!

            For weeks, Keeping Tabs
has been eagerly awaiting the last few tabloids of 1999. With every publication
known to mankind kicking out special issues, she was certain the tabs would
follow suit and deliver some juicy, best-of-the-year/century/millennium
packages. She could even see the headlines: "Machiavelli's Secret Health
Crisis!" "Martin Luther Packs on 30 Pounds!" "Gertrude Stein in Love Nest With
'Gal Pal!' "

            But much to her chagrin, the tabs have hardly
mentioned the dawning of the 21 st century (aside from a few New
Year's predictions from their astrologers). Keeping Tabs couldn't help but
wonder if the tabs' reluctance to reflect might have something to do with their
track records. Would the Globe want to be reminded, for example, that
its May 4 issue announced that Jennifer Aniston was "about to become a bride
and a mother"? (At press time, she and boyfriend Brad Pitt are neither married
nor expecting.) What about the Sept. 21 issue of the Globe that
explained "why Pierce Brosnan will NEVER marry sexy lover" Keely Shaye Smith?
The two became happily engaged the next month, prompting the Globe to
claim that its story forced Brosnan's hand.

            Would the Star care to recall the fact that
right before Jerry Seinfeld's engagement to Jessica Sklar, the comedian was
reportedly "head over heels" for Gwyneth Paltrow? Does the Enquirer
still stand by its July prediction that Prince Charles and Camilla Parker
Bowles would publicly announce their secret engagement "at the end of this
year," with a wedding to "follow soon after"?

            'Nuf said. Since the
tabloids aren't interested in remembering the year that was, Keeping Tabs has
assembled her favorite tabloid moments of 1999:

            M ost hyperbolic story: This week's Star cover
story on the "Surprising Hush-Hush Romance" between Prince William and teen pop
star Britney Spears. While the tabs are notorious for speeding up celeb
couples' romantic timetables, this romance is so hush-hush that, well, the two
have yet to meet. But that doesn't stop a Star source from speculating
that Spears might consider marriage if the prince were to ask.

            
               Most creative use of a prepared statement: A
Dec. 5 story on the Reuters wire reported that comedienne Madeline Kahn's
husband, John Hansbury, announced her death outside a New York hospital. "We
all suffered a great loss today," Hansbury told the assembled media. "While we
mourn her passing, we celebrate a full and wonderful life." The following week,
the Globe quoted Hansbury "sobbing" those exact words "to friends." 


            
               Most overused
cliché : Celebs dying alone and heartbroken. See, for example, the
Star on the "sad, last days" of What's Happening!! 's Shirley
Hemphill; the Star on the "sad, last days" of Ellen Corby of The
Waltons ; or the Star on the "sad, tormented life" of the late Dana
Plato.

            M ost dubious proof of pregnancy: The Globe 's
aforementioned Jennifer Aniston story, in which one of the "strong hints" that
Aniston was "in a family way" was the fact that when children come to the
Friends set, she is always "the first to rush over and ask if she can
hold the tot." (Keeping Tabs is sure that with that in mind, Brad and Jennifer
just skipped the pregnancy tests and started painting that nursery.)

            
               Trend Keeping Tabs would like to go on
record as vehemently opposing: The kinder, gentler National
Enquirer , which is apparently modeling itself after Reader's Digest .
The Enquirer is now filled with headlines such as "Cat's Incredible:
Kitty walks 2000 miles back home" and "Millionaire Businessman Learns to Read
at 56!" The Enquirer has also taken to running "Helpful Household Hints"
and paying for readers' contributions: $10 for "Happy Thoughts" (Sample entry:
"To me, happiness is finding that your flashlight works after the lights go
out.") and $25 for "Why I love my pet."

            
               Secret tabloid
technique debunked!: The tabs' habit of crediting "insiders" and "sources"
with information gleaned from talk-show interviews. To wit: the
Enquirer 's story on Sopranos star Edie Falco--cribbed entirely
from her appearance on the Late Show With David Letterman --and this
week's Enquirer piece on Jodie Foster's "secret passion" for garage
sales. Keeping Tabs now considers herself an "insider," given that she knew all
about Foster's "secret" passion after watching the actress discuss it at length
on the Rosie O'Donnell Show last week.

            M ost ironic tribute: The Globe salutes all
the "much loved" public figures who passed away in 1999, most notably John F.
Kennedy Jr. and Carolyn Bessette Kennedy. "Our hearts are particularly heavy
this year as we look back at those we've lost," the Globe writes
lovingly. "May they all rest in peace." Apparently the Globe subscribes
to the theory that incessant posthumous prying ("They hadn't slept together for
12 months" screamed one recent John-and-Carolyn cover) is just the thing for
those trying to rest in peace.

            
               Most tedious "World Exclusive": The
Star 's six-page spread on Tanya Tucker and her 2-week-old daughter,
Layla, which basically consisted of frame after frame of the singer's head in
varying proximity to the sleeping newborn.

            
               Most tabloid clichés
in a single story: The Enquirer 's October piece about convicted
murderer Susan Smith, who is said to have 1) taken a lesbian lover in prison;
2) lost 60 pounds from bulimia; and 3) become desperate to have a baby.

            A nd finally, the best tabloid headlines of 1999--oh,
what the hell, of the millennium: Both were in the Star . In second
place: "I Made Love to Potsie in Hot Tub While His Wife Went Shopping." And the
grand prize goes to (drumroll please), "I thought my wife was cheating with
Kevin Costner--but I found her with Prince Andrew."

            Happy New Year. May you
stay out of the pages of the tabs in 2000. 

         
      
   
