
   
   
      
         
            Wiesel Words

            
               Movies

            

            

               
                  Magnolia
                (New Line Cinema). Rave after rave for writer-director
Paul Thomas Anderson's ( Boogie Nights ) star-filled film about a series
of interconnected characters in the San Fernando Valley: "A wildly funny, truly
wise and subversively sincere film about pain, forgiveness and the possibility
of healing" (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall Street Journal ). The cast
includes Julianne Moore, William H. Macy, Jason Robards, Philip Seymour
Hoffman, and Tom Cruise (who receives over-the-top praise for his performance
as a men's self-help guru). Critics do express some reservations, mainly about
the movie's length and overwrought emotion--as Roger Ebert writes, the film is
"operatic in its ambition," and viewers should "[l]eave logic at the door. Do
not expect subdued taste and restraint" (the Chicago Sun-Times ). A few
feel that Anderson doesn't pull it off: Magnolia , a "big, showy flower
of a movie, unfurls brilliantly, each plot petal a thing of exquisite design.
Then it ripens. Then it disintegrates, leaving a mess of color and a faint
whiff of rot" (Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ). (The official
site includes
several trailers and stills from the film.)

            

               
                  Snow Falling on Cedars
                (Universal Pictures). "Inert," "hollow,"
"anesthetized," and other deadly adjectives fill the reviews for the screen
adaptation of David Guterson's best-selling novel about the lingering effects
of Japanese internment camps in the Pacific Northwest. Director Scott Hicks
( Shine ) takes a few knocks: "If ever there was an example of a
director's getting in the way of a story, this is it" (David Ansen,
Newsweek ). Strangely enough, Ethan Hawke--the film's biggest star--gets
almost no mention. The cinematography is alternately praised as stunning and
condemned as boring, but the response to the story line is unanimous: It's a
"liberal soap opera" (Richard Schickel, Time ) that consists of a
"self-congratulatory anti-prejudice message, fleshed out with painstaking
topographic detail" (Dennis Lim, the Village Voice ). A few critics stand
up for the film, calling it a "thoughtful, evocative thriller" (Kenneth Turan,
the Los Angeles Times ). (Find out more about Hawke here.)

            
               Books

            

            

               
                  And the Sea Is Never Full
               , by Elie Wiesel (Knopf). After heaping
praise on Wiesel's work on behalf of countless Holocaust causes, reviewers
reluctantly detail their problems with this second volume of his memoirs. On
the positive side: It's a compelling document "of a life marked by high
seriousness, good conscience and an utter refusal to submit to evil and
oppression" (Jonathan Groner, the Washington Post Book World ), and upon
reading it you "become persuaded that something about his combination of
seeming innocence and moral honesty has the power to move if not mountains then
those who have the most power" (Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, the New York
Times ). But complaints against the book are uniform: 1) This volume "feels
anti-climactic" (Duane Davis, Denver Rocky Mountain News ) when compared
with his first because it lacks the kind of compelling events that shaped his
early life. 2) The book "is patchwork, a grab bag of speeches he gave, the
great and the near-great he met, causes he could not refuse to get involved in,
conferences he helped to organize, ideological battles he fought" instead of a
linear narrative (Lehmann-Haupt). (Click here
to read an interview with Wiesel.)

            

               
                  James Joyce
               , by Edna O'Brien (Viking Penguin). This latest
installment of the "Penguin Lives" series is well received, even though it
trails Richard Ellman's definitive 900-page Joyce tome, which was deemed
"probably this century's best biography of a writer" (David Kippen, the San
Francisco Chronicle ). Undaunted, novelist O'Brien attempts something
entirely different: She gives 179 pages of "hardheaded hagiography in which she
spends a lot of time knocking Joyce around" (Robert Sullivan, the New York
Times Book Review ). It's notable not for its wide net, but for its
precision, economy, and insight: "a first-rate appraisal of a master … a model
of pristine brevity" (Robert Taylor, the Boston Globe ). One complaint:
The book contains an "impressive number of inaccuracies of a factual nature,"
such as misidentifying the poet laureate of Victorian Ireland and misquoting
critic Walter Pater (Thomas Flannagan, the Los Angeles Times ). (This Joyce site has essays,
links, and message boards on the author.)

            

               
                  Fasting, Feasting
               , by Anita Desai (Houghton Mifflin). Nominated
for the Booker Prize in England, Desai's novel of a small-town family in India
is deemed "splendid" (Gabriella Stern, the Wall Street Journal ). The two
parts of the title refer to the internal structure of the book, the first half
following the life of the family's plain and somewhat dim older daughter, who
after failing to marry is consigned to the life of a glorified house servant.
The second half follows the family's favorite son as he travels to America for
his education. A "wry, touching and understated novel" (Francine Prose, the
New York Times Book Review ). (Click here to
find out more about Desai.)

            
               
                  Sick Puppy
               ,
by Carl Hiaasen (Knopf). Excellent reviews for the Miami Herald
columnist's latest thriller excoriating the excesses of his home state. "He
shows himself to be a comic writer at the peak of his powers" and "once again
produces a devilishly funny caper revolving around ... environmental
exploitation" ( Publisher's Weekly ). The tale follows a slightly
psychotic environmentalist who decides to enact personal revenge on a local
real-estate bigwig who happens to be an incurable litterbug. The only
criticism: Hiaasen "walks a fine line between satire and outrage, as well as
another between the conventions of the thriller and the conventions of
slapstick, and … toward the end matters get so frenetic that credulity is
strained well past the snapping point" (Jonathan Yardley, the Washington
Post ). (Read an interview with Hiaasen.)

         
      
   
