
   
   
      
         
            The Masked and the Unmasked

            Paul Thomas Anderson's

                  Magnolia
                takes place on a dark night of the soul in the
City of Angels. A patriarch is dying. No, hold on, this is a three-hour movie:
Two patriarchs are dying. Rich geezer Jason Robards is slipping in and out of a
coma on a bed with an oxygen tube up his nose while his minky young wife
(Julianne Moore) acts out her despair at losing an old man she thought she'd
married for his money. The geezer's nurse (Philip Seymour Hoffman) listens to
his semi-coherent monologues then decides to get in touch with the dying man's
estranged son (Tom Cruise), who gives inspirational lectures in which men are
exhorted to "turn women into sperm receptacles" and to leave behind their
"unmanly" pasts. The son gets a double dose of his unmanly past this night,
since a female TV journalist (April Grace) has uncovered the history he has
determinedly concealed and is eating through his mask of machismo on camera.
"We may be through with the past," says someone, "but the past isn't through
with us."

            The second dying
paterfamilias is Philip Baker Hall as the host of a quiz show for bright kids.
He bursts in on his estranged daughter (Melora Walters) with news of his
imminent demise, but the addled girl for some reason (three guesses) won't have
anything to do with him. His visit sends her into a cocaine-snorting frenzy,
which is interrupted by a policeman (John C. Reilly) checking out her deafening
stereo: "You've been doing some drugs today?" After 10 minutes, it isn't clear
whether this dweebish flatfoot is interrogating her or trying to ask for a
date--or whether he even knows. Meanwhile ( Magnolia could have been
titled Meanwhile ), an aging ex-quiz-kid celebrity (William H. Macy) gets
fired from his job and goes looking for the love he never had, while a
contemporary quiz-kid celebrity (Jeremy Blackman) tries to make his father
(Michael Bowen) understand that he wants to be loved for himself and not his TV
achievements--even if that means peeing in his pants on-camera.

            What's the connection among these people? Some of the links
are familial, others merely circumstantial. But everyone and their dad are
having a really lousy day. At the peak of their collective loneliness, the
cokehead daughter puts on a plaintive Aimee Mann song, the chorus of which
goes: "It's not going to stop/ It's not going to stop/ It's not going to stop/
Till you wise up." She moves her lips and the director cuts to all the
characters in all the movie's other strands as they all move their lips to the
same universal refrain: "It's not going to stop …" The wife in the car sings.
The aging quiz kid on the barstool sings. The cop searching for his lost gun
sings. I thought, "Please don't make the guy in the coma sing, or I'm going to
be hysterical"--but yup, the guy in the coma sings, too. At that point, I had
an interesting reaction to Magnolia : I laughed at it and forgave it
almost everything.

            OK, you could spend three
hours snickering at Anderson's "What the World Needs Now Is Aimee Mann"
metaphysic. But his vision cuts deeper than a lot of folky bathos. His
characters have been screwed up by their families, so when he turns around and
makes a case for family as the ultimate salvation, he doesn't seem
simple-minded. He's saying the diaspora is understandable--but that it's also
killing people. At the point where these people could actually start dying of
aloneness, he goes metaphorical. He goes biblical. He goes nuts. He has sort of
prepared us with weather reports and the recurrence of numerals suggesting an
Old Testament chapter and verse. But nothing could prepare us for the
full-scale, surreal, gross-out deluge that's the picture's splattery climax.
For the second time, he dynamites his own movie. And for the second time I
forgave him almost everything.

            What clinches Anderson's case for family is how beautifully
he works with his surrogate clan. Many of the actors show up from his Hard
Eight (1997) and Boogie Nights (1997), and he's so eager to get Luis
Guzman into the film, despite the lack of a role, that he makes him a game-show
contestant named "Luis Guzman." He's like a parent who can't stop adopting
kids. Anderson knows what actors live to do: fall apart. He puts their
characters' backs against the wall, then gives them speeches full of free
associations and Freudian slips, so that they're suddenly exposed--and
terrified by their nakedness. By the end of the first hour of Magnolia ,
the whole cast is unraveling. By the end of the second, they've unraveled so
much that they've burst into song. Anderson must have needed that bonkers
third-hour climax because there was nowhere to go short of spontaneous
combustion.

            The actors are
great--all of them. It seems unfair to single anyone out, but I loved Reilly's
unsettling combination of sweetness and prudery--unsettling because he's just
the kind of earnest, by-the-book cop whose wheels move too slowly in a crisis.
Between tantrums, Julianne Moore opens and closes her mouth like a fish that's
slowly suffocating at the bottom of a boat. And who would have expected a real
performance from Tom Cruise? Anderson takes everything fake in Cruise's
acting--the face-pulling, the too-quick smile--and turns it into the
character's own shtick, so that when the mask is pulled off you get a startling
glimpse of the rage and fear under the pose. Elsewhere, Anderson uses Mamet
actors and Mamety diction, but he's the Anti-Mamet. He makes his actors feel so
safe--so loved--that they seem to be competing to see who can shed the most
skin.

            The title card of 
                  The Talented Mr.
Ripley
                is a stroke of genius. Adjectives flash before the words
Mr. Ripley , with "talented" an imperfect substitute for about 30 other
possibilities, including "confused." Actually, I think confused (or vulnerable
or desperate) would have been a more appropriate choice. As played by Matt
Damon, this Ripley's chief talent is for licking his lips and looking clammily
out of place. Dispatched to the south of Italy by a magnate named Greenleaf
seeking the return of his wastrel son Dickie (Jude Law), the working-class
Ripley has to pretend he's an old Princeton classmate. But nothing in Damon's
demeanor remotely suggests the Ivy League. Beside the smooth, caramel-colored
Law, even his pale little muscles seem like poseurs.

            Anthony Minghella ( The English Patient , 1996)
has adapted The Talented Mr. Ripley from a thriller by Patricia
Highsmith, and it's a gorgeously creepy piece of movie-making. The Old World
luxury--even the Old World rot--is double-edged, subtly mocking its
bantamweight New World protagonist. The light that bronzes everyone else burns
poor, pasty Ripley. We watch him having the time of his life, but there's no
question of his ever fitting in with Dickie, his willowy girlfriend Marge
(Gwyneth Paltrow), or even their fat, to-the-manner-born pal Freddie Miles (a
hilarious Philip Seymour Hoffman)--he's too tense, too hungry, too incomplete.
When Ripley is by himself onscreen, there's nothing going on.

            Minghella is a thoughtful
man and a snazzy craftsman, but by the end of Ripley , I wasn't sure what
had attracted him to this material. What does a vaguely masochistic humanist
see in Patricia Highsmith? The novel's Ripley (and the Ripley of René Clément's
1960 Purple Noon , Alain Delon) isn't so palpably out of his depth. With
a bit of polish he can pass for a playboy, and the bad fun is watching him do
anything to keep from accepting the swinish Dickie's view of him as an eternal
loser. Damon's Ripley is an eternal loser, an anti-chameleon, and so
conscientiously dreary that he lets Jude Law act him off the screen. He isn't
allowed to feel a moment's glee at seizing what these rich boobs have denied
him. Minghella comes up with a bleakly sincere ending that's the opposite of
what this ironic little melodrama needs. He's trying to inflate it into
tragedy, where Highsmith's setups are too cold and shallow to be tragic. The
old biddy herself would have thought this ending stinks.

            Along with many Americans, I first caught Andy Kaufman on
the Tonight Show in the mid-'70s. He sat next to Johnny Carson and in
his helium-pitched "foreign man" voice told jokes without punch lines ("Her
cooking ees so bad--ees terrible") and did non-impressionistic impressions;
then he got up and launched into the most electrifying Elvis Presley takeoff
I've ever seen. Without that final flourish of virtuosity, the shtick would
have been just weird. With it, Kaufman signaled that his comedy was about more
than untranscendent ineptitude: It was about wondrously fucking with your
head.

            That whole act is
reproduced in the funny, frustrating Kaufman biopic 
                  Man on the
Moon
               , but not on the Tonight Show . Kaufman (Jim Carrey)
does it onstage at a tiny club. We don't know where it came from or what the
thinking was behind it. He brings down the house (lots of shots of people
smiling and laughing), then goes out for a drink with a potential manager
(Danny DeVito), who tells him, "You're insane--but you might also be
brilliant." That's about as close to analysis as the picture gets.

            As in their Ed Wood (1994) and The People vs.
Larry Flynt (1996), screenwriters Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski
take marginal or plain cruddy characters and stick them in the middle of
breezily wide-eyed biopics. Their Horatio Alger tone is the joke, but it's not
a joke that director Milos Forman seems to be in on. Forman tells one, deadly
serious story: A reckless individualist is slowly crushed by society. It meshed
with McMurphy in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975) but seemed odd
with Mozart ( Amadeus , 1984) and disastrous with Valmont ( Valmont ,
1989). With Andy Kaufman, it seems not so much wrong as beside the point. Where
did the rage in Kaufman come from, and at what point did it kill the comedy?
More important: Did Kaufman himself consider some of his experiments failures,
or had his aesthetic finally become so punk/pro-wrestling that he thought
driving people crazy was enough? As Jared Hohlt  in 
                  Slate
               , the
comedian got sick at the point where he needed to reinvent himself to keep from
sinking into obscurity. The filmmakers reverse the trajectory (and the actual
chronology of Kaufman's career), so that he seems to achieve a magical
synthesis of warmth and aggression--and then gets cut down at his prime. That's
not just bogus; it's false to the conflicts that ate Kaufman alive.

            The reason to see Man
on the Moon is Jim Carrey. It's not just that he does the Kaufman routines
with the kind of hungry gleam that makes you think he's "channeling" the dead
comedian. It's that he knows what it's like to walk the high wire and bomb. He
knows what it's like to lose control of his aggression: It happened to him in
The Cable Guy (1996), maybe his real Andy Kaufman film. I bet
that what Carrey saw from inside Kaufman's head would be more illuminating than
anything in the movie. He's not just a man in the moon: He generates his own
light.

            Anyone who reads 
                  Angela's Ashes
                is
torn down the middle--appalled by the misery and deaths of small children and
yet exhilarated, even turned on, by the cadences of Frank McCourt. His
alcoholic father starved him of real food but filled his head with the kind of
stories that nourished his poet's instincts. I worried that the movie, directed
by Alan Parker, would miss McCourt's voice and dwell too much on the tragic
details. But what happens is the opposite: McCourt narrates the film, and it
turns into a lifeless slide show. There's no flow, no connective tissue between
episodes. After the 80 th teensy scene goes by, you realize the movie
isn't just botched: It doesn't even exist. Emily Watson suffers prettily, but
whatever she's thinking stays in her head, and Robert Carlyle is so mopily
present that you don't have a clue why such an earnest fellow would drink so
many lives away. (The horror of the father McCourt describes is that he's not
at home on planet Earth.) The narrator says his dad was a helluva storyteller,
but the man on screen doesn't say so much as "Once upon a time …" Has anyone
involved in this disaster ever heard a real story?

         
      
   
