
   
   
      
         
            Case's Best Scenario

            

               America Online is buying Time Warner. The $166 billion deal is
the biggest corporate merger ever and would create the world's largest media
company, valued at over $350 billion. Analysts hailed the marriage because 1)
Time Warner will be able to market its movies, music, and magazines to AOL's 20
million subscribers; and 2) AOL will be able to use Time Warner's massive cable
network to deliver high-speed Internet access. Reporters tripped over
themselves to describe the importance of the deal, saying, in order of
increasing excitement: 1) it signals "convergence between old media content and
the new medium of the Net"; 2) it presages more megamergers, as other companies
struggle to keep pace; 3) it "marks the passage of the Internet from an exotic technology
into a mass media industry"; and 4) it represents "the triumph of the Internet as the irresistible force in
business." Customers were tepid, wondering whether the mammoth company would
improve consumers' access to products or increase investors' access to profits.
("" asks if AOL paid too much for Time Warner, and "" wonders if Nora Ephron
brokered the deal.)

            

               Three Chinese stowaways died on their way to the United
States. Their bodies were discovered, along with 15 survivors, inside
a metal shipping container unloaded in Seattle. Eighty-seven illegal Chinese
immigrants have been arrested in West Coast ports since the new year--almost
all on container ships from Hong Kong. Unless the stowaways can prove they were
persecuted in China, they will be sent home. Officials were incensed by: 1) the
greed of the smugglers, who charge up to $60,000 per person; 2) the complicity
of the shipping lines; and 3) the negligence of Hong Kong authorities. The
gloomy spin: This shows the desperate measures people will take to escape
Chinese
oppression . The rosier spin: This shows the desperate measures people
will take to gain American freedom .

            

               A Florida court granted temporary custody of Elián González to his
Miami relatives. The state judge ordered González to remain in the
United States until a hearing in March. Last week, the Immigration and
Naturalization Service ruled that the 6 year-old should be reunited with his
father in Cuba. The INS could overrule the judge's decision but has hinted that
it won't. González's Miami relatives said he was gaining a chance at due process and a better life in the States. Most
legal experts said the chance would be short-lived, since courts are
almost certain to grant permanent custody to the father. Last
week's cynical spin: The INS caved to political pressure from Cuba. This week's
cynical spin: Florida caved to political pressure from Cuban exiles.

            

               The Postal Service wants to raise prices. If approved by
Postal Rate Commission, stamps for letters and postcards would each increase by
a penny in early 2001, to 34 and 21 cents, respectively. The Postal Service
spun the rate hike as a competitive necessity that would allow it to maintain
universal service, improve technology, and cover rising costs. Critics charged
that it would hinder 1) businesses and nonprofits that rely on direct mail; and
2) the Postal Service itself, by providing even greater incentive to use
alternative shippers.

            

               Peace talks between Israel and Syria wound down. Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak and Syrian Foreign Minister Farouk Shara are returning home
without an agreement on Israel's withdrawal from the Golan Heights or Syria's
guarantees of security. Their delegations will continue to negotiate, and the
leaders will likely meet again in late January. The Clinton administration
deemed the talks a success, saying 1) no one expected a breakthrough in the first round; and 2) the
unprecedented discussion of substantive issues 
                  was a breakthrough
               . Skeptics said the progress was
minimal and questioned whether the "well-rehearsed technique of locking Israel
and its adversaries in a negotiating arena, cut off from other distractions,
still works as well as it once did."

            

               Al Gore and Bill Bradley reiterated their support of gays in the
military. Gore said he would insist that potential appointees to the
Joint Chiefs of Staff support allowing gays to serve openly. Bradley said he
would require his Joint Chiefs to carry out such a policy. Gore later asserted
that he meant what Bradley said. Military officers and the Republican
candidates blasted Bradley and Gore for crossing "a boundary between
social politics and military policy." Analysts variously said the hubbub
revealed that 1) gay voters are increasingly important to Democrats; 2) the candidates are
willing to sacrifice popular support in order to court them; and 3) Bradley is
better than Gore at doing so.

            

               The flu is hitting the United States. Flu season arrived
earlier than in previous years, and the number and severity of infections are higher than average.
Some hospitals are delaying elective procedures to deal with the influx of flu
patients. The good news: 1) The most widespread flu strains are covered by the
current vaccine; and 2) new medications are effective if taken immediately
after symptoms appear. The bad news: 1) Fewer than 10 percent of people take
the vaccine; 2) it may be too late to get vaccinated this season; and 3) people
usually react too slowly to flu symptoms for the new medications to be
effective.

            

               Elizabeth Dole endorsed George W. Bush. In her long-expected
announcement , Dole likened Bush to Ronald Reagan and said he would
repair the presidency's tarnished image. Analysts called it a win for 1) Bush,
who gains support from women voters; 2) Dole, who increases her chances of
nabbing the vice presidential nomination; and 3) John McCain, who can again
cast "Bush as the charmed insider and [himself] as the scrappy outsider."

            
               La
Niña is altering winter weather. The effects of the cooler-than-normal
Pacific Ocean currents include 1) balmy temperatures on the East Coast; 2)
tornadoes in Kentucky and Mississippi; and 3) cool weather in California.
Midwesterners ran for cover. Easterners celebrated with "giddiness usually reserved for the first
days of spring." Pessimists called the weather a "spooky" reminder of Mother
Nature's power and predicted further climatic changes from the greenhouse
effect.

            

               Y2K came and went without terrorism or technological snafus.
Airplanes stayed airborne and ATMs dispensed cash as usual. Observers said the
Y2K bug's threat 1) was averted thanks to diligent preparation; 2) had been
exaggerated by greedy programmers so that customers would commission expensive
repairs; and 3) won't pass until companies and governments have used their
"backroom systems," which were not repaired as thoroughly as critical programs. ("" sums up
the millennium coverage from around the globe, and "" examines whether the Y2K
preparations were a waste.)

         
      
   
