
   
   
      
         
            Coming Soon to a Newsstand Near You

            

               "This is not about tighter buns. It's all about ... the incredible
invigoration that women get from achieving certain goals they set out to
achieve." --Editor Dagny Scott on Outside magazine spinoff Women
Outside
            

            
               
                  Inside
Outside
               
            

            From
the premier chronicler of the outdoor adventure, a new monthly packed with
interior design tips for creating rugged, exhilarating spaces out of
standard-sized bedrooms and kitchens. In our debut issue, Sebastian Junger
finds "The Perfect Storm Window." Plus, a Scandinavian furniture report: Jon
Krakauer is "Into Finn Chairs."

            
               
                  Maxim
Silver
               
            

            A new
laddie book for laddies of a certain age. A place where the sports cars are
bigger, the breasts are seasoned, and the beer is wine. The premiere issue
features a hot and heavy photo shoot, as Bo Derek and Farrah Fawcett get wild
in Palm Springs.


            
               
                  Architectural
Digest, Braille Edition
               
            

            Style
is an ineffable creature--what can't be seen can always be felt. Now there's a
magazine dedicated to that spirit and to the spirit of America's many blind
citizens. Our Braille descriptions spare no detail, bringing to life a lavish,
eight-page photo spread on Bunny Williams' adorable Connecticut farmhouse.
Plus, several more Braille descriptions of other lavish photo spreads. Same
glossy paper--but with bumps!

            
               
                  Prospect
Forum
               
            

            The
luminaries behind the American Prospect offer a new journal for the
liberal libidinal imagination. Prospect Forum delivers ribald tales of
seduction and kinky sexxx fantasies--all illustrative of the proper role for a
compassionate, activist government. Jedediah Purdy pens "Log Cabin Lovin'," a
gazonga extravaganza in praise of the things every 46DDD babe has in common.
This guy sincerely digs a great rack!

            
               
                  Cosmopolitan
for Womyn
               
            

            Short
skirts, breast implants, making your man orgasm all night long, and striving
for equal wages: all part of fourth-wave feminism's clarion call. Cosmo
says, "You go, Gyrl!" Watch your favorite theorists tackle everybody's favorite
subject, as Katha Pollitt limns "50 Progressive Ways To Make Him Scream," and
Judith Butler finds "Hot Honeymoon Hump Tips That Catharine MacKinnon Could
Love."

            
               
                  The Tikkun
Guide to Colleges
               
            

            A
message from Michael Lerner: "Most college guides privilege corporate values,
treating education like a commodity. Tikkun has constructed a new set of
pluralistic, democratic criteria--the 'rankings of meaning.' We've determined
which graduates spend a year trekking through Nepal or volunteering for
ineffectual NGOs. We've queried departments to calculate which professors
practice Pilates or ride unicycles." A sneak preview: In the first
Tikkun guide, Reed edges out Bard for the top spot, for what it's worth,
as any hierarchy is by nature counterharmonious.

            
               
                  Lesbian
Bride
               
            

            Does Vera Wang offer a
daily double? She'd better! Lesbian marriages are through the roof, and all
those engaged lesbians need a magazine of their own. Here it is! Complete with
news items (the maid of honor shortage), the latest dos and don'ts (DO quote
Scripture!), and down-to-the-minute lesbian wedding planning guides. A perfect
gift when lesbian wedding bells are ringing for someone you love.

         
      
   
