
   
   
      
         
            Saint Boris

            "How
do you feel in the Holy Land?" Boris Yeltsin was asked. "Holy," he replied.
According to Le
Figaro of Paris, which supplied this anecdote, the former Russian
president, who resigned on New Year's Eve, totally eclipsed all the actual
heads of state from other Christian Orthodox countries--Greece, Romania,
Georgia, Ukraine, etc.--gathered in Bethlehem to celebrate the Orthodox
Christmas. La
Stampa of Turin noted that Yeltsin came to Israel with an entourage of
140 people and several black limousines. The Jerusalem Post noted that, despite reports of Russian
military setbacks in Chechnya, Yeltsin said that Russia "will finish with the
[Chechen] terrorists within a month." Earlier in the day, he had predicted a
Russian victory in two months, but after a festive luncheon held in his honor
by Israeli President Ezer Weizman, he halved the estimate. The Post said
his room in Jerusalem had been stocked with a selection of Israeli vodkas. When
asked to sign a visitor's book, Yeltsin "spent a few long minutes writing
laboriously in the volume," the Post said. "But all he left for
posterity in Jerusalem was his signature and the date." Ha'aretz , meanwhile,
continued its campaign to persuade President Weizman to resign, after reports,
which he has not denied, that he received nearly $500,000 in gifts from a
French millionaire.

            The
Independent
of London reported allegations Thursday that the Russian apartment-block
bombings that ignited the latest war in Chechnya and propelled Vladimir Putin
into the presidency were the work not of Islamic terrorists, as claimed by
Moscow, but of the Russian special services. The paper's Moscow correspondent
claimed to have seen a video in which a Russian officer captured by the
Chechens made the allegations. Identifying himself as Alexei Galitin of the GRU
(Russian military intelligence service), the bearded captive said that the
explosions last September in Moscow and Volgodonsk that killed nearly 300
people had been carried out by the GRU in collaboration with the FSB (the
Russian security service). The Russian ministry of defense dismissed the video
as a Chechen dirty trick. "The Russian armed forces protect the people. It is
impossible that they would attack their own people," a spokesman said.

            From
Providence, R.I., Sergei Khrushchev, son of the late Soviet leader Nikita
Khrushchev, told the Moscow Times that he is "scared" by the transfer of power
from Yeltsin to Putin. Khrushchev, a former Soviet missile engineer who became
an American citizen last July, said he believes Putin launched the war in
Chechnya to mask the fact that he has no economic program for Russia.

            The
Italian papers Friday fronted what they called a snub to Pope John Paul II by
China, when it consecrated five "patriotic" Roman Catholic bishops in Beijing
without his authorization. The South China Morning Post of Hong Kong described the action as a severe blow to efforts to
normalize diplomatic relations between China and the Vatican and said that "the
timing of the ceremony at a Beijing cathedral appeared to be an open challenge
to the Pope, just hours before he was due to ordain 12 new bishops from around
the world at St. Peter's Basilica in Rome." The Vatican's ties with Taiwan are
a major obstacle to the restoration of diplomatic relations, the paper
said.

            The
Daily Telegraph of London led its front page Friday with a report
of an epic escape from Chinese Communist rule in Tibet by the teen-age head of
one of the four great sects of Tibetan Buddhism. It said the 17 th
karmapa, a 14-year-old boy, crossed the Himalayas on foot with four attendants
before stumbling into Dharamsala, the Indian seat in exile of the Dalai Lama,
Wednesday. He had traveled 900 miles from his remote monastery home, 30 miles
northwest of Lhasa, the Tibetan capital. The South China Morning Post
called his flight a "body blow" to Beijing, which
recognized his enthronement as a living Buddha in 1992 and was suspected of
wanting to manipulate him to drive a wedge between his sect and the dominant
Gelugpa sect of the Dalai Lama. According to the Chinese media, the karmapa
left behind a letter saying he was going abroad "to get the musical instruments
of the Buddhist mass and the black hats that have been used by the previous
living Buddhas." Playing down his defection, the New China News Agency said
that he "did not mean to betray the State, the nation, the monastery, or the
leadership."

            For
the second time this week, the Financial Times of London ran an editorial
calling for the U.S. Federal Reserve to be made more accountable to politicians
and the public. Praising Alan Greenspan's record as he embarks on a fourth term
as its chairman, the FT said, however, that "the concentration of so
much policymaking power in the hands of one individual does not constitute
international best practice. Nor does the Fed win first prize for openness and
transparency in central banking." The paper led its front page, as did the
New York Times , with the inquiry into the U.S. auditing profession
following revelations of rampant violations of share ownership regulations by
partners in PricewaterhouseCoopers, the world's biggest accounting firm.

            The British tabloid the
Sun reported
"exclusively" Friday that Catherine Zeta Jones, the Welsh film star, has agreed
to sign a pre-nuptial agreement forgoing any claims on Michael Douglas' fortune
if their marriage fails. Douglas announced Thursday on his Web site that they
plan to marry sometime this year. The Sun said Zeta Jones didn't want a
Hollywood wedding but hoped to marry Douglas in a tiny chapel close to her
childhood home in South Wales.

         
      
   
