
   
   
      
         
            No. 363: "Edgy and Explosive"

            
               The list includes
daggers, pipe bombs, spears, and bows and arrows. List of what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Sunday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Wednesday's Question
(No. 362)--"Judge Mental":
            

            

               
                  On Tuesday in U.S. District Court in Manhattan, Judge Shira
Scheindlin ruled that because there was a "top hat" but no "bad boy," something
must be done. What?
               
            

            "The
government must release Fred Astaire's censored Depression-era
skinflicks."-- Neal Pollack
            

            "A
classified ad must be taken out in the Village Voice ."-- Matt
Sullivan
            

            "A
collection of Peter Arno cartoons must be redrawn so as to better represent the
diversity of American society."-- Evan Cornog
            

            "Make
sure Chippendale's delivers satisfaction."-- Colleen Werthmann
( Charlie Glassenberg had a similar answer, but S&M.)

            
"Apparently, they're making the new Monopoly tokens more
gay-friendly."-- Adam Bonin
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Many News Quiz
participants treated the top hat as a self-consciously anachronistic symbol of
the rich. (The participants, not the hat, are self-conscious; although I'd wear
my hat more often if it were a little more self-aware.) But while the silk hat
no longer invokes uptown swells, no other headgear has replaced it in our
metonymy. Indeed, compared to the prewar wealthy, the contemporary rich have no
apparent class markers. It is not just hats but entire wardrobes that fail to
denote magnificent excess: The modern rich dress like business executives
during the day and like pop stars at night, if indeed anyone is wearing
anything other than sneakers and jeans. The opera house--natural habitat of the
top hat (i.e., the opera hat)--is no longer the preserve of the rich; it is, if
anything, a cathedral of gay culture. Nor have the rich maintained that audible
indicator, that quasi-English, quasi-lockjawed accent that the swells all had
in Depression-era movies. The rich now talk like everyone else, except Donald
Trump, who speaks as if taught by Diane Fosse. Not even the long limousine
inspires a class-conscious hooligan to hurl a paving stone; the wise ragamuffin
knows he's likely not seeing a mogul but some kids from Queens on the way to
their prom. In an ugly tux. And entirely hatless. But he throws it anyway.

            
               Stealing From the
Poor Box Answer
            

            The United Way of America must pay William Aramony,
its imprisoned former president, $4.2 million in deferred compensation.

            Aramony, jailed for
fraud and embezzlement after years of stealing from the charity, had a "top
hat " pension plan, a grotesquely lavish package of benefits far richer than
those offered to ordinary workers. Because his contract did not include a
"bad boy "clause that would have revoked his benefits if he
committed a felony, Judge Scheindlin ruled that the United Way must pay up.

            
               You Are What You
Perq Extra
            

            This actual e-mail was
sent to everyone at Condé Nast. I intended to ask participants to devise
similar but imaginary perqs that perfectly captured the ethos of other media
companies, but then I couldn't shake the image of Ved Mehta in spandex, so I
think I'd better go lie down and put a cold compress on my forehead. Or down my
pants. However, other examples of actual character-revealing corporate perqs
would be most welcome.

            
               To: 4
Times Square 5

            

               Subject: 2000 Glamour Swimsuit Try-On

            Swimsuit season will soon be upon us and once again
Glamour will be hosting its annual Swimsuit Try-On January 11th & 12th.

            Often people don't realize that the suit they've
been wearing doesn't complement their body type. So, for those who wish to
participate, we are offering a free one-on-one consultation to identify the
best suit for your figure.

            To test drive these
swimsuits, please e-mail Michelle DeShields by January 7th and be sure to
include your size and body type.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The Monopoly guy.

         
      
   
