
   
   
      
         
            No. 365: "Urge To Merge"

            
               Fill in the blank
as America Online CEO Steven M. Case evaluates the Time Warner properties he's
just acquired: "Traditional media assets have a vibrant future if they can
________________."
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Monday's Question (No.
364)--"Top 20":
            

            

               
                  In his autobiography, George W. Bush called it "the longest 20
minutes of my tenure as governor." What was he doing?
               
            

            
"Writing his autobiography."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            
"Deciding who to smoke first--the retard or the black guy."-- Alison
Rogers
            

            "The
part where Forrest just keeps on running."-- Gus Robertson
            

            "Those
people at the karaoke bar just wouldn't let him sit down until he did two
encores of Eric Clapton's 'Cocaine.' "-- Francis Heaney
            

            "Oh,
meeting with some visiting dignitary. From some other country. Wore a rag on
his head. Or was it a sombrero? Anyway, it was all, 'my people' this, and 'my
people' that. Took forever."--Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            This was the toe shoe on
which many responses pirouetted: George W. Bush is stupid. No argument here.
But how to explain why being caricatured as The Dumb Guy sank Dan Quayle, yet
G.W. is surprisingly buoyant? One possibility: G.W. is rich, and that seems to
be the Trump card in any conversation, at least with a fashion model. And
aren't we all? Another angle: He's quiet, leaving it to the people of South
Carolina, for example, to decide if there should be a big banner of a lynching
fluttering above their Capitol building. It is hard to punch fog. Possibility
3: He's not a man, he's a logo. We don't expect badinage from the Pillsbury
Doughboy or banter from Betty Crocker. We know them to be the artificial
personification of a particular set of values--cut taxes for the rich, roll
back the civil rights movement, build an anti-missile system. (That doughboy
has always been a sucker for shiny yet unworkable military hardware.)
Possibility the fourth: We the people are like terrified rabbits frozen in the
glare of the onrushing headlights of the great big truck that is G.W. That is,
we're paralyzed by the repeated idea that his election is inevitable. Which
brings us to possibility No. 5: His election is inevitable. The fix is in.
Sufficient money and party regulars and money have been assembled to make the
primaries and indeed the general election even more than usually irrelevant. I
do feel like a rabbit. In toe shoes. And I've never looked lovelier.

            
               Hang 'Em High
Answer
            

            Bush was loafing around with his buddies, waiting
to execute Karla Faye Tucker. He was so distraught, he couldn't eat for days.
No, wait, sorry, there is no record of his missing so much as a meal. And a
year later, he was sufficiently recovered to mock the late Ms. Tucker in
Talk magazine. That's resilience. Or something.

            In his five years as
governor, Bush presided over the executions of 111 men and one woman, more than
any other governor in any state since the Supreme Court revived the death
penalty in 1976, a record his brother Jeb can only envy. No, wait, sorry--he
can also attempt to emulate it by persuading the Florida legislature to
"reform" its death penalty statutes so they can kill folks as fast as Texans
do. A guy needs a dream.

            
               Putting It All
Into Perspective Extra
            

            Q: Just this week, George W. Bush's fellow
presidential candidate Donald Trump referred to "the hardest thing I've ever
done." What was Trump's greatest test?

            A: Breaking up with
Melania Knauss, the 25-year-old Slovenian professional beauty. On the plus
side, no lethal injection was required.

            
               AOL Time Warner
Augmented Quotations
            

            Below, comments on the biggest merger in history.
Each final sentence added by News Quiz.

            

               "When I cast my vote for 100 million shares, I did it with as much
excitement as I felt the first time I made love some 42 years ago. And I was
just as drunk."-- Ted Turner
               

               "There has always existed the import of U.S. culture. It has been the case
for years in film and television shows. They have content that European
consumers are very attuned to. Except for the WB, which just makes us all
sick."-- Therese Torris, director of European Internet commerce, Forrester
Research, Amsterdam
               

               "The first element is connectivity, the second element is content, and the
third element is scale. No, wait, sorry--I was thinking of Trump buying a new
supermodel, but it probably holds for this AOL thing."-- Chris Dixon, Paine
Webber
               

               "We had very few resources so we were forced to figure out how to get other
people to carry our water. Now we can carry it ourselves in a solid gold
bucket, we're so stinking rich!"-- James Kimsey , AOL
co-founder
               

               "I accept that something profound is happening in the Internet space; I
believe that. For one thing, you can download pictures of the first time Ted
Turner made love 42 years ago."-- Gerald M. Levin, Time Warner chairman and
CEO
               

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            George W. is stupid.

         
      
   
