
   
   
      
         
            No. 362: "Judge Mental"

            
               On Tuesday in U.S.
District Court in Manhattan, Judge Shira Scheindlin ruled that because there
was a "top hat" but no "bad boy," something must be done. What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Monday's Question (No.
361)--"Lit Crit":
            

            

               "Oh, I can't stand that. You could get diabetes reading them, couldn't
you?" Who said this about what? (Question courtesy of Adam
Bonin.)
               
            

            "The
pope, on applications for sainthood."-- Stuart Wade
            

            
"Janeane Garofalo, about romantic comedies (the ones without her in
them)."-- Matt Sullivan
            

            
"Norman Mailer, reviewing his granddaughter's 'Best Grandfather Ever'
card."-- Tim Carvell
            

            "Pat
Buchanan, about the collected works of Simon Wiesenthal."-- David
Lott
            

            
"George W. Bush, on ads for the Diabetes Walk."-- Sophie Pollitt-Cohen
( Peter Lerangis had a similar, but Candygrams, answer.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Many participants built
their responses around the scorn of our putatively fiercest critics--Norman
Mailer, Michiko Kakutani. But ours is not an era of harsh condemnation; it is
an age of over-praise. It is rare to find opprobrium heaped on a cherished book
or play or millennial fireworks display. The more common experience is to watch
a much-admired movie with high hopes only to discover that Magnolia is
Short Cuts for dummies, or that Boys Don't Cry has no ideas about
its subject beyond those in any of a score of newspaper articles written about
the case. Indeed, if a movie is in color, in focus, and indoors, it was likely
to have been praised by the New York Times ' departing Janet Maslin. In
part, this is a form of kindness: It is terribly difficult to, say, write a
novel. Indeed, the entire enterprise of serious literary fiction is so marginal
that one hates to discourage any sincere effort. But this pseudogenerosity is
also a kind of cowardice: A critic may be censured for slamming a worthy movie;
she may have to defend her judgment. But she won't have to defend her praise;
the pleasure she took in that film is its own justification. How perceptive is
she to have seen its merit. How dull I am to have missed it. I can only hope
that these low critical standards extend to my own work. Should I ever do
any.

            
               Three-Panel,
Two-Dimensional Answer
            

            Charles Schulz said it about Family
Circus .

            Schulz detests phony-baloney religiosity, writes
David Templeton in the Sonoma County Independent :

            

               He
cringed when I mentioned Family Circus , the strip by Bill Keane that is
strewn with cutesy references to Jesus (who wants to protect children on school
buses, but can't because of laws about separation of church and state!) and
those sickly-sweet images of invisible deceased grandparents looming
protectively over the kids. ... Kindly, he added, "Bill's a nice fellow,
though. A very decent person."

            

            Schulz was less amiable in his assessment of
another strip:

            

               "I
despise those shallow religious comics," he said. "Dennis the
Menace , for instance, is the most shallow. When they show him
praying --I just can't stand that sort of thing, talking to God about
some cutesy thing that he'd done during the day. I don't think Hank Ketcham
[ Dennis ' creator] has any deep knowledge of things like that."

            

            Schulz's final daily
Peanuts strip ran Monday. Read the entire interview here.

            
               I Do Not Choose To
Extra
            

            A survey of nearly 400
potential congressional candidates listed factors that might deter them from
running. Which of these made the list?

            1. Having to raise large
sums of money to finance campaign.

            2. Separation from family
and friends.

            3. Heat, humidity in D.C.
make me "sweat like a chunk of rancid pork."

            4. Fear of glimpsing Strom
Thurmond and his ass in Capitol showers.

            5. Loss of personal and
family privacy.

            6. Sexual exploitation of
staff now considered "old-fashioned."

            7. Can make more money
smuggling cigarettes into Canada.

            8. Takes too much time
away from stalking Cameron Diaz.

            9. Being forced to wear
"gender-appropriate" underpants.

            10. Rivals might spread
embarrassing rumors about my so-called "killin' spree" with Joyce Carol
Oates.

            11. Having to endure
negative campaigning.

            12.
Having to endure Peter Jennings.

            
               Answers
            

            1, 2, 5, and 11 made the
cut.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Backbiting novelists.

         
      
   
