
   
   
      
         
            Jan. 10, 2000

            We
landed at Charles de Gaulle Airport a couple of days before Christmas. One dog,
one infant, nine books on how to get along with the French, and 11 pieces of
luggage, three of which had already gone missing. We drove for 90 minutes in
heavy traffic, the baby howling, the wife attempting to hide her exposed
nursing bosom from the driver, and the dog scratching her bottom across the
floor of the minivan. At length we arrived at our new home on the Left Bank,
which we'd never actually seen, except in photographs. It was a small cluster
of room-size houses in a tiny garden tucked away at the back of a courtyard of
an old apartment building. We piled out of the car and rushed to the front
door, a small teeming peristaltic bundle of needs and hopes and anticipations.
The door failed to open. The key mailed to us by the landlord did not fit the
lock.

            For
the next 30 minutes, we sat in the cold, dark Paris courtyard and waited,
mainly because we couldn't think what else to do. We were being punished for
our sins; we had wanted to dance, now we were paying the fiddler. It had been
fun, when people asked us where we lived, to say, "Well, that's hard to say,
since at the end of the year we're moving to Paris." They were all envious, or
pretended to be, which was just as gratifying. For the past six months we had
been playing our new role: People Who Are About To Live in Paris . Now
here we were, in Paris itself. We knew no one. We spoke so little French that
it was better to claim we spoke none. We had no purpose. And that, I should
have reminded myself, was the point.

            About
18 months ago, my wife, Tabitha, and I were on an airplane when I began to
complain about adulthood. One of the many things I dislike about being a
grown-up is the compulsion to have a purpose in life. People are forever asking
why you are doing whatever you happen to be doing and before long you succumb
to the need to supply an answer. The least naturally ambitious people can have
ambition thrust upon them in this way. Once you've established yourself as a
more or less properly functioning adult, it is nearly impossible to just go
somewhere and screw off.

            Five
months pregnant with our first child, Tabitha pointed out that the feeling of
being weighed down by adulthood wasn't likely to improve anytime soon.
Parenthood loomed. There was a time when I suspected this wouldn't have much
effect on me. I figured that the chemical rush that attended new motherhood
might get me off the hook--that Tabitha would happily embrace all the new
unpleasant chores and I'd stop in from time to time to offer advice. She'd do
the play by play; I'd do the color commentary. Five months into the pregnancy
that illusion had been pretty well shattered by the anecdotal evidence. One
friend with a truly amazing gift for getting out of things he did not want to
do wrote to describe his own experience of fatherhood. "Remember that life you
thought you had?" he wrote. "Guess what. It's not yours anymore."

            At any
rate, since a door in our lives seemed to be closing, we went looking for a
window. As we sat on the plane, one thing led to another, and before long we
had spread out on our laps the map of the world at the back of the in-flight
magazine. We had no idea where we would wind up; we just knew we were going
someplace foreign. My vague desire to live in Africa got swapped, unfairly I
felt, for my wife's even vaguer one to live in Asia. Whole continents vanished
from our future in an instant. After 40 minutes we had shrunk the world to two
cities: Barcelona and Paris. A few days later we were at a dinner party. The
man across the table, an old friend, mentioned that his sister had this old,
charming place in Paris occupied by tenants she couldn't stand. There it was:
Our bluff was being called. We agreed to rent the place, sight unseen.

            Now we
are in Paris, in the cold and the dark, homeless and friendless and
tongue-tied. Unbelievably, I hear myself asking: Why on earth did we come? Just
then an elderly woman hobbles into the cobblestone courtyard and makes for the
door nearest ours. Our new French neighbor! A distant memory lifts my
spirits.

            
Fifteen years ago, when I arrived in London, to live outside the United States
for the first time in my life, I was fitting the key into my new front door
when an elderly woman called to me from the neighboring garden. "My name is
Amanda Martin," she said in an ancient voice, "and I'll be your friend if
you'll have me." Just like that, Amanda Martin had taken me into her life; I
had a friend. She'd turned 100 that year. The queen had sent her a telegram to
congratulate her. When you know someone with that kind of standing in society,
you somehow feel you belong, too. Assimilation is just another word for
acquiring a bit of the local status.

            I eye
our new old French neighbor with longing. And even though I know that the
moment history looks as if it is repeating itself is exactly the moment it is
not, I feel a little leap in my spirits. I walk over, open a door for her, and
say bonjour . She doesn't even look up, just keeps tap-tapping on by with
her head down and right into her apartment. As she closes her door, the odor of
stove gas wafts into the courtyard. A voice behind me says, "She so old she
forgets to turn off her gas burners when she goes out." I turn around. There
stands a young man wearing a black stocking cap, a navy pea coat, and a grim
expression. He looks like something dreamed up by Dostoevski, yet he sounds
perfectly American. He motions to the door closing behind the elderly French
woman: "One day she'll come back here, light a match, and this whole building
will be a crater."

            He
puts his hand in the pocket of his pea coat. "I have your key," he says.

         
      
   
