
   
   
      
         
            The Russian Military

            In 1942, the Soviet army
saved the world from Nazism by holding Stalingrad while the Germans pounded it
to rubble. Today, that army's delinquent stepchild, the Russian army, is
fighting a city battle of its own. The Russians are pounding their own city,
Grozny, to rubble and are murdering Russian civilians in the process. Their
conquest of Grozny, which should conclude by the end of January, will complete
a methodical campaign of brutality. Since October, more than 100,000 Russian
troops have inched through Chechnya, leveling villages with low-precision
artillery and dumb bombs. This "pacification" has killed many Chechen
guerrillas and civilians and has turned most of the survivors into refugees.
"In its indiscriminate use of firepower against civilian targets, it is as bad
as anything since World War II," says Lani Kass, a professor of military
strategy at the National War College.

            No matter. The war against the Chechens, who are
despised as Muslim terrorists in slavic Russia, is wildly popular, proof that
Russian military power is returning. Chechnya is payback for Afghanistan, for
the first humiliating Chechen war of 1994-96, and for NATO's bombing of Serbia.
The army's triumph will ensure Vladimir Putin's election as president in March.
It has already restored the military's prestige and budget.

            But the notion that
Chechnya's rape represents a return of Russian military glory is preposterous.
Russia is turtling through Chechnya partly because it doesn't have enough
competent troops to fight more quickly. Russia can rely on only about 20,000
skilled soldiers in an army of 700,000. Analysts believe that Russia could
muster "one or two" decent army divisions out of a paper strength of 70
divisions.

            Russia's military is a lumpen -army, the dregs of
dregs. Conscription remains mandatory, but more than 80 percent of young
Russians avoid it. The enlisted ranks fill with the stupid, the sick, and the
criminal. These soldiers are little better than cannon fodder. Russia makes no
serious effort to train them, because it doesn't have qualified noncommissioned
officers, and its officers can't control the conscripts. Hazing is unbelievably
brutal: More than 1,000 soldiers are murdered every year by their
brothers-in-arms, and more than 500 kill themselves because of the horrific
conditions.

            Pay is laughably small
and usually in arrears. Russia has shelved its longstanding plan to switch to a
volunteer army because it can't pay enough to recruit soldiers. According to
the CIA, Russia spends only one-sixth as much on the military as the Soviet
Union did during the '80s. Clothing and rations are scarce: Navy servicemen
have starved to death. Alcoholism is rampant, as soldiers drink everything they
can get their hands on. (In the '80s, the Mig-25 was nicknamed the "Flying
Restaurant" because crews would drain and drink its alcohol-based hydraulic
fluid.) Hepatitis flourishes because troops don't know how to dig latrines. The
army is "a kingdom of darkness," says U.S. Army War College professor Stephen
Blank.

            Russia can't afford to equip its so-called soldiers. Only a
tiny fraction of Russian materiel is equal to modern Western equipment. Russia
lacks up-to-date communications, computers, and precision munitions. Much
hardware remains from the Soviet buildup, but most of it doesn't work. Soldiers
cannibalize spare parts to keep a few vehicles working. Pilots lack the fuel
and equipment to fly training missions. Russian arms plants still produce
excellent weapons for export (anti-ship missiles, for example), but the Russian
military can't afford to buy any of them.

            Russian conventional
forces have grown so flaccid that Russia has altered its nuclear policy. It
used to abjure first-use of nukes. Now first-use is an essential part of
military doctrine, because Russia knows it can't defend itself conventionally.
(The only good news about the military is that it has regained secure control
over its active nuclear weapons--though not over discarded nuclear material.)
Even the Pentagon, which has long featherbedded its budget by inflating the
Moscow threat, has largely stopped pretending that Russia can endanger U.S.
military interests. The Russian army is no longer the great Russian bear but a
"rather vicious ferret," says Mark Galeotti, a Russian military analyst at
Britain's Keele University.

            This military has decayed immeasurably since the glory days
of the Mighty Red Army. The Russian army broke Napoleon. Soviet troops, in
Winston Churchill's words, "tore the guts" out of the Nazis. U.S. officials
certainly exaggerated the competence of the Soviet military during the Cold
War, but it was still a great force: 6 million men under arms, a 3-to-1 tank
advantage, a 2-to-1 aircraft advantage. The Red Army was the only institution
that matched the Communist Party in prestige. The best and brightest joined the
officer corps. There were 15 applicants for every slot at some military
schools. The state pampered officers with special stores, chauffeured cars, and
dachas .

            The Czarist and Soviet
armies were not artful, but they were often effective: weak on offense, strong
on defense. They performed poorly in far-flung adventures (the Russo-Japanese
War, for example) but savaged invaders when the Motherland was under attack.
They mastered brute-force warfare, throwing huge numbers of troops, tanks, and
shells at the enemy. The U.S.S.R. won World War II by losing 8 million
soldiers.

            The Afghanistan invasion vanquished the myth of Soviet
military invincibility and aroused the popular mistrust of the army that
persists today. The breakup of the U.S.S.R. shattered the army into 15 pieces,
as Russia lost nukes, ships, bases, and many of its best officers to newly
independent republics. In the post-Soviet chaos, youngsters found more ways to
duck conscription, and the quality of the average soldier plummeted. Boris
Yeltsin, who didn't trust the army, further damaged it by elevating the
interior ministry--with its hundreds of thousands of soldiers--as a separate,
independent foundation of military power. The first Chechen war dealt the final
disgrace. The hardened rebels slaughtered Russia's ill-prepared men, ambushing
them by the hundreds in Grozny. Russian mothers traveled to Chechnya, pulled
their sons off the front lines, and brought them home.

            Russia's generals and
politicians essentially ginned up the new Chechen war as a confidence builder.
Russia has reason to invade Chechnya: The rebellious province has been
agitating to form a separate, antagonistic Muslim state. But Russia was itching
for an excuse to attack. When Chechens raided the Russian territory of
Dagestan, and bombs wrecked Moscow apartment buildings, the army seized the
opportunity. (Many suspect that the bombings were staged to marshal support for
war.) Because it is a win-at-all-costs war to restore military prestige,
Russian generals have shown utter indifference to civilian casualties and a
willingness to lie to retain popular support. (Russia, for example,
consistently undercounts its war dead.) The West tolerates Russia's atrocities
because it has no choice and because it is better for Russia to take out its
aggression on its own citizens than to go adventuring abroad.

            The Sherman's march through Chechnya is not just boosting
Russian military pride. It is also increasing the military's political clout.
The Russian military has long been politically quiescent because a tradition of
professionalism pervades the officer corps. But the general staff insisted that
Putin grant them total freedom to prosecute the war. Putin, who wants a victory
to boost his own prospects, granted it, essentially castrating the civilian
defense ministry and subordinating the interior ministry. Western analysts now
fear that the generals are using Chechnya to reassert control over national
security and foreign policy. Their militarism and nationalism bode ill for
future relations between Russia and the West. The general staff, for instance,
has essentially forbidden Russia from talking to NATO.

            As for the victory in Chechnya, it's a mirage. For
Russia's generals and politicians, victory simply means flying the Russian flag
in downtown Grozny. But Chechens are fighting a guerrilla war. Russian soldiers
will shell Grozny to its foundations and fly their flags, but they won't engage
in street-to-street fighting: It's too bloody. So the rebels can melt away and
join their comrades in Chechnya's southern mountains. Chechnya has been
fighting Moscow for 217 years and hasn't surrendered yet. It won't stop now.
When the Russian army continues south, it will find itself in another mountain
war--a mini-Afghanistan, this time against a tougher and better-organized
enemy. The Chechens will gradually bleed the Russian garrison--one car bomb,
one mine, one mortar at a time--until the Russians withdraw in frustration. But
for now, Putin and his generals will get their victory --a Potemkin triumph for
a Potemkin army.

         
      
   
