
   
   
      
         
            Grand Finale

            Mike Leigh's

                  Topsy-Turvy
                broadly recounts the creation of Gilbert
and Sullivan's comic opera The Mikado at London's Savoy Theatre in 1885.
Perhaps "broadly" is putting too fine a point on it. The first hour, in which
Arthur Sullivan (Allan Corduner) attempts to sever his ties with W.S. Gilbert
(Jim Broadbent) and the owner of the Savoy, Richard D'Oyly Carte (Ron Cook), is
a mess: The order of scenes feels arbitrary, and characters pop up and vanish
with bewildering frequency. You might be tempted to vanish, too. (Friends of
mine did.) Be patient. Leigh's movies, born of actors' improvisations and
loosely shaped, always take a while to find their rhythm--and, frequently,
their point. This one finds everything. By the end of its two hours and 40
minutes, Topsy-Turvy has evolved into something extraordinary: a
monument to process--to the minutiae of making art. And to something more: the
fundamental sadness of people who labor to make beautiful things--who soar--and
then come down to a not-so-beautiful earth.

            It would be charitable
to attribute the shapelessness of the early scenes to the characters' own lack
of focus, but it would also be inane. As Elvis Mitchell pointed out in

                  Slate
               's "," Leigh's opening shot features an usher who moves
along a row of the Savoy Theatre lifting and peering under every seat. That's
every seat. You can almost hear Leigh cackling: "How's this for a fast
start?--you bourgeois slaves to narrative." Inevitably, something does happen:
Princess Ida , one of Gilbert and Sullivan's duds, has its premiere, and
Gilbert fumes over a review that calls him the monarch of "topsy-turvydom"--of
formulaic plots involving magical elixirs and coins. A heat wave has hit
London, theater attendance is down, and Sullivan is itching to go off and
become the English Mendelssohn--to write operas and symphonies instead of comic
"soufflés." Leigh evidently loves the bloodless formality of the scenes between
Gilbert and Sullivan, men of opposite tastes and temperaments who only overlap
in their work. He must also love that those scenes are narrative dead ends:
"How's this for conflict?--you bourgeois slaves to melodrama."

            The wake-up call comes an hour into the movie. Gilbert
attends a popular exposition of Japanese culture at Knightsbridge and watches
Kabuki routines and women in kimonos pouring green tea ("spinach water"). When
a Japanese sword he has purchased falls off his wall, he hefts it; mimes a
fight while issuing strangled, samurailike cries; then has a brainstorm. We
hear the horns of The Mikado overture, then Leigh cuts to the fully
realized opening scene on stage at the Savoy: "We are gentlemen of Japan …"
Just that chorus is enough to reanimate the audience--to make people sit up and
grin. And Leigh's technique of leaping back and forth between the finished
Mikado and painstaking scenes of rehearsal has magic in it: You're
watching straw, then gold, then straw, then gold. And you see the
connection.

            A central section of the
drama is missing. What exactly fired Sullivan up about doing The Mikado ?
What was different about this collaboration? No answer.
Topsy-Turvy turns into something other than the Gilbert and Sullivan
story: a portrait of life in the theater. A group portrait. D'Oyly Carte
becomes a quiet third protagonist, a humane businessman. He softly negotiates a
salary increase with the company's lead comic (Martin Savage), a neurasthenic
junkie. He gently seeks the assurance of a tipsy ingénue (the tremulous Shirley
Henderson) that her "little weakness" will not re-emerge. In the dressing room,
performers gossip and complain, drink and shoot themselves up with drugs.
Leigh's ensemble casts strive to be "microcosms" of society, so issues of class
are ever present. You see it in Sullivan's banter with the working-class
musicians in the pit and in Gilbert's with the uppity actors (the movie's
posturing middle class), whom he drills on pronunciation and poise. The chorus
is presented as some sort of collective folk conscience when it lobbies Gilbert
to restore the rashly cut solo ("A more humane Mikado never did in Japan
exist") of the sad, fat fellow (Timothy Spall) in the title role.

            Who would have predicted that Leigh would make Gilbert and
Sullivan into Mike Leigh characters? Gilbert could be a stand-in for Leigh
himself--a haughty, ill-humored man with an obsession for tiny details and a
glowering dedication to process. Gilbert haggles with his actors over small
things that shouldn't resonate but which somehow add up. Leigh's small things
add up, too. The joke of The Mikado is that its Japanese lords are
thinly disguised English bureaucrats; the joke of Topsy-Turvy is that
the opera's English performers seem culturally incapable of playing Japanese.
They rehearse in long coats and top hats, and some of the women (and men!)
express horror at appearing on stage without corsets. Behind the satire,
however, is a reverence for Gilbert and Sullivan: The tempos are slower than
modern audiences are used to, and the staging has been stripped of high-camp
accretions. I saw a D'Oyly Carte production of The Mikado in the late
'70s: It was played fast and to the groundlings and made me never want to see a
G&S opera again. Now I can't wait for the next production.

            Only a lunatic would
call Topsy-Turvy , with its lame first hour and host of loose ends, a
masterpiece, but by the finale I was ready to have myself committed. The finale
itself must have done it. Leigh's endings are often wondrous, and this one is
up there with the rooftop scene in High Hopes (1988). The Mikado
is a triumph--it would be the Savoy's biggest hit--but there's no
transformation in the lives of its makers. Gilbert can't bring himself to reach
out to his brokenhearted wife (Lesley Manville), and Sullivan has a melancholy
inkling that he has reached his artistic peak. The ingénue, Leonora, is
drinking again, toasting herself in the mirror and praising the loveliness of
Nature--a Nature that will, of course, destroy her. The final image is of Art:
Leonora on stage singing Yum-Yum's sublime "The sun whose rays are all ablaze
…" As Leigh's camera pulls back over the orchestra and the audience, this movie
feels like one of the saddest and loveliest tributes to the lives of artists
ever made. Topsy-Turvy leaves you upside down and breathless.

            Like Mike Leigh, Errol Morris rarely begins a project with
a clear idea of what he wants it to be. Sometimes he doesn't end a project with
a clear idea of what he wants it to be, either. His newest documentary,

                  Mr. Death : The Rise and Fall of Fred D. Leuchter,
Jr.
               , kicks up all sorts of messy emotions that his coolly ironic
technique can't begin to handle.

            The director is in his
weird element only in the first half-hour, in which he sits his subject down
and gets out of his way. Leuchter, who looks a little like the archetypal movie
dweeb Charles Martin Smith and has a heavy exurbs-of-Boston accent, explains
how he became involved in redesigning problematic electric chairs. "Excess
current cooks the tissue," he says, barely suppressing a smirk at his own
expertise. "There've been occasions where a great amount of current has been
applied, and the meat actually will come off the executee's bone like the meat
coming off a cooked chicken." Leuchter set about making capital punishment more
"humane." He moves on to talking about his redesigns for lethal-injection
systems, gas chambers, and even a gallows, while underneath, Caleb Sampson
provides macabre funhouse music and wistful calliope waltzes. Morris' distance
from his subject implies condescension--Leuchter looks like something in a jar.
But that's OK, because the man is an interesting specimen. Is he a monster or a
humanist committed to eliminating the "deplawrable tawchaw" of capital
punishment? It could go either way.

            M r. Death gets into deeper waters when it recounts
the trial of Ernst Zundel in Canada for proclaiming that the Holocaust never
happened. Zundel hired Leuchter to go to Auschwitz and examine the "alleged"
gas chambers: Footage (taken by Zundel's cameraman) shows the little man
chiseling at walls, vandalizing what even he admits are international shrines.
Leuchter smuggled specimens of rock and concrete back to the United States,
where chemical analysis revealed no cyanide gas. Furthermore, Leuchter can't
figure out how the gas would even have been administered without killing the
Nazis themselves--proof, he argues, that mass extermination at Auschwitz never
took place. The subsequent "Leuchter Report" became the backbone of Zundel's
defense (he lost anyway) and of the burgeoning revisionist movement led by
David Irving. But if Leuchter became a hero to neo-Nazis, he also became a
target of Jewish groups and a pariah even in the execution business. When
Morris hooks up with him for the last time, he's in hiding from creditors.

            Is Leuchter a raving
anti-Semite or a pathetic pawn who thrived on having--for the first time in his
life--a bit of celebrity? The film suggests the latter. It certainly produces
no evidence of malice. Plenty of monstrous insensitivity and hubris, though.
Morris uses the Dutch historian Robert Jan van Pelt as a counternarrator: He
calls Leuchter "a fffool " who didn't have a clue what to look for in a
place that had changed enormously in 50 years. "If he had spent time in the
archives," says van Pelt, "he would have found evidence about ventilation
systems, ways to introduce Zyclon B into these buildings--but of course I don't
think he knows German so it wouldn't have helped very much." The most
devastating rebuttal is from the chemist in charge of the Auschwitz analysis,
who explains that the gas wouldn't have penetrated more than 10 microns into
the wall (a human hair is 100 microns thick), so by crushing the samples
(standard procedure), he had effectively diluted the cyanide 100,000 times.
Against all this, Morris shows footage of Leuchter chiseling at Auschwitz and
even adds some of his own, along with slow-motion shots of hammers bashing
rocks, walls, floors, etc. It's an obscenity.

            After my rage at Leuchter had subsided, I began to get
angry at Morris for aestheticizing that violation--turning it into an ironic
art object. The director's beautiful detachment suggests a kind of cowardice.
His technique is based on standing back--maintaining a fixed distance--while
his subjects hang themselves, and for a while that works stunningly. But at a
certain point, isn't it only human to want to engage this man? You don't need
to play Mike Wallace and demolish Leuchter on camera. You could just ask him
what he makes of, say, van Pelt's assertion that the answer to the riddle of
the gas chambers was all over the archives, or what he thought of the chemist's
declaration that the test performed for cyanide was the wrong test. Morris can
be heard asking one question only: "Have you ever thought you might be wrong or
that you made a mistake?"--sufficiently broad that Leuchter can casually affirm
his own inanity.

            My concern here isn't so much for Leuchter or even
the Holocaust revisionists, who'll just think he was sandbagged. The problem is
that when a documentary filmmaker seems too scared or cool or arty to violate
his own immaculate aesthetic, he ends up weakening his case. He also provides
no emotional release, which isn't a small matter when the subject is Holocaust
denial. Morris was close enough to Leuchter to have gotten something more, to
have gone a little deeper in search of a poison that does penetrate
surfaces.

         
      
   
