
   
   
      
         
            No. 364: "Top 20"

            

               In his autobiography, George W. Bush called it "the longest 20 minutes
of my tenure as governor." What was he doing?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com.

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 363)--"Edgy and Explosive":
            

            

               The list includes daggers, pipe bombs, spears, and bows and arrows.
List of what?
            

            
"Florida's replacements for the electric chair."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            
"Things, other than 'love' that could've busted 'Hurricane' Carter out of
jail."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            
"Reasons why Juan Miguel González, Elián's father, refused an offer to visit
the United States and its vibrant anti-Cuban community."-- Ross Hight
            

            
"Things the Daryl Hannah character invented in the movie Clan of the Cave
Bear ."-- Laura Miller
            

            "
'Welcome to the Neighborhood' gifts delivered to the Clintons' Chappaqua home
this week."-- Ron Lieber
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Wrap-Up
            

            Surely a single John Rocker response is sufficient
impetus to point out that Major League Baseball--the organization, not the
actual players--is as odious and craven a pack of millionaires never sued by
Patricia Duff. What happened to Rocker's right to free (albeit despicable)
speech? While the First Amendment limits government action, not that of an
employer, doesn't MLB--a group that constantly claims to symbolize
America--have sufficient respect for that doctrine not to threaten to fire a
guy for expressing his (albeit despicable) views? No, as it happens, it
doesn't.

            And then, lacking the
courage to fire the guy directly, MLB sends Rocker to a psychiatrist. Didn't we
used to deride the Soviet Union for putting those who expressed unpopular
(albeit despicable) views in mental institutions? Rocker isn't insane; he's a
contemptible (albeit despicable) racist. He should not be fired; he should be
despised. Boo him from the stands, shun him in the locker room, denounce him in
the press, but don't "treat" him and don't take away his job. Of course, Rocker
will not be banned from baseball; he's too skillful a pitcher. But MLB will
keep him in the game without any moral courage--some public display of
contrition, lessons learned, amends made, Prozac taken--but without the booing
and the shunning and the denouncing. Hardly worth it.

            
               The Benign Influence of
God's Answer
            

            These were the most common sorts of weapons seized
by the Indonesian army during the current outbreak of Muslim-Christian
violence.

            Soldiers confiscated
thousands of weapons in Ambon last Monday following clashes that left 18 people
dead. On Tuesday, soldiers opened fire on battling mobs, killing 17. More than
550 were slain throughout the week. Indonesia is 90 percent Muslim, but the
Christian and Muslim communities in this region, the Mollucas, are about the
same size, making for a more evenly matched sort of strife.

            
               Corporate Ethos
Extra
            

            This follow-up was
e-mailed to all Condé Nast employees:

            Michelle Deshields@CNP

            12/27/99 04:35 PM

            To: 4 Times Square 1, 4
Times Square 2, 4 Times Square 3, 4 Times Square 4, 4Times Square 5

            
Subject: 2000 Glamour Swimsuit Try-On

            For all of those who
have replied and plan on participating, if you were to fall into one of the
following categories which would it be?

            Small Bust

            Large Bust

            Long Torso

            Waist Cincher

            Pear Shaped

            Tummy Control

            Large sized

            (Rainy-Day Fun: Match
your favorite New Yorker writer with his/her body type and look of
despair.-- Ed.)
            

            
               Cultural Details
Extra
            

            " 'I'd like to see him do a video in Harlem dancing
with youngsters in caps and a grunge look,' says Shashi Gopal, managing
director of Magnasound India Ltd." (Thanks to Tim Carvell.)
            

            This is the culturally
savvy marketing plan Gopal described to the Wall Street Journal , by
which Indipop, a hybrid of Indian music, rock, rap, and reggae, will conquer
America, through the person of Daler Mehndi, a 31-year-old Sikh who used to
drive a taxi in San Francisco. Mehndi's first album, the 1995 Bolo Ta Ra
Ra , sold 2 million copies, the biggest Indipop success ever. Today the
Punjab, tomorrow Harlem, the day after tomorrow--I dunno, maybe the parts of
the Bronx with the caps and the grunge and the dancing and the
youngsters.-- Ed.
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            School violence, Republican debate violence.

         
      
   
