
   
   
      
         
            Of Muck and Morons

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I need to ask you a
question about my sister. I don't want to unload on her if her behavior is
normal, but I have my doubts. Whenever we're in a public restroom, she will
wash her hands (afterward) and then take a paper towel or toilet paper to turn
off the faucets, then use it to open the door to leave. She does this so she
doesn't have to touch anything with her bare hands. How crazy is that?
            

            

               --Sally
            

            Dear Sal,

            You have perhaps come to
the wrong person. It has occurred to Prudie that maybe she's the secret love
child of Howard Hughes because of her own slight phobia about germs.
Actually, your sister's routine with the paper towels is merely one of taking
precautions. What is the point, after all, of washing your hands only to then
touch a surface that a non-hand-washer has touched? Prudie is so concerned for
health, in fact, that she travels with a physician.

            
--Prudie, antiseptically

            

               
                  Prudie,
               
            

            
               I am the mother of
two beautiful children (4 and 6) who were both adopted from Russia. Both were
amputees and therefore wear artificial limbs. I can't count the number of times
people have rushed up to me and said, "Poor children, what happened?" Or worse,
"What kind of drugs did you take when you were pregnant?" (This, of course, is
always in front of the kids.) My standard response is to stare calmly and ask,
"Why do you need to know?" I am writing for two reasons: The first is to remind
people that this is not a Jerry Springer society, and everyone does not have
the right to ask about a stranger's disability. The second is to ask if you
have any great retorts for these morons?
            

            

               --J.D.
            

            Dear J.,

            Prudie thinks you're
handling things perfectly. If you want to enlarge your repertoire, however, you
might try saying, "I don't believe I know you," and continue on. They will get
the underlying implicit message. The important thing for you to know is that
these foolish people who think everything is their business have their own
congenital defect: no brains.

            
--Prudie, righteously

            

               
                  Prudence,
               
            

            
               "" wrote asking
about his abnormal fixation on sex. Had he written you about an abnormal
drinking habit, you might have sent him to Alcoholics Anonymous. Do you not
know that there is Sexaholics Anonymous, which is a well-respected organization
dealing with fixations on sex? Send him to www.sa.org.
            

            

               --NO NAME PLEASE
            

            Dear NO,

            Prudie knew of this
organization, but it didn't come to mind; perhaps an indicator that sex
addiction is less established in our society than alcoholism. Thank you for
being a Prudie.

            
--Prudie, appreciatively

            

               
                  Pru,
               
            

            
               I am having what
you'd call a philosophical argument with a friend. My position is that without
rules and civilized, ordered behavior, life would be nasty, brutish, and short
(to borrow from Hobbes). My friend believes that anarchy might be preferable
and more "honest," with no imposed ordinances. His point is that if rules are
dictated rather than instinctive, they are false--therefore not genuine and not
worth having. What do you think about this? Maybe a word from you could settle
the matter.
            

            

               --Philosophically Interested
            

            Dear Phil,

            Prudie votes with you
... and she's relieved, by the way, that yours was a philosophical question,
because upon reading the words "nasty, brutish, and short," she thought your
letter was about her starter husband. In any case, offer your friend a very
ordinary, everyday example: Imagine the flow of traffic without lights and
signs. Of course Prudie does not think traffic lights are what Hobbes had in
mind (since they didn't exist then), but she has a hunch he would have
appreciated their contribution to civilization. If you need more ammunition,
just point out what happened to Czolgosv, the chap who assassinated McKinley.
In addition to having a name like that, he was electrocuted.

            --Prudie, procedurally

         
      
   
