
   
   
      
         
            Shostakovich Joins the Mickey Mouse Club

            
               Movies

            

            

               
                  Fantasia/2000
                (Buena Vista Pictures). Sixty years
after the release of Walt Disney's film of cartoons set to classical music,
this updated IMAX version introduces new sequences as well as a remastered
version of the original's famous "Sorcerer's Apprentice" segment. The critics
are nearly unanimous: The sequel falls short but is "splendid entertainment"
nonetheless (Roger Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ). The presence of "The
Sorcerer's Apprentice" only underlines how much better the original was. The
highlight of the new material is a rendering of Hans Christian Andersen's story
"The Steadfast Tin Soldier" to Dmitri Shostakovich's Piano Concerto No.
2 . A few sniff at the new production: "The difference between
Fantasia and Fantasia/2000 is the difference between a dialogue
with Jack Paar and a brisk 'interview' with David Letterman, between reading a
book and answering questions posed by a CD-ROM" (Joseph Horowitz, the New
York Times ). (Click here to visit the official site.)

            

               
                  Hurricane
                (Universal Pictures). Denzel Washington
delivers a knockout performance as Rubin "Hurricane" Carter, a boxer who spent
20 years in jail for a crime he did not commit. But the rest of the film pales
in comparison: It's "fairly standard middle-of-the-road fare, simplistic,
conventional, and, when the camera is not focused on Washington, lacking in
things to hold our attention" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). On
balance, the film works: It may be "as blatantly manipulative as a pep rally,"
but "Mr. Washington leans into an otherwise schlocky movie and slams it out of
the ballpark" (Stephen Holden, the New York Times ). (Click here to
find out more about Carter's story.)

            

               
                  Galaxy Quest
                (DreamWorks Distribution). This gentle
Star Trek spoof strikes a chord; it's "a fast, loose, and very funny
parody that pulls off the not-so-simple feat of tweaking Trekkies and honoring
them" (Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly ). The film's premise: A
group of middle-aged actors from a long-canceled space show get "spacejacked by
naive aliens in need of protection" who mistook the program for a historical
document (Jay Carr, the Boston Globe ). The result is campy, goofy, and
"funny without being flip" (Rita Kempley, the Washington Post ). (Click
here to read an interview with Sigourney Weaver about her
character in the movie.)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Tha Doggfather: The Times, Trials, and Hardcore Truths of Snoop
Dogg
               , by Snoop Dogg, with Davin Seay (William Morrow). Good
reviews, for the most part, for the autobiography of one of hip-hop's most
successful artists: "An amusing, contemplative memoir" that paints "a
surprisingly humanistic portrait" of the crack dealer turned platinum-selling
musician ( Kirkus Reviews ). The tales of his misspent youth and rise to
fame are "eloquently told" (Michael Harris, the Los Angeles Times ). One
reviewer splits from the pack and delivers a withering pan: "[T]he ability to
sell a lot of records has almost nothing to do with insight or maturity. …
[I]ts author is seemingly incapable of self-examination. … [H]e retreats behind
religious platitudes, empty sloganeering and half-truths." His coup de
grâce : "Artists asserted that rap was the voice of urban youth and that it
should not be silenced. Tha Doggfather offers 250 pages of evidence to
the contrary" (Ta-Nehisi Coates, the Washington Post Book World ).
(This site includes
news, audio clips, and a discography for Snoop Dogg.)

            

               
                  The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror,
Repression
               , by Stéphane Courtois, Nicolas Werth, Jean-Louis
Panné, Andrzej Paczkowski, Karel Bartosek, and Jean-Louis Margolin; translated
by Jonathan Murphy and Mark Kramer (Harvard University Press). Critics stand in
awe of this thousand-page enumeration and exploration of the crimes committed
by Communist regimes around the globe: "an extraordinary and almost unspeakably
chilling book … enormously impressive and utterly convincing" (Michael
Scammell, the New Republic ). Published in France two years ago, it
immediately created a stir, drawing criticism from the left and becoming an
unexpected best seller. The book is not easy to read: "To the extent that the
book has a literary style, it is that of the recording angel. … It is a
criminal indictment, and it rightly reads like one" (Alan Ryan, the New York
Times Book Review ). No one questions that communism was immensely
destructive (the book estimates that between 85 million and 100 million people
were killed by Communist regimes). What causes more of a stir is the book's
assertion that "given the nature and the magnitude of the crimes committed in
its name, communism was fully the equal of Nazism as one of the supreme evils
of our century" and the question it raises of whether "the history of the
twentieth century hasn't given us objective and final proof … that human nature
itself is fallen and twisted at its core" (Scammell). (Click here to
read about the book's reception when it was published in France.)

         
      
   
