
   
   
      
         
            Cuba Getting Junior

            

               The Immigration and Naturalization Service ruled that Elián González
should be reunited with his father in Cuba. González's Cuban-American
relatives had argued that he should remain in the United States after he was
rescued from a shipwreck in which his mother died. Protesters blocked
traffic in Miami, and González's family promised to appeal the ruling,
charging that the INS was giving into blackmail by Castro. INS supporters
countered that 1) the ruling was based solely on legal concerns ; and 2) the only blackmail was
Cuban-Americans' threats of political retribution against the Clinton
administration. The INS's spin: He's being reunited with his family.
Cuban-Americans' spin: He's being denied a better life in the United
States.

            

               Al Gore and Bill Bradley debated in New Hampshire. In their
third meeting in a month, they clashed over health care and gun control and
agreed on support for gays in the military . But most pundits said personality and leadership --not policy issues--were
the true points of contention: Gore deemed Bradley "too intellectually removed"
to deal with real-world problems; Bradley charged that Gore was not removed
enough from the "Washington bunker" to generate creative solutions. The rosy
Democratic spin: The frequent debates help both candidates practice "crisper critiques of one
another and more polished defenses of their positions." The gloomy Democratic
spin: The constant sparring over character issues makes them both less likable.
(
                  Slate
               's Jacob Weisberg offers his assessment of the
debate in "," and William Saletan offers another take in ".")

            

               U.S. stock markets plunged. Tuesday's declines were the most
severe in more than a year: The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.2 percent,
and the tech-heavy Nasdaq dropped 5.5 percent. Asian and European markets
followed suit. The apparent cause: Investors waited for the new tax year to
reap profits from recent stock gains. The counterintuitive causes: Wall Street
darling Alan Greenspan was nominated for a fourth term as Federal Reserve
chairman, and Y2K economic disruptions never surfaced--both of which increase
the likelihood that the Fed will raise interest rates. Wall Street shrugged off
the decline as a "necessary and expected" correction. Skeptics termed it an
indication that investors are "even more confused than usual about what stocks
are really worth these days." (James Surowiecki explains why an interest-rate
hike would bad news for stocks in this "."

            

               Y2K came and went without terrorism or technological snafus.
Airplanes stayed airborne and ATMs dispensed cash as usual. Observers said the
Y2K bug's threat 1) was averted thanks to diligent preparation; 2) had been
exaggerated by greedy programmers so that customers would commission expensive
repairs; and 3) won't pass until companies and governments have used their
"backroom systems," which were not repaired as thoroughly as critical programs. ("" sums up
the millennium coverage from around the globe.)

            

               Israel and Syria began peace talks. Syria wants to regain
control of the Golan Heights, which Israel captured in 1967. Israel wants
security guarantees and the restoration of normal diplomatic relations. The
initial discussions were deemed "rocky," with each side claiming that the other
was not following the agenda. Israel and Syria called the impasse a "crisis"
that threatened to derail the entire peace process. Skeptics charged it was
manufactured to convince Israeli and Syrian citizens that
their representatives bargained hard. The Clinton administration downplayed the
dispute, saying 1) no one expected a breakthrough in the talks' first round;
and 2) the difficulties show that "the two sides [are] getting into the knotty
issues." Separately, Israel and Palestine agreed to a plan for Israeli troop withdrawls from parts of the West Bank.

            

               Florida State won college football's national title. With a
46-29 Sugar Bowl victory over No. 2 Virginia Tech, the undefeated Seminoles
became the first team to hold a No.1 Associate Press ranking throughout the
entire season. Sportswriters were happy for 1) Florida State receiver
Peter Warrick , the undisputed star of the game, who
"redeemed" himself after last year's arrest and suspension for theft; 2)
Florida State coach Bobby Bowden, who got his first undefeated season and
second national championship in 40 years of coaching; and 3) the Virginia Tech players , who "put season-long criticism
of their toughness to rest" with a valiant comeback attempt.

            

               Elizabeth Dole endorsed George W. Bush. In her long-expected
announcement , Dole likened Bush to Ronald Reagan and said he would
repair the presidency's tarnished image. Analysts called it a win for 1) Bush,
who gains support from women voters; 2) Dole, who increases her chances of
nabbing the vice presidential nomination; and 3) John McCain, who can again
cast "Bush as the charmed insider and [himself] as the scrappy outsider."

            

               Boris Yeltsin resigned. Prime Minister Vladimir Putin became Russia's
acting president and is expected to win the presidency by a wide margin in March
elections. In his surprise resignation speech, Yeltsin admitted his failings.
Pundits agreed he had botched much of his job but also noted his shrewdness in
1) capturing the world's attention on New Year's Eve; 2) cutting his losses
before his communism-busting legacy was further tainted by a money-laundering
scandal or the war in Chechnya; and 3) designating his likely successor, who
has immunized Yeltsin from prosecution.

            
               La
Niña is altering winter weather. The effects of the cooler-than-normal
Pacific Ocean currents include 1) balmy temperatures on the East Coast; 2)
tornadoes in Kentucky and Mississippi; and 3) cool weather in California.
Midwesterners ran for cover. Easterners celebrated with "giddiness usually reserved for the first
days of spring." Pessimists called the weather a "spooky "
reminder of Mother Nature's power and predicted further climatic changes from
the greenhouse effect.

            
               The
Indian hijacking crisis was resolved. The still-unidentified Islamic
terrorists released their 155 hostages after India agreed to free three of
their jailed comrades. The hijackers were given 10 hours to leave Afghanistan
and have presumably vanished into Pakistan. India accused Pakistan of backing
the hijacking and giving shelter to the terrorists. Pakistan accused India of
playing politics with the hijacking. The rest of the world again worried about
a nuclear confrontation between the two countries. The 
                  Washington Post
                denounced Afghanistan and Pakistan
for "trying to have it both ways on terrorism. They play host to terrorist
groups, yet wax indignant when terrorists hijack an aircraft."
(
                  Slate
               's "" rounds up overseas reactions to the
hijacking, and "" outlines the history of the Kashmir conflict.)

         
      
   
