
   
   
      
         
            Gore Takes Round 1

            Al
Gore and Bill Bradley faced off Wednesday night in the first debate of 2000.
Here's a play-by-play analysis of the debate's key themes and exchanges.

            

               1. Ball control. In football, your opponent can't score unless
he has the ball. Therefore, the longer you keep possession of the ball, the
more likely you are to win the game. Gore is killing Bradley in this department
by staying on the attack. Let's look at three plays from the debate.

            

               
                  a)
                Moderator Peter Jennings asks each man whether his
opponent has "ever taken a vote of yours or a quote out of context." Bradley
says yes. Gore dances around the question ("I haven't complained about any. … I
won't accuse him of that"), then finally says no. Bradley gives the honest
answer, but Gore gives the smart one. Normally, when you're invited to accuse
your opponent of something, the smart course is to accept the offer. But look
more closely: Jennings is inviting you to accuse your opponent of accusing
you of something. You're the one ultimately being accused. Suppose
you say you're angry that your opponent has accused you of kicking your dog.
Some viewers, after turning off their televisions, will think your opponent is
a vicious liar. But most will wonder whether you kick your dog.

            By
saying no, Gore avoids this trap. Bradley, however, walks into it. He faults
Gore for suggesting "that I was going to hurt African-Americans [and] Latinos
with [my] health care program" and "that I am going to destroy Medicaid without
saying what it is going to be replaced with." Bradley explains why Gore's
charge is unfair, but Gore gets to repeat and elaborate on the accusation:
"Medicaid is eliminated, and they're given instead a little $150 a month
voucher. … Not a single [health plan] can be purchased for anything close to
$150 a month." Bradley explains that his $150 is a "weighted average," not a
cap. But Gore tells a joke making fun of "weighted average" as a nerdy weasel
word. Gore is lying about the "cap" and the "voucher." But politically, he wins
the round, because both men end up spending several minutes discussing the
principal charge against Bradley without discussing any of the charges against
Gore.

            

               
                  b)
                Another panelist asks each candidate whether "you
have ever had to make a difficult decision that you knew would hurt you
politically." Bradley picks a vote on which he differed from "most of my
Democratic colleagues." Gore, however, picks two votes on which he differed
specifically from Bradley: President Reagan's budget cuts ("I wish that Bill
had stood up to that one") and the authorization to use force in the Persian
Gulf (on which Bradley voted no). Bradley answers the question at face value.
Gore uses it to land two good punches.

            

               
                  c)
                Each candidate is invited to ask a question of the
other. Bradley asks Gore why he isn't proposing universal health-insurance
coverage. Gore neutralizes the question and turns it on Bradley. "Both of us
have proposed the same goal: high-quality health care for all," says Gore. "I
devoted $374 billion to the solvency of Medicare. You have not devoted one
penny to ensuring the solvency of Medicare. And my question to you is: Why
not?" Bradley complains that it's not Gore's time to ask questions. But
Jennings replies that Gore can ask the question, and Bradley never gets off a
solid answer to it.

            

               2. Gore's credibility problem. Gore makes lots of allegations
about Bradley's past votes and future plans. To sustain those allegations, Gore
needs to husband his credibility. The best way to do this is to admit the truth
when it's disadvantageous to him. He begins by making such a concession about
the 1996 Democratic fund-raising scandal: "It was wrong. And I think that the
phone calls that I made were a mistake." But as the debate goes on, Gore
repeatedly strains credulity. He asks New Hampshire voters "to give me a
come-from-behind upset victory here," and then, after Bradley points out the
absurdity of Gore's plea--"Al, your underdog pitch brings tears to my
eyes"--Gore repeats his claim that it would be an "upset victory."

            Yes,
if Gore wins New Hampshire, he could argue that it's an upset. And, yes, he
needs the media to buy into that assumption. But saying it so baldly, and then
repeating it, is counterproductive. Gore does this all the time--"risky tax
scheme," "no controlling legal authority," etc.--and seems incapable of
controlling the habit. The problem is not that he comes off as a talking-points
robot--which he does--but that he insults everyone's intelligence. He looks
like a suck-up student who thinks he can get a good grade by parroting the
professor's buzzwords. When he calls Republican tax cuts a "tax scheme" and
calls his hypothetical New Hampshire victory an "upset," you get the feeling
not only that he's twisting the truth, but also that he thinks you're too
stupid to realize it. And the deeper that feeling sinks in, the less attention
voters will pay to anything Gore says.

            

               3. Bradley's arrogance problem. If Gore's flaw is dishonesty,
Bradley's flaw is moral and intellectual vanity. Bradley began the campaign
determined to convey his virtue and wisdom, and he succeeded. Now his problem
is that he can't turn it off. The more he equates his candidacy with goodness
and enlightenment, and the more condescendingly he dismisses Gore ("Let me
explain to you, Al, how the private sector works. … I can say that in much
shorter words"), the more voters wonder whether Bradley knows his limits and is
capable of learning from his mistakes.

            Gore,
recognizing this Achilles' heel, goes after it with a crowbar. Reciting
Bradley's votes for the Reagan budget cuts, against welfare reform, and against
the use force in the Persian Gulf, Gore asks, "Would you vote differently on
any of those three votes if you had it to do over again? Were they mistakes?"
Bradley replies that they weren't, and Gore pounces on this answer: "I think
all three were mistakes, but I'm not going to debate the details. … My point is
beyond that, Bill. In all those words about the three different votes, one word
I didn't hear was the word 'mistake.' And here's why I think that is important.
I think our country deserves a president who, when he makes a mistake, is
willing to acknowledge it and willing to learn from it, because I believe that
the presidency is not an academic exercise. It's not an extended seminar on
theory. … If I make a mistake, I'll do my best to own up to it and then to
learn from it, and learn from you [the audience] about how we can deal with the
reality as we find it."

            Eventually, Bradley
remembers something he admits was a mistake--"I voted against Alan Greenspan
the first time" --and everybody laughs. But Gore has found a big chink in
Bradley's armor. He has found three votes on which Bradley took unpopular
positions, and he has found that when pressed about those votes, Bradley
exposes a character trait that puts off many voters. If history is any guide,
Gore will exploit that dilemma for the rest of the campaign. But if Gore
doesn't learn to stop talking like a used car salesman, nobody's going to be
listening.

         
      
   
