
   
   
      
         
            A Banner Year

            One of
the events we political Web-watchers were waiting for has arrived: Serious
presidential candidates have begun advertising on the Internet. George W.
Bush's campaign is now running several different interactive banner ads
targeted to Web users in early primary states, including one for voters in New
Hampshire that allows viewers to calculate how much they would save under
Bush's tax plan. (Click here to see the tax-savings banner.) John McCain ran
banners soliciting volunteers to circulate ballot petitions for him in Virginia
last month. (To see these ads, click here.) Today
McCain announced another Internet ad campaign touting his support for a
permanent moratorium on Internet taxation.

             

            The
Bradley and Gore campaigns are likely to follow suit with banner ads of their
own. But before these ads become as commonplace as 30-second TV spots, it's
worth considering a few of the issues they raise.

            

               Privacy: Both Bush's and McCain's banner ads were developed by
Aristotle
Publishing , a political firm that maintains up-to-date voter lists and
sells them to campaigns for use in various kinds of voter targeting, from
direct mail to door-to-door canvassing. Aristotle has recently developed an
Internet application. It cross-references its voter information with data
collected by portals, Web sites, and Internet service providers. By sifting
such information together, the company believes it can surgically target
clusters of voters of special interest to candidates--such as, say, married
women in their 30s who are registered as Republicans in New Hampshire. Both
Bush and McCain have been using Aristotle's method of targeting banners for
their pilot Internet ads.

            But
this sort of targeting raises an ethical question: Should a person, by virtue
of registering to use a certain Web site, become the involuntary recipient of
political propaganda? Jay McAniff of Aristotle says his firm relies on what is
known as "permission-based marketing"--that is, it only uses information
offered voluntarily, not the kind gained passively on the basis of "cookies"
(click  for Michael Kinsley's explanation of cookies). And the McCain and Bush
campaigns both say they won't resell or otherwise use the information collected
from people who click on their ads.

             

            But
even if all are scrupulous about what they do with user data, there's something
Big Brother-ish about being bombarded with ads based on information you've
given for another purpose. Imagine if your television was able to gather
details about your viewing habits and your personal life and then transmit that
data to companies that wanted to use it to sell you things. You might find it
pretty creepy. With e-mail spam or old-fashioned direct mail, at least the
recipient knows that someone is marketing something to him with the help of
data that someone else sold. With banner ads, targeting can be invisible.

            

               Disclosure and Fairness: Bush spokesman Scott McClellan told
me that the campaign's banner ads have run on some 1,500 Web sites, including
Yahoo, Excite, and CNN.com. But McClellan declined to give any more specific
information about the ad buy for "strategic reasons." McCain's campaign
couldn't provide the names of any of the Web sites where it was advertising.
Aristotle Publishing isn't even willing to divulge the name of the company that
actually places its banner ads on Web sites.

            If we
were talking about conventional TV or radio advertising, all such information
would be a matter of public record. According to federal law, stations have to
maintain open books showing who spent how much on political advertising. This
assures compliance with Federal Communications Commission rules designed to
secure equal access to public airwaves. Mandatory disclosure means that WMUR,
the leading TV station in New Hampshire, can't give Steve Forbes a volume
discount without offering the same deal to Forbes' rivals. But these FCC rules
haven't yet been applied to the Internet, and it's not clear they can be.
Portals and ISPs don't use the public airwaves, and they don't need
broadcasting licenses.

            
There's a widespread and largely sensible aversion to the mechanistic
application of existing campaign-finance regulations to the rapidly evolving
medium of the Internet. But the TV-Internet disclosure disparity is hard to
justify in principle and points to potential abuses down the road. As it is
now, Web companies not only have the ability to provide diabolically precise
demographic targeting to political campaigns, they can also make such offers
exclusively. Yahoo could theoretically offer its entire inventory of New
Hampshire Republicans through Feb. 1 to the Forbes campaign at a premium price.
This would be unfair to the other candidates--and if done on television or
radio, entirely illegal. But a campaign lawyer I spoke to for this story said
he couldn't see what would prevent it on the Internet, so long as Yahoo charged
at least the going rate for the ads.

            

               Effectiveness: Of course, we'll only need to worry about
issues of fairness and privacy if banner ads are seen by political campaigns as
working. The Bush people say the results of their effort aren't in yet, but
they're optimistic and expect to stick with Internet advertising. The McCain
campaign has more specific evidence of success. According to spokesman Dan
Schnur, 192 people clicked McCain's Virginia banner ads, some 2 percent of
those who viewed the banners. This isn't a bad response rate, though it means
the overall campaign was tiny--just 10,000 ad impressions. But of the 192
people who clicked, Schnur says nearly half followed through by circulating
petitions for McCain. An ad buy that probably cost less than $1,000 prompting
nearly 100 people to volunteer in person--that's true interactivity.

         
      
   
