
   
   
      
         
            No. 240: &quot;So Stop and Ask Directions&quot;

            
               Fill in the blank
on this thoroughly satisfying explanation from Defense Secretary William Cohen:
"None of those maps indicated that it was the Chinese Embassy that was being
targeted. It was not a human error or mechanical error--it was a(n) __________
error."
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 239)--"Terror Train":
            

            

               
                  "We're not being motivated by what's to come, but a fear of
being left out as the train is pulling away from the station, with some exotic
station in mind." Who said this about what?
               
            

            "At
which point I always say, 'Mom, if Elderhostel is not something that you
continue to enjoy, you do not need to be a participant.' It sounds a lot less
formal in Yiddish."-- Andrew Silow-Carroll
            

            "The
eponymous protagonist says this of his Weltschmerz in the
revised-for-the-'90s edition of The Little Engine That
Could ."-- David Finkle
            

            "Hey,
you know, at the end of Entrapment , a train pulls out of a railway
station, and Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta-Jones are on it, and it's in
Malaysia. So I'm going to go with: Sean Connery and Catherine Zeta-Jones, about
their train. In Malaysia."-- Tim Carvell
            

            
"Elizabeth Dole, at a kaffeeklatsch in Iowa. Then she lifted her dress over her
head and sang 'They Call Me the Pineapple Princess.' "--John Leary
            

            "I
have no joke for this, but may I be the first to weigh in with 'Dana Plato's
Retreat?' "--Bill Scheft ( M. Pesca had a similar answer.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Not motivated by what's
to come but by the fear of being left out. Puts me in mind of Boswell's
description of what in the 18 th century was called a hypochodriack,
what we'd call a depressive:

            
               His opinion of himself is low and
desponding. His temporary dejection makes his faculties seem quite feeble. He
imagines that everybody thinks meanly of him. ... He regrets his having ever
attempted distinction and excellence in any way, because the effect of his
former exertions now serves only to make his insignificance more vexing to him.
... There is a cloud as far as he can perceive, and he supposes it will be
charged with thicker vapour the longer it continues. He is distracted between
indolence and shame. Every kind of labour is irksome to him. Yet he has not
resolution to cease from his accustomed tasks. ... He acts therefore like a
slave, not animated by inclination but goaded by fear.
            

            
               
                  The
Hypochondriack , December 1780
            

            
               ElectroLiteracy
Answer
            

            Laurence Kirshbaum, chief executive of Time Warner
trade publishing, said it about electronic books. He and his colleagues have to
deal with them, but they don't yet know what to think about them. (To find out
what Jacob Weisberg thinks about them, click to go to his piece in

                  Slate
               .)

            One conflict: What
royalty are writers entitled to? Because electronic publishing eliminates
paper, printing, warehousing, and delivery, costs are lower, say writers, so
publishers should take a smaller share of a book's price, and the writer's
share should increase. Not so, say publishers, who insist they should continue
to take a whopping chunk of the money for no particular reason. Oh, yes:
Because they can.

            
               Match Wits With a
Times Editor Extra
            

            Below, pertinent details
of stories in today's New York Times , each followed by a pair of
headlines. Can you determine which is the real headline and which is the
amazing simulacrum?

            1. "She grabbed her dog,
Lucky, and his insulin. Then she and the others simply walked to a nearby
apartment complex for foreigners."

            A. Let's Throw Stones at Lucky, the Diabetic
Dog

            B. Envoy Says Stoning
Will End, Ties Won't

            2. "On Saturday night, at
an event called Columbine Surprise Party, players from the Denver Broncos and
the Colorado Rockies mingled with students and family. On Sunday, Shania Twain
visited. Later, for the second time, votive candles sparked a fire which
consumed a canopy tent, bouquets, scraps of poetry and stuffed bears."

            A. God Proves Sadistic, but With Sense of Humor

            B. Teacher of Colorado
Gunmen Alerted Parents

            3. " 'More than anything
else, Silicon Valley is on the 50-yard-line of the political spectrum,' Mr.
Randlett of Technet said."

            A. Techno Guy as Articulate as a Doctor

            B. Candidates Falling
Into the Finally Open Arms of High Technology

            4. " 'I tired of getting
urine tossed on my back,' said Mr. Fallopa."

            A. Disney To Retire Dull Rides at Sao Paulo Theme
Park

            B. Making Brazilian
Soccer a Bigger Deal

            

               Answers
            

            

               1-B, 2-B, 3-B, 4-B.
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Bad service on trains.

         
      
   
