
   
   
      
         
             Serbs, Kosovars, Israelis, Palestinians

            Ask two Israelis a question
on any subject, and you'll hear six opinions (nine during election season) and
probably start a brawl. And even on Kosovo, a topic you wouldn't think Israelis
could disagree about, they are managing to squabble, revealing a peculiar
ambivalence about this black-and-white issue.

            American Jews have
uniformly greeted the Serbian brutality in Kosovo with outrage. They identified
with the displaced Kosovars, comparing them to the Jews of the Holocaust. They
commended NATO for bombing quickly rather than ignoring the brutality as Allied
leaders did during the Holocaust. One Jewish organization ran newspaper ads
depicting trainloads of bedraggled Kosovars, an echo of Nazi concentration camp
trains. American Jews poured cash into half a dozen relief funds established by
national Jewish groups, and at least two Jewish agencies sent relief teams to
the Balkans.

            Israeli Jews' reaction to Kosovo has been equally intense
but much more complicated. Like American Jews, most Israeli Jews view Kosovo as
a reminder of the Holocaust and feel a special obligation to aid Kosovars.
Israel has done more for Kosovar relief than any other non-NATO country (as
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu never hesitates to note). Israel sent a field
hospital and 80 doctors to Macedonia and welcomed 112 Kosovar refugees,
offering them permanent residence. Israelis also mobbed a huge Kosovo benefit
concert.

            But beneath Israelis'
sympathy for Kosovars lurk more perplexing reactions that illuminate the
anxieties of a state where a beleaguered ethnic minority seeks independence,
the byzantine nature of Israeli electoral politics, and the enduring weight of
the Holocaust in Israel--but not the weight you'd expect.

            Israeli doubts about Kosovo begin with Israeli doubts about
Palestinians. Palestinian newspapers and leaders have compared the ethnic
cleansing of Kosovo to the Palestinian "nakba " of 1948, when thousands
of Palestinians fled Israel and ended up in permanent refugee camps. (This
analogy has been endorsed by the likes of the Economist , which called
the flight of the Palestinians an unpunished ethnic cleansing.) Palestinians
also claim that the West's intervention to preserve Kosovar autonomy confirms
their right to independence. "We will ask the international community to
intervene to end the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land and to expel the
settlers from it," said Ahmed Abdel Rahman, the Palestinian Authority's Cabinet
secretary, citing the Kosovo bombing as exemplar.

            Most Israelis are merely
irritated with this Palestinian claim, viewing it as an unseemly attempt to
exploit the Kosovo crisis and as a faulty analogy. (An Arab invasion of Israel
in 1948 prompted the Palestinian flight, not an Israeli invasion of Arab
territory.) But Israel's far right has taken the Palestinian claim seriously.
The far right views Kosovo not as tragedy but as threat, "a dangerous
precedent." Some right-wing Knesset members have called for an end to the
airstrikes: If the West intervenes on behalf of an independence-seeking ethnic
minority in Kosovo, one asked, "couldn't it happen here, too, in a different
variation today or tomorrow?"

            The Serbs only exacerbate Palestinian righteousness and
Israeli right-wing paranoia by calling Kosovo Serbia's "Jerusalem." If Kosovo
is Jerusalem, that means that either a) Israel's hold on Jerusalem is
unjustified, as Palestinians argue; or b) Serbia's hold on Kosovo is justified,
as a few fringe-right Israelis are now hinting.

            Kosovo ambivalence has
also become a pawn in next month's Israeli election. The Israeli left has
blasted Netanyahu for his languorous response to the humanitarian crisis: He
took several days to decide that Israel would help refugees and several more
days to announce support for bombing.

            But Netanyahu and his allies, particularly hawkish Foreign
Minister Ariel Sharon, are using Kosovo more cleverly. Early in the bombing,
Sharon warned that an independent Kosovo could become the heart of a "Greater
Albania" that would be a staging ground for Muslim terrorism. Netanyahu quickly
disavowed Sharon's remarks, but Sharon had scored points with the far right,
where anti-Muslim sentiment abounds. Israeli media have been full of
unsubstantiated reports that the Kosovo Liberation Army is funded by Iran,
Afghanistan, Osama Bin Laden, and Hezbollah. Calls to Israel's far-right talk
radio station have demanded that Israel send its Muslim Kosovar refugees to
Iran or Saudi Arabia.

            Sharon has especially
exploited Kosovo to court Israel's 1 million new Russian immigrants, whose
votes are expected to decide the election's outcome. Sharon has visited Russia
three times in the past few months, including once in the midst of the Kosovo
bombing. Sharon eagerly sucked up to Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov,
implicitly condemning the NATO bombing during his most recent trip. Russian
Israelis are not especially pro-Serb, but they definitely want close ties with
Russia. So, Sharon is using Kosovo to butter up Russia. That, in turn, could
swing Russian voters.

            The final and most beguiling aspect of Israel's Kosovo
ambivalence is Holocaust remembrance but of a different sort. There is
lingering Israeli sympathy for Serbia rooted in Serbs' supposedly admirable
behavior during the Holocaust. The premise: 1) Serbs welcomed Jews into their
anti-Nazi guerilla groups; 2) individual Serbs bravely sheltered Jews from the
Nazis; 3) Serbs fought the Nazis harder than anyone; and 4) both Serbs and Jews
were victimized by brutal Croats and Bosnian Muslims.

            During the past decade,
Serbia has taken advantage of this version of its World War II history to make
common cause with Israel. In the late '80s, with the blessing of Slobodan
Milosevic, a group of Serbs organized the Serbian Jewish Friendship Society,
which has propagandized endlessly about Serbia's Holocaust decency. (Serbia
also tried to ally with Israel over their shared enmity with Muslims.) Serb and
Israeli cities made themselves sister cities. When Iraq was shooting missiles
into Israel during the Gulf War, a delegation of Serbs traveled to Tel Aviv to
show solidarity. There were rumors that Israel even supplied Serbia with
arms.

            This mythology of Serbian goodness paid off during Serbia's
Croatia and Bosnia wars. Israelis sided with the Serbs against the Croats, who
had been truly monstrous toward Jews during the war. And even when it became
clear that Serbs were slaughtering Bosnian Muslims, Israel was largely silent,
and even occasionally sympathetic, about Serb misbehavior.

            As it happens, Serbia's treatment of the Jews was
not as the Serbs have portrayed it. It's true that Tito's Communist Partisans
welcomed Jews into their guerilla units, and it's true that the Serbs were not
as terrible as the Croats and Bosnians. But, 1) the Chetniks, who are the
direct ancestors of today's Serbian nationalists, were consistently and
violently anti-Semitic. (The Chetniks also supported the Nazis for much of the
war, and even turned over Jews to them.) 2) The Serbian collaborationist regime
cooperated eagerly with the Nazis. 3) Serbia's Jews fared much worse than most
European Jews. Nazis exterminated more than 90 percent of Serbia's 15,000 Jews,
the women and children at a camp right outside Belgrade. Serbs did not resist
or protest this slaughter.

            Even so, vestigial sympathy for Serbs remains today
in Israel (and, in a much more limited way, in the United States). Israel has
seen a few small pro-Serb demonstrations during the Kosovo crisis, and Israeli
media frequently refer to the Serbs' decency during the Holocaust. Such
expressions of solidarity, along with right-wing distaste for the NATO bombing,
don't begin to outweigh Israeli sympathy for Kosovars and outrage at Serbs. But
God knows they're more than Milosevic and his people deserve.

         
      
   
