
   
   
      
         
             Death Stamps

            Not content, apparently, with Oregon's pioneering
status as the first state to legalize physician-assisted suicide, the Oregon
state government has decided to be the first in the country to offer
financially assisted suicide as well. Last year the state agency in charge of
determining Medicaid assistance for the poor included assisted suicide among
the approved uses of the state's health-care dollars.

            So, how much does it cost to kill yourself, anyway?
Under the Oregon Death With Dignity Act you must consult with a physician and a
psychiatric counselor before imbibing the $45 cup of hemlock (actually
Phenobarbital D). It turns out to be quite hard to get a price quote for this
service over the phone. Medical academics I talked to said you would probably
need at least five professional visits at $60 each, for a total bill of $350 or
more. But the two individuals for whom claims have been made so far cost the
state a total of only $99, which suggests that not a lot of handholding was
going on.

            Since death itself costs
$45, the two-for-$99 figure suggests that the poor of Oregon who claim this
benefit are getting only $4.50 worth of dignity. On the other hand, how many
people are there in Oregon who would like to die but have to go on living
because they can't scrape together $49.50?

            But here's the killer. Before expanding the definition of
"health services" to include intentional death by overdose, Oregon was known
for another kind of health-policy sang-froid. A few years ago the state
expanded medical benefits to cover more people but fewer ailments. A Health
Services Commission was set up to consider all illnesses and the treatments
available and to prioritize them on a cost-benefit basis. This year's list
identifies 743 different conditions and treatments. There was only enough money
to treat the top 574 conditions. Venereal warts just made the cut. Uninsured
sufferers from condition No. 575--anal fissures--are out of luck. Ditto Nos.
576 through 743.

            After hearings last year,
the commission decided that, since Oregon voters had approved of
physician-assisted suicide in not one but two referendums, it was appropriate
to include this service under the category of "comfort care" for the terminally
ill. "Comfort care" entered the chart at No. 263 with a bullet, just below
acute ischemic heart disease and delirium tremens, nosing ahead of various
mental disorders, Tourette's syndrome, and rectal polyps.

            The Oregon legislature is reconsidering all this. People
afflicted with illnesses that have not made the funding cut (particularly a
group with the Monty Pythonesque name of Not Dead Yet) are irate that a
lifesaving operation in the territory around No. 570 can depend on the annual
appropriating whims of the legislature, while a free barbiturate consolation
prize is safely ensconced at No. 263. Defenders of the commission counter that
it would be unconscionable to deny poor people a right as fundamental as
death.

            It sounds like classic
big-spending liberalism. But is that what is really at work here? Aiding and
abetting a suicide--even at $350 per--is cheaper than just about any other
serious medical treatment. Anyone dying in a modern hospital will quickly cost
more by staying alive than by exercising the right to die, dignity and all. The
commission declined to estimate the cost impact of fatal "comfort care." It
could easily be positive, a money saver. If I were an Oregon Health Plan member
who suffered from anal fissures (No. 575), my first reaction would be
bitterness that by putting assisted suicide at No. 263, the commission had
bumped me and my suffering off the list. But my second reaction would be that
the more people who take advantage of No. 263, the more likely it is that there
will be money enough for No. 575 after all.

            Given the harrumphing by legislators that Oregon voters
never intended to fund suicide when they approved the 1994 referendum, the era
of government-subsidized death will probably soon be over. A federal bill
sponsored by Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, would forbid the prescription of drugs
for assisted suicide, presumably taking doctors out of the death-assistance
business for all patients.

            This is too bad. Oregon led the country in facing
the health-care rationing issue head-on. And now, perhaps unintentionally, it
has taken the next logical step: bribing people to go early and save the system
a bit of money. To the agonizing issue of health-care costs for the terminally
ill, Oregon has stumbled onto a kind of answer, heartless though it may be.
Those who attack it will have to come up with something better.

         
      
   
