
   
   
      
         
            No. 224: &quot;Spring Break&quot;

            

               Back in Washington after the two-week congressional recess, Trent Lott
answered a reporter this way: "I would describe it one word--quizzical. Like,
why? And what?" How did Sen. Lott spend his vacation?
            

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 223)--"You Who?":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          
"I'm on top, I'm 35 years old, I don't want to get hurt anymore, and I've got
nothing left to prove." Who said this about
what?
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "Drew
Barrymore's liver."-- Adam Bonin
            

            
"Katharine Hepburn, turning down the lead in yet another remake of
Gloria ."-- Cliff Schoenberg
            

            "George
Stephanopoulos, on his publisher's insistence that for the next book he use a
ghostwriter and, for the media tour, lose the rug."-- Barbara Lippert
( Marilyn L , Bill Burton , and Mary Anne Townsend had
similar answers.)

            "Every
single one of the guys who broke up with me last year."-- Alison
Rogers
            

            "Julie
Krone, telling Bill Clinton why she's going to kill him."-- Richard A
DeCamp
            

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Let's take a rare glimpse
inside the News Quiz Tower (it's not yet killed as many people as that new
Condé Nast Building, but next week we start heaving copies of Vogue off
the observation deck) and learn what it takes to get a hefty 400-pound hog from
the farm to your table to the president's desk where it is signed into law. By
which I mean: How did we select today's question? By rejecting these three:

            1. "Fill in the blank in
this remark by Susan Webber Wright, the first judge to hold a U.S. president in
contempt of court. 'I don't think a judge should be __________. My focus is to
be fair to all sides.' "

            A good way to get at an
important story, but nixed on formal grounds. We ran a fill-in-the-blank just
last week. We try for variety in form as well as in subject matter.

            2. "Texas Rep. Charlie
Gonzalez said, 'You've seen someone else handle it up close and personal, so
you know you can survive it. It's not so foreign to you.' Handle what?"

            A nice ambiguous remark
that participants would do well with, but it refers to too trivial a story,
children of former officials--Bush/Dodd/Kennedy--going into the family
business.

            3. "The Leonardo DiCaprio
film The Basketball Diaries , the computer game Mortal Combat, and the
Internet sex site Meow Media--what's the connection?"

            A pleasing juxtaposition
of elements, and it's sure fun to type out "sex site Meow Media," but rejected
for both form and content. We've used this structure recently, and it's a
lightweight story.

            I began hoping to do
something with either the war or the president's contempt citation, and eager
to use "I give the headline; you give the lead," or "I give the answer; you
give the question," or "I give the caption; you describe the photo," three nice
forms we've not used lately. But nothing turned up that worked that way. I'm
relieved that Trent Lott's back in town.

            
               100-Pound
Answer
            

            Jockey Julie Krone said it about retiring.

            In her 18-year career,
Krone won 3,541 races, earned over $80 million in prize money, and broke more
than a dozen bones. In 1993, she won the Belmont Stakes and rode five winners
in one day at Saratoga. Last November, at the Meadowlands, she broke her right
knee riding a winner; she won two more races before going to the hospital.

            
               Have Another
Candied Egret, Your Grace, It's for Charity Extra
            

            The "Benefits" column in
Sunday's New York Times listed more than two dozen events coming up this
week. A few highlights:

            
               Event
               : Sting is
among those singing a tribute to Sinatra.

            
               Tickets
               :
$2,000.

            
               Beneficiary: The rain forest.

            

               Downside: Sting is singing tribute to Sinatra.

            
               Event: Young professionals throw
Cinco de Mayo party.

            
               Tickets: $75.

            
               Beneficiary: Leukemia Society.

            

               Downside: Open bar means hundreds of young professionals
gooned on margaritas and their own benevolence.

            
               Event: MC Charlie Rose honors
Cardinal O'Connor.

            
               Tickets: $1,000.

            
               Beneficiary: Museum of Jewish
Heritage.

            

               Downside: Chance that O'Connor could stop by Cinco de Mayo
party on way over, get tanked on margaritas, make crude pass at Charlie
Rose.

            
               Event: Steve Martin and others read
from their own stuff, honor Rupert Murdoch.

            
               Tickets: $500.

            
               Beneficiary: Adult literacy
programs.

            

               Downside: Could be the night God's wrath descends on Rupert
Murdoch, killing hundreds of literacy volunteers in corollary damage from
lightning strike.

            
               Event: One hundred restaurants
including Four Seasons and Nobu, hold Sunday Night Supper.

            
               Tickets: Free! A percentage of each
bill goes to charity.

            
               Beneficiary: Groups that provide
meals to the homebound.

            

               Downside: Overt use of phrase "crumbs from rich man's table"
could cause scores of diners to die of embarrassment.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Andre Agassi, Brooke Shields, George Stephanopoulos,
and that darned beaver. There's your wacky sitcom, Mr. Bigshot development
jerk.

         
      
   
