
   
   
      
         
            <STRONG><EM>Slate </EM></STRONG><EM>Mea Culpas</EM>

            
               The Shearered
Truth
            

            Readers who might enjoy parsing all the careless
errors in A.O. Scott's silly about Cody Shearer and Chris Matthews should stop
right here, and use your very thoughtful link to my current Salon
column. It's a longish list, I'm afraid, but most of Scott's mistakes should be
obvious to anyone who can read. Just to correct the record in

                  Slate
               , here they are:

            Scott writes: "On Jan. 8 last year, shortly after
she had testified in the Paula Jones trial, Willey reportedly had a frightening
encounter with a jogger near her house in Richmond, Va." Fact: As I mentioned,
the alleged incident on Jan. 8 was three days before Willey testified
in the Jones case. Otherwise, what was the point of "intimidating" her?

            Scott writes: "Matthews seemed to have a pretty
good idea who [the mysterious jogger] was--an idea that he got from the
Drudge Report ." Fact: As I noted, the Drudge Report picked up the
jogger's supposed identity from the Matthews broadcast in an item posted
the following day . That's why the column was primarily about
Matthews.

            Scott writes: "The next night, chatting with
Newsweek 's Michael Isikoff and NOW President Patricia Ireland, Matthews
was less coy. The Shearer in question, he declared, was Brooke's twin brother,
Cody." Fact: As I wrote, quoting the transcript of May 11, Matthews
identified Cody Shearer by name the night Willey appeared . There are
many words to describe the way Matthews behaved. "Coy" is not among them.

            Scott writes: "Shearer could not have been Willey's
stalker, Conason declared, because he was on a transcontinental flight last
Jan. 8--a flight on which Shearer happened to bump into his brother-in-law's
old boss former Secretary of State Warren Christopher." Fact: Actually, what I
"declared" was that Shearer has documents proving he was in San
Francisco Jan. 8--and that he sat next to Christopher on a flight back to
Washington Jan. 11. This mistake is a little worse than what Matthews did. He
had to make a phone call to get the facts. All Scott had to do was read
them.

            Scott writes: "According to a recent Drudge
posting, a man with a gun was arrested outside Shearer's house a few days after
Matthews' Willey segment aired." Fact: (This is exhausting) Many news sources,
including the AP, reported the appearance of a gun-waving man at Shearer's
home, not just Drudge. Those same sources also made it clear that the gun nut
wasn't arrested outside Shearer's house, but in fact arranged voluntary
surrender to the police a few days later.

            As for my failure to
"explain" why nutty people are nuts--and why they weave Shearer family
conspiracies around an event that may or may not really have occurred--that is
beyond my competence. Sort of like journalism (or even reading) is for A. O.
Scott.

            Best
regards,
Joe Conason

            

               
                  A.O. Scott replies:
                
               I thank Joe Conason for
pointing out my errors, and I apologize to the readers of
S
                  late for my carelessness. The article as now published
reflects the corrections.
            

            

               Ticketmaster
            

            I found Paul Krugman's "" somewhat puzzling. First,
why would allowing the interplay of free-market forces imply that stadiums,
movie houses, and other mass entertainment centers would become dominated by
wealthy people? More specifically, why would letting the price of tickets rise
to the market clearing-level necessarily "lock out" the average fan? This is an
assumption about demand. What Krugman appears to be saying is that demand for a
given commodity will become more inelastic as one's income or wealth increases.
This is odd because it collapses the distinction between willingness to pay and
ability to pay. Just because someone can afford to pay $120 for an advanced
showing of The Phantom Menace or $10,000 for a Knicks game doesn't mean
he will. Why, then, conclude domination by elites?

            Second, even if we allow for Krugman's assumptions
and his conclusions, it would still imply that those who pay more must also be
rabid fans. Is it true that wealthy people are bigger sports fans than the
nonwealthy? If not, stadium seating will always be accessible to the average
fan.

            Third, even if we accept the conclusions, they
don't apply to all mass entertainment venues. A particular sporting event can
be unique. Seeing Michael Jordan do a slam-dunk right in front of your eyes
because you have courtside seats can be a singular experience. A movie, on the
other hand, is the same everywhere. Why, then, would George Lucas be concerned
about alienating tens of millions of fans by allowing some advanced showings at
premium prices? The movie can air for as long as it keeps packing the theaters.
How is accessibility reduced?

            Fourth, money is a very flexible tool. It is
possible to shift our disposable income to any number of items. Why couldn't an
average fan spend $120 or so to see an advanced showing of The Phantom
Menace and simply forgo doing something else he obviously valued less?
Charging below market prices to make tickets "affordable" does not appear to
make any sense.

            Gary Becker's argument
is the only one that appears to make any sense. If the value of mass
entertainment is in the social experience, then guaranteeing that the venue be
packed by charging below market prices is a rational policy. Many bars and
clubs live and die by this principle, often giving the impression of being
"packed" by letting a long line of people in at a slower rate than they
otherwise could. The strongest example of this is probably Wrigley Field. It's
been argued that the stadium contributes enormously to the baseball experience,
which is why the place is packed even if the Cubs have a bad season.

            -- Mark Pokorni
            

            
Chicago

            
               Defense
Defense
            

            "How exactly is it that in the land of the
childproof cap it's legal and even customary to keep a loaded unlocked gun in a
house with children?" asks the May 14 "," citing an experiment suggesting that
many children (especially ones aged 4 to 7) will play with guns even when told
not to. Let me suggest a possible answer.

            1. It turns out that there are very few fatal
firearms accidents involving children. This may be surprising, given that 35
percent to 50 percent of all U.S. households own guns, but it's so. According
to the National Safety Council's Accident Facts , there were about 30
fatal gun deaths in 1995 among kids age 4 to 7. There were 30 such deaths among
kids 0 to 4, and 170 among kids 5 to 14. This tells us about the age of the
victim , not of the shooter, but it's the best rough proxy I've seen in
my professional readings (I teach a seminar on firearms regulation at UCLA Law
School).

            To put that risk in some perspective, about 500
kids age 0 to 4 drown each year in residential swimming pools, which are legal
and even customary to keep around one's house; that's twice as many as the
fatal gun accidents for all kids age 0 to 14, even though pools are much less
common than guns. (I know some people fence their swimming pools, but some
don't--just like some keep their guns locked and others don't.) More generally,
the total number of fatal accidents involving kids 0 to 14 that year was 6,500,
so fatal firearms accidents accounted for about 3 percent of the total. There
were about 1,400 fatal firearms accidents involving people of all ages, out of
a total of 93,300 fatal accidents from all causes.

            2. But doesn't it make sense to require parents to
keep guns locked or unloaded even if it'll save just one child's life?
Unfortunately, the analysis can't be that simple, because such a restriction
will not only save lives, but also cost lives.

            Guns are used quite commonly in self-defense;
estimates range from 110,000 (National Crime Victimization Study) to 1.5
million to 2.5 million yearly defensive gun uses (studies by largely pro-gun
criminologist Gary Kleck and by largely anti-gun criminologist Philip Cook).
Nobody knows what the exact count is, and how many of these uses involve saved
lives, or saved lives of kids. Nor does anyone know how many of these uses
would have been frustrated by having to fumble with unlocking the gun, often in
the dark, when one has just been waked up by an intruder breaking into the
house. It is at least possible, though, that this number of lost lifesaving
self-defense uses would be greater than the number of fatal accidents
caused by having the guns loaded and unlocked. Not certain, but possible.
Certainly the answer isn't certain in the other direction.

            3. So, one answer to the
question "Why would a reasonable gun owner believe that it should be legal and
customary to keep a loaded unlocked gun in a house with children?" (not quite
the question Today's Papers asked, but the only one I'm remotely qualified to
try to answer) is: "Because loaded unlocked guns can save children's lives as
well as take children's lives, and reasonable gun owners--especially ones who
live in dangerous parts of town--may be acting very rationally in keeping their
guns maximally ready for self-defense, despite the modest risks this may
impose."

            -- Eugene Volokh
            

            Acting Professor, UCLA Law
School

            Los
Angeles

            
               The Future Is
Now
            

            Jacob Weisberg writes in "": "And when they
(e-books) truly arrive, I predict that the Rocket will be remembered as a
landmark: the first demonstration that reading a 'book' didn't require paper,
ink, or even an overhead light."

            For the sake of
historical accuracy I hope that the Rocket will not be so remembered. Some of
us have been reading 
                  Slate
                and other fine reading material on the
john (and wherever) for a few years now using our palmtop computers. I use my
Psion Siena or 3C. I won't bore you with the details, but it's really quite
easy to download books and other reading materials into a palmtop computer.

            -- Phillip
Rose
            

            
Wellington, New Zealand

            
               Flighty
Argument
            

            In , Scott Shuger asks, "Why shouldn't big people
(not just 'fat' people) pay more for plane tickets? After all, moving them
through the air takes more fuel. Why should this argument make sense for
postage but be abandoned for people?"

            Taken to the extreme, should small people pay less?
Should small people be charged more for heat since they generate less of their
own? Should smarter people pay more for school since they remember more? Should
children and older people be charged more in taxes since they require more
services? Should city people pay more in income taxes since they have more
services? How do you suggest this is administered?

            Ticket prices are based
on the bell-shaped curve that describes the population. This gives the average
height and weight. These "outliers" are already accounted for. Congratulations,
however: You are well on your way to being a true libertarian.

            -- Patrick
Donahue
            

            Salinas, Calif.

         
      
   
