
   
   
      
         
            Tepid <EM>Tea</EM>

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Tea With Mussolini
                (Universal Pictures). This story
about a group of English and American ladies living in 1930s Florence--sort of
an "Enchanted Fascist April" (Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment
Weekly )--receives tepid reviews. Surprisingly, Cher is the highlight of the
movie and holds her own among Lily Tomlin, Judi Dench, and a gaggle of other
British actresses: "Cher is terrific here doing what she does best: Wearing
heavy makeup and being flamboyant"(Mike Clark, USA Today ). Aside from
her performance, though, the film isn't much more than "a kind of
sub-Merchant-Ivory mix of eccentric ladies and enchanting scenery" (Roger
Ebert, the Chicago Sun-Times ). (Check out this collection of
Cher photos through the ages.)

            

               
                  The Phantom Menace
                (20 th Century Fox).
More negative responses: The critics are resentful about the fact that the film
will rake in money despite their reviews. A few, such as the Chicago
Sun-Times ' Ebert, defend the film: "If it were the first "Star Wars" movie,
'The Phantom Menace' would be hailed as a visionary breakthrough. ... How
quickly do we grow accustomed to wonders." The Weekly Standard 's John
Podhoretz also praises the film, saying "it will strike a chord with audiences
for the same reason that its predecessors did: It is earnest, well-meaning, and
delightfully free of irony. ... The jokes in Phantom Menace are broad
and childish in a way that may displease sophisticates but will be endearing to
everyone else." The more high-flown critics are flush with Schadenfreude
at what they see as director George Lucas' fall from glory. Some even take jabs
at the gullibility of eager fans. Anthony Lane writes in The New Yorker :
"It is, of course, profoundly gratifying that "The Phantom Menace" should
emerge as a work of almost unrelieved awfulness. It means, for one thing, that
the laugh is on all those dweebs who have spent the last month camped out on
the sidewalks beside movie theatres, waiting for the big day." ( David
Edelstein's take on the film in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Turn of the Century
               , by Kurt Andersen (Random House).
Former New York magazine editor, Spy co-founder, and current
New Yorker writer Kurt Andersen's satire of late-'90s culture wins good
reviews, but many carp about its weaknesses. 1) The irony is laid on too thick:
Andersen is "so arch you could almost drive through him" (Daniel Okrent,
Time ). 2) Turn of the Century is not a novel with a plot so much
as a collection of riffs, observations, and set pieces on subjects such as
Microsoft, Hollywood, and Manhattan power couples. Although it "bristles with
sharply observed detail" (David Gates, Newsweek ), the book runs into
trouble in terms of developing characters and maintaining any sort of pacing or
momentum. (Click to read 
                  Slate
               's "Book Club" about the novel;
click here to read an excerpt [requires free registration].)

            

               
                  Close Range: Wyoming Stories
               , by Annie Proulx
(Scribner). The words "bleak," "harsh," and "tough" show up in almost every
review of Pulitzer Prize-winner Annie Proulx's collection of stories set in her
adopted state of Wyoming. The word "powerful" shows up frequently, too.
Cowboys, ranch hands, and the unforgiving nature of life out west are her main
subjects, and by all accounts she handles them with extraordinary skill and
control. The critics can't say enough about her tight, honed prose: She gets
the speech patterns just right ("a stunningly authentic voice," declares
Michael Knight in the Wall Street Journal ), she writes "sentences whose
specific gravity mysteriously exceeds their size" (Walter Kirn, New
York ), and her characters have an "absolute authenticity" (Christopher
Lehmann-Haupt, the New York Times ). (Listen to this CBC interview with Proulx.)

            

               
                  Why We Buy
               , by Paco Underhill (Simon & Schuster).
Critics say this exploration of what factors affect a shopper's behavior within
a store is interesting, but several grouse that at times it reads as if the
"book is really one long advertisement for Envirosell" (Michelle Marchetti,
Sales & Marketing Management ), Underhill's consulting company. If
the subject sounds familiar, it's because The New Yorker reported
Underhill's findings in 1996 (the Wall Street Journal , Paula
Throckmorton Zakaria). Many reviewers are fascinated by the sociological
details of retail shopping--things like the "butt brush factor" (a woman often
won't buy something if another customer accidentally brushes her behind while
she's shopping) or how the positions of signs and chairs in a store affect a
shopper's likelihood of actually purchasing an item. (Click here to read
a chapter.)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Music
            

            
               
                  Take Your
Shoes Off
               , by Robert Cray. Great reviews for Memphis soul-blues
singer and guitarist Cray's 11 th album: "A sheer blast of rocking
good times" (Amy Linden, People ). It may not break any new ground, but
it nevertheless impresses the critics--Joe Rosenthal of Rolling Stone
writes that it is "a slow-burning soul record--and one of the most focused
album's of Cray's 25 year career."

         
      
   
