
   
   
      
         
             Matt Groening

            I have before me the
current issue of The Comics Journal , which features a list of the 100
greatest comics of the century, from Prince Valiant at the bottom to
Pogo, Peanuts , and Krazy Kat at the top, with room for everyone
from R. Crumb to Captain Marvel in between. There is no place in it, however,
for Matt Groening's Life in Hell . Groening's friend Lynda Barry (whose
work often shows up next to his in the pages of alternative weeklies across the
land) gets the nod for her brilliant Ernie Pook's Comeek (No. 74).
Up-and-coming comics superstar Ben Katchor's Julius Knipl, Real Estate
Photographer checks in at No. 56. But those anxious bunnies Binky and Bongo
and their sidekicks, the deadpan fez wearers Akbar and Jeff, are conspicuous
(to me, anyway) in their absence.

            This is a shame, since
Groening, better known as the creator of The Simpsons , and now of the
much-hyped Futurama , is also an important figure in the world of
pen-and-ink serial cartooning. He is the link between Jules Feiffer (who earns
two spots on The Comics Journal 's list) and Dilbert (who earns
none). He is also part of the explosion of brilliant graphic work that began in
the early 1980s and has so far produced an array of permanent contributions to
American culture---the Hernandez brothers' Love and Rockets , Joe Sacco's
Palestine , and Art Spiegelman's Maus , to name only a few. Unlike
these artists, Groening is not interested in rigorous draftsmanship or extended
narration, but he is, like them (and like Barry and Katchor), committed to
using cartoons as a way of addressing reality. Life in Hell hits us
where we live: under the thumb of well-meaning, rational, but ultimately
psychotic and abusive authority. Hell is other bunnies--bosses, parents,
teachers, co-workers, boyfriends, girlfriends. We (I mean all us bunnies, fez
wearers, and miscellaneous snaggletoothed, pop-eyed, four-fingered creatures)
seem hard-wired for sadomasochism. Even the exuberant, indistinguishable lovers
Akbar and Jeff spend panel after panel devising new ways to baffle, dominate,
and mind-fuck each other.

            To paraphrase Henry David Thoreau: When reality becomes
cartoonlike, the only place for a realist is in cartooning. It's no accident
that the rise of serious comics (or "graphic novels" as some publishers chose
to call them) came at a moment when American fiction was relatively moribund.
For its part, The Simpsons arrived at what was a relatively bad period
for Hollywood movies and was part of what will be remembered as an explosion of
inventive network television programming: thirtysomething ,
Roseanne , My So-Called Life , Twin Peaks and, of course,
Seinfeld .

            
               The Simpsons ,
now midway through its 10 th season, has outlasted them all. It began
as a series of fill-in segments for The Tracey Ullman Show . (Oh, for the
Fox network of yesteryear! Of 21 Jump Street and Shannen Doherty-era
90210 , of Alien Nation and Roc ! Where have you gone,
Keenen Ivory Wayans?) These crudely drawn mini-episodes were like Raymond
Carver stories optioned by Hanna-Barbera. They featured the grind and
humiliation of lower-middle-class family life, and they centered not on the
children Bart, Lisa, and Maggie but on the beleaguered patriarch Homer. The
early Homer was hardly the sweet-natured oaf who quickly replaced Bill Cosby
and Ronald Reagan as America's favorite dad. His voice was growlier, his temper
quicker, and his shaky masculine pride always on the line. The first bit I
recall seeing involved Homer falling for the aggressive sales pitch of an RV
salesman, and his willingness to bury his family under crushing debt in order
to look like a big shot in the salesman's eyes, and theirs. (The current Homer,
in contrast, is a creature so utterly without pride as to qualify for a kind of
sainthood.)

            In early 1990, Fox, a fledgling outfit with nothing to
lose, put the half-hour Simpsons in its Thursday, 8 p.m. slot, up
against The Cosby Show , then the No. 1 program in America. The upstart
did not just so much challenge Cosby as envelop it: In perhaps the most
sustained of the winking pop-culture references for which it has become famous
(and on which it came to depend rather too heavily as time went on), The
Simpsons soon featured an avuncular African-American physician with a
penchant for multicolored sweaters.

            
               The Simpsons is
justly celebrated for the density of its cultural allusions and the rich detail
of its visuals. The best episodes project two dimensions into three better than
any animation since Disney's features of the 1940s or the great Chuck Jones
Merrie Melodie shorts for Warner Bros. But the show's real achievement is in
its characters, a range of comic types as vivid as any in Dickens or
Shakespeare. While Bart is the franchise and Lisa the feminist-intellectual
icon, the heart of The Simpsons is the extraordinary marriage of Homer
and Marge, a marriage that has had its tests (Remember that slinky French
bowling instructor? That country-and-western diva? The six-foot hero sandwich?
The nervous breakdown on the freeway?), but has endured since the end of the
disco era. When George Bush sneered during the 1992 campaign that America
needed more families like the Waltons and fewer like the Simpsons, you knew it
was over for him--and not only because he seemed to be wishing for an end to
electricity and indoor plumbing. The Simpsons are our truest, best selves:
stupid--maybe; lazy--you bet; suspicious of authority--always; willing to do
anything about it--not really; but above all, loyal to our spouses, our
children, our little sisters, our friends, our hometowns, our bad haircuts, and
our favorite brand of beer. The Simpsons may be hip and ironic, but
unlike, say, South Park or Ren & Stimpy , it has never been
cynical.

            Its success resulted from the unlikely collusion between
Groening, a left-wing populist (and self-described hippie) from the Pacific
Northwest, and Rupert Murdoch, a right-wing populist from Australia. While
Groening has always insisted on (and been granted) freedom from network
interference, his show is still a creature of contradictions. It pokes endless
fun at the corporatization of all aspects of life (think of Duff Gardens, a
mind-numbing, totalitarian theme park; or the robotic Schwarzenegger clone
known as McBain; or Malibu Stacy, the Barbie-like doll Lisa Simpson lives for)
even as its characters have become among the most recognizable icons of
corporate culture. This January, the spiky hair and bulging eyes of Bart
Simpson mysteriously found their way into a photograph of soldiers patrolling a
street in Hebron that accompanied a New York Times Magazine essay by
Palestinian intellectual Edward Said. An "Editor's Note" the following week
explained that the photographer in question signs all his pictures by holding a
Bart Simpson mask up to his lens--and that the editors erroneously assumed that
the mask had been held by a passing Palestinian child.

            "As much as I love the
Simpsons show," Groening recently told Wired magazine, "I also
love the Simpsons figurines. To me the figurines are part of the
creative product." Groening's willing, if somewhat ironic, embrace of the
marketing bonanza his creation has unleashed may have cost him his rightful
spot in the The Comics Journal 's highbrow/subculture pantheon. I'm sure
he's not as upset about it as I am.

            In the decade since its debut, The Simpsons has
spawned a raft of imitators and has launched a boom in prime-time animation.
Some of the products of this boom have been unsurprisingly dreadful (Remember
The Critic ? Duckman ?). But others have been pretty good--the
tragically misunderstood Beavis and Butt-head , for instance, and its
creator's subsequent King of the Hill . And now Fox, ever eager to flog
its winning formulas to the point of exhaustion, has come up with The Family
Guy , The PJs , and Groening's own Futurama . The critics have
been generous to Futurama , confident that it will pick up steam as it
goes along. I'm not so sure. Visually, it's stunning. The screen is packed with
puns for the eye and teasers for the brain. But the writing is slow and
stilted, and the situations already seem tired and didactic. This week's
episode was as cuddly as an episode of Full House , and the previous one,
in which it's discovered that the moon has become a vulgar tourist trap, seemed
recycled from Simpsons outtakes right down to the "Whalers on the Moon"
singing panorama. Perhaps Futurama will pick up. I make no
predictions.

            Except one. A thousand years from now, if robot
historians want to know what life was really like in
late-20 th -century America, they will look to Life in Hell and
The Simpsons . No, there were no talking rabbits, and human hair was not
sculpted into yellow spikes or blue pylons (well, not that often anyway). But
everything else is pretty much accurate.

         
      
   
