
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , April 17
            

            
               (posted Friday, April
16, 1999)
            

            The cover story worries that the Kosovo crisis could
refreeze relations between Russia and NATO. Russia is so eager to reassert its
authority that it may "gamble away its standing in the democratic world in
support of a regime that has committed the most heinous human-rights abuses in
modern Europe." ... Another editorial charts the sinking status of the refugee.
During the Cold War era, Western countries viewed asylum as a symbolic triumph
over the Soviet empire, but refugees displaced by recent ethnic conflicts are
finding no havens. ... The magazine profiles Serbian filmmakers. The most talented of the
lot, a man who just released a penetrating movie about war and moral decay, is
now negotiating a deal to direct costume dramas and love stories for
Miramax.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , April 18
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
April 15, 1999)
            

            The first of six special
millennium issues picks "The Best Ideas, Stories and Inventions" of the past
1,000 years. The introduction defends the concept of ranking (it cuts through
late 20 th -century "data smog," and besides other magazines do it
too). Leon Botstein deems the human voice Best Musical Instrument, and A.S.
Byatt awards Scheherazade Best Story. Among the other winners: human
rights for Best Idea; Celestine V for Best Pope; India for Best Revolution;
penicillin for Best Invention; and Lucille Ball for Best Clown. The list is
decidedly Brit-heavy, with citations for Elizabeth I (Best Leader), Henry VIII
and Anne Boleyn (Best Sex Scandal), the purchase of the Suez Canal (Best Land
Deal), and Adm. Nelson's victory over Napoleon at the Nile (Best Naval
Battle).

            
               
                  Time and
Newsweek
               
               , April 19
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
13, 1999)
            

            
               Newsweek 's cover story on Slobodan Milosevic, "The Face of Evil,"
recites the now familiar story of how he co-opted Serb nationalism to fuel his
own rise to power. Time 
               calls the Kosovo crisis "Clinton's War," but Newsweek

               suggests that Vice President Al Gore may eventually pay the
price for it during the 2000 campaign. Gore has defended the bombing-only
strategy so vehemently that he'll suffer if the president does send ground
troops. Time prints a map of the world's ethnic and civil conflicts,
color-coded to show the level of U.S. involvement, annotated with death tolls.
A Newsweek 
               sidebar reports that both the Serbs and the Kosovo Liberation
Army have been trafficking in drugs to fund weapon purchases.

            
               Time 's cover story on the amateur genealogy trend sweeping the
nation points would-be researchers to the National Archives, Internet
databases, and prison records. The most avid practitioners are Mormons, who
believe that ancestors can be saved through posthumous baptism and have
established 3,200 genealogy libraries around the world to encourage
conversions.

            
               Newsweek

               features the findings of a psychologist who claims he can
predict with 90 percent accuracy whether a marriage will endure or dissolve.
The piece includes a handy quiz for couples who want to diagnose their
viability. (Yes or no: "My partner generally likes my personality.")

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               
                  , April 19
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
13, 1999)
            

            The cover story
debates whether NATO's goal should be to carve up Kosovo or
administer it as a protectorate. A caustic piece reports that war has improved life in Belgrade: There
are no traffic jams (because so many people have fled), and the crime rate has
dropped (because all offenses are tried under martial law). ... A
profile says Bill Bradley may be the slumbering giant of the
presidential race. He's raising cash fast and his once-derided brainy
folksiness is earning praise.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , April 19
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
13, 1999)
            

            A profile of the Ochs
and Sulzberger families suggests that their stewardship of the New York
Times was unduly influenced by self-consciousness about their Judaism.
Arthur Sulzberger intentionally underplayed the paper's reports of Nazi
exterminations. ... A long piece chronicles how a death row inmate from
Arizona named Paris Carriger was exonerated with legal support from a small
cadre of savvy East Coast friends. He didn't know any of them when sentenced,
but he cultivated epistolary friendships from his prison cell with reporters,
anti-capital punishment activists, and experts he saw featured on the
MacNeil-Lehrer NewsHour . ... A New York chef reveals the
nastiness inside upscale restaurant kitchens: old fish, grimy meat, and rivers
of butter.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , April 19
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
13, 1999)
            

            The editorial lauds
hawkish Republicans for their willingness to send ground troops to Kosovo and
berates poll-wary Democrats for their hesitance to do so. ("Why don't they just
make Dick Morris the national security adviser and stop the charade?")
... A piece suggests that Americans are not as skittish about battle
casualties as the conventional wisdom dictates: During the Gulf War, 84 percent
of Americans backed the use of ground troops. ... The cover story likens
Serbian ethnic cleansing to the practices of Nazi Germany. Both are a harsher
expression of the same impulse that leads to "separate academic departments for
African-American studies, women's studies, Jewish studies."

         
      
   
