
   
   
      
         
            No. 252: &quot;Euphemism?&quot;

            
               "We want to be
able to land in grandma's backyard at night, in thick fog, without hitting the
clothes line," says Jack Allison, an engineer on the project. What
project?
            

            
               
                  (This question
courtesy of Jill Pope.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 251)--"Now Even Reformier!":
            

            
               Rabbi Gary Bretton
Granatoor of New York's Stephen Wise Synagogue, at the forefront of today's
Reform Judaism, says, "There is a group in the synagogue called Morei Derech,
which means role models, and they are lay people taking on responsibilities
that in the past many congregants felt professionals had to do." What
responsibilities?
            

            

               
                  (This question courtesy of Beth Sherman.)
               
            

            
"Selling reconditioned hyperdrives to stranded Jedi knights."-- Daniel
Radosh
            

            "I'm a
huge anti-Semite, so I'd have to say they're celebrating the
Eucharist."-- Tim Rogers ( Tim Carvell had a similar answer.)

            
"Molesting young boys? Oh, sorry, wrong church."-- Chris "Pushing the Limits
of Taste" Thomas
            

            
"Closed-captioning 700 Club broadcasts in Yiddish, so everybody laughs
at the same time."-- Al Petrosky
            

            
"Converting non-Jews by tapping them on the top of the head and proclaiming,
'Jew!' "--Morris Jackson (similarly, Leslie Goodman-Malamuth )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            With subtle--Talmudic!--reasoning, Rabbi Sheldon
Zimmerman sees anti-Semites behind the movement to reform Reform Judaism:
They're just not anti-Semitic enough. Bastards! The rabbi, president of Hebrew
Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion, our seminary, suggests that as
anti-Semitism has declined in America, the larger society less frequently
reminds Jews of their identity, so people embrace ritual to, as he puts it,
"find themselves Jewishly."

            When I worked at
Late Night (oh, no, not another of his tedious stories about the old
days!), I asked the writers' assistant to scan the viewer mail pile for
correspondence I could use in my planned anthology, Kids' Anti-Semitic
Letters to Dave . For a while there was a satisfying flow of vitriol
beginning "Dear Jew Letterman ..." It seemed like Anti-Semitism Classic. But
anyone who envisioned Dave's big, friendly, goyish head bent over the Torah
needed not more tolerance,  but more Prozac. It wasn't genuine hate mail; it
was nut mail, and there wasn't enough of it to do a book. I felt like an Apache
contemplating the last anti-Semitic buffalo, sad and scraggly and demented. But
I still had a ham sandwich for lunch, he said Jewishly.

            
               Mucho Mitzvah
Answer
            

            Some lay people want to visit the sick.

            That's just part of the "remarkable transformation"
going on at Stephen Wise, including more Hebrew in the service, more singing
and chanting by the congregants, and a greater interest in religious education.
These changes are typical of the new Reform Judaism.

            Begun in Germany more than a century ago, the
Reform movement emphasized ethics over ritual, abjuring the wearing of
tallis and yarmulkes at services, for instance, and encouraging the use
of local languages rather than Hebrew.

            Last week, Reform
Judaism's Central Conference of American Rabbis adopted the Pittsburgh
Principles, reviving many of these customs in what supporters call a reclaiming
of Jewish tradition, and critics call Conservative Judaism Lite, and even
harsher critics call a retreat from rationalism.

            
               Ayn Rand's Panties
Extra
            

            This past Sunday,
Showtime presented The Passion of Ayn Rand , with the fierce and
smoldering Helen Mirren as the dishy right-wing egomaniac, leaving many
otherwise sensible people hungry for the forbidden passions of the
libertarians. Satisfy these cravings at Laissez Faire Books, "The World's Largest Selection of
Books on Liberty." Below, some items from its May catalog.

            
               Those Dirty Rotten
Taxes , by Charles Adams

            "A lively chronicle of courageous, patriotic
Americans who hated taxes and did something about it."

            I believe he also wrote
Those Dirty Rotten Prices , a lively chronicle of courageous
shoplifters.

            
               Hide Your Assets and
Disappear , by Edmund Pankau

            "A step-by-step guide to vanishing without a
trace."

            And yet, so few on the
right actually do.

            
               The Food and Drink
Police , by James T. Bennett and Thomas J. DiLorenzo

            "America's Nannies, Busybodies, and Petty
Tyrants."

            A heartfelt plea for the
return of tainted meat.

            
               That Every Man Be
Armed , by Stephen R. Halbrook

            "Halbrook shows that your right to bear arms isn't
some crackpot notion."

            I particularly enjoyed
the chapter, "A Legal Theory From Those Screaming Voices in My Head."

            
               Freedom in
Chains , by James Bovard

            "Shocking story about government gone wild."

            Party down with those
maniacs at Health and Human Services ... if you dare.

            
               Myth of the Robber
Barons , by Burton W. Folsom Jr.

            Turns out, those steel
strikes were staged with actors who were not killed by the Pinkertons, but
retired to mansions on Fifth Avenue.

            Hayek poster: $9.95

            This month marks the
centenary of Friedrich August von Hayek, the Austrian economist,
anti-socialist, Nobel Prize winner, and dreamboat. There's only a cursory
description of the poster, but I smell string bikini.

            Video: Phil Donahue
Interviews Ayn Rand and Milton Friedman, Part I and Part II
            

            Oh, like I don't already
own it on laserdisc.

            
               Ayn Rand: A Sense of
Life , by Michael Paxton

            "Hundreds of revealing, never-before-published
photos."

            The perfect companion
for my William Buckley vibrator.

            
               Tim Carvell's
Bloated Indulgence Extra
            

            Participants are still
invited to find a sentence in an actual publication that best conveys hideously
conspicuous consumption in 1999. Submissions due by noon ET, Monday, June
7.

            
               Headline
Haiku
            

            The Making of
A True Threat:
Artists in Love
And No Ale

            
               Village Voice , June 1, 1999

            
               --Francis
Heaney
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            It's a brisathon.

         
      
   
