
   
   
      
         
             The Equality Equation

            After all these years I am
still amazed at the persistence of people in believing things that are unproved
or that are more complicated than they realize. My most recent example is Pay
Equity Day, called to protest the fact that women's pay is only 74 percent of
men's. Pay Equity Day was April 8. Perhaps you missed it.

            Why make pay equity the
subject of a protest? Surely Pay Equity Day's organizers don't think that
everyone should get the same pay. I'd guess that my housekeeper's pay is less
than 74 percent of the pay of the organizers. Why don't they protest that fact?
Presumably they would explain that they are more productive than my
housekeeper. But the only evidence they have of their superior productivity is
the fact that someone is willing to pay them more than anyone is willing to pay
my housekeeper.

            One might think that would be the end of the matter. Men
get paid more than women because someone is willing to pay them more, just as
Pay Equity Day's organizers are paid more than my housekeeper because someone
is willing to do it.

            But, of course, that
isn't the end of the matter. If we accept productivity as a proper measure of
what people should earn, we have to consider the possibility that employers'
willingness to pay is a wrong measure of workers' productivity. It could be
wrong in either of two senses. Employers may have an incorrect estimate of the
relative productivities of men and women. Or, having a correct estimate of the
relative productivities, they may want to pay women less than their
productivity merits because they have some prejudice against women in the
workplace.

            In a perfect world we could compare the relative earnings
of women and men with their relative productivity. But there is no good way to
measure relative productivity--at least, no better way than looking at relative
earnings, which only leads us back to where we started. So, students of the
subject approach it indirectly, comparing the earnings of men and women who are
similar in the respects that contribute to productivity: They compare the
incomes of men and women of the same age, the same years of work experience,
the same years of education, and in jobs of the same stress, riskiness, and
difficulty. When they do, they generally find that the gender gap in earnings
remains but is smaller than the gap for women and men in total. But the results
are difficult to interpret. The number of years devoted to education and the
number of years of experience, for example, do not make the same contribution
to productivity. And it is never possible to be sure that you have taken
account of all the factors that determine productivity.

            Suppose you compared the earnings of men and women
who are 35-year-old lawyers, all childless, and all Law Review graduates
of Harvard Law School, and found that the men's earnings are higher than the
women's. (I'm making this up.) Would this mean that there is discrimination
against women? We would also find that all the women in this category do not
earn the same salary. There is something, some X Factor, other than the
conditions I have listed and other than gender, which explains the difference
in salaries among the women. But if this X Factor is unequally shared by men
and women, there will be a difference in the average earnings of men and women
that does not reflect discrimination.

            Maybe the X Factor is
height. A taller lawyer can reach the books on the top shelf without a ladder.
If all women were paid the same as all men of the same height, the average pay
of men would be higher than that of women because the average man is taller.
But there would be no discrimination.

            Much of what we know about the economic status of women is
summarized in an excellent monograph by Diana Furchtgott-Roth and Christine
Stolba, Women's Figures: The Economic Progress of Women in America . One
striking fact presented there is that childless women at age 30 earn 95 percent
as much as men at the same age, whereas mothers earn only 75 percent as much as
men. This suggests that the relatively low earnings of many women are related
to their relatively low productivity because child-bearing and child-rearing
interferes with their productivity in the marketplace. But another force may be
at work. Women who can command earnings that are 95 percent as high as those of
men may decide not to have children rather than forgo those earnings. We don't
know how the earnings of these women compare with their productivity. If their
productivity is 10 percent higher than that of men, the fact that they are paid
only 5 percent less would not show that there is little discrimination.

            There are three gaps involved in this
discussion:

            1) The gap between the earnings of men and
women.

            2) The gap between the earnings of women and their
productivity.

            3) The gap between the
productivity of women and the productivity of men.

            There is plenty of evidence that the first gap has been
declining--fairly rapidly by historical standards. There is no good way to
measure the gap between women's earnings and their productivity, but it is
reasonable to say that their earnings have risen pretty much in line with their
productivity. At least, it seems clear that the earnings of the total labor
force have risen pretty much in line with productivity (output per hour of
work) when measured correctly. Women are so large a part of the labor force
that it is hard to believe that this could be true of the total if it were not
also true of women. If the gap between the earnings of women and men is
declining, and if the earnings of women are rising in line with their
productivity, it follows that the productivity of women has been rising
relative to the productivity of men. That would be consistent with what we know
about changes in the character of women's education and their distribution
among occupations.

            Whether this combination of facts and speculation
is grounds for demonstrations of protest is a matter of taste.

            I think there is a problem lurking here, but it is
not the one the protesters have been protesting. In an earlier age, when
incomes in the market were lower than they are now, the cost to a parent of
forgoing market employment in order to stay home and care for a child was also
lower than today. And when the men-women wage gap was lower, the clear choice
was for the woman to stay home and look after the child. But given higher
market incomes, having and rearing a child is more expensive in terms of
forgone income. And with the men-women wage gap narrowed it has become less
clear how the staying home with the child should be divided between the mother
and the father. This problem of family life is not a result of incomes being
too low or the wage gap being too big. It is rather the reverse.

         
      
   
