
   
   
      
         
            Ellison's Wonderland

            When Ralph Ellison died in 1994, he left behind
thousands of pages of drafts and notes for the book he had been working on for
40 years--and a terrible dilemma. Ellison's readers (and Ellison's publisher)
wanted the legendary second novel they were sure had to be buried in the papers
somewhere. But literary scholars (and Ellison's friends) would surely denounce
the publication of anything that went beyond the author's known intentions.
Because the manuscript was nowhere near to being a coherent, finished work and
because Ellison left no instructions, his literary executor John F. Callahan
had to choose between disappointing the amateurs and infuriating the
professionals.

            The griping about Juneteenth even before
publication makes it clear that Callahan has taken the side of readers.
"Ellison did not leave behind the shapely building that Callahan has given us,"
Gregory Feeley wrote last month in the New York Times Magazine . Critics
quoted in the article complain that sections of the novel published as excerpts
during Ellison's lifetime are missing, that important characters have withered
or vanished, and that 1,500 or more pages have been whittled down to 350.

            A scholarly edition,
promised for the future, will enable better-informed opinions by placing this
extract in the context of Ellison's longer manuscript. But on the basis of what
we know, I'd say that Professor Callahan, who teaches at Lewis & Clark
College in Portland, Ore., deserves to be commended, not condemned. Without
adding a word (other than the title Juneteenth ), he has culled a nugget
that gives a sense of what Ellison was up to all those years without harming
any of the alternative conceptions of the work that are bound to emerge.
Juneteenth doesn't pretend to be a definitive framework or even a
framework at all. It's merely a necessary starting point for an inquiry into
what might have been.

            In an afterword, Callahan says that he took most of
Juneteenth from Book II, the strongest and most heavily plotted part of
what were apparently intended to be three parts. The story begins in
Washington, D.C., circa 1955, when a black church delegation arrives at the
office of the Sen. Adam Sunraider on urgent, unstated business. Before the
group succeeds in reaching him, an assassin shoots the racist Sunraider from
the Senate gallery. Critically wounded, Sunraider summons the leader of the
congregation, the Rev. Alonzo Hickman, to his bedside. We learn that Hickman, a
Baptist preacher known as "God's Trombone," was the only father Sunraider ever
had. Though either white or a fair-skinned mulatto, "Bliss," as the senator was
known as a boy, was raised by Hickman to be a black minister.

            From here, the story
unfolds outward in many directions at once, jumping from the hospital bed to
various points in Hickman's and Sunraider's lives. The turning point for their
relationship was a celebration of Juneteenth Day, a holiday commemorating the
day in 1865 when slaves in Texas first learned that the Civil War was over and,
two and a half years after the fact, that President Lincoln had issued the
Emancipation Proclamation. Amid the festivities, a crazed white woman appeared
claiming to be Bliss' mother. After this incident, Bliss became obsessed with
his lost mother and eventually ran away from home. We get woozy glimpses of
Bliss Sunraider's later life as a con artist, moviemaker, and chauffeur before
he became a senator and a bigot.

            Little of this information comes in the form of
straightforward narrative but instead accumulates through murky fragments. The
language is far more complex and difficult than that of Invisible Man .
In place of a single narrator, there are at least three: The authorial voice;
Hickman; and Sunraider, who speaks in a number of distinct tongues--as the
child Bliss, in dreams, in remembered conversations, and in convoluted memories
poured into a death-reverie stream of consciousness. (Click to read a brief
excerpt describing Sunraider waking in the hospital with Hickman at his
bedside.)

            The passage is
characteristic of the book in both its lyricism and its opacity. We only find
out subsequently that Sunraider is Bliss and that "Why hast Thou forsaken me"
was his opening line at Hickman's revival service, when he would rise,
Christ-like, from a coffin.

            Only in a few places does Juneteenth attain the
narrative velocity of Invisible Man . In a thrilling climax we finally
hear the story of how Bliss came to be adopted by Hickman, and how Hickman was
transformed from an Oklahoma City ne'er-do-well into a man of God (it hinges on
a false accusation of rape, a lynching, and some amateur obstetrics). This
section indicates that Ellison could still write in the lucid, explicit vein of
his first novel but chose to do something more difficult and complex, both
thematically and stylistically, in his second. Ellison's first love was
jazz--he played the trumpet--and many of the passages in Juneteenth are
extended riffs in a kind of free-form verbal polyphony. If Invisible Man
was Louis Armstrong, Juneteenth is Charlie Parker.

            At the level of plot,
many things are never explained, among them how "Bliss," got to be Sunraider,
the story of Sunraider's own illegitimate mixed-race son (who seems also to be
his assassin), and the meaning of the message that prompts Hickman to
Washington. Future fragments may illuminate these issues. But these confusions
seem largely purposeful, not accidents of omission by author or editor. If
Ellison had finished and published his novel, the story still wouldn't be
whole. It's meant to be up to the reader to assemble the shards into a vase.
For this reason, one doesn't feel cheated by not having all the pieces. In a
curious way, the unfinished state of the novel complements the inherent and
intentional incompleteness of the underlying story.

            Think of William Faulkner, whose characters often appear
and reappear in his various novels and stories. It's as if Hickman and
Sunraider have an independent existence of which Ellison offers glimpses and
glances in the various pieces he never assembled into a single structure. For
me Juneteenth recalled especially Absalom, Absalom! in which
Quentin Compson puts together a story that rattles family skeletons and points
up the reality that white Southern culture is blacker than meets the eye.
Sunraider yearns to know who his mother is, and Hickman wants to know how Bliss
became Sunraider. The reader approaches these mysteries through the incomplete
knowledge of the characters. Crucial information is delayed and denied, which
brings us back to the motif of "Juneteenth," the day when slaves found out
they'd been free for two and a half years.

            Why didn't Ellison finish--or publish--the book?
The oft-repeated official version involves a fire that destroyed an important
manuscript in 1966. But as disastrous an event as that must have been, I find
it unconvincing as an explanation. Ellison described losing a summer's worth of
work. He had a decade of writing his novel behind him and almost three more
ahead of him. A more compelling explanation is that Ellison wanted to write a
second novel that would meet the standard of Invisible Man while being
an entirely different kind of book. This strenuous ambition was confounded by a
perfectionism that, as Ellison wrote in the introduction to his volume of
essays Shadow and Act , made it somewhat "unreal" to even think of
himself as a writer. As he puts it, "my standards were impossibly high."

            Those standards didn't keep Ellison from writing,
merely from calling it quits. Failing to finish doesn't mean he failed. Indeed,
a great, unfinished work can be more fascinating than a finished one because of
the way the reader is drawn into the artistic process. Juneteenth is a
truly interactive novel, in which readers are not an audience but
collaborators, trying to pull together strands and elements of a story that has
no final resolution. Other fragments and versions will add to what Callahan has
assembled, not overwrite it. As with Faulkner, the boundaries of Ellison's
separate texts may blur, but the mythic force of the buried story and the
stylistic virtuosity of its telling will remain.

         
      
   
