
   
   
      
         
            High School Confidential

            It's no fun being a
highbrow if you don't sometimes swing low. I know an expert in 19 th
century English history who devours mystery novels by the shopping bag load, a
prominent intellectual journalist who loves Bruce Willis shoot'em-ups, and a

                  Slate
                editor who admits to being hooked on Felicity . In
this context, I am prepared to admit an entertainment vice of my own: the teen
flick. This is a genre that flourished in the mid-1980s, then fell into
abeyance for a number of years, and is now, I am happy to report, experiencing
a modest renaissance.

            The new rash of teen
movies seems heavily skewed toward quasi-remakes of the classics. The genre
revived in 1995 with Clueless , which was based on Jane Austen's
Emma . Cruel Intentions is the zillionth adaptation of the
18 th century French novel Les Liaisons Dangereuses . She's
All That is loosely based on Pretty Woman , which was loosely based
on My Fair Lady , which was based on George Bernard Shaw's
Pygmalion . Arriving at multiplexes in the next few months will be
O , a version of Othello set against a backdrop of high-school
sports, and 10 Things I Hate About You , an adaptation of The Taming
of the Shrew .

            But it would be wrong to think of these films as classic
comics for the Clearasil set. Most of them are movies that utilize classic
plots as new ways to frame their exploration into what it's like to be an
American teen-ager. At their best, these films immerse you once again in all
the joys and anxieties of adolescence. To me, they are the quintessential good
bad movies, because while seldom subtle or artful, they are capable of
recreating a familiar and utterly compelling world.

            The first teen movies
were made in the 1950s, but the genre was largely codified by screenwriter,
director, and producer John Hughes, who drew on his experiences at a large
suburban Chicago high school in the 1960s in a series of movies made in the
1980s. The first film Hughes directed was the romantic comedy Sixteen
Candles (1984). Molly Ringwald plays a quirky, intelligent sophomore who
wakes up to discover that everyone in her family has forgotten her birthday.
Insult is piled on injury as she confronts her so-called life. In the clip
available at right, she faces the daily indignity of the school bus. The plot
winds and unwinds a mismatch of affections. The freshman geek with braces,
Anthony Michael Hall, has crush on Ringwald. Ringwald has a crush on a cute
senior who is dating the feathered blond prom queen. The film has all the
commonplaces of the genre--the party that utterly trashes someone's parents'
house, the voyeuristic visit to the girl's locker room, the guys betting about
getting laid, and the happy comic resolution: The geek beds the prom queen,
Ringwald lands the cute senior.

             

            S ixteen Candles is awful in some ways. A racist
subplot revolves around a Chinese exchange student called Long Duk Dong. Yet
the movie sets up the basic theme of Hughes' subsequent--and I would maintain
all successful--teen movies, which is to overthrow the stereotypes that
comprise the basis of adolescent identity. The basic insight of the Hughes
films is that high school is built around a caste/class system, which is
basically vicious and unfair. Like his subsequent movies, Sixteen

               Candles is essentially a fantasy about throwing out this system: The
excluded are included and the exclusionary are either enlightened or humbled.
The geeks get to be cool, the cool kids get humbled, the druggies get smart,
and the smart kids get stoned.

            Hughes handled this
theme in a more self-congratulatory and heavy-handed way in The Breakfast
Club (1985). This was probably the most famous of the '80s teen flicks,
launching as it did the careers of several of the "Brat Pack" actors--including
Emilio Estevez, Judd Nelson, and Ally Sheedy. Five different types--a geek, a
richie, a screw-up, a jock, and a sullen arty girl--are forced to spend a
Saturday in detention considering who they are. This is my least favorite of
the Hughes films, because it's a moral lesson with flashes of humor. Hughes'
best films are romantic comedies informed by good values.

            Happily, he returned to form in 1986 with Pretty in
Pink , which was stylistically the best of the lot. This time Ringwald plays
a sweet girl from the wrong side of the tracks who has to choose between the
richie, played by Andrew McCarthy, and her loyal pal Duckie, played by Jon
Cryer. Pretty in Pink is tragically marred by the wrong ending: Ringwald
walks into the sunset with the preppie rich kid. But Hughes must have realized
his mistake, because the next year he essentially rewrote it as Some Kind of
Wonderful . The quirky and talented poor kid, played by Eric Stoltz, has a
crush on the prom queen, which breaks the heart of the orphan girl (!) who has
been secretly infatuated with him for years. Check out the clip available at
right for the scene in which Stoltz makes the right choice.

            The male Molly Ringwald
was John Cusack, who started his career with a minor role in Sixteen
Candles. The second coming of John Hughes was the writer and director
Cameron Crowe, who cast Cusack in Say Anything ..., a funnier and more
touching John Hughes movie than Hughes ever made. Cusack plays the funny kid
from a broken home who crushes on the A-student valedictorian played by Ione
Skye. In the clip available at right, Cusack answers her dad's question about
what he plans to do with his life after high school.

            At the end of the 1980s, teen films took a darker turn with
the black comedy Heathers . The three popular girls, who all have the
same name, take up Veronica (Winona Ryder), who can't resist the offer of
inclusion but detests their values (they make her ignore her old friends and
play cruel practical jokes on losers). Only this time, instead of humiliating
the jocks and cheerleaders, Ryder and her boyfriend, played by Christian
Slater, kill them. View the clip available at left to see them off the first
Heather. As black as it is, Heathers has the same theme as the
Ringwald/Cusack movies. It's a fantasy about high school as a kind rather than
a cruel place. Ryder realizes that murder is not the right approach and offers
to spend prom night with the fat girl everyone abuses.

            What makes these teen
flicks the ideal good bad movies? The first is the familiarity of the world
they portray. Not everyone in America goes to a big public high school, but
everyone goes to a high school governed by a hierarchy of popularity and
cliques. Films set at college are never as universally recognizable, because
people's experiences after high school are too different to generalize about.
Universities, unlike high schools, are not unitary social structures. The
second essential quality of these films is that they are all, basically, the
same. The formula allows one to savor minor differences and adaptations.

            For some reason, teen flicks died out for a while after
Heathers --perhaps because it took the conventions of the form as far as
they could go. Then, following the success of Clueless , teen films
started to trickle back. The trickle has suddenly become a torrent. The
economics are easy enough to understand, lacking major stars, these movies are
inexpensive to make and draw the ideal audiences: teens who are capable of
seeing Titanic 17 times. She's All That was made for a $10
million budget and has already grossed nearly $60 million.

            What's different about
the late 1990s' version? Teen films no longer glorify drug use, but other than
that, very little. As the genre has expanded, it has broken into sub-genres.
There's the black Heathers category , the most recent exercise being the
reportedly awful Jawbreaker . There's the self-referential horror
category as manifest in the Scream movies. There's a Masterpiece
Theatre for juniors category that started with the delightful Baz Luhrmann
version of Romeo + Juliet with Leonardo DiCaprio and Claire Danes.

            But the reigning champ is still the Hughesesque romance,
the most recent example of which is She's All That . The heroine is an
artist from a broken home whose father cleans swimming pools. The most perfect
boy in her school, who dates the most popular bitch, makes a bet with his best
friend that he can transform the ugly duckling into the prom queen. Of course,
the perfect boy ends up ditching his snobby clique and falling in love with
her. Even the racy Cruel Intentions , set among rich Upper East Side
kids, is a spin on the old Hughes formula. The evil super-rich girl makes a
diabolical bet with her stepbrother that he can't corrupt the new girl at
school. The stepbrother falls for the good girl and the wicked stepsister is
humiliated in front of everyone.

            These films have been derided as "teensploitation,"
but I don't think the description is fair. Instead of pandering to the
prejudices of teens, they offer a fantasy about a freer and happier
adolescence. Their message is that there's life beyond high school, kids aren't
bound by what adults want from them, how their peers think of them, or the ways
in which they categorize themselves. All Hollywood films are exploitative to
some extent. But I'd say a sweet, dumb movie such as She's All That is a
lot less insulting to teen intelligence, and to the average adult one, than
Patch Adams or Message in a Bottle .

         
      
   
