
   
   
      
         
            No. 208: &quot;Favorite Things&quot;

            

               Urine-absorbing disposable diapers, mistake-eradicating liquid paper,
bullet-stopping Kevlar--what's the connection?
            

             

            by noon
ET Wednesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Monday's Question
(No. 207)--"Samaranch Hand":
               

               

                  
                     
                        
                           
                              As it prepares to convene in
Switzerland this week, the International Olympic Committee has invited a
well-known American to join its reform panel. Who and why? (Question
courtesy of Andrew
Staples.)
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               

               "The
Yankee Clipper, Joe DiMaggio, because of his grace under pressure and his
unimpeachable sense of fair pl--What? He did? Oh, never mind. Can you get me
tickets to The Lion King for my 10-year-old?"-- David Rakoff
( Bill Franzen and Eliot Cohen had similar answers.)

               "John
Glenn. Anyone who can take a junket on the space shuttle is all right with the
IOC."-- Dwight Lemke
               

               "The
ubiquitous Alan Dershowitz. Because he's ubiquitous."-- Dr. Jonathan E.
Snow
               

               "Whoopi
Goldberg. It's a trap: They're going to push her into a pit and cover it with a
steel plate in order to prevent her from hosting the Oscars. It's far-fetched,
but a guy can dream."-- Daniel Radosh
               

               "Phil
Knight, but only if he agrees to bring 20 pairs of Air Jordans for each
committee member, plus some hookers. In return, Nike becomes the official shoe
of the IOC Reform Committee."-- Tim "Deathly Afraid of Freeways"
Carvell
               

                

                

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

            

            Do dark and brooding News
Quiz participants regard any effort at reform as insincere or just the IOC's?
What about AFSCME DC37, the New York municipal employees union? What about the
New York Police Department's recent plan--what was it called? oh yeah--Pride,
Respect, or I'll Shoot. No, wait, it was CPR: Courtesy, Professionalism,
Respect. How's that working out, by the way? Here's how: According to a New
York Times survey, 51 percent of all New Yorkers (72 percent of
African-Americans) believe most of the police use excessive force; 70 percent
think the police often engage in brutality against blacks; 60 percent think
that the mayor's response to the Amadou Diallo shooting has made matters worse.
The mayor's press secretary said everyone in New York is just wrong: "The poll
numbers seem to be driven by false perceptions." That's a kind of reform plan.
And by "dark and brooding," I, of course, mean appealing and simpatico.

            
               News Quiz Time
Line
            

            

               First slam at Eleanor Clift--March 16, 1999

               First reference to Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis--March 16, 1999

               First use of phrase "monkey ass" (not alluding
to Landis)--March 16, 1999

            

            
               Honest to God I'm
Not Making Up This Answer
            

            As Greg Diamond , seeking the moral high ground, IOC
President Juan Antonio Samaranch has invited Henry Kissinger to join the reform
panel, for reasons that utterly confound me. The secret war in Cambodia? The
overthrow of the Allende government? The harassment of Daniel Ellsberg?

            Also invited, Jacques
Delors, architect of the European Union, and Fiat tycoon Giovanni Agnelli.
Samaranch told the Milan-based Gazzetta dello Sport that the new IOC
would include 35 representatives each from international sports federations and
national Olympic committees, "plus a group of athletes of great prestige and
some global personalities of unquestioned fame." A lovely phrase, that:
unquestioned fame. Like Idi Amin or Cher.

            
               The Price Is Right
Extra
            

            Match each dollar amount with the item it buys.

            
               Cost
            

            1. $1,099

            2. $7 million

            3. $3.5 million

            4. $5.25 million

            

               Benefit
            

            A. "Chainsaw" Al Dunlap's back pay from Sunbeam.

            B. Bonus payment to Philip Morris CEO Geoffrey
Bible.

            C. Amount left on contract of fired New Jersey Nets
coach John Calipari.

            D. Panasonic's high-tech toilet seat.

            

               Answers
            

            1-D: The "personal hygiene system" advertised in
today's Times features "intimate washing, heated seat, air dryer."

            2-C: Off to a 3-17 start, Calipari will likely get
to keep the money. Of his former bosses he said, "I do believe that they care
about me." None of his players was heard to say the same about their
ex-coach.

            3-B: Bible's bonus, a reward for his part in the
settlement with 46 states, was approved by the head of the compensation
committee, John Reed. As co-chair of Citigroup, Reed got a bonus of $7.8
million. That's called "empathy."

            4-A: Dunlap, the
dismissed CEO says he's owed the money; the company says he's not. Sunbeam,
incidentally, does not make a personal hygiene system, but for enough money,
Dunlap will come to your house, give you a sponge bath, and fire your
mother.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Don King. (Oh, right--you
kill one guy and I suppose that makes you a murderer. People are so
judgmental.)

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
