
   
   
      
         
            No. 205: &quot;Nothing but Cash&quot;

            

               Devise a pair of words to fill in the two blanks--one word each--as
Thomas Rogers, president of NBC cable, describes his shift away from the old
network economic model: "Our goal over time is to turn viewers into __________
and __________."
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Tuesday's Question
(No. 204)--"Stay!":
               

               

                  
                     Who said this to whom about what, "Keep on doing what you're
doing, and don't call us, we'll call you."
                  
               

               
"Madeleine Albright, to Bill Clinton, shortly after her appalling discovery
that the president had promised Slobodan Milosevic a job at Revlon if only he
would sign the damn peace treaty."-- Jennifer Miller
               

               "The
head of the Human Genome Project said it to the head of the Dog Genome Project
when asked for advice."-- Mac Thomason
               

               "St.
Peter, to Roger Ebert, regarding his concerns about working with Tom
Shales."-- Erich Van Dussen
               

               "The
emperor told us that in 1941 when they sent us to this island. Now you say the
war is over? I wonder why he didn't call."-- David Ballard
               

               "Oh my
God! The call is coming from inside the house!"-- Eric "Just Watched
Urban Legend " Fredericksen
               

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

               Instead of our regular class work, let's go outside
under the big, old dead elm and show a filmstrip, i.e., let's quote a few
highlights from Tim Weiner's dark and charming New York Times obit
titled "Sidney Gottlieb, 80, Dies, Took LSD to CIA," an account of the man who
ran MKUltra, a project that dosed unsuspecting Americans with hallucinogenic
drugs for charity.

               

                  "In one case, a mental patient in Kentucky was dosed with LSD continuously
for 174 days."

                  "The experiments were useless."

                  "The CIA awarded Mr. Gottlieb the Distinguished Intelligence Medal and
deliberately destroyed most of the MKUltra records in 1973."

                  " 'Gottlieb never did what he did for inhumane reasons,' Mr. Marks
said."

                  "Gottlieb ... developed a poison handkerchief to kill an Iraqi colonel, an
array of toxic gifts to be delivered to Fidel Castro, and a poison dart to kill
a leftist leader in the Congo. None of the plans succeeded."

                  "He bought land with an old log cabin outside a small Virginia town,
Boston, where he practiced two of his lifelong hobbies, folk dancing and
herding goats."

                  "Friends and enemies alike say Mr. Gottlieb was
a kind of genius."

               

               
                  Golden Arch's
Answer
               

               Pope John Paul II said it to Cardinal John O'Connor
about his offer to resign as archbishop of New York.

               Five years ago, on turning 75, O'Connor submitted a
pro forma resignation, as church law requires, and received the above
reply. Last week, in what was seen as a sign of his impending retirement, he
invited all the priests in the archdiocese to see him celebrate the Chrism
Mass.

               "The Cardinal turns 80 in January," says archdiocese
spokesman Joseph Zwilling, "and I think many people including the Cardinal
expect that will pretty much mark the end of his term as Archbishop."

               With its characteristic
accent on youth, the church prohibits cardinals over 80 to hold certain offices
or vote for a new pope. Before accepting O'Connor's resignation, the pope is
expected to name a successor to Washington's Cardinal James Hickey.

               
                  Movie Math
Extra
               

               Match the numbers with
the movie lore they enumerate. All figures refer to 1998 movies produced by
members of the MPAA (i.e., excluding DreamWorks and New Line among others.)

               
                  The
Numbers
               

               1. $52.7 million

               2. $25.3 million

               3. $6.95 billion

               4. 1.48 billion

               5. 34,168

               
                  The
Lore
               

               A. Total cost of Elia Kazan rationalizations.

               B. Average production cost of a movie.

               C. Average marketing cost of a movie.

               D. Total engineering cost of Roger Ebert's new
partner, a giant talking cheese sandwich.

               E. Number of movie screens in the United States.

               F. Number of Americans who've dozed during a Kevin
Costner movie.

               G. Number of Americans who envied those dozing
through a Kevin Costner movie.

               H. Box office receipts for 1998.

               I. Insured value of Meg Ryan's perkiness.

               J. Admissions for
1998.

               
                  The
Answers
               

               
                  1-B,
2-C, 3-H, 4-J, 5-E.
               

               
                  Fun
Fact
               

               During the February
sweeps period, 21 of the 25 most watched programs on cable TV were wrestling
shows.

               
                  Common
Denominator
               

               That scamp Monica
Lewinsky and her sexual shenanigans.

            

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
