
   
   
      
         
            

            
 Kosovo update:
1) NATO admitted that one of its planes bombed a caravan of ethnic
Albanians. Yugoslavia, claiming that the bomb killed 75 civilians, called
it a NATO "atrocity." NATO said the plane's crew mistook the caravan for a
Serbian military convoy. President Clinton said that such tragedies are
"inevitable" in war and that NATO must fight on to stop far worse Serbian
atrocities. 2) The U.S. military is reportedly planning to call up thousands
of reservists . 3) U.S. officials changed their definition of victory. Old
definition: Driving the Serbs out of Kosovo. New definition: Shifting the
"balance of power" from the Serbs to the Kosovo Liberation Army. The sunny
spin: Now we have a viable strategy. The cynical spin: Now we're allied with
vengeful, ethnic-separatist thugs. (4/16/99)
            

            
Astronomers
found another solar system . It consists of at least three huge planets
around a star 44 light-years away. The spins: 1) We are not alone! 2) There
can't be life on these planets, because they're too big, too gaseous, and too
close to their star. 3) Maybe they have moons capable of supporting life. 4)
Among the 200 billion sunlike stars in our galaxy, we're certain to find other
habitable solar systems. (4/16/99)
            

            
 Hockey legend
Wayne Gretzky is retiring . Known as "The Great One," he holds the
National Hockey League records for goals (894), assists (1,962), and most
valuable player awards (nine). As of Friday morning, his decision wasn't yet
official, but he indicated he would retire "unless a miracle happens between
now and Saturday." Hockey pundits lauded him in terms reminiscent of Michael
Jordan. The happy spin: Gretzky built hockey into a popular sport in the United
States. The sad spin: He's going out on a low note because his team, the New
York Rangers, is mediocre. (4/16/99)
            

            
President
Clinton was held in contempt of court for lying in the Paula Jones case.
Judge Susan Webber Wright called his testimony about his relationship with
Monica Lewinsky "false, misleading and evasive" and "designed to obstruct the
judicial process." The judge ordered him to pay court costs and Jones' legal
expenses that were caused by his lying. Pundits agreed that materially the
ruling is just a slap on the wrist (and therefore Clinton won't appeal it) but
that symbolically it's a huge blow to his legacy, since he's the first
president to be held in contempt of court. Conservatives hailed the ruling as
history's verdict on Clinton. Liberal editorialists paired it with the
acquittal/mistrial of Susan McDougal, which they portrayed as a similar rebuke
to Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr. Cynics expressed satisfaction that each
man is being repudiated without vindicating the other. (4/15/99)
            

            
Independent
Counsel Kenneth Starr testified against renewal of the independent counsel
law . He argued that it had failed in its stated purpose, which is to assure
the public that investigations of the government would be nonpartisan.
Democratic senators blamed Starr for discrediting the law by injecting politics
into his investigations. Starr replied that the courts had repeatedly rejected
assertions that he and his staff had "conducted ourselves inappropriately."
Elite opinion is divided into three camps: 1) in favor of Starr and the
independent counsel law; 2) against both; and 3) against Starr (as a bad
example) but in favor of the law. After Starr's testimony, all three camps took
a break from their quarreling to make fun of Starr for being the only advocate
of the fourth position--against the law but in favor of himself.
(4/15/99)
            

            
Dr. Jack
Kevorkian was sentenced to 10 to 25 years in prison for injecting lethal
drugs into a terminally ill man with the man's consent. The case was based on a
videotape of the man's death, which was brought to CBS by Kevorkian and aired
on 60 Minutes . He can't be paroled until he has served at least six
years. Kevorkian's lawyer's spin: The death was a victimless crime, the verdict
is an injustice, the sentence was too harsh, and Kevorkian will starve himself
to death in prison. The prosecutor's spin: Kevorkian forced the issue by taking
the tape to CBS. The judge's spin: The case wasn't about assisted suicide, it
was about a flagrant challenge to the rule of law. The new liberal spin:
Kevorkian was an embarrassment to the assisted suicide movement, and we're glad
he's out of the way. (4/15/99)
            

            

               Susan
McDougal avoided conviction in her Whitewater cover-up trial. She was
acquitted 
               of obstructing Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr's
investigation (by refusing to testify against the Clintons) and got a
mistrial 
               on the remaining charges of 
               criminal contempt
because the jury was deadlocked. McDougal's spin: The jury agreed that her
refusal to testify was based on a reasonable belief that Starr was trying to
get her to lie. The prosecutor's spin: She escaped justice by putting Starr on
trial, but we'll try her again. Her lawyer's spin: Go ahead, and we'll try
you again. (4/12/99)
            

            

               José
María Olazábal 
               won the Masters golf tournament. The sentimental
spin: It's the heartwarming tale of a golfer who came back to win one of the
sport's biggest prizes after being so seriously injured three years ago that he
couldn't walk. The counterspin: It's the heartbreaking tale of third-place
finisher Greg Norman, who, after blowing a six-stroke lead in the tournament's
final round three years ago, choked away his lead again this year. The
completely unsentimental spin: It's the tournament's worst winning score in a
decade. (4/12/99)
            

            

               Two of
the 
               Washington beavers were captured . The National Park Service
suspects them of gnawing down four cherry trees in the District of Columbia's
scenic Tidal Basin. Agents are pursuing a third beaver that is believed to be
still at large. The captured beavers were given medical checkups and were then
released in a secret location to protect them from public scrutiny. According
to the Washington Post , "Officials tried to determine the sex of the
second beaver, but the animal did not seem to appreciate the prodding." The
spins: 1) Hurray, the feds saved the trees! 2) Hurray, they caught the beavers!
3) Boo, let the beavers eat the trees! 4) This is another attempt to distract
attention from the bombing of Yugoslavia. (4/12/99)
            

         
      
   
