
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , April 4
            

            
               (posted Friday, April
2, 1999)
            

            The cover editorial bluntly criticizes NATO's cautious
intervention strategy for Kosovo ("horribly wrong") and urges the West to
assume control of the region. The piece acknowledges that this will be
difficult "from the air alone" but doesn't directly recommend ground troops.
Another editorial berates President Clinton for foreclosing
the ground troop option, thus goading Slobodan Milosevic into further obstinacy
and tying NATO's hands. ... An article calls Microsoft President Steve Ballmer a
"tyrant," a "little boy," and a poor choice for the position. Ballmer is
neither restrained nor tech-savvy enough to lead the company through its
current legal and business challenges.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               
                  , April 19
            

            
               (posted Friday, April
2, 1999)
            

            The cover story claims
that New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has become a victim of his own
achievements. Because his crime crackdown has succeeded, further reductions in
lawlessness are coming at the cost of increased friction with innocent
citizens. Racial hysterics and Dinkins Democrats exploit incidents like the
Diallo murder to sully the mayor's success. ... An analysis claims that
Republicans have abandoned foreign policy principles. The GOP was gearing up to
criticize Clinton for coddling dictators, but the Kosovo bombing
short-circuited this argument. So now some Republicans are criticizing Clinton
for attacking a dictator, claiming that humanitarian interventions exhaust U.S.
resources. ... An article argues that military exchanges with China are
foolhardy. Officials insist the exchanges help dispel Chinese perceptions of
American military weakness and give our guys a peek at China's military. But
there is no real reciprocity of access, and we find ourselves hosting such
dubious guests as generals who perpetrated the Tiananmen Square crackdown.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               
                  , April 4
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
April 1, 1999)
            

            The cover story examines
"The Last Counterculture": the Catholic priesthood. It attributes the plummet
in the number of men entering the priesthood to pedophilia scandals,
disillusionment with celibacy, and "the increasingly secular nature of American
life." Contemporary seminarians try not to disengage from mainstream America,
but they are disgusted with a popular culture that celebrates contraception,
premarital sex, and godlessness. ... A profile of Dan Quayle suggests
that his presidential run is all about proving he's not an idiot. The theme of
his campaign--also the subtitle of his memoir--is that he's "America's most
misjudged public figure." Though there is some Quayle revisionism--Larry King
told him, "You're not a joke like you once were"--he is still widely considered
unelectable.

            

               
                  Time
               
               
                  , Newsweek , and U.S. News &
World Report , April 5
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
30, 1999)
            

            The newsweeklies all run worried, doubtful cover
stories on the Kosovo war and eavesdrop on the high-level conversations behind
it. Time 
               stresses the historical angle, calling the Balkans a
centuries-old "tinderbox" that the NATO airstrikes will ignite.
Newsweek 's history lesson: Henry Kissinger reminds readers that World War I started not because of
ethnic cleansing but because of outsider intervention. Time and

                  U.S. News
                argue that the strikes compromise both dicta of
the Powell Doctrine because the United States isn't acting with either maximum
force or an exit strategy. Both Time and 
                  Newsweek
                report that the president told his advisers,
"This isn't a 30-second commercial. This is going to be a sustained
effort."

            All three magazines profile Slobodan Milosevic.
Newsweek 
               psychologizes that his parents' suicides caused his "clear
longing for certainties, a need to be in control." Time 
               describes Milosevic as "one of the great losers of history"
but then wonders if he's crafty enough to outmaneuver NATO anyway. U.S.
News and Newsweek cheer Gen. Wesley Clark, director of NATO's
campaign against the Serbs. U.S. News 
               calls him "the smartest man in the Army," while
Newsweek 
               describes how Clark rappelled down a mountainside to rescue
soldiers in Bosnia.

            Rudolph Giuliani
defends  his handling of the Amadou Diallo shooting to
Newsweek . "[The New York Police Department] is not the KKK," he
offers.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               
                  , April 5
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
30, 1999)
            

            A piece by Seymour Hersh
blames the U.S. government for the disintegration of U.N. weapons inspection
efforts in Iraq. Eager to assassinate Saddam Hussein--and supported by
presidential orders--the CIA hijacked the intelligence operation designed by
the U.N. Special Commission for Iraq to track Iraq's weapons development, thus
destroying UNSCOM's credibility. Hersh also alleges that Iraq paid Russian
Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov $800,000 for weapons know-how in 1997.
... A story describes the courtship between John Hinckley Jr. and a
woman who had murdered her 10-year-old daughter, when both were confined to a
D.C. mental hospital. The romance developed steadily until Hinckley began to
pester a hospital pharmacist who resembled Jodie Foster.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , April 5
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
30, 1999)
            

            The editors lambast the "pathetic
incoherence" of Republican foreign policy and urge a return to the more moral
and aggressive approach of the Reagan era. ... A piece calls the
protests against the Diallo killing "a ludicrous moral pageant" and an attempt
by the "prevailing ideological power structure" to delegitimize Mayor Giuliani
in particular and conservative governance in general. ... The cover
story argues that George Washington has been ignored by historians because he
was a paragon of virtue and praises recent efforts to spiff up his media
image.

            

               
                  Esquire
               
               
                  , April 1999
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, March
30, 1999)
            

            An exposé headlined
"DWB" (Driving While Black) slams Operation Pipeline--a Drug Enforcement
Administration-sponsored program to catch drug "mules"--which effectively
targets minorities. Cops are trained to pull over, interrogate, and search on
the basis of "indicators," such as air fresheners, fast-food trash, lack of eye
contact, and insufficient or excessive luggage. The indicators are often a
proxy for the motorist's race: One trooper admits he was trained to target
blacks.

            

               
                  Ms.
               
               , April/May 1999
            

            
               (posted Saturday, May
27, 1999)
            

            The feminist magazine
relaunches with articles on subjects predictable (female candidates for
president, abortion clinic violence) and less so (adultery, the benefits of
eating soy). ... A patient narrates her face lift. At first, she feels
like "female goods in a dick-driven market," but a few weeks later finds her
smoother, younger face a source of pleasure and confidence. ... A photo
essay, "In Praise of Women," features shots of impoverished or oppressed women
in Afghanistan, Africa, and Haiti, with lushly worded captions. ("Though worlds
apart geographically, we are all sisters in our souls.")

         
      
   
