
   
   
      
         
            Suffocating the Cat

            Gen. Augusto Pinochet made
a comeback on Europe's front pages Friday after British Home Secretary Jack
Straw announced that Spanish extradition proceedings against him could go
ahead. The Daily Telegraph of London claimed that it would now be "several
years" before the 83-year-old former president of Chile would either be sent
for trial in Spain or freed. In Spain, the British decision was warmly
welcomed. El País
said in an editorial Friday that the mere fact that Pinochet is to be
subjected to extradition proceedings constitutes "an irreversible victory for
the rights of man." It represents "the birth of an effective universal
jurisdiction for dealing with crimes against humanity and, at the same time, an
unequivocal warning that the United Kingdom will not be a refuge for
blood-stained dictators."

            In another editorial, El Mundo of Madrid said much the same thing, welcoming the
arrival of "a supranational judicial structure that will be able from now on to
knock down the protective barriers that tyrants throughout the world have
erected around themselves." Both papers welcomed the fact that Pinochet's
friends and supporters-- El País named Margaret Thatcher, Henry
Kissinger, ex-President Bush, Sen. Jesse Helms, and the pope--had failed in
their efforts to get him freed.

            In London, the
conservative press took the opposite view. The Daily Telegraph called
Straw "a straw man" and ridiculed his claim to have made his decision "with an
open mind." The paper said, "The Home Secretary does not allow his open mind to
be troubled by the fact that, long after Gen. Pinochet peacefully relinquished
power, his former opponents are pleading for his return. Nor does the damage
inflicted by the affair on British national interests, already palpable in the
Falklands and on our annual exports to Chile of 200 million pounds [$320
million], disturb the peace of the ministerial open mind." The tabloid Daily
Mail quoted Thatcher as saying that Straw had "demeaned his office" with a
vindictive decision.

            The main story across Europe, though, was NATO's admission
that it accidentally bombed a refugee convoy in Kosovo. This gave rise to much
comment that clean wars don't exist and renewed support for NATO's decision to
continue the bombing. "Wars mean casualties" said the Telegraph , calling
once again for the deployment of ground troops. And the liberal Guardian had an
editorial saying exactly the same thing: "If Nato is to blame for Wednesday's
carnage, then that has only underscored the inadequacy of air power. Forces on
the ground is becoming urgent." Le Figaro of Paris said the West has no choice but to
continue fighting and quoted a Provençal proverb: "Once one has started
suffocating the cat, one has to finish it." The German press reported broad
support in the Bundestag for the government's commitment to the war and noted
American reservations about its peace plan.

            
               Corriere della Sera of Milan reported huge flight
delays in Italy because of congestion in the skies caused by military aircraft
bombing Yugoslavia. Five out of six domestic civilian flights are now departing
late, it said. In Britain, the Times reported that the BBC's world affairs editor, John
Simpson, was coming under fierce British government criticism for "Serb bias"
in his coverage from Belgrade. "In an astonishing attack, senior officials
accused him of presenting at face value claims by the Serbs about damage done
by Nato attacks, being grossly simplistic in suggesting that the Nato assault
has united the Serb population and Milosevic's forces, and of swallowing Serb
propaganda about the impact of Nato's air raids," the Times said. In an
editorial, the paper defended Simpson's reporting from Belgrade, but attacked
NATO for being so quick to blame Serbia for the deaths of Albanian refugees in
the disputed convoy incident.

            "The Pentagon's
inordinately clumsy handling of the news when it first broke must have left
Slobodan Milosevic weeping tears of joy," the paper said. Since the Pentagon
had no evidence at that time to show who was to blame, its spokesman Kenneth
Bacon "did the credibility of the Alliance nothing but harm by alleging that
Serb forces had done the killing themselves to embarrass Nato. ... [T]his
disastrously gave the impression that Nato might stoop to the black propaganda
at which the Milosevic regime excels."

            
According to an Australian biologist, certain
"rebel" worker bees have found ways of breeding in defiance of the convention
that only queen bees are allowed to reproduce. Ben Oldroyd of the University of
Sydney told the Sydney
Morning Herald Thursday that in normal bee colonies only the queen is
allowed to lay eggs, and if worker bees lay their eggs, they are destroyed in
seconds by other bees, which can identify the queen's eggs by a special
chemical she marks them with. Because of a genetic mutation, however, certain
bees are able to put a fake royal marker on their eggs, making other bees think
they are the queen's. The forgery enables a worker bee's eggs to survive,
thrive, and reproduce, Oldroyd said.

             

         
      
   
