
   
   
      
         
             The Phantom Menace

            The B-2 stealth bomber had
barely touched down after its first ever combat mission last week when two of
its most loyal allies staged a press conference to claim vindication. Standing
before one of the sleek black aircraft on the tarmac at Missouri's Whitman Air
Force Base, Democratic Reps. Ike Skelton of Missouri and Norm Dicks of
Washington scorned skeptics who had doubted the $2 billion (each!) airplane.
"We have seen this type of criticism on every major weapons system," said
Dicks, "and when they go to war, they work."

            Inside the same media
moment, footage of Serbian villagers frolicking beside the wreckage of a downed
F-117 stealth fighter punctured the technology's invincibility--and rekindled
the debate over U.S. reliance on high-tech weaponry. In 1981, at the dawn of
the stealth era, James Fallows warned in National Defense that
"airplanes, tanks, ships and missiles have grown too complex, expensive and
delicate to be useful in warfare or credible for deterrent purposes." Fallows
argued in vain that the United States should instead spend its defense budget
on cheap and simple armaments, and the military pumped around $50 billion into
stealth programs alone. Then, a decade ago, as the military redefined the B-2's
mission from an H-bomb taxi to a deliverer of conventional bombs, a Republican
senator from Maine articulated the silliness of the concept: "It's the
equivalent of saying we're going to send a Rolls-Royce down into a combat zone
to pick up groceries." Today, as secretary of defense, William Cohen sends the
B-2 out on Balkans milk runs.

            Although the B-2 stealth bomber, manufactured by Northrop
Grumman Corp., and the F-117 stealth fighter, built by Lockheed Martin, are
based on different underlying technologies, their names conceal a
little-appreciated similarity: They're both 
               bombers . The F-117
was originally imagined as an invisible dogfighter, but the Pentagon reframed
the plane's mission when the geniuses at the aircraft skunkworks failed to push
the technology far enough. While not a fighter, the $45 million F-117 ain't no
sissy, either. It carries a pair of 2,000-pound bombs into combat, but it's
slow and hard to maneuver. The 56-plane fleet only flies at night (which
explains why it's painted black) because it has no air-to-air combat
capabilities. If an enemy fighter spots and engages the F-117, it's toast. Very
expensive black toast.

            At least the stealth
bomber begins to live up to its name. Designed as a long-range weapon that
would penetrate deep into the Soviet Union to wage nuclear war, today it
subsists on a no-nukes diet, carrying 16 satellite-guided, one-ton bombs (or
eight 5,000-pounders) into battle. Editorial writers love to note that, ounce
for ounce, the B-2 is five times pricier than gold. Its incredible cost stems
from endless development snafus and such mind-bending design features as a
surface smoothness measurable to 1/10,000 th of an inch. The Air
Force defends the cost by saying that one B-2, with its heavy payload, can do
the work of several conventional bombers--risking fewer pilots in a safer
plane. But even the hawks who considered the B-2's sticker price a bargain when
the game was nuclear deterrence grudgingly admit that nobody would ever build
such a device to drop conventional bombs on Serbian factories.

            With its subtle curves, smooth surface, and intimidating
bat wings, the B-2 is the cooler big brother of the two planes. But the smaller
F-117's boxy and angular look gives it a nerdy cachet. The two designs
represent different strategies for evading radar: The B-2 absorbs enemy radar
waves; the F-117's awkward geometry mostly scatters them.

            Neither design is
flawless. It's commonly assumed that stealth planes are invisible to radar.
They're not--they're just very difficult to see. And sometimes they're not hard
to see at all. Stealth technology is vulnerable to older, long-wave radars and
well-coordinated radar systems. Also, the planes are exponentially easier to
spot when they open their bomb-bay doors, even during simple bank turns. For
those reasons, the Pentagon has abandoned its original boasts that stealth
planes would be truly "invisible."

            
The previous watershed for stealth technology
was the 1991 Gulf War, in which the F-117 pounded Baghdad with impunity and
apparent precision. The General Accounting Office, however, later downgraded by
half the Pentagon's claim that stealth fighters had scored an 80 percent
mission success rate. Naysayers continue to heap scorn on the two stealth
bombers, insisting that the weapons have yet to be truly battle-tested because
the Serbs and the Iraqis who have faced the technology have put up no more than
a token resistance.

            Even so, the anecdotal
success of the Balkans adventure has refueled the high-tech crusade. Despite
the B-2's piddling role over Serbia so far--two missions involving a total of
four planes--the Wall Street Journal 's Paul Gigot thumbed his nose last
Friday at Democrats who had opposed the bomber, cracking wise about "B-2 Bill"
and suggesting the Pentagon could use 40 more of the machines. The stealth war
news comes at a critical moment for the Pentagon, which is pushing for the
production of a new-generation stealth fighter, the F-22 Raptor. (This one
really is a fighter.) The cost: About $60 billion to build more than 300
F-22s at $187 million apiece. That's nowhere near five times the F-22's weight
in gold, but still 10 times dearer than an F-16.

            The national love affair with stealthy weapons will endure
for several reasons. Although decades old, the technology is perennially
futuristic--it was the Romulans of Star Trek , after all, who first
invented "cloaking"--and it advances the ethos of American can-doism. (Planes
acquire an added allure whenever they're developed in secret: The military
didn't even confirm the F-117's existence until 1988, after 40 were built and
flying.) And then there's something perversely sexy about the vehicles'
max-tech black sheen, something peeping-tom kinky about the planes' advertised
invisibility, something magical about striking without being struck back.

            Despite their technological limitations, stealth
weapons appeal to us because they indulge our fear of commitment. And this is
what ultimately makes them pose their own kind of stealthy threat to us. As
we've seen, stealth weapons blind the risk-averse public and policy-makers to
the genuine perils of combat in the opening days of any military engagement,
turning war into an "out of sight, out of mind" proposition. They encourage the
view that there's nothing--from Iraqi germ weapons programs to Serbian
atrocities--that a few invisible planes can't fix. Enticing us into believing
that wars can be won with Futurama technology and without American blood
being shed, the seductive charms of stealth weapons ultimately evaporate into
nothingness. We are left unfulfilled by their limitations and cheated by their
costs.

         
      
   
