
   
   
      
         
            

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , April 26
            

            
               (posted Saturday,
April 10, 1999)
            

            The magazine's redesign brings with it a new Web site and a slick,
decidedly un-wonkish new look. ... The "TRB" column argues that the intelligence community should use its
Cold War-era spying apparatus to monitor human rights abuses. Spooks have
generally shied away from such missions because of the moral and political
dilemmas created when an intelligence agency witnesses atrocities. ... A
piece describes wartime propaganda on Serbian TV. The
programming includes nationalistic music videos, scornful exposés of Western
governments (Hillary Clinton is gay, as is most of Tony Blair's Cabinet), and
repeated showings of the film Wag the Dog .

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , April 10
            

            
               (posted Friday, April
9, 1999)
            

            The magazine endorses the deployment of ground troops in Kosovo.
But a separate editorial says that partial defeat (concessions to the
Serbs, failure to repatriate Kosovars) will be NATO's "price of going to war
without the will to do the job properly." The West neglected to anticipate the
refugee crisis, and the subsequent dispersal of homeless Kosovars across the
already shaky Balkan region could cause "a potential collapse of terrifying
proportions." ... A piece bemoans Britain's inert tourism business.
Government and industry are squabbling over whether to promote the country as
the modern, hip "Cool Britannia" or as the tradition-soaked land of high tea
and Queen Victoria.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , April 11
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
April 8, 1999)
            

            A writer visits two
veterans of the Tiananmen Square uprising who have moved to the United States
and become evangelical Christians. Both believe that "the root of democracy is
the spirit of Christ" and that democracy will only come to China through mass
religious awakening. ... The magazine profiles public radio hero Ira
Glass, host of This American Life , a weekly exploration of odd corners
of American culture. Glass is considering launching a TV version of the show,
but not on public television, which he deems too influenced by its corporate
sponsors.

            

               
                  Time
                
               and

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , April 12
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
6, 1999)
            

            The newsweeklies slam the Clinton administration's
Kosovo policy. Time 's caustic cover story ("War, we are shocked to discover, is not a video
game") derides the White House's apparently unshaken faith in air power.
Newsweek 
               lambastes the president for "diplomatic errors and missed
opportunities": Security advisers originally told the administration to offer
President Slobodan Milosevic a face-saving compromise; when action became
inevitable, they recommended strengthening NATO's military threat; finally, as
airstrikes began, they urged planning for the refugee crisis sure to come. At
every turn, Clinton failed to heed. A sidebar reports that in the early '90s the CIA nixed a plot
by Milosevic's inner circle to overthrow the dictator. A Newsweek

               piece crudely indicts the entire Serb nation (they "didn't
need to load Kosovars into boxcars to look bad"). Since losing the Battle of
Kosovo in 1389, the Serbs have been "seasoned haters raised on self-pity." Both
magazines print huge, heart-rending photographs of Kosovar refugees.

            
               Time explains why the anti-sweatshop
movement is growing on college campuses: The AFL-CIO has jump-started the
protests by lavishing student activists with internships and trips to countries
with poor working conditions.

            
               Newsweek

               writes that Ernest Hemingway's soon-to-be published final
manuscript, True at First Light , a fictionalized account of an African
safari, contains some of his funniest and most complex work.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , April 12
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
6, 1999)
            

            The cover
story opines that the United States should have offered Milosevic a
better deal at Rambouillet. A sidebar suggests that the president's lingering anger over
impeachment has colored his approach to Kosovo crisis. Another sidebar , titled "Talking Casualties," scopes out what it
would take for NATO to win a ground war (200,000 troops and a month or two of
setup time). NATO commander Gen. Wesley Clark is a "born-again advocate" of an
invasion. ... A story forecasts country music's Next Big Thing: African-American
crooners. Country originated in gospel and blues, but since the civil rights
era blacks have associated country music with white prejudice. Now record
executives are hoping that black country acts will boost lagging sales.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , April 12
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
6, 1999)
            

            
               The 
               New
Yorker excerpts Ralph Ellison's posthumous novel Juneteenth , the
story of a boy of mixed race who denies his black heritage and becomes a racist
senator. It will be published in June. ... The magazine profiles a
controversial British "what if" historian whose work examines European history
as it might have been. He has deemed that World War I was Britain's
fault and that allowing the Germans a partial victory then would have prevented
the Bolshevik Revolution, World War II, and the Holocaust. ... A writer
recounts the colorful rise and fall of the Rev. J. Charles Jessup, the "the
most preachable preacher that ever preached preachable preaching." The star
faith healer built America's first evangelical empire in the 1940s by
broadcasting his tent revival act on the radio. After collecting about $10
million in "faith donations," Jessup was locked up for mail fraud.

            
               
                  The
Nation
               
               , April 19
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
6, 1999)
            

            Much condemnation of
NATO's air campaign. An editorial says the bombing encourages Serb nationalism,
enables Milosevic to crack down on dissent, destabilizes Russia, undermines the
United Nations, and violates the principle that foreign powers should not
intervene in civil wars. ... A scathing article says the administration
is acting to make the world safe for American economic imperialism as much as
to avert a humanitarian disaster. Given U.S. brutality in South Vietnam and its
failure to stop other horrors (Rwanda, Sierra Leone, etc.), America "has no
moral ground to stand on" in condemning and attacking the Serbs.

         
      
   
