
   
   
      
         
             Thank Heaven for Little Boys

            It is, of course, every politician's fantasy to
discover that an opponent molests children. But since such pedarastic
revelations are (surprisingly) rare, pols sometimes must settle for the next
best thing: pretending that their opponent coddles child molesters.
(Click for a spectacular example from the 1998 election.)

            The political benefits of pedophilia have not been
lost on Washington's Republicans, who have ginned up not one but two child
molestation controversies during the past few weeks. These tempests do not
arise from any actual disagreement over pedophilia. Rather, they are perfect
case studies in how politicians fabricate, then profit from, an inflammatory
issue. (See also: Democrats and Social Security, Democrats and Medicare,
etc.)

            The first controversy begins with a July 1998
article from Psychological Bulletin , the journal of the American
Psychological Association. Researchers Bruce Rind of Temple University, Philip
Tromovitch of University of Pennsylvania, and Robert Bauserman of University of
Michigan re-examined 59 studies in which child sexual abuse victims had been
surveyed as college students. They concluded that victims, especially boys,
typically do not suffer "intense psychological harm" from childhood sexual
abuse. The researchers also recommended changing the terminology of sexual
abuse: An encounter between a "willing" child and an adult should be called
"adult-child sex," not "child sexual abuse."

            The study and its
revolting linguistic suggestion moldered away in the great bibliographic
graveyard until it was brought to the attention of radio nag Dr. Laura
Schlessinger in March. The article was an easy and deserving target: It
promoted the notion that an 8-year-old child could consent to sex. Author
Bauserman, it turned out, had published in Paidika: The Journal of
Pedophilia , a Dutch journal that favors the legalization of sex with
children. And the North American Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA) was
trumpeting the article on its Web site.

            Dr. Laura's crusade against the APA study enlisted the
legions of the Christian right: the Family Research Council, the Christian
Coalition, Dr. James Dobson, Jerry Falwell, and the Traditional Values
Coalition. The APA distanced itself from the study, noting the association's
long record of fighting pedophilia and insisting that the article does not
mitigate the illegality and immorality of pedophilia.

            In early May, Hill
conservatives deployed the APA article as a political weapon. Led by House
Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, 19 Republican members of Congress have
introduced a resolution to condemn the article and to demand that President
Clinton do the same. The House is expected to vote on the measure in mid-June.
Supporters of the resolution say congressional condemnation will discourage
child molesters from citing the article in their legal defenses--not that
there's any evidence that anyone has done that.

            The Republican National Committee saw its opportunity on
May 12, when White House spokesman Joe Lockhart skirted a question about the
APA study by saying the White House had not reviewed it. (The White House has,
of course, denounced pedophilia.) A week later, when Lockhart still had not
commented on the study, the RNC blast-faxed a press release congratulating the
GOP for its brave stand and slamming Clinton. Its headline: "White House Still
Spinning 'Sexual Relations'--As GOP Protects Minors From Pedophiles."

            The Christian right's
political exploitation of the APA squabble ranges from the Traditional Values
Coalition's criticism of "liberal political advocacy ... laying the groundwork
for the permissibility of child molestation" to the Family Research Council's
loopy accusation that the president is fronting for pro-pedarasty gay-rights
activists. "There is an eerie silence from the White House. I think they are
afraid of offending their allies in the homosexual ranks, since there is a
strong element of support among homosexual activists for lowering the age of
consent," says FRC Senior Director of Cultural Studies Robert Knight.

            The mainstream press has ignored the pedophilia flap, but
Dr. Laura, other talk radio hosts, and Christian activist publications have all
trumpeted the GOP's courage to the party's conservative base.

            The conservatives have
managed to cast themselves as the scourge of pedophiles, insinuate that the
president is soft on pedophilia, and link Clinton to a sub rosa campaign to
lower the age of consent--and all this is based on a report that no one noticed
until the Christian right uncovered it, that no one in the White House seems to
have read, and that no one remotely linked to the Democratic Party or the White
House has ever endorsed.

            The second pedophilia scare has served a more pragmatic
purpose: legislative blackmail. During the past few weeks, the Ways and Means
Committee has been considering a $2.3 billion bill for the U.S. Customs
Service. Federal employee unions, Democratic members, and the White House
strongly opposed a provision that would limit certain kinds of overtime pay for
customs officers. In the face of this opposition, Republicans played the
molester card. They added $10 million to the legislation for customs to
investigate Internet kiddie porn traffickers. They also added money for drug
interdiction.

            Democrats on the
committee endorsed the child-porn and drug funding but voted against the bill
in subcommittee because of the overtime provision. Trade Subcommittee Chairman
Phil Crane, R-Ill., immediately accused the minority party of giving aid and
comfort to molesters. "This bill protects our children from drug dealers and
pedophiles, and it's unfortunate that the Democrats have put special interest
pressures ahead of our children's safety," Crane said.

            Democrats, unwilling to take another beating, folded,
voting unanimously for the bill in full committee. It passed the House Tuesday
by 410-2.

            A Democratic staffer gripes, "There is not a single
member of the House who objects to the funding to fight child porn, but
Republicans constructed the vote in such a way that a vote against the bill can
be framed as a vote to say Democrats favor pornography. They added on the
child-porn provision and the drug provision simply to force us to vote for
them. And we had to."

            (Which raises an
intriguing notion: Why aren't Republican members of Congress attaching
anti-pedophile measures to every bill? What are they afraid of?)

            Now that they have conquered the House Democrats with bogus
pedophile charges, House Republicans are siccing the tactic against the White
House, which still objects to the overtime provision. "Our children are under
attack by child pornographers who prey on them over the Internet. Couple that
with the constant peddling of narcotics to our children and you have a deadly
combination that we must do everything we can to stop. This is not a time for
partisanship or special interest influence," Committee Chairman Bill Archer,
R-Texas, warned the president this week.

            The president, who doesn't want to be called
squishy on molesters, will probably cave. Once he does, perhaps the two parties
can abandon this imaginary controversy and tackle the scourge that actually
plagues Washington--not child sexual abuse, but child sexual abuse abuse.

         
      
   
