
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  The Deep End
of the Ocean
                (Columbia Pictures). Good reviews for this story of
the disappearance and eventual return of a young child, based on Jacquelyn
Mitchard's best seller. Michelle Pfeiffer's turn as the distraught mother is
singled out for praise; many reviewers call it "an exceptional performance ...
one of her best ever" (Kenneth Turan, the Los Angeles Times ). Some say
the subject matter has a made-for-TV feel, but most conclude that the acting
elevates the film into real drama. 
                  Slate
               's David
Edelstein is of two minds about the film: "I want to say it's subtle, but I
also want to say it's heavy-handed. I want to say it's incisive, but I have too
many problems with its psychological elisions to let it off the hook." (Read
the rest of his review .)

            
               
                  The
Corruptor
                (New Line Cinema). Hong Kong action star Chow Yun-Fat's
second English-language film (after the unenthusiastically received
Replacement Killers ) gets mixed reviews. Mark Wahlberg co-stars as
Chow's rookie partner in a task force charged with controlling gangs in
Chinatown. Critics like this movie better than Chow's last film and say it has
"a stylish patina that puts it a cut above much of the competition" (Stephen
Holden, the New York Times ). But the story, an exploration of the line
between everyday palm-greasing and real treachery, does not capture everyone's
imagination. Gary Arnold of the Washington Times calls it "a groggy
hotbed of sensationalism." (Find out more about Chow on this
fan site.)

            
               
                  The Rage:
Carrie 2
                (MGM/UA). Critics agree that this film is a sorry
imitation of the original: "as generic in every aspect as Brian De Palma's
original was inventive" (Dennis Harvey, Daily Variety ). The plot is the
same (tortured telekinetic teen starts bloodbath when humiliated), but this
time it's just "campy inanity" (Jay Carr, the Boston Globe ) with none of
the original's terrifying flair. The Los Angeles Times ' Kevin Thomas is
the film's only ally; he calls the direction "astute" and the script
"intelligent." (Find out more about the 1976 film starring Sissy Spacek
here.)

            
               
                  Wing
Commander
                (20 th Century Fox). This film adaptation of
the popular computer game is deemed "so cheesy it could be served on crackers"
(Renee Graham, the Boston Globe ). Freddie Prinze Jr. and Matthew Lillard
(who is "upstaged by his hair ," according to Entertainment
Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman) star as two young fighter pilots in the year
2564. Many critics note that the enemies (an evil race of aliens) look like
"characters from Cats reupholstered in slimy green Naugahyde" (Godfrey
Cheshire, Daily Variety ). The most notable thing about the film is that
the second trailer for the new Star Wars movie runs before it. (Find out
more about the computer game on this site.)

            

               Death
            

            
               Stanley
Kubrick (1928-1999). In a pre-release publicity coup for his
forthcoming Eyes Wide Shut , Stanley Kubrick dies. The director of A
Clockwork Orange , 2001: A Space Odyssey , and Dr. Strangelove Or:
How I Learned To Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb was universally hailed for
a famously uncompromising vision. It was an "amazingly varied body of work"
that was "unified not only by bizarre brilliance but also by its rare ability
to disturb" (Janet Maslin, the New York Times ). His most commonly cited
shortcoming is what many critics describe as "coldness," even in his most
accomplished films. Many of the recent life and work recaps emphasize Kubrick's
famous idiosyncrasies: 1) his reclusiveness (though Time 's Richard
Schickel was apparently an intimate); 2) his obsessiveness (he was known, wrote
Roger Ebert in the Chicago Sun-Times , to call projectionists personally
and complain about how his film was being shown in a particular theater); and
3) maniacal attention to detail (scores of takes were the norm). Jack
Nicholson, who starred in Kubrick's The Shining , was the only star big
enough to talk about the maestro with anything less than total respect:
"Stanley's good on sound," Nicholson said to Time . "Stanley's good on
the color of the mike. Stanley's good about the merchant he bought the mike
from. Stanley's good about the merchant's daughter who needs some dental work.
Stanley's good." ( Edelstein's and Alex Ross' take on Kubrick in

                  Slate
               .)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  Black Hawk
Down: A Story of Modern War
               , by Mark Bowden (Atlantic Monthly
Press). Reviewers are fascinated by this account of the U.S. intervention in
Somalia. The writing may not be polished, but "[w]hat this demotic,
you-are-there prose lacks in literary finesse ... it makes up in pure narrative
drive." (William Finnegan, the New York Times Book Review ). Some
reviewers wish the account gave more of a sense of the historical context. But
Bowden's excellent reporting--he interviewed scores of U.S. and Somali
soldiers--makes for a "vivid, immediate and unsparing narrative that is filled
with blood and noise and terror" (Jonathan Yardley, the Washington
Post ). (Read the first chapter courtesy of the New York
Times [requires free registration].)

            Find a movie playing
near you on Sidewalk.com.

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Analyze This ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Cruel Intentions ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Lock, Stock & Two Smoking
Barrels ;

               
                  Book -- Monica's Story , by Andrew Morton;

               
                  Theater -- Annie Get Your Gun ;

               
                  Theater -- Bright Lights, Big
City .

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  8MM ;

               
                  Movie -- 200 Cigarettes ;

               
                  Movie -- The 
                  Other Sister ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Houdini Girl , by Martyn Bedford;

               
                  Book -- Perfect Murder, Perfect Town , by Lawrence
Schiller;

               
                  Theater--
                  Not About Nightingales .

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  October Sky ;

               
                  
                     Movie --Jawbreaker ;

               
                  Movie -- Office Space ;

               
                  Music--
                  The Hot Rock , by Sleater-Kinney;

               
                  Book--
                  Traveling Mercies: Some Thoughts on Faith ,
by Anne Lamott;

               
                  Book -- The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and
the Quest for the Ultimate Theory , by Brian R. Greene.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Blast From the Past ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Message in a Bottle ;

               
                  Movie
                  --My Favorite Martian ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Testament , by John Grisham;

               
                  Book
                  --South of the Border, West of the Sun ,by Haruki
Murakami;

               
                  Theater--
                  Death of a Salesman (Eugene O'Neill
Theatre, New York City).

            

         
      
   
