
   
   
      
         
            Tame at Heart

            Why do big-studio movies that celebrate wildness
and primal man and equate civilization with corruption tend to play as if their
plots have been hammered out by Hollywood executives on car phones? And why do
those pictures always feel as if they've been honed with the help of focus
groups in suburban shopping malls to ensure that no aspect will be jarring to
the middlest of middle-class viewers? Instinct is the newest specimen of
commercially overprocessed primitivism. The film, which purports to explore the
circumstances under which a celebrated anthropologist, Ethan Powell (Anthony
Hopkins), disappeared among Rwandan gorillas and emerged two years later as a
mute and wild-eyed killer of park rangers, is loaded with radical credos--ideas
evocative of Kafka, deep ecology, and Dian Fossey at her most gorillaphilic.
But every one of those conceits is rendered toothless by a form of storytelling
that's the opposite of instinctual. The more subversive Instinct gets in
proclaiming free will an illusion fostered by a rigidly repressive society, the
more captive it seems to a rigidly repressive studio marketing department.

            
               Instinct is
"inspired" by Daniel Quinn's 1991 cult novel Ishmael , which is largely a
Socratic, telepathic dialogue between a man and a gorilla, the latter of whom
hectors the former about the destructive path of modern society and restates
the history of the world as a struggle between "leavers" (animals, wise nomadic
tribes) and "takers" (mostly white males). Someone must have spent a fortune to
option Quinn's book before concluding that an interspecies Socratic, telepathic
dialogue with huge chunks of the Earth First! manifesto wouldn't burn up the
box office, so screenwriter Gerald DiPego was brought in to fashion a story
around Quinn's core principles. (The movie would have been more fun, though, if
DiPego had left in a token telepathic ape. Maybe just for a prologue: "Gimme
that banana and I'll tell you the story of my old friend Ethan Powell. What a
character ...")

            Anyway, Instinct is built around that theater
standby, the series of charged encounters between a psychiatrist and a shackled
patient, during which it dawns on the doctor (Cuba Gooding Jr.) that he and his
society are the ones who are actually in need of curing. (Come to think of it,
the first Broadway play I ever saw, Equus , featured Hopkins in the role
of the shrink who concludes that a boy who blinded eight horses with a metal
spike has a passion sadly lacking in his sterile countrymen.) The ambitious
Gooding's first challenge is to get Hopkins, sedated and under heavy guard at
Florida's Harmony Bay Correctional Facility, to speak. It seems to me that his
next challenge is to get Hopkins to shut up, since with relatively little
prodding the ex-mute wild man launches into a stream of resonant orations about
life among the silverbacks: "Did they think of me? I thought of them. ... It
was terrifying and wonderful ... I was coming back to something I had lost a
long time ago and was only now remembering." Danny Elfman puts a swelling choir
on the soundtrack to help us remember those same things--i.e., awestruck
countercultural jungle movies such as The Emerald Forest (1985) and
Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan, Lord of the Apes (1984).

            
               Instinct recycles a lot of countercultural
touchstones--the lovable psychotics out of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest (1975), the fascist guards out of Cool Hand Luke (1967). "He
lives with the animals, takes on their behavior, becomes one of them," says
Gooding, seemingly on the verge of a chorus from Doctor Dolittle (1967).
"He can give me a look at man at his primitive state--ungoverned man." It's a
giggle, but the idea of a young African-American learning the secrets of the
Dark Continent from a 60-plus-year-old Welsh ham has its daft charm: "He's
leading me into the jungle," concludes Gooding. Maura Tierney, playing Hopkins'
estranged daughter, listens to Gooding talk and struggles to keep her emotions
in check, smoking intensely while her eyes water and her chin quivers. Will she
and Gooding do the Wild Thing? No; perhaps the mall focus groups turned thumbs
down on interracial romance. Back in the prison, Hopkins puts Gooding in a
headlock and gives him an intellectual noogie: What has he lost, now that he
has been immobilized by a senior citizen? Control? No: No one has control.
Freedom? No: No one is free. The answer is supposed to be his "illusions"--but
more likely it's whatever remains of Gooding's credibility as an actor.

            If nothing else, the
director, John Turteltaub ( Phenomenon , 1996), keeps the performers from
drifting into camp. A raw-skinned actor named John Aylward does a good job of
making the warden--a malignly neglectful bureaucrat--recognizably human, and
John Ashton plays the chief villain, a guard called Dacks, as a man whose
cruelty arises out of an obsession with control: What makes him scary is his
watchfulness. But Turteltaub's technique is otherwise too slick for his
supposedly primal subject. The larger problem is that Instinct doesn't
have the courage to leave its natural subjects untamed. The gorillas are
pussycats, and Powell isn't a true murderer after all. He killed a couple of
Rwandan park rangers in defense of his adorable ape family--which makes the
movie a de facto vigilante picture and thus as mainstream a product as any that
Hollywood churns out. "You taught me to live outside the game," says Gooding,
his eyes misting up. But Instinct is the work of players.

            For true instinct, you must turn to Mike Figgis, an English
director ( Leaving Las Vegas , 1995, One Night Stand , 1997) who's
defiantly not a player and whose pixilated, semi-autobiographical,
semi-allegorical The Loss of Sexual Innocence would not have got past
the mall focus groups that evidently embraced Instinct . It nearly didn't
get past the screening that I caught at Manhattan's indie-friendly Angelika
Film Center, which was marked by uneasy throat clearing and lots of walkouts.
What the hell is this thing?

            In the movie, Adam and
Eve show up at intervals looking like Calvin Klein models: He (Femi Ogumbanjo)
is black and muscular, she (Hanne Klintoe) is waiflike and flaxen-haired with
an expensive-looking coif. They emerge naked from golden waters into a
yellowish African landscape, explore each other's orifices, and recline beside
a white stallion and in range of a (disappointingly ordinary) snake. At the
end, they eat squishy fruit, vomit, and are set upon by paparazzi .

            Before that, seminal episodes of disillusionment, jealousy,
and betrayal are recalled by the movie's protagonist, Nic (Julian Sands). As a
lad in Kenya, he peers through a window at an African girl practicing her
English in lingerie for a drowsing old white pervert. Cut to an English
landscape from which all color has been drained, and where Nic is a skinny
teen-ager (Jonathan Rhys-Meyers) whose pubescent girlfriend drunkenly cheats on
him during her father's wake. Sex and death are forever entwined: Nic sees
photos of a naked woman stabbed by a lover, a corpse bloated after three weeks
in a river. As a grown-up, he drives through the northern English countryside
beside a frostily pissed-off blond wife, whom he subsequently takes from behind
in the kitchen of their country cottage while his young son, clutching a
stuffed animal, wanders their way. Figgis shoots all this through windows to
make the couple's alienation palpable.

            Nic's wife dreams of coming upon Nic in a jazz
combo, then dancing half-naked for old people; Nic dreams of being dogged at a
train station by a gangly cretin who then stabs him. As the pavement rises up
to meet his falling body, he sees himself and his wife walk into their country
cottage and close the door. Cut to a shot of newborn twins, who are then
separated and grow up to be the lush Saffron Burrows, one English, one Italian.
The twins nearly meet each other in an airport, but fate keeps them from
connecting. The Italian twin drives Nic--who turns out to be a documentary film
director--to the desert of Tunisia, where there is further betrayal, loss of
sexual innocence, exploitation of Third World peoples, and a tragic
retaliation. The soundtrack is melancholy classical piano.

            That The Loss of Sexual Innocence doesn't gel
is a point too obvious to belabor. Much of it is risible, yet I loved watching
it--not because I thought that the emperor was wearing new clothes but because
I thought he looked fine--beautiful, actually--naked. Figgis' camera is probing
and alive, so that even when his meanings are laughable, his images remain
allusive and mysterious. What can I say? The man gives good movie.

         
      
   
