
   
   
      
         
             The War in Kosovo

            In ","
William Saletan examines President Clinton's struggle between idealism and
realism. In "," he discusses Clinton's watered-down apologies for the embassy
bombing.  In "," he lambastes the hell no, we won't go Republicans; in "," he
asks who's miscalculating the belligerence level. In "," he strafes the bogus
arguments against the NATO war plans.

            In
"Strange Bedfellow," David Plotz looks at , shows how Kosovo has turned and
doves into hawks, and discusses why .

            Mathew
Cooper in "" explains there are good reasons for what we're doing in
Yugoslavia. Credibility isn't one of them.

            Massa
Gessen introduces , the minister nobody knows, in "Assessment."

            ""
says we can prevent genocide.

            
Jonathan Chait debunks the myth of the underpaid solder in "."

            
"Explainer" tells how frees prisoners; describes NATO's ; finds out who is the
; provides a ; and gives the lowdown on which way to "Kosovo," depending on
your politics.

            What
solution does history dictate for Kosovo? Good question, says David Greenberg
in the "."

            In ","
William Saletan dissects the diplomatic doublespeak for negotiating with
Milosevic. In a "," he asks: "How can we justify invading Kosovo after
promising not to?" and decides that it sounds like a job for Bill Clinton. NATO
and Milosevic are playing a head game over who's punishing whom. In "," Saletan
shows how Milosevic is winning the spin war.

            How
did Clinton win public support for bombing Serbia? By rephrasing the question,
Saletan. Some people ask, "Why bomb Serbia?" Clinton asks, "Why not?"

            says,
that's Mister Milosevic to you. he examines the justification for the
U.S. media's outrage at being expelled from Yugoslavia.

            
Michael Kinsley helps you translate the favored by politicians unwilling to
take a stand on the Kosovo bombings.

            
"International Papers" summarizes what the world press has to say about Kosovo
in the , , and columns.

            ""
tells you what's going on in Kosovo, and also what politicians say is
going on in Kosovo.

            And ""
gives you the latest from the armchair generals of the Sunday morning talk show
circuit.

            Read
what John Allen Paulosand Lisa Zeidner think about the news coverage of the
conflict in "."

            Masha
Gessen supplies "," while Eliot A. Cohen and Owen Harries debate ""

            John
Hillen and Robert Kagan discuss ""

            ""
discusses newspaper coverage of the bombings.

            does
his bit for the boys by concentrating the full power of www.anagramgenius.com on
Serbia's leader. Sample: "Slobodan Milosevic" yields "So, so vile, bold,
manic!" Also, he that Clinton will lie his way to victory in Kosovo.

            
Finally, if you're a little rusty on what exactly they're fighting about in
Kosovo, here are squibs on 1) (hint: They're not the same); 2) the difference
between ; 3) why fighting in Kosovo could spark ; and 4) . Or click for a
profile of Slobodan Milosevic.

         
      
   
