
   
   
      
         
            No. 227: &quot;Vile&quot;

            

               Fox TV is planning to fill hundreds of plastic vials. With what?
Why?
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question--(No. 226) "It Depends":
            

            

               
                  "This is quite controversial," said Kevin Sparkman of
Pennsylvania. "Until now, we have always depended strictly on altruism." What
is he talking about?
               
            

            
"Sparkman, head of the area chapter of panhandlers, is discussing the group's
decision to go from simple requests for change to armed assault. 'Frankly,' he
noted, 'the can-you-spare-a-dime thing has got worn out, and it only works
about 5 percent of the time. Our studies have confirmed that "can you spare a
dime, and by the way, I have a gun" has a response rate in the mid-70s, and you
just can't ignore numbers like that.' "-- Tim Carvell ( Tim
Liebler , William Considine , Dianne Carter , Mac
Thomason , and Dwight Lemke had similar answers.)

            "The
recent bids for mouth-to-mouth resuscitations on eBay. Sparkman, a pool guard
in Scranton, was asked his opinion."-- Ross Levatter
            

            
"Lancaster drug dealers' recent decision to start charging the Amish for their
rumschpringes* methamphetamines."-- Gina "Gaining No Benefits of Nepotism"
Duclayan
            

            
"Following the designation of 'ugly' as a diagnosable sexual dysfunction,
Pennsylvania Blue Cross has agreed to cover prescriptions for
Rohypnol."-- Charles Star
            

            
"Sparkman is the executive director of a Philadelphia nonprofit that places
discarded church organs with poor schools' neglected music departments. He is
troubled over whether to accept donations from the professional kirkbuzzers'*
guild."-- Jeff Hoover
            

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Daniel's
Wrap-Up
            

            The South has rednecks,
the Midwest has rubes, Los Angeles has vapidity, New York has violence, and
foreign countries have foreigners. News Quiz has affirmed these truths time and
time again. But Pennsylvania? Well, there's a heroic fictional boxer and a
couple of less heroic nonfictional baseball teams. But mostly there are the
Amish, a source of amusement not only because they eschew modern conveniences
(with the exception of Rollerblades and hard drugs, if I have that right) but
also because they are so unfathomably beneficent, at least among themselves.
Real Americans, of course--whether from the South, the Midwest or, especially,
New York or L.A.--would rather be dead than altruistic. And even dead, the most
we can promise is we'll consider it.

            
               Organic
Answer
            

            Under a new program, families of Pennsylvania organ
donors will be eligible to receive $300 toward the donors' funeral expenses.
Last year, 394 altruistic Pennsylvanians donated organs; 4,500 patients needed
them. Three hundred dollars pays for one-ninth of a hardwood casket with your
choice of wheat, cross, praying hands, Masonic, or U.S. flag panels from the
John W. Keffer Funeral Home in York, Pa.

            As Kevin Sparkman of the
Delaware Valley Transplant Program notes, the plan is controversial, but
perhaps less so than the one it replaces. You see, I once knew a guy who had a
friend whose cousin picked up a girl on a business trip to Lancaster. The next
morning he woke up in a bathtub full of ice with a crude surgical scar in his
side. Written in lipstick on the mirror was the message, "Welcome to the world
of Pennsylvania. Now go home." It was signed, "The Amish."

            
               *Fifty-Cent Word
Extra
            

            Rumschpringes (noun): Pennsylvania Dutch meaning,
literally, running around; an Amish rite of passage during which teen-agers are
temporarily freed from the community rules.

            Kirkbuzzer (noun): A
person who robs churches; from the archaic Scotch.

            
               Two Evils
Extra
            

            Recently, the MSNBC Web
site hosted one live chat with Dilbert creator Scott Adams and another one with
(alleged) Serbian war criminal Arkan. In one of those glitches we've come to
expect from Microsoft sites, the two chat sessions got hopelessly jumbled. Or
at least they might have. Here are actual questions posed to Adams, paired with
genuine answers to different questions by Arkan. Both have been edited, but
syntax is preserved.

            
               Q: Is Dilbert based on
a real person?
            

            A: I think he's the
president of Serbia.

            
               Q: Do you recommend
working in a corporation?
            

            A: I personally will not
make a deal with any devil.

            
               Q: Are you trying to
insult persons who toil in workstations?
            

            A: We don't have nothing
against Albanians.

            
               Q: What do you think of
business casual?
            

            A: I think it's pure
propaganda, I don't believe in that.

            
               Q: What about the
tie?
            

            A: It's part of our
souls.

            
               Q: Will Dilbert find
love?
            

            A: He's the most popular
man in Yugoslavia.

            
               Q: Is Dogbert and
Catbert male or female?
            

            A: They produce 9-15
children.

            
               Q: What's with the feud
between you and Griffith, the creator of Zippy ?
            

            A: We are fighting for
peace and love, we are not fighting for war.

            
               Q: Is Dilbert
idea evolving with time and where is it heading now? I mean what is the
next move you think?
            

            A: Well, I don't know what
he's thinking, which move he's going to make.

            
               Q: Is Dilbert
(the strip) ever going to get old and dull a la
Doonesbury ?
            

            A: There is still a chance
to stop it and not be a war criminal.

            
               Q: Are you married?
:)
            

            A: I don't have a
relationship with President Milosevic.

            
               Q: I wish you'd remove
the animal characters and replace them with people, I could relate much
easier.
            

            A: I
really don't give a damn.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The Amish ... incongruously riding A Streetcar
Named Desire .

         
      
   
