
   
   
      
         
            No. 194: &quot;Unaffordable&quot;

            

               After a call from Ford Motors, Greg Bradsher of the National Archives
said, "You have to think in terms of corporate memories. There is probably no
one around who knows anything about this stuff." What stuff does Ford need help
remembering?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Wednesday's
Question (No. 193)--"Whoa, Canada":
               

               
                  The Poitras Report,
recently released in Montreal, describes an inept organization that routinely
broke the law, lacked ethics and professionalism, and embraced a code of
silence that thwarted whistle-blowers. What organization?
               

               

                  ( Question courtesy of Matthew Singer.)
                  
               

               
"Leonard Cohen's old girlfriends."-- Chris Kelly
               

               
"Whoever it is, it's not the Church of Scientology. Now please give me back my
daughter."-- Greg Diamond
               

               "The
New York Police Department. But I'd like to see ya come down here and release
that report, tough guys."-- Daniel Radosh
               

               "Sounds
like the International Olympic Committee, but any group that could find hookers
in Utah seems far from inept to me."-- Alex Balk ( Lara Williams ,
Andrew Reid , and Eddie Haskins had similar answers.)

               "Who
cares? It's Canada!"-- Tim Carvell (similarly, David Ballard )

               Click
for more answers.

            

            
               Randy's 3,000 Miles
of Unguarded Wrap-Up
            

            According to the old
Canadian clichés, a diet of back bacon and access to excellent health care lead
to Neil Young boring everyone silly by singing about hockey in two languages.
The new Canadian cliché, judging by News Quiz responses, is just hockey, and
it's now broadcast on Fox. It's a different sort of coverage from the days when
Peter Puck appeared between periods to explain the game to us unsophisticated
Americans. That animated black rubber cylinder provided a surprisingly lucid
exegesis of offside, icing, and the undesirability of Quebec separatism, along
with some disturbing Toronto sex techniques. But I may be misremembering. In
those days we played without helmets, and I was regularly high-sticked in the
head, just like Neil. Hey hey, hi hi.

            
               Answer
Québecois
            

            Le Sûreté du Québec.

            The 4,100 member provincial police force, more a
sort of regional FBI than state troopers, accepted the scathing criticism
delivered by a public inquiry last month and will undertake sweeping reforms,
reports Monique Beaudin in the Montreal Gazette . "We are taking this
very seriously," said SQ chief Florent Gagné.

            The investigative commission headed by former Chief
Justice Lawrence Poitras was set up in 1996 to look into allegations of
cover-ups and threats after a botched drug investigation.

            "They have been notorious
thugs since the turn of the century," adds Matthew Singer.

            
               Augmented
Quotations Extra
            

            Each final sentence added by News Quiz.

            

               "I think it's absolutely ludicrous to completely
wipe out something so many people are in favor of. Just like with
slavery."--Sorority gal Jennifer Coup detests Dartmouth's plan to eliminate
single-sex fraternities and sororities.

               "It would be much nicer to have real ones. My dad
said he was disappointed too. You need the noise and the smell. It's as
disappointing as those robot lap dancers."--New Yorker Benny Chang hates the
mayor's ban on Chinese New Year firecrackers.

               "I've got so much real work to do, I can't do this
very often. After lunch, I launch myself into a low Earth orbit to battle giant
space monkeys from Neptune."--Lawyer Johnnie Cochran sets aside time from his
busy schedule to appear on Guiding Light .

               "We're getting the speed of light so low we can
almost send a beam into the system, go for a cup of coffee and return in time
to see the light come out. We can also see Jay Leno making up gags about the
post office."--Danish physicist Lene Vestergaard Hau and her team have devised
a way to slow light from 186,00 miles a second to 120 feet an hour.

               "We do not know where he is. He made us all close
our eyes, spin around three times, and count backwards from 100."--Taliban
diplomat Abdul Hakeem Musjahid has looked everywhere for Osama bin Laden, but
just can't find the guy.

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Hockey.

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will 
               become the property of

               
                  Slate
                
               and will be published at

               
                  Slate
               
               's discretion.

               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its site in
connection with your submission .

         
      
   
