
   
   
      
         
            No. 237: &quot;Flawed and Tailored&quot;

            
               The bombing
campaign--15,000 bombs and missiles so far--is working, says Germany's Gen.
Klaus Naumann, NATO's senior military officer. "We will see how they will feel
after a few more weeks and months or what have you of continuously pounding
them into pieces." However, he adds, "We may have one flaw in our thinking."
What?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 236)--"Tragedy Plus Time Minus Taste":
            

            

               Columbine students resumed classes Monday at nearby Chatfield High
School. Many wore white T-shirts imprinted on the front with "We Are..." and on
the back ... what?
            

            "...
Guaranteed straight A's."-- Stuart Wade and Brooke Saucier
            

            "...
Famous."-- Matt Sullivan and Charles Star ( Lynn Rosetta ,
Lori Hoffman , and Greg Diamond had similar answers.)

            "...
Suing."-- Greg Diamond
            

            "...
Not riding the bus for fear of a NATO misfire."-- Michael Holloway
(similarly, David Ballard )

            "Hmm
... that's odd. I could have sworn I had my 10-foot pole right here
..."-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Some participants, confused by the question,
replied with slogans for both the front and back of the Littleton T-shirt. I
blame the ambiguous use of ellipses. And those damn video games. Violent
movies. The estrangement of too many parents from John McCain's life. (Have any
of you phoned him today?) Our failure to embrace a lackluster technical fix
from Al Gore and his Web cronies. The absence of Orrin Hatch praying in the
nation's schools. (Isn't there some high-tech way to fly him from class to
class, perhaps on Boeing's new Delta III rocket; you know, once it stops
malfunctioning.) I'll tell you who I don't blame, the NRA. Or myself. OK, I do
blame myself. I should simply have asked: "What did it say on the back?"
Sorry.

            Displeasing in content
as well as in form, today's question garnered a record number of responses
scorning the heartlessness of News Quiz. It also garnered a record number of
responses, or if not a record, certainly a lot. So, presumably participants
were not as offended as they claimed to be. When Boswell expressed enormous
sympathy for the victims of an earthquake, Johnson took him to task for his
showing deep feeling, saying he doubted that Boswell had even missed a meal.
Johnson disdained exaggeration. If anyone wants to discuss this further, I'll
be at Chuck Heston's house hacking around on his Playstation and giving him a
little talking to. Of course it's his fault.

            
               A 100 Percent
Cotton Answer
            

            The front of the
T-shirts says, "We are ..." and the back says, "Columbine." Chatfield,
Columbine's traditional rival, welcomed their guests with banners and signs
including, "We Are One," featuring Columbine's colors, blue and white, and
Chatfield's colors, maroon and white, entwined in a heart.

            
               Mom-arama
Extra
            

            Giddily promoting online
shopping for Mothers Day, Yahoo reduces every mom to 18 categories of desire,
each linked to shopping opportunities. Which of these are actual Yahoo Mother's
Day categories?

            1. Candies and Sweets

            2. Beer and Cigarettes

            3. Fashions for Mom

            4. Inappropriately Erotic Fashions for Mom

            5. For the Home

            6. For the Farm, Factory, or Faculty Lounge

            7. Get Mom Online

            8. Get Mom off Crack

            9. Her Green Thumb

            10. Her "Blond" Hair

            11. Her Incessant Nagging

            12. Leave Me Alone! Leave Me Alone! Leave Me Alone!
Oops, sorry.

            13. Moms-To-Be

            14. Moms-To-Beware-Of

            15. Movies and Video

            16. Liquor and Porn

            17. Music

            18. Persistent Abrasive Noises

            19. Pamper Her

            20. Pester Her

            21. Leap out of the Closet and Scare the Bejesus
out of Her

            22. Perfume

            23. Other Things With
Powerful Odors

            
               Real Yahoo
Mom
            

            1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 13, 15,
17, 19, 22

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Heartless online quizzes.

         
      
   
