
   
   
      
         
            No. 251: &quot;Now Even Reformier&quot;

            
               Rabbi Gary Bretton
Granatoor of New York's Stephen Wise Synagogue, at the forefront of today's
Reform Judaism, says, "There is a group in the synagogue called Morei Derech,
which means role models, and they are lay people taking on responsibilities
that in the past many congregants felt professionals had to do." What
responsibilities?
            

            
               
                  (This question
courtesy of Beth Sherman.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 250)--"Musa vs. Ake":
            

            

               
                  
                     On Wednesday, Musashimaru defeated Akebono to become
the 67 th 
                        yokozuna . Why is this
noteworthy?
                  
               
            

            "No
kidding!!! Man, one of these days I'm gonna get cable TV!"-- Craig
Aranha
            

            
"Because the New York Times says so."-- Daniel Radosh
            

            
"Because Musashimaru is actually a ring-tailed lemur."-- Molly Shearer
Gabel
            

            "By
dominating sumo, the Americans have finally got the Japanese back for beating
us in manufacturing."-- Charles Star
            

            "
'Because there is no Wednesday on the Japanese calendar,' said Encyclopedia
Brown, as Taylor sputtered with rage. 'Your story's a fake. Therefore,
you're the real jewel thief!' "-- James Poniewozik
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            Few things are more amusing than the national games
of other countries. Even the box scores are funny, so comical are the names of
the athletes. (Although Brazilian car soccer is brilliant: Small cars ram a
huge ball into a goal. It looks ultra-American, like demolition derby with a
higher purpose.) But for sheer tedium, nothing can rival our own national
pastime. When you are in the field, more than 50 percent of that half of the
inning is spent doing nothing: The pitcher is simply holding the ball. And when
your team is hitting, you spend nearly all that time sitting in the dugout.
Thus, for any player, 75 percent of the game is spent doing nothing at all.

            Of course, the four 12-minute quarters of a
professional basketball game take two and a half hours to televise, but at
least in the NBA they have the decency to call that downtime what it is: a TV
commercial.

            Baseball is also,
incidentally, the only sport where players can smoke during the game; you used
to catch appealing glimpses on television of some professional athlete puffing
away. It made a welcome change from the spitting. I think a lot more people
would watch figure skating if they let the athletes smoke. And diving. And
sumo.

            
               
                  Gaijin
Answer
            

            For the first time in the 300-year history of sumo,
a foreigner became grand champion by defeating another foreigner.

            Both are Americans, from
Hawaii, of Polynesian and Samoan ancestry. In 1993, Akebono became the first
non-Japanese yokozuna . Wrestlers from Argentina, Brazil, Korea, and
Mongolia are also currently active. A few foreign
rikishi --wrestlers--have become popular, but some critics charge that
they prevail through sheer size rather than agility. Musashimaru weighs 473
pounds.

            
               Neck and Neck
Extra
            

            "I just read Chris
Kelly's ad hominem remarks about George Lucas and his neck. Let Chris K. put
his own neck on the line. Is it scarf-worthy? Maybe he should have it pierced
with silver or something. We all have necks. The question is, do we stick it
out? Do we risk it? Or is it just a love item?"-- Alfa-Betty Olsen
            

            
               Tim Carvell's Can
You Top This Bloated Indulgence Extra?
            

            Participants are invited to find a sentence in an
actual publication that embodies conspicuous consumption and fatuousness better
than the following, from last week's New York Times "Home" section:

            "Today, the urinal has taken its stand alongside
the bidet and the working fireplace as the latest must-have in the
well-appointed bathroom suite."

            Submissions due by noon
ET, Monday, June 7.

            
               Headline
Haiku
            

            In Cosmic Blasts,
Clues
Of Things to Come
In Tests on People
Drug Is Found Just

            
               New York Times ("Science Times"), May 25,
1999

            
               --Chris
Hammett
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Fat jokes, Pokémon, Ono, Bono.

         
      
   
