
   
   
      
         
            Splat! Bam! Pow! <BR>@#$%&amp;!

            Fear no more, earthlings,
the age of frustration and humiliation is over! I am the great Shopping
Avenger, who hath descended to Earth from the planet Galleria in a
nuclear-fueled Chrysler Town & Country minivan (base price: $27,385, left
sliding door standard in most models) to save you from the dark forces of
turbo-charged capitalism and shoddy customer service.

            OK, enough with the superhero shtick. It's
unsustainable over several paragraphs.

            Here's the problem: Like
most American shoppers, I've been doing my part to fuel the Dow to absurd
heights. My own personal consumer confidence is high (up 2.5 percent just this
last month!), and my spending is profligate--laptops and children's toys and
weed whackers and coffee tables and SUVs. They make it, I buy it. Retail,
even.

            But what do I get in return, except for 1 billion American
Express Membership Rewards points (which I can apply toward, among other door
prizes, an "NBA Black Leather Zip Daytimer") and a personal note from Robert
Rubin thanking me for my help?

            Frustration is what I get. When I went searching The
Home Depot for a replacement charger for the Skil Twist Xtra Flexi Charge
Interchangeable Power System Cordless Screwdriver, did anyone there know what a
Skil Twist Xtra Flexi Charge Interchangeable Power System Cordless Screwdriver
even was? No. When Northwest Airlines charged me $1,000 for a ticket I didn't
want and didn't order, could I even get anyone on the phone in less than 15
minutes? Also no! When I ordered Chechnya: Calamity in the Caucasus from
Amazon.com and received instead a copy of Early Islamic Mysticism: Sufi,
Quran, Miraj, Poets and Theological Writings , did I get justice in the form
of a refund or a copy of the book I needed? No! (Although I am now a recognized
Sufi master.)

            Just as I was writing
this last paragraph, I received an e-mail from Amazon boy-wonder Jeff Bezos. I
figured he was writing to apologize (Bezos claims to know what I want to read,
so why shouldn't he also know when I'm mad at him?), but instead his
e-mail--which he apparently sent to other people too--flacks his new, sure to
lose money and at the same time boost his stock price another 200 percent
venture, Amazon.com Auctions. I think I'll start by auctioning off my copy of
Early Islamic Mysticism: Sufi, Quran, Miraj, Poets and Theological
Writings .

            But the Shopping Avenger digresses. Now, I understand
retail. I'm not naive. In order to boost quarterly earnings to meet the
cosmically greedy expectations of a handful of Wall Street analysts who've
never sold anything in their lives, American corporations must cut, cut, and
cut again. Pensions are out, job security is out, and customer service is most
definitely out.

            This column will not
address such issues as pension rights and job security (though it will refer to
them from time to time out of guilt--at one point, earlier in my life, I
pretended to be a democratic socialist, and I was for a time an actual
kibbutznik).

            This column instead will seek vengeance for you, the loyal
American consumer.The Shopping Avenger was born a couple of years ago, at a
dinner party in New York. I was seated next to a man who said he was one of the
inventors of corporate voice-mail routing systems. (This, of course, was a
lie--Al Gore was the inventor of corporate voice-mail routing systems.) I told
him that, in my humble opinion, the advent of voice mail and the disappearance
of live operators meant longer waits on the telephone for help.

            He said I was wrong. I told him I felt this fairly
strongly. He again told me I was wrong: Surveys show that the waiting period
for help has been cut by 98 percent, or some such number. I then told him that
earlier in the day I had spent seven minutes pushing buttons in order to make a
single airline reservation.

            He told me it was just my
perception that I spent seven minutes pushing buttons. Then I called him an
asshole, and that was that. It was then that I decided the American consumer
needed help battling the forces of corporate arrogance. I felt I was the one to
lead the charge. But like most selfless impulses, I thought about it for a
while and the feeling eventually passed.

            But the Shopping Avenger was born again. He was born again
in Toys "R" Us, where none of the employees seemed to know what a potty seat
was, and he was born yet again at the Budget Rent a Car counter at La Guardia
Airport, where the reservation he had made and confirmed suddenly ceased to
exist, and where he got yelled at for his troubles.

            And so, this column. Here's how it works. You
e-mail your tale of woe--inferior products, ignorant customer service--to
shoppingavenger@slate.com, and
the Shopping Avenger will use his reporting skills, which have been described
by some as "almost supernatural in scope" (and have been described by others as
"adequate" and "sort of pathetic") to extract on your behalf grudging apologies
from faceless bureaucrats at Fortune 500 companies.

            First come, first served
and, be warned, the Shopping Avenger looks askance at the bearing of false
witness. Those companies that deserve praise will be praised. Onward!

            P.S.: The Shopping Avenger
will also entertain questions about Sufi mysticism.

         
      
   
