
   
   
      
         
            Monday Morning Quarterbacking on Kosovo

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , June 12
            

            An
editorial laments the mess NATO has made of war and
peace. Milosevic can claim vindication, because NATO dropped its Rambouillet
demands for full access to Serbia and for an independence referendum in Kosovo.
NATO botched its central aim--prevention of ethnic cleansing--and bears some
responsibility for bombing fatalities. ... The cover story claims that Serb brinkmanship spurred some
NATO concessions during negotiations, including the extra four days for
withdrawal of Serb troops and a trimmed demilitarized zone. But NATO did hold
its line in how it carved up peacekeeping zones: The French will govern the
region that Russia coveted. ... Another piece suggests South Africans have less to celebrate about
their recent elections than they think. The peacefulness of the process would
seem to augur well for continued reconciliation. But the African National
Congress' vast parliamentary majority will silence opposition, and votes were
split neatly along racial lines.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , June 28
            

            The
cover story denounces the allies' prosecution of the
war and its settlement. A weaker America will result from the idea that we can
triumph without peril to our armed forces. Air power only worked when combined
with KLA pressure on the ground and the threat of a ground invasion. The
settlement is fatally flawed: Milosevic can't be trusted, ex-combatants can't
coexist, and the Kosovars will continue to agitate for their own state.
... National sovereignty is overrated, according to an article . Supporting nationalist aspirations is
humanistic and consonant with the United States' rebellious roots. Plus, the
more nations splinter, the longer America will dominate the fractured world
stage. ... "TRB " bemoans the abolition of the draft. Americans view
military engagements as distant exploits. A national service requirement would
relink citizens to their country, their compatriots, and the nation's foreign
policy.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , June 13
            

            The
cover story follows a Minnesota public school's "harassment specialist" as she
leads workshops, distributes pamphlets, and investigates complaints. Recent
legal decisions, including one by the Supreme Court, have made schools liable
for indifference to sexual harassment among students. Conclusion: Trying to
distinguish harassment from everyday schoolyard taunts is a clumsy but
worthwhile process. ... College tuition is rising two to three times
faster than inflation, another piece reports. Explanations: Universities vie to
supply the most luxurious amenities; generous federal loans mean students can
afford higher tuition; and the steep fees are a way for colleges to have
wealthier students effectively subsidize poorer ones.

            

               
                  Time
               
               , 
               June 14
            

            The
cover package wraps up Time 's "100 People of the
Century" series by profiling 20 icons and heroes. Colin Powell lauds the
GI as an embodiment of America's courage and
diversity. Henry Aaron celebrates Jackie Robinson for inspiring civil rights by breaching
baseball's color barrier. Others honored include Anne Frank, Billy Graham,
Princess Diana, and Che Guevara. ... The Kennedys and the Nehrus are rated the 20 th
century's greatest dynasties. ... The "100 Worst Ideas of the Century"
are also named, including Prohibition, The Jerry Springer Show , Barney,
and letting interns staff the White House during the government shutdown.
... An article dampens enthusiasm about NATO's victory. The West
drew a moral line against barbarism but failed in its primary aim, which was to
avert a humanitarian catastrophe. NATO is saddled with an unstable Kosovo and
an intact Milosevic.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , June 14
            

            The
cover story says stress causes heart disease, memory loss,
immune deficiency, impaired cognition, and even a thick waist. Women respond to
more stressors than men do, but their blood pressure spikes less in reaction.
Stressed-out kids are more likely to be listless when they're not tense and to
overreact as adults. ... In an essay , British Prime Minister Tony Blair urges "a new
internationalism" based on values and law. The West must start a moral crusade
to excise "the cancer of ethnic conflict" by rebuilding the Balkans,
strengthening the economies of southeastern Europe, and eventually welcoming
some more states into NATO. ... A glowing review of the new Austin Powers movie notes the campy
merchandising that accompanies it. Coming to a store near you: a genuine Austin
Powers Swedish Penis Enlarger.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , June 14
            

            The
already-outdated cover
story wonders if NATO's deal with Yugoslavia will hold. ... A
piece says the food-stamp program is funding the war in
Kosovo. With poverty down, politicians are raiding food-stamp surpluses for
extra cash. ... An article examines the booming international car-theft
industry, which is virtually ignored by law enforcement. Vehicles are picked
off American streets and smuggled abroad, where foreign buyers pay two to three
times a car's U.S. retail price for them. The most commonly stolen models are
Honda Accords and Toyota Camrys.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , June 14
            

            A
piece investigates Binjamin Wilomirski, author of a heart-rending, highly
lauded, and completely fake memoir describing the atrocities he (never)
suffered as a Jewish child in Nazi death camps. Wilomirski, a Swiss Protestant
since birth, may be a charlatan, or he may simply be deluded. Most troubling is
the public's willingness to value the memoir's drama over its truthfulness.
... A survey of the nascent presidential race declares George W. Bush
and Al Gore ideologically indistinguishable. The country is so flourishing
"that politics has almost begun to seem irrelevant." ... Editor David
Remnick opines that Bosnians and Kosovars have suffered from the president's
historical naiveté in general and from his seduction by Balkans fatalist Robert
D. Kaplan in particular. (Click to read William Saletan's explication of the
debate that arose out of Kaplan's work.)

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , June 14
            

            The
cover package assesses George W. Bush's coronation as GOP savior. One piece
argues that "compassionate conservativism" is merely a loose translation of
President Clinton's triangulation and asks Bush to flesh it out with specific
policy proposals. But another piece suggests that Lawrence Lindsey, Bush's top
economic adviser, is the very embodiment of the phrase. Despite his Reagan
administration pedigree, Lindsey ardently supports government assistance to the
underprivileged. ... An editorial crows that Milosevic's capitulation
represents a triumph for the president, hawkish Republicans, NATO, the
U.S.-Russia relationship, and interventionism.

         
      
   
