
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Mod
Squad
                (MGM-UA). Vicious pans for this remake of the 1968-73 TV
show about three juvenile delinquents (Claire Danes, Omar Epps, Giovanni
Ribisi) pushed into police undercover work. "It could be the capper segment in
a Fox prime-time special on the World's Most Inept Movies " (Richard
Corliss, Time ) ... "really, really dumb" with characters who
"miraculously 'solve' the crime with a tape recorder and a lot of bad driving"
(Chris Kridler, the Baltimore Sun ) ... "one of the lamest films [MGM]
ever has foisted upon the world" (Todd McCarthy, Daily Variety ) ...
"torturously boring" (Lawrence Van Gelder, the New York Times ) ...
"almost unreleasable" (Mike Clark, USA Today ). And to add insult to
injury, the Chicago Sun-Times ' Roger Ebert uses the expression
"rumpy-pumpy" in his review for the third time in four months. The L.A.
Times ' Kevin "I Gave At First Sight a Good Review" Thomas, correctly
foreseeing that the studio would be desperate for advertising blurbs on this
one, pumps the thing up: It's "a great-looking picture that zips along with
grace, light on its feet." (Check
out this archive of Claire Danes photos.)

            

               
                  EdTV
                (Universal Pictures). Mainly positive reviews
for a Ron Howard Truman Show -ish comedy. In this one, the guy, Ed
(Matthew McConaughey), knows what's going on. Critics say it's not as subtle as
The Truman Show , but it's funnier: "There's a nice overlay of goofiness
in the satire" (Jay Carr, the Boston Globe ). Kenneth Turan of the Los
Angeles Times calls it "a grab bag that's both amusing and frustrating.
Simultaneously inspired and contrived, clever and crude." Some critics call the
Hollywood self-consciousness about stardom and the price of fame a tad too
navel-gazing; most find the movie pretty charming, especially the twangy
McConaughey's performance as Ed. (Read
this interview with McConaughey; David Edelstein's review in

                  Slate
               .)

            
               
                  20 Dates
               
(20 th Century Fox). Critics are unanimously repulsed by Myles
Berkowitz's documentary about his attempts to find a girlfriend. He films a
series of dates, sometimes secretly. Many reviewers identify with the one who
stabs him in the hand when she finds out what's going on. Renee Graham of the
Boston Globe calls the film "excruciating," and Berkowitz "the biggest
jerk you're likely to see in a movie this year." Justine Elias of the
Village Voice compares him to "an obnoxious four-year-old who believes
everything he does is fascinating and adorable." Somehow in the course of the
film he manages to find a woman who'll continue the relationship, and the two
are allegedly now engaged. 
                  Slate
               's Edelstein says of the film: "I
found myself wanting to apologize on behalf of obnoxious heterosexual Jewish
men the world over." (Read the rest of his review .)

            

               Television
            

            
               
                  Futurama
               
(Fox; Sunday, 8:30 p.m.; starting April 6, Tuesday, 8:30 p.m.). Mainly nice,
loyal reviews for Matt Groening's new animated sitcom; a few "this ain't no
Simpsons " complaints. Critics say the sci-fi spoof set in the year 3000
is more visually interesting but that it lacks the "bite" (Ron Wertheimer, the
New York Times ) and the "snappy rhythm and the kind of far-reaching
humor" (Ginia Bellafante, Time ) that make The Simpsons so good.
On the positive side, Tom Shales of the Washington Post calls it
"another satiric triumph," and the viewers turned out in force--its Nielsen
rating was higher than both The Simpsons and The X-Files .
(Find out more
about the show at Fox's Web site.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  All Too Human: A
Political Education
               , by George Stephanopoulos (Little, Brown). Idealist
or opportunist? Most reviewers find the Clinton adviser revealed in this memoir
more the opportunist. Garry Wills' lethal piece in the New York Times Book
Review blasts the book: "The self-importance underneath the self-criticism
is breathtaking." Wills calls the memoir as a whole "tiresomely moralizing" and
knocks the quality of the advising Stephanopoulos did for Clinton, noting that
it was after he left that the Clinton presidency really took off. The
Economist praises the book ("impressively honest and hugely enjoyable")
but doesn't have much company. Owen Ullmann writes in Business Week that
"[p]erhaps the book should be renamed All Too Ambitious ." ( Jacob
Weisberg and Christopher Caldwell's discussion of the book in

                  Slate
               .)

            
               
                  For the Relief of
Unbearable Urges
               , by Nathan Englander (Knopf). This story collection
draws praise, along with raised eyebrows in regard to some extra-artistic
issues. The reviews are wonderful: "graceful and remarkably self-assured ...
unpretentious and powerful stories" ( Publishers Weekly ). The oohs and
aahs come over Englander's reported $350,000 advance, an unheard-of sum for a
debut short story collection. His stories mostly hinge on matters of faith. As
Albert Mobilio writes in the Village 
               Voice Literary Supplement ,
"the questions with which James Joyce and Flannery O'Connor pried at Catholic
doctrine he now aims at Orthodox Judaism." (Read an excerpt from the book
here.)

            Find a
movie playing near you on Sidewalk.com.

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  True Crime ;

               
                  Movie -- The King and I ;

               
                  Movie -- Forces of Nature ;

               
                  Television--The Oscars ;

               
                  Book-- Years of Renewal
                  , by Henry Kissinger.

            

             

            

               
                  
                     Movie--
                  
                  The
Deep End of the Ocean ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The
Corruptor ;

               
                  Movie--
                  The Rage: Carrie
2 ;

               
                  Movie--
                  Wing
Commander ;

               
                  Death-- Stanley Kubrick;

               
                  Book--
                  Black Hawk Down: A
Story of Modern War , by Mark Bowden.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Analyze This ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Cruel Intentions ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Lock, Stock & Two Smoking
Barrels ;

               
                  Book -- Monica's Story , by Andrew Morton;

               
                  Theater -- Annie Get Your Gun ;

               
                  Theater -- Bright Lights, Big
City .

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  8MM ;

               
                  Movie -- 200 Cigarettes ;

               
                  Movie -- The 
                  Other Sister ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Houdini Girl , by Martyn Bedford;

               
                  Book -- Perfect Murder, Perfect Town , by Lawrence
Schiller;

               
                  Theater--
                  Not About Nightingales .

            

         
      
   
