
   
   
      
         
            No. 193: &quot;Whoa, Canada&quot;

            
               The Poitras Report,
recently released in Montreal, describes an inept organization that routinely
broke the law, lacked ethics and professionalism, and embraced a code of
silence that thwarted whistle-blowers. What organization?
            

            

               ( Question courtesy of Matthew Singer.)
               
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Tuesday's Question
(No. 192)--"Where It's At":
               

               

                  
                     Fill in the blank in Dr. Orville Gilbert Brim's report on a 10
year study funded by the MacArthur Foundation: "On balance, the sense we all
have is that ________ is the best place to be."
                  
               

               "The
MacArthur Foundation."-- Ellen Macleay , Daniel Krause , Jon
Delfin , and Michael Roche
               

               "During
a showing of Message in a Bottle , the lobby."-- Jon
Hotchkiss
               

               
"Starbucks. (Is this a trick question or something?)"-- Cliff Schoenberg
( Larry Amaros had a similar answer.)

               "New
York state. (The study centered on where you are likely to find women starting
new careers after being publicly humiliated by their husbands.)"-- Brooke
Saucier
               

               
"Renaissance Florence. Now would one of those fucking geniuses we keep funding
build us a time machine?!"-- Steve Smith
               

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

            

            One way to judge a grant
program is to count the number of projects that but for that grant would not
have come to fruition. By this measure the MacArthur "genius grants" are a
failure. Awarding much of their money to established academics, the MacArthurs
tend to fund those happy in their work, people who simply continue what they've
been doing for years, but in more stylish clothes. Another way to judge a grant
program is to count the number of summer houses the grant recipients have
bought; by this measure the MacArthurs are a triumph.

            
               AARParific
Answer
            

            Middle age is the best place to be.

            Brim's associates found
the years between 40 and 60 to be a time of well-being for most of the 8,000
Americans they studied, with only 23 percent reporting a midlife crisis. Even
menopause emerged as a less traumatic transition than is usually reported. Dr.
Alice Rossi, who analyzed that data, said, "The Gail Sheehy image of the
menopausal woman with sweat running down her face is just not true."

            
               All Gall's
Extra
            

            One last romp through the
catalog of "America's
largest supplier to public safety professionals." Can you match the trademark
to the product?

            
               Brand
Name
            

            1. RAT TRAP

            2. SUPER STINGER

            3. STREET HAWK

            4. THE ADVANTAGE 1000

            5. MIAMI CLASSIC

            6. ELIMINATOR

            
               Item
            

            A. Gas mask (also available: The Phalanx Alpha
Plus)

            B. Holster (also available: Tornado, Grabber, White
Lightning)

            C. Socks (also available: Professional)

            D. Pocket-sized spikes to flatten car tires at road
blocks (also available: Checkpoint Charlie, MetroSpike)

            E. Flashlight (also available: Wow, TopSpot,
Surefire)

            F. Light bar for patrol
car roof (also available: Excalibur, Vector, Code 3)

            

               Answers
            

            
               1-D,
2-E, 3-F, 4-A, 5-B, 6-C.
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Ten years?!

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of 
               
                  Slate
               

               and will be published at 
               
                  Slate
               
               's
discretion. 
               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its
site in connection with your submission .

         
      
   
