
   
   
      
         
            American Guns Stun Europeans

            The school massacre near
Denver supplanted Kosovo as the lead story in the late editions of almost all
the British newspapers, which carried the usual expressions of European
bewilderment over the lack of serious gun control in the United States. In an
editorial Wednesday, the London Evening
Standard said that even the mass murder at Columbine High School was
unlikely to lead to any change in the law. "[S]o extravagant is the American
concept of 'freedom,' and so deep-rooted is the pollution of firearms of all
kinds throughout the country, that there is little prospect that even this
latest monstrosity will provoke a meaningful shift in public attitudes," the
paper said. It noted that President Clinton had "mouthed the necessary words of
horror and condolence," but commented that it was "hard for the rest of the
world to take these entirely seriously, when repetition seems almost
inevitable." The Evening Standard splashed the story on its front page
with the headline "They Did It for Hitler's Birthday."

            The Times of London observed
in a report from Washington that Americans are "frankly disbelieving" when told
how Britain outlawed hand guns in the wake of a school massacre in Dunblane,
Scotland. "They argue, rightly, that no such sweeping legislation could be
passed in America," it said. The Times also noted that the National
Rifle Association faced "the considerable embarrassment" of holding its annual
convention next week in Denver, very close to the scene of the tragedy.

            NATO's war with Yugoslavia remains the other main story
around the world. Wednesday's coverage included an interview with Italy's
La Repubblica
by Shimon Peres, the former Israeli prime minister, to mark his arrival in Rome
for the first informal annual meeting of past winners of the Nobel Peace Prize.
He wrote that he had been asked to be available to mediate in the Kosovo
conflict but had replied that he would only do so "if and when the parties are
truly determined to seek a political solution." He said, "It doesn't seem to me
that this is the mood at the moment, but it might be very soon." Peres called
the war an "absurd" one that should never have started, but added, "One can't
deny that its purpose is fundamentally of a moral character. It is not a
political or a power game. The civilized world is simply tired of racism,
discrimination and atrocities."

            In an interview in
Corriere
della Sera of Milan, Italian Prime Minister Massimo D'Alema offered
rather qualified praise of Clinton. He is "an intelligent leader," D'Alema
said, but "I don't know if he saw all the traps that had been set for him in
the war." The prime minister, whose coalition government is divided about
Kosovo, said that once the war was over there should be reflection about "the
criteria for NATO intervention. ... The right of humanitarian interference is
legitimate, but we must ask ourselves about its limits."

            Turin's L a Stampa
                led its front page with an appeal for
peace in Belgrade by the Russian Orthodox Patriarch Alexis II. It said the
patriarch has criticized NATO but has asked "the leaders of Yugoslavia, like
those of the Atlantic alliance, to halt military operations." Yugoslav
President Slobodan Milosevic has expressed the hope that the efforts of Russia
and its Orthodox hierarchy "may lead to peace and the end of aggression."

            
               Die Welt complained Wednesday
in its main front-page story that in western Europe only Germany is keeping its
promises toward Albanian refugees. "Of the 13,824 refugees who had arrived in
Europe by Monday morning, 9,937--more than two-thirds of the total--have come
to Germany," it said. In an accompanying front-page comment, the paper said:
"Typically German. Two weeks ago the federal government said it would take
10,000 Kosovo refugees--and today they are here. German generosity? German
efficiency? Or stupidity, a continuing feeling of anticipated guilt that other
countries quietly smile at and exploit?"

            In France Wednesday, Le Monde led its front page with a question: "A month
of war, with what results?" Its answer, in summary, was that the offensive has
weakened Serbia's military potential but has failed to deter Milosevic or
prevent "ethnic cleansing" in Kosovo. "A third of the population has been
driven out, and diplomatic initiatives are at a dead end," it said. The British
press focused again on the prospects of a ground war, with the conservative
tabloid the Daily Mail splashing the claim that Prime Minister Tony
Blair is now planning for one. It said that for the first time since the
bombing began Blair and Foreign Secretary Robin Cook "held out the prospect of
British soldiers going into Kosovo before a ceasefire has been agreed with
Belgrade." But it added the rider that "this will only happen when the back of
Serb resistance has been broken by Nato's air power."

            The Times of India
Wednesday condemned the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia for its ecological effects.
The paper said in an editorial: "There is
nothing humanitarian or liberating about the intense bombing of Yugoslavia,
which has created even more refugees and resulted in widespread ecocide." The
paper devoted its second editorial
to the diplomatic significance of Madeleine Albright's jewelry. Under the
headline "Lapel Diplomacy," the paper said that "her sparklers--the brooches
she wears while negotiating knotty issues of geo-politics--are as much a
statement as the press releases after various meetings with, say, the Iraqis,
Serbs, Russians, or Israelis." It went on: "The American eagle brooch says
without a word being exchanged that she is in hawkish, combative mood; the
cherub brooch betokens the spirit of innocent accommodation; and the red and
gold balloon brooch denotes a festive moment. On all other counts, Ms Albright
is thought prone to tough-talk, but her brooches seem to tell a different, more
nuanced story."

             

         
      
   
