
   
   
      
         
             Hawkish Doves, Dovish Hawks

            Democratic Sen. Daniel
Patrick Moynihan, you may remember, opposed the Gulf War on the grounds that
Iraq's conquest of Kuwait was just one "nasty little country invad[ing] a
littler, but just as nasty, country." So what does Sen. Moynihan think of
American intervention to stop nasty little Yugoslavia's invasion of littler,
but almost as nasty, Kosovo? He's a hawk.

            Conservative columnist
Charles Krauthammer declared before the Gulf War, "If a small, heavily
militarized regime can stand up to a global blockade [and] the opprobrium of
the entire world ... and still emerge intact and in possession of the fruits of
its aggression, the message to every other potential aggressor and victim will
be clear: There are no rules in the post-Cold War world."

            So what's Krauthammer's view of the small, heavily
militarized Yugoslav regime that is standing up to a global blockade and the
opprobrium of the entire world? He would leave Yugoslavia intact and in
possession of the fruits of its aggression. He's a Kosovo dove.

            Kosovo is performing a zoological alchemy on
America's foreign policy leaders. Hawks have mysteriously become doves, doves
have inexplicably become hawks. Kosovo has upset the traditional taxonomy and
replaced it with what appears to be chaos.

            But it's not chaos.
Here's who is where on Kosovo, and how they got there.

            
               Doves Into
Hawks
            

            
               1. The
Europeanists
            

            Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del., is the stellar example
of this category, which includes other Democratic legislators who opposed the
Gulf War. The Europeanists are pragmatic rather than moralistic about Kosovo.
Biden opposed intervention in Somalia, Haiti, Lebanon, and Kuwait. But he's
hawkish on Kosovo because it's in Europe, and Europe, unlike the Persian Gulf
and East Africa, is a vital American interest. America, Biden likes to say, is
a "European power." (The Europeanists are also NATOists. They say NATO will be
ruined if it doesn't stop Milosevic, so the United States must support the
alliance.)

            The Europeanists' claims
are somewhat disingenuous: It's hard to argue that benighted, bankrupt Kosovo
is a more vital American interest than oil-rich, centrally located Kuwait. So
there is another, unspoken, reason why the Europeanists favor intervention: a
Democratic president.

            
               2. The Liberal
Humanitarians (a k a Red-Tailed Hawks)
            

            Unlike the Europeanists, the Liberal Humanitarians
have turned hawk for moral reasons. These folks have opposed every American
military operation from Grenada to the Gulf War. Sen. Paul Wellstone of
Minnesota is a pre-eminent Liberal Humanitarian. The Democratic senator opposed
the Gulf War because Saddam Hussein is no Hitler, and the control of Kuwaiti
oil was not a cause worth dying for. But Wellstone favors Kosovo intervention
to stop the "Holocaust-like atrocities" occurring there.

            The Liberal Humanitarians are a product of the
post-Cold War peace. During the Cold War, liberals shunned military
intervention--even humanitarian military intervention--because such adventurism
could provoke conflict with the Soviets and tended to buttress thuggish
right-wingers. The end of the Cold War has freed them to pursue humanitarian
ends: The United States now can be the world's policeman, so it
should be.

            (A special place in the
Liberal Humanitarian pantheon belongs to New York Times columnist
Anthony Lewis. Click to read why.)

            
               3. The Third
Worlders
            

            The Rev. Jesse Jackson is
the principal of this small group. Jackson opposed the Gulf War but has since
favored U.S. intervention in Haiti, Somalia, and Bosnia. The Third Worlders
share most of the concerns of the Liberal Humanitarians but are particularly
hawkish about helping groups traditionally shunned by the West, notably
Africans and Muslims. In this case, Jackson avidly sides with the underdog
Muslim Kosovars.

            
               4. The Credibility
Fanatics
            

            Henry Kissinger is the
intellectual leader of the Credibility Fanatics. They are conservatives who
fundamentally detest U.S. involvement in Kosovo and have little interest in the
morality of the issue. They don't believe Kosovo is important enough to fight
for, they wish we had never gone to Rambouillet, and they think it will be a
horrible, ugly conflict. But while their Kosovo instincts are dovish, they are
Real hawks (pronounced "ray-all"): Now that the president has committed
U.S. forces, we must win. If we don't, the credibility of NATO and the United
States will be shattered. Unsurprisingly, Republican Sens. John McCain of
Arizona and Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, the Senate's leading veterans, are
Credibility Fanatics.

            
               5. Caspar
Weinberger
            

            Weinberger, a kind of
conservative counterpart to the Europeanists, deserves his own category. His
Weinberger Doctrine, which precludes U.S. military action except in absolutely
vital cases of national security, would seem to bar any Kosovo intervention.
But Weinberger has declared that the Balkans are a vital national
interest because they "were at the heart of two world wars." Hence the United
States should intervene--and with overwhelming force.

            
               Hawks Into
Doves
            

            
               1. The
Neo-Isolationists
            

            Many Republican senators belong in this category,
including Majority Leader Trent Lott of Mississippi and Deputy Majority Leader
Don Nickles of Oklahoma. During the Cold War, these conservatives were hawks,
believing the United States should intervene promiscuously to reverse communism
(Krauthammer's "Reagan Doctrine"). Now that there's no Evil Empire, they
believe the United States shouldn't intervene militarily unless national
security is really at stake.

            The Neos cite three reasons for their Kosovo
dovishness. First, Kosovo is not a vital American interest: It has no
commercial or strategic value. Second, unlike Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the
Serbian rout of Kosovo is a civil war, and the United States should not involve
itself in civil wars. We leave sovereign nations alone. Third, and more
preposterously, Sen. James Inhofe of Oklahoma claims that interceding on behalf
of Kosovars demonstrates a "European-American" bias in American foreign policy.
Why don't we help the Rwandans and the Sudanese? (Krauthammer fits in the
neo-isolationist category, but not perfectly. Click for why.)

            The Neo-Isolationists
are not entirely insincere: They really do believe Kosovo is too
irrelevant to national security to risk American lives. But there's also
another major reason they have turned dovish: Democrat Bill Clinton is
president, and they side against him reflexively.

            
               2. The
Paleo-Isolationists (a k a Turtledoves)
            

            They are the mirror image
of the Liberal Humanitarians. Pat Buchanan is their champion. Like the Neos,
they are Cold War burnouts. They were ferocious Cold Warriors, but they favored
military action only to defeat the communist menace, not for any greater moral
purpose. Now that there is no menace, they have withdrawn into their shells.
The Paleos believe almost nothing justifies intervention these days. Buchanan
opposed the Gulf War on the grounds that it was irrelevant to America's vital
interests. (Any oil price increase caused by Iraq's takeover, he claimed, would
help the United States by hurting Europe and Japan.) If the invasion of Kuwait
didn't qualify as a vital interest, then a civil war in Kosovo certainly
doesn't. Unlike the Neos, the Paleos are not against the Kosovo bombing for
partisan reasons: They would oppose U.S. involvement even if a Republican were
president.

            
               3. The Israel
Analogists
            

            This is less a group than
an undercurrent. No one has explicitly adopted this position: The closest there
is to an advocate is New York 
               Times columnist A.M. Rosenthal.
Palestinian advocates have exploited the Kosovo war by likening Serbian
viciousness against Kosovars to Israeli cruelty toward Palestinians. The Israel
Analogists would turn that comparison around. Rosenthal, for instance, opposes
the Kosovo bombing partly because the Serbian army and the Kosovo Liberation
Army are morally equivalent in their brutishness. Just as the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict is more complicated than the Palestinian cartoon
of it, so too the Serbian-Kosovar war is subtler than it seems. Rosenthal even
tacitly compares Serbs to Israelis: "Serbs are as likely to give up Kosovo
willingly because the Albanians want it as Israelis are to give up Jerusalem
because the Arabs want it." (The subtext: Serbia has as much right to Kosovo as
Israel does to Jerusalem--namely, a lot.)

            
Not all hawks and doves have changed places.
Consider:

            
               1. The
Conservative Moralists
            

            This group includes Bill
Kristol and his Weekly Standard , Jeane Kirkpatrick, and other
neoconservatives. These folks are Reaganites who did not give up Reagan's
imperial, moralistic vision when the Cold War ended. They don't believe
communism's defeat ended America's global obligations: The United States should
still strike boldly against authoritarian oppressors. The Conservative
Moralists are less concerned with the national interest than with what's right.
The Standard , for example, editorializes that Republicans should support
Kosovo action unless they want to become "the party of callous indifference to
human suffering."

            
               2. The Old-School
Lefties
            

            The rest of the left may have turned hawk on
Kosovo, but a few die-hard doves remain. The 
               Nation , for example,
has written extensively against the war. A recent cover story argued that the
bombing was dubious because a) the United States was just as brutal in Vietnam
as the Serbs are now; b) the United States ignores similarly horrific ethnic
cleansings in Turkey, Rwanda, etc.; and c) U.S. policy is being driven by
corporate interests. It's reassuring to know that some things, indeed, never
change.

         
      
   
