
   
   
      
         
            &quot;Slobba Sinks to a New Evil&quot;

            The war in Yugoslavia
continued to eclipse all other news across Europe Wednesday, with the
Guardian of London leading its front page: "Day 21: more
bombs, more death, more despair." The paper said the war "showed ominous signs
of widening" with the Serb incursion into Albania Tuesday. In the British
tabloids, though, the dominant war issue was rape. "The Rape Factory" was the
main front-page headline in the Sun , which added the rider, "Slobba
sinks to a new evil." "The rape camps" was a headline in the Daily
Mail .

            The reports were based
on a statement Tuesday by British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook that young
ethnic Albanian women are being herded into an army camp in Kosovo and
subjected to systematic rape by Serbian security forces. In the London
Evening Standard , conservative historian Andrew Roberts
warned against the demonization of Slobodan Milosevic, because it would
increase his support among the Serbs. He is, of course, "a vicious, ruthless
tyrant, but so are many people in the world whom Nato has chosen not to bomb.
To equate him with Hitler, who really did threaten the West in a way Milosevic
never could, can only flatter and strengthen him."

            The Daily Express of London splashed an exclusive report on its front page that the British Conservative
Party had received "substantial" donations in the 1997 election from a
Serbian-owned company with close links to the Milosevic regime. Two payments of
about $14,500 each were made by Metalchem International, "a British-registered
metal trading company which was under United Nations sanctions and remains on a
U.S. blacklist because of its financial ties with Serbia." In an editorial, the
Express said the Conservative leadership should "immediately and without
question repay to Metalchem or to the Serbian government the money they
gave."

            In other British press
editorials Wednesday, the conservative Daily Mail said that "public
opinion is swinging in favor of an invasion" and that "the launch of a ground
offensive seems likelier every day"; the Times "that it may take
ground troops, backed by massive air power, to drive them [the Serbian forces]
out of Kosovo"; the Daily Telegraph that Bill Clinton and Tony Blair should rapidly
sanction "the Nato ground offensive that would be required to bring Serbia to
heel"; and the Guardian that the West was sending a signal to Belgrade
"that ground action is becoming an available option for Nato, should the air
campaign bring no acceptable result, but that an opportunity remains for
settlement before a decision on ground action is made." The Financial Times , on the other
hand, devoted an editorial to the argument that "the US should engage Russia
more. That means accepting more than a token Russian presence in the
international force that may accompany the refugees back to Kosovo. Failure to
do this risks turning a split over Yugoslavia into another cold war."

            Meanwhile, a report in the Independent said that the United States might offer Iraqi
Kurds full military protection against President Saddam Hussein if they allowed
the Iraqi opposition to base itself in the area they control. The story quoted
Hoshyar Zibari, a leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, which controls
western Kurdistan, as saying, "We would need to have a no-fly, no-drive zone
protecting our cities from Iraqi government retaliation if we were to
co-operate with the Iraqi opposition." U.S. officials are "seriously
considering" the matter, he claimed.

            In Iceland, the daily Morgunbladid reported
that a plan to sail an Icelandic Viking ship to North America as part of next
year's millennium celebrations is in jeopardy because lack of funding has
delayed the preparations. The original plan was for a crew of nine or 10 people
to take the Vlkingur , a replica of a Viking vessel, to Newfoundland,
Canada, and to New York "to commemorate the 1,000 th anniversary of
Leifur Eiríksson's discovery of North America." the paper said. But now, if the
voyage goes ahead at all, the ship will sail only to Halifax, Nova Scotia. A
final decision will be made this week.

            The Irish Times of Dublin carried a front-page picture caption,
"The Lord God omnipotent raineth on choir in Fishamble Street." This was above
a picture of members of Our Lady's Choral Society in pink raincoats and
waterproof hats trying to sing Handel's Messiah outdoors in a hail
shower. The first performance of the Messiah was held in Fishamble
Street in 1742.

             

         
      
   
