
   
   
      
         
            No. 226: &quot;It Depends&quot;

            

               "This is quite controversial," said Kevin Sparkman of Pennsylvania.
"Until now, we have always depended strictly on altruism." What is he talking
about?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question--(No. 225) "Love Hurts":
            

            

               On Tuesday, in Texas, after a public display of affection, one of
them 
               playfully grabbed the other by the wrist and shouted,
"Run! Run!" What was going on?
            

            "Leper
practical jokes."-- Dave Gaffen ( Greg Diamond had a similar
answer.)

            "Gov.
Bush got a playful French kiss from Anna Nicole Smith at the annual World's
Biggest Boob Relay Race at the Texas State Fair."-- Brooke Saucier
            

            "Jesse
Jackson, looking in the mirror, decides the country needs him ...
again."-- Christopher Clark
            

            "Sounds
like another one of Darryl Strawberry's romantic liaisons about to be called
foul by the vice squad."-- Peter Carlin
            

            "Lyndon
Johnson and Lee Harvey Oswald, trying not to be seen together. The Tuesday was
in mid-November 1963."-- Tim Carvell
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Daniel's
Wrap-Up
            

            Even when Forrest Sawyer is sitting in, it's still
World News Tonight With Peter Jennings . Just because Johnny goes on
vacation, The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson doesn't suddenly
become The Tonight Show With Jay Leno . The task of a guest host is
delicate. He has to be familiar (and competent) enough to keep viewers
satisfied, but also distinct (and flawed) enough that when the star returns,
everyone remembers exactly why they love him so. Similarly, when two men hold
hands in Texas, all our suspicions are confirmed.

            OK, that's not the least bit similar. These segues
are harder than they look from where you're sitting.

            
               Was It Good for You
Too Answer
            

            Rudolph Giuliani and George W. Bush were simpering
and giggling for the press after their 90-minute meeting at the governor's
mansion in Austin, Texas. It was a love fest.

            "He is one of the real hopes that the Republican
Party has of regaining control of the United States," said the mayor in his
characteristic military style.

            "He's a good tough campaigner," the governor
reciprocated manfully.

            "I think I might have eaten a bad clam," said
someone, perhaps me.

            Neither man would formally endorse the other, but
when a reporter asked the mayor if he'd specifically urged the governor to run,
Bush contorted his arm behind his back and said, "He twisted my ..." Well, you
know what he said. Then Giuliani displayed his usual flair for playful repartee
with the run, run business.

            (Answer composed
pre-departure by Randy Cohen.)

            
               Military
Intelligence Extra
            

            1. According to NATO Secretary-General Javier
Solana, "Milosevic is losing, and ..."

            a) He knows he is losing.

            b) He doesn't know he is losing.

            c) I can fly!

            2. Which explanation did NATO spokesman David Wilby
give for the attack that killed 10 civilians in a residential area of Pristina
last week?

            a) "One bomb appeared to be seduced off target at
the final stages."

            b) "Relax, it's not like we hit a convoy of refugees
or anything."

            c) "Kill 'em all, let God
sort 'em out."

            3. Explaining why he went to Belgrade, Dan Rather
said, "On some days, in some ways ..."

            a) I miss Afghanistan.

            b) Tom Brokaw can kiss my ass.

            c) Danger is my
business.

            4. Which was not said by a college student at a
Kosovo teach-in?

            a) "I'm very against genocide."

            b) "This Milosevic guy is Serbian, right?"

            c) "Forget ground troops,
let's send in Buffy."

            5. A party for NATO's 50 th anniversary
will still go ahead as scheduled, but administration officials acknowledged
that they would have to "adjust the tone" to make it, in the words of the
National Security Council's Don Blander:

            a) Less "triumphalist," more "serious and
sober."

            b) Less "imperialist," more "pathetic."

            c) Less "Greek,
Hungarian, Italian, and French," more "British and American."

            

               Answers
            

            1-a. Solana was also asked what would constitute a
"permissive environment" for NATO troops. "Why don't you help me a little," he
replied, "and not ask me to define the word 'permissive.' " He was not asked to
define "losing" either.

            2-a. A little candlelight and a bottle of Alizé, and
that ordnance just can't control itself.

            3-c. "I get $19,178 a day plus expenses," he could
have added, but didn't.

            4-c. At least, that's the only one the New York
Times reporter didn't overhear.

            5-a. Meanwhile, a NATO
postage stamp illustrated with a dove of peace has been "rescheduled for a
later date," the postal service said. "They're replacing the dove with an
Apache helicopter, so it'll take at least a month before it arrives," the
postal service did not add.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Texas-sized homoeroticism.

         
      
   
