
   
   
      
         
             Firing Blanks

            In
recent days, the National Rifle Association and its allies have argued that
additional gun laws would not have helped avert the April 20 Colorado
high-school massacre, because gun laws already on the books proved useless. Why
propose "more gun laws" since the Colorado killers had broken "17 laws" anyway,
asked House Republican Conference chairman J.C. Watts Jr., R-Okla. Republican
presidential candidate Gary Bauer ("18 gun laws were violated") and Senate
Majority Leader Trent Lott, R-Miss., ("17 to 19 laws ... We have lots of laws
on the books") echoed this construction. The NRA's latest tally, provided to

                  Slate
                Tuesday, lists 20 laws allegedly violated in the massacre.
But on closer inspection, the list evaporates.

            

               A. Distractions. The first four laws cited by the NRA concern
bombs.

            
               1. Possession of a
"destructive device" (i.e., bomb).
            

            
               2. Manufacturing a
"destructive device" (i.e., bomb).
            

            
               3. Use of an explosive
or incendiary device in the commission of a felony.
            

            
               4.
Setting a device designed to cause an explosion upon being triggered.
            

            What
do bomb laws have to do with gun laws? According to the NRA, nothing.
"Incredibly, we've been asked if we would support an instant check on
explosives purchases," NRA Vice President Wayne LaPierre noted with disgust in
a speech at Saturday's NRA convention. "Well, I don't have to tell you, we're
not the National Explosives Association." So, why does the NRA include bomb
laws on its list? To pad the total.

            

               B. 
               Tautologies. Nine other laws on the list
concern the use of guns to commit the massacre.

            
               5. Use of a firearm or
"destructive device" (i.e., bomb) to commit a murder that is prosecutable in a
federal court.
            

            
               6. Possession of a
firearm or "destructive device" (i.e., bomb) in furtherance of a crime of
violence that is prosecutable in a federal court.
            

            
               7. Brandishing a
firearm or "destructive device" (i.e., bomb) in furtherance of a crime of
violence that may be prosecuted in a federal court.
            

            
               8. Discharging a
firearm or "destructive device" (i.e., bomb) in furtherance of a crime of
violence that may be prosecuted in a federal court.
            

            
               9. Conspiracy to
commit a crime of violence prosecutable in federal court.
            

            
               15. Possession of a
firearm on school property.
            

            
               16. Discharge of a
firearm on school property, with a reckless disregard for another's
safety.
            

            
               18. Intentionally
aiming a firearm at another person.
            

            

               19. Displaying a firearm in a public place in a manner calculated to
alarm.
            

            The
salient feature of these nine laws is that the killers violated them
during the massacre, not beforehand. To say that these laws were
violated is merely to say that the massacre happened, i.e., that two kids
walked into a school and brandished, aimed, and discharged firearms in a manner
calculated to alarm people, endanger the safety of others, and further a crime
of violence. It is meaningless to bring up these laws in a discussion of
prevention. Like murder laws, they are designed to prevent a killer's second
crime, not his first.

            

               C. 
               Laws not violated or not known to have been
violated.
            

            
               12. Possession of a
handgun by a person under age 18.
            

            
               13. Providing a
handgun to a person under age 18.
            

            
               14. Licensed dealers
may sell rifles and shotguns only to persons age 18 or over, and handguns to
persons age 21 or over. ... Persons under age 18 are prohibited from possessing
handguns from anyone (dealer or not).
            

            
               17. Possession,
interstate transportation, sale, etc., of a stolen firearm.
            

            

               20. Possession of a firearm with an obliterated serial number.
            

            "It is
not known, however, whether the 17-year-old perpetrator possessed the handgun
used in the crime," concedes the NRA. The other perpetrator was 18 years old.
According to the New York Times , the man who evidently bought the gun
and passed it to the killers was 22 years old, and investigators don't know
whether he "sold, gave or lent the gun or which gunman ... was the recipient."
As for the other three guns, the Times says the 17-year-old
perpetrator's 18-year-old girlfriend "has admitted buying two shotguns and a
rifle for him. But she was not charged because it is legal in Colorado for a
minor to own shotguns and rifles." There is no evidence that any of the guns
was stolen. Also, the NRA concedes that it has only been "suggested that at
least one of the firearms used in the crime had an obliterated serial
number."

            

               D. 
               Duplicates. Two statutes on the list ban
possession of certain kinds of weapons, essentially duplicating other statutes
on the list that ban acquisition of those weapons.

            
               10. Possession of a
short-barreled shotgun.
            

            

               12. Possession of a handgun by a person under age 18.
            

            

               E. Formalities. So the list of relevant laws known to have
been violated boils down to one:

            

               11. Manufacturing a "sawed-off" shotgun.
            

            This
law prohibited the two perpetrators from making a sawed-off shotgun. However,
no law prohibited them from acquiring both a shotgun and a saw. So this law
means nothing.

            Would
the additional laws proposed by President Clinton last week have made any
difference? One of them would prohibit 18- to 20-year-olds from possessing
handguns. If that law had been passed and effectively enforced, it would have
prevented the elder gunman from acquiring the handgun used in the massacre.
Another of Clinton's proposals would hold negligent parents liable for crimes
committed with guns by their kids. This law might or might not have prompted
the parents of the Colorado killers to intervene before the massacre.

            It is
always possible that more gun laws would not have helped. But the NRA's bogus
list proves nothing.

         
      
   
