
   
   
      
         
            No. 233: &quot;Courtly&quot;

            

               "I couldn't do my current job without them," said Justice Antonin
Scalia yesterday as he waved something in the air. What?
            

             

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 232)--"Summoning DiMaggio's Ghost":
            

            

               
                  The list includes whistling, making certain hand gestures, and
carrying bottles, baseball bats, or flashlights. List of
what?
               
            

            
"Telltale signs that your teen-ager might be troubled. That and having a bomb
factory in your garage."-- Barbara Lippert ( Andrew Kickertz ,
Francis Heaney , and Michael Jenkinson had similar answers.)

            "Things
I'm not allowed to do within 50 yards of Dame Judi Dench."-- Daniel
Radosh
            

            "Why,
West Side Story dance steps, of course."--Steve Lyle
            

            "Ways
to ward off Peter Lorre in M ."-- Andrea Carla "Been in a Coma Since
1932" Michaels
            

            
"Chapter headings in Wendy Shalit's new book, When Modesty
Fails ."-- Ananda Gupta
            

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Kate Wing's
Question Critique
            

            Oh, Randy, this is one of
those questions where you taunt us with the open arms of the obvious.
You--sitting in a well-upholstered recliner, casually sipping something
top-shelf and free of little umbrellas, poking lackadaisically at a morsel of
takeout--have only to dance your fingertips across the keyboard to condemn us
as we fall prey to writing "things prohibited in high schools" or "new ways to
pick up interns." We are so weak, Randy. Pity us.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            "The whole system should be blown up." No, not Eric
Harris or Dylan Klebold on the Littleton schools--that's Rudolph Giuliani on
the New York schools. Metaphorically? Wadda ya, an idiot? It's just an
expression. "I can understand why people would pick on it. Because they want to
deliberately misunderstand it," said the mayor. "And if anybody misunderstands
it, they're honestly doing it on purpose. To get me," he added, except for
those last three words.

            News Quiz participants
mostly associate the activities in today's question with Littleton or Kosovo,
two locales that President Clinton seems unable to connect, even when his
hand-wringing about teen violence runs on the same front pages that report NATO
bombs and refugee suffering. It's a violent country. Who knew? I'm no fancy
social reformer but maybe, just maybe, the whole system should be blown up.
Metaphorically. Don't pretend not to understand me, the way those robots do
when they follow me around. Idiots.

            
               There's No Such
Thing as a Free Association Answer
            

            All are illegal under the anti-gang statutes of
various California towns.

            Betty Loren-Maltese, town
president of Cicero, Ill., wants to fight even harder; she proposes exiling
gang members--banishing them from Cicero--and coming down hard if they ever
return, even to visit their families. The people of Cicero overwhelmingly
supported a nonbinding referendum on her plan.

            Q: How
will Betty Loren-Maltese identify gang members?
A: The town has a list of 600 "known gang members" including several minors.
They'd have 60 days to get out of town.

            Q: How does Betty
Loren-Maltese propose to round up these young thugs?

            A: She
might consider gating neighborhoods and establishing police checkpoints.

            Q: Cicero has a reputation
for racism and government corruption. What did the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.
call it?

            A: The
Selma of the North.

            Q: Does Betty Loren-Maltese
think her law should apply to convicted felons like her late husband and to
those in organized crime?

            A: "If
they get involved in drive-by shootings."

            Q: How does Betty
Loren-Maltese respond when constitutional scholar Mark Tushnet notes: "You can
punish people for what they do; you can't punish people for what that are."

            A: "The
ACLU says gang members have rights. How about our civil rights?"

            Q: Is there something else
Betty Loren-Maltese kind of calls her proposal?

            A: "I
kind of call it tough love."

            
               Prelude to a Kick
Extra
            

            

               "This is an all-out war on people who do bad things," said San Francisco
Mayor Willie Brown, just before strangling Michael Eisner with the entrails of
Rupert Murdoch. Or perhaps he was planning to arrest some more jaywalkers.

               "Any visit-and-search regime, of course, has to have the appropriate rules
of engagement," said Gen. Wesley Clark, just before rummaging through Julia
Roberts' lingerie drawer. Or perhaps he was clarifying NATO plans to board
Balkans-bound oil tankers.

               "There's still a lot of old equipment out there," said Mick Mack, just
before using a laser pointer to highlight surprising features of Cher's
anatomy. Or perhaps he was commenting on dangerously outmoded playground
apparatus.

               "I want to make a plea to everybody who is waiting for the next deer season
in my home state," said President Clinton, just before telling newly mobilized
Air National Guardsmen that bombing Serbs would be a lot like shooting
ruminants, only safer. Or perhaps he was about to announce a new gun control
package.

            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Littleton and Kosovo.

         
      
   
