
   
   
      
         
            Divide and Rule

            

               China
Daily said Friday in an editorial that behind America's "barbaric air
strikes against Yugoslavia" lies a plan to divide Europe and dominate the
world. The United States' secret strategic objective is to keep Russia and
Western Europe apart, it said. The United States fears that Russia and the
European Union are trying to get closer together and eventually might unite to
compete with it in international trade. "The most urgent strategic task for the
United States in Europe is first to contain Europe and prevent it from becoming
powerful enough to threaten U.S. hegemony in the world," the paper said. Then
it will try to deepen Russia's economic crisis with a view to destroying its
nuclear capability. If this works, the United States might then target China to
eliminate its nuclear capability.

            In
Hong Kong, the South China
Morning Post reported that Beijing has sent diplomats and foreign trade
officials to Europe to lobby for an end to airstrikes. "Beijing is exploiting
its status as an aggrieved party to weaken the unity of what it calls the Nato
war machine," the paper quoted an unidentified diplomat as saying. It also said
that Chinese foreign trade officials have indicated that European countries
that dissociate themselves from Washington's "hawkish" policies will stand the
best chance of reaping benefits from the vast China market. Even so, Beijing
has signaled its willingness to separate politics and business by instructing
the media to cool their anti-U.S. rhetoric. The media have been told that
criticism of the United States should be confined to the specific issues of
Kosovo and the embassy bombing. "The leadership wants to contain popular
hostility even against American businesses and products," a Beijing source told
the SCMP . The paper also reported Friday that President Rexhep Meidani
of Albania will visit Beijing this month for talks on the Kosovo crisis,
despite the fact that the Albanian Embassy, like the embassies of the United
States and Britain, was attacked by demonstrators Sunday and Monday, apparently
because Albania is considered an ally of NATO.

            
Despite editorials around the world expressing alarm about the deteriorating
political situation in Russia (including an especially strong one in Asahi
Shimbun of Tokyo), Le Figaro of Paris led Friday with French President Jacques
Chirac declaring after talks in the Kremlin that he doesn't believe that Russia
will withdraw from the Kosovo peace process and that he expects the next few
days to show "that things are moving in the right direction, that of peace."
The German press led on the deal struck at a stormy meeting of the Green Party,
a member of Germany's ruling coalition, by which the government of Chancellor
Gerhard Schröder is permitted to hold to its existing war policy.

            The
Italian papers were dominated by the election of former governor of the Bank of
Italy Carlo Azeglio Ciampi as Italy's next president at the age of 78. The easy
victory of this former wartime partisan and European enthusiast was welcomed by
La Repubblica
of Rome in a front-page comment as "a fine moment for Italian politics and for
the whole country." Kosovo was replaced on the front pages of several British
newspapers by the start of a new campaign by Prime Minister Tony Blair to put
an ambivalent Britain at "the heart of Europe," and by the threat of huge
disruption to the country's secret intelligence services by the publication on
various Web sites of a list of 117 British secret agents. The Guardian , in its main front-page lead, said that frantic
government efforts to purge the Web of this sensitive information are "doomed
to failure."

            In
Canada, the conservative National Post accused Janet Reno of "dereliction of duty" for failing to
investigate China's theft of a half-century's worth of nuclear secrets from Los
Alamos, N.M., "the most damaging case of spying against the United States since
the Rosenbergs passed along the atomic bomb to the Soviet Union." It said
Friday in an editorial that U.S. scientists informed the Energy Department that
as early as 1995 they suspected China had stolen the design of the United
States' most advanced nuclear warhead, the W-88. Yet it looks as if Reno chose
not to investigate all this "on the old principle: 'if something smells bad,
why put your nose in it?' When that something is the theft of the development
codes for the entire U.S. nuclear arsenal, however, such discretion shades into
dereliction of duty of the worst kind. It must now receive the fullest and most
open inquiry--and any resistance to such investigation will unavoidably look
like evidence of guilt."

            The
Times of
London led its front page Friday with the news that the parents of Louise
Woodward, the English nanny convicted two years ago in Boston of killing
9-month-old Matthew Eappen, have been arrested in England over fraud
allegations relating to a trust fund set up to pay their daughter's defense
costs. Sue and Gary Woodward, who have separated, have been released on bail
until July 1, the paper said. The Daily Telegraph gave
front-page treatment Friday to the death in London of a 7-month-old baby who
had been put in a clothes drier by his 3-year-old sister, who thought she was
being helpful when he woke up crying with a soiled diaper. The
Guardian 's front page reported that British teen-agers have the worst
record for sexual disease, pregnancy, and abortions in Europe.

         
      
   
