
   
   
      
         
            The Out-of-Towners

            As Hillary Clinton toys
with a run for Daniel Patrick Moynihan's Senate seat, the main charge leveled
against her has nothing to do with her conventional liberal views, her status
as a politician's wife, or her smarmy New Age morality. Rather, critics blast
her status as a carpetbagger--an Illinoisan, by way of Arkansas and Washington,
D.C., who would exploit New York's lax residency requirements for personal
glory. So how come no one cares that Moynihan was born in Tulsa, Okla.?

            Of course, Moynihan grew
up in New York. Still, the point is that in our highly mobile society,
carpetbagging is as common a political sin as taking soft money or committing
adultery. According to a 1993 tally by Roll Call , 36 senators and 145
House members--about a third of Congress--were born outside the states they
represented. Sen. Robert Byrd, known for bringing federal pork to his West
Virginia constituents, hails from North Carolina. And his junior colleague, Jay
Rockefeller, isn't a native either. Presidential candidate Bob Smith, hoping to
capture New Hampshire's critical primary as a native son, was born in Trenton,
N.J. Yet the charge of carpetbagging remains a favorite campaign-season
accusation.

            Where does the term come from? Southerners pinned the label
on both the opportunistic and idealistic Northerners who packed their worldly
possessions into "carpetbags" during Reconstruction and moved to Dixie to enter
politics. A term of opprobrium, the word came from the Southerners' perception
that the newcomers represented the dregs of society, seeking nothing but easy
political gain. In particular, carpetbaggers were scorned for capitalizing on
the freed slaves' newly granted right to vote. Testifying before a
congressional committee in 1872, Alabama Democrat William M. Lowe explained, "A
carpetbagger is generally understood to be a man who comes here for office
sake, of an ignorant or bad character, and who seeks to array the negroes
against the whites."

            While the North won the
Civil War, the South won Reconstruction. By the late 1870s, Southern
"redeemers" (as they were admiringly called) got the federal government to
withdraw the troops that were safeguarding the rights of blacks. Meanwhile,
white supremacists regained control of state governments through fraud and
violence. Confederate apologists, who wrote the first round of histories of the
South, portrayed slavery as a benign, paternalistic institution (for more on
this topic, see "") and painted the carpetbaggers as venal and corrupt
interlopers.

            Hardly a pack of jackals feeding off the crippled South,
the carpetbaggers came from various backgrounds and acted from a range of
motives, historians tell us. Most were well educated, and included former Union
soldiers, lawyers, businessmen, teachers, newspapermen, and agents of the
postwar Freedmen's Bureau.

            The opportunism of some
carpetbaggers was more economic than political: The war-ravaged and
economically stagnant South direly needed Northern investors to spur the kind
of dynamic industrial and commercial growth that was transforming the rest of
the country. Others, of a religious bent, followed what one called "a Mission
with a large M" to help former slaves. Still others simply warmed to the
region's climate, the way Americans would later flock to California. "Maybe I
will locate in the sunny South," one sergeant wrote to his sister in Ohio in
1866. "What think you of roses blooming in open air in November, and the
gardens glorious with flowers." As historian Richard Current noted, the phrase
"Go South, young man" supplanted Horace Greeley's famous exhortation to head
West.

            While the behavior of a few of the carpetbaggers is,
according to Current, "rather difficult to defend," most were not unusually
corrupt. Committed to rebuilding the South, they advocated strong public
schools, better roads and railroads, labor reform, and progressive taxation. As
for disturbing race relations, of course many carpetbaggers did so--that was
the whole idea. In a society drenched in white supremacism, race relations had
to be disturbed. Few today would question their virtue on that score.

            The carpetbaggers'
reputation has improved, but the word's negative connotations have spread to
cover all ambitious newcomers. The proliferation of railroads, then the
automobile, and later the airplane made this a country of mobile, ambitious
newcomers. By the mid-20 th century, carpetbaggers made up the
majority in the West. Yet, as observers dating back to Alexis de Tocqueville in
1835 have noted, Americans take pride in their local communities: Wherever
transience and provincialism collide, the charge of carpetbagging still
stings.

            In Oakland County, Mich., earlier this year, opponents of a
state Senate candidate went to court to try to force him off the ballot,
arguing he hadn't lived in the district long enough. (They lost.) In
Massachusetts last year, former Boston Mayor Ray Flynn--a lifelong South Boston
resident--leased an East Boston apartment to qualify for an open
congressional seat. (He lost, too.) Of course, Flynn was merely imitating John
F. Kennedy, who ran for Congress in 1946 by using a hotel as his
11 th District "residence." (He won.) A Kennedy rival placed a
mocking newspaper ad: "Congress Seat for Sale. No Experience Necessary.
Applicant Must Live in New York or Florida."

            New York's easy residency requirements--you only
need to be a resident at the time of the election--and its political prominence
make it a carpetbagger magnet. Detractors assailed Robert Kennedy for his 1964
New York Senate bid; even the liberal New York Times endorsed Republican
Kenneth Keating. Six years later, Connecticut resident James Buckley suffered
similar charges en route to winning the seat. Candidates have accused opponents
of carpetbagging in other high-profile Senate races: Frank Lautenberg vs. Pete
Dawkins in New Jersey in 1988; Dianne Feinstein vs. Michael Huffington in
California in 1994; Paul Sarbanes vs. Bill Brock in Maryland, also in '94. It
didn't help Brock's case that he had already served as a U.S. senator--from
Tennessee.

            For all its currency, the carpetbagger charge only
carries these days in parochial places and when it plays into other, more
potent, liabilities: the naked ambition of Dawkins or Huffington, the
Washington-insider image of Brock. Solid candidates, such as RFK (or HRC),
weather the charges. And for some politicians, such as Arizona's John McCain,
living in an adopted home state doesn't seem to matter at all. The Constitution
requires only that a senator "when elected, be an inhabitant of that state for
which he shall be chosen." Having rehabilitated the carpetbaggers, we might as
well give them back their good name.

         
      
   
