
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am an American who lives in Wales, and I have
a problem with geographically challenged American friends who confuse England
(just a part of the whole) and the United Kingdom, and are constantly sending
mail addressed to me in Wales, England--instead of Wales, U.K.
            

            
               Should I make a pest
of myself and keep telling my friends that I live in Wales, not England, or
should I just shrug it off?
            

            

               --Adopted Welshman
            

            Dear Ad,

            Ah yes, a gray matter issue. But you have come to
the right person. A geographically challenged American, that is. (Prudie thinks
she was in the bathroom when other people learned these things in grade
school.)

            In any case, speaking as
one who would be on the receiving end of your "pestering," by all means offer
the mini-education. Sending mail--and wanting it to arrive--makes your little
lesson one with actual value. If, however, you find yourself having to tell the
same person more than once, then shrug it off ... and Prudie hopes you
will be compassionate.

            
--Prudie, geographically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Just a quick note of support for your reply to
"" regarding forms of address. I think your first instinct, that "children
should address adults in the manner in which the adults ask to be addressed,"
is absolutely dead on.
            

            
               Not only as a child, but even now--well into my
adulthood--this rule has served me well. Not only do people appreciate my
respect for their preferences, but I also don't have to choose to whom to cater
in mixed situations. It is one of those rare cases in which I can please
everyone. Best of all, though, I avoid the hubris of pushing my ideas of
appropriate formality on others, even those who agree with me.
            

            
               Now I just wish more
forms would allow me to omit Mr. from my name ...
            

            

               --Accommodating in Seattle
            

            Dear Ac,

            Prudie thanks you for the
vote of confidence, and doubly so because she was taken to task by some readers
who disagreed. We are kindred in another way, as well. Prudie just likes to use
her first and last name and would happily ditch the Ms. or the Mrs. or the
Miss.

            
--Prudie, gratefully

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Does a bridesmaid
have to give the future bride a gift for every shower given?
            

            

               --The Professor
            

            Dear Prof,

            Certainly not. Some brides have so many people
entertaining for them that it would seem to be constantly "raining" luncheons
and teas--and etiquette calls for the attendants to be invited to every such
event.

            The bridesmaids may skip
giving shower presents, unless they simply feel they'd like to. Or a token gift
would be appropriate. And since Prudie is living in America in 1999, a small
addendum about those brides who've previously been up at bat. Emily Post wrote
this: "Those who attended a shower for the bride before she was married the
first time should not be invited to a second shower unless they are very close
relatives or very dear friends who would want to be present."

            
--Prudie, graciously

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               We got to be friends with our neighbors, with
whom we had much in common. We shared tools, went to see Bob Dylan together,
cared for each other's cats while away on trips. They borrowed a bottle of wine
while we were gone, and they were doing the cat thing for us. It was not a wine
that was known to them (i.e., they didn't know if it was a gift, or special in
some other way). But they took it anyway, drank it, and told us about it as
soon as we returned. It was not, in fact, a special or expensive bottle of wine
but, not to belabor the point, they didn't know that. They also didn't replace
it in a timely fashion. When we let them know we weren't happy with the whole
thing, they were offended and have since completely severed the
friendship.
            

            
               What do you think about taking something like
this from someone's home while you're doing them a favor? If it had been a Bud
or two from the fridge we wouldn't have given it a second thought. But a bottle
of wine that may have been irreplaceable?
            

            
               Thanks,
            

            

               --Sad in Philly
            

            Dear Sad,

            First, they told you, and second, they failed to
replace it. This suggests they view things differently than you two, and their
idea of correct behavior is different from yours. There is a chance that, by
their lights, they assumed that had you been home you would have "lent" them
the wine.

            Prudie agrees with you that this was not first-rate
behavior. It could be, though, that they just didn't know any better. Should
you feel generous and lonesome for the friendship, you might make the first
move and say you wish to let bygones be bygones because the relationship was
important to you. I mean, you all went to see Bob Dylan together!

            Their severing ties
bespeaks their embarrassment at having made a social misstep and perhaps anger
that you wouldn't cut them some slack. So ... Prudie recommends that you patch
it up if you wish the whole thing had never happened. And she is certain
if relations are repaired that the neighbs will never again help themselves to
anything in your house.

            --Prudie, soothingly

         
      
   
