
   
   
      
         
            The Balloon Smugglers

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               This is an odd
question to ask a stranger--but at least you are objective, seeing as how we
don't know each other. I am undecided about whether or not to get breast
implants. I have convinced myself that they are not dangerous. The issue, now,
is the correctness of having such a procedure. I do not mean political
correctness; I mean how important should it be for 1) oneself, 2) one's
"onlookers," and whatever ethical-philosophical considerations come into play.
My boyfriend, by the way, says the decision is mine. (P.S.: I am not
particularly flat-chested.)
            

            

               --To D or Not To D
            

            Dear To,

            This is a first for Prudie, who has never been
asked before to decide about someone's chest enhancement.

            Only you know the
reasons for considering implants. Are you built like a boy? Do you think a pair
of remarkable hooters will change your life for the better? Do you think
drawing attention to your chest is a good thing? In general, there do not seem
to be "ethical-philosophical considerations" attached to breasts. Prudie's
personal view is that implants fool very few people (they often do not feel
genuine to a companion) and really, what is the point? Prudie wishes she could
attribute the phrase to the proper person, but some clever soul named the
bearers of implants "the balloon smugglers." That pretty much expresses
Prudie's thoughts on the matter.

            
--Prudie, naturally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Could it be that ,who so disliked the use of
the expression "there you go," has confused that phrase with "off you go?" I'm
not sure whether the latter has any currency in America, but here in Australia
it is often uttered in a pleasant--and perhaps patronizing tone of voice in
instances such as, say, insisting to a reluctant teen-ager that he march off
and do his homework. By actually describing the addressee's future act of
leaving the presence of the speaker, the "off you go" indicates a request for
departure.
            

            
               I think the reason
"there you go" has no such unpleasant connotations is that it describes, in the
retail context, the state in which the customer finds him- or herself after
successful completion of the purchase. (See also the rather Henry Jamesian
"there you are.") In other words, it functions as a polite observation
naturally terminating the transaction.
            

            
               --Yours
pedantically,
            

            

               Amitavo from Sydney
            

            Dear Am,

            Prudie thanks you for
your internationalist input on the issue of "there you go." She found it
enlightening and thoughtful. Whoever named your part of the world "down under"
surely was not referring to the educational level of Prudie's Australian
readers.

            
--Prudie, internationally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Having just marked
Mother's Day, here is my problem. I am married to a lovely man with a charming
family. He has no sisters, and I am the only daughter-in-law. For as long as
anyone can remember, the men in this family always forgot my mother-in-law's
birthday, Mother's Day, etc. Although she clearly loves a fuss, her sons and
husband produce not a cake, a card, a flower, or a gift. A year ago, I realized
everyone expected me to attend to these details, which I had previously
neglected to do. I am happy to celebrate her occasions in a way she would
enjoy, but I resent being expected to handle this task for everyone just
because I am a woman. Should I put feminist principles aside and do my familial
duty because it's the nicer thing to do, or should I leave it to the men to
wise up?
            

            

               --Dutiful Daughter-in-law, Toronto
            

            Dear Duti,

            Let's make a list. On
the plus side is "a lovely man with a charming family." On the minus side,
these male people can't seem to get it together to do anything about occasions.
Prudie feels certain feminism wasn't addressing itself to this issue and hopes
you will lose the resentment factor. Do the thoughtful thing for your lovely
husband and the charming others, because on the Richter Scale of Family Chores,
this ranks about .05. You can only reap the appreciation of your male clan
members, and who knows? In time you might have trained them by example, without
their even knowing it.

            
--Prudie, generously

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               What is the most
polite--but effective--way to handle guests who do not know when to leave a
party? My brother brought friends of his to a brunch I gave recently. Not only
did these friends have too much to drink, but they actually stayed later than
my brother. I resorted to time-honored tricks such as washing the dishes, then
announcing I had a headache--and yet the guests stayed for another hour! Of
course I will never invite these people to my home again, but was there a more
direct, yet still polite, way I could have induced them to leave?
            

            

               --Tired Host
            

            Dear Ti,

            You say you will never
invite these people again. My dear, you didn't invite them the first
time. Prudie recommends, however, for those invited or not, a direct approach
once a hint is ignored. (Granted, people who aren't sober can be rather slow on
the uptake.) Simply say the festivities are over and you hope they had a good
time. If they wore wraps, hand them to them. If the weather is too warm, thank
them for coming and walk with them to the door. Do not take no for an answer.
The socially inept are not kid-glove candidates.

            --Prudie, directly

         
      
   
