
   
   
      
         
            No. 244: &quot;When IRS Eyes Are Smiling&quot;

            
               Fill in the blank
on this tax tip from a Washington state IRS collection officer. "If you don't
want to pay your taxes today all you have to do is say two magic words:
_________ _________."
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Wednesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Monday's Question
(No. 243)--"A Crush on You":
            

            

               
                  
                     "All great leaders since Moses have known that feared
enemies must be crushed completely." Who served up this baloney on Sunday, to
inspire whom, to do what?
                  
               
            

            "A
leader of the Makah tribe, inspiring 600 men armed with pointed spears and
high-powered rifles to tear into the 'feared enemy,' who was, at that moment,
peacefully sorting baleen."-- Dale Shuger
            

            "The
'voices' telling Joan Van Ark to liberate France from the English, in yet
another strange twist on Knots Landing ."-- Matt Sullivan
            

            "A
government spokesman explains why the federal government is funding research on
the Crushinator 6000, an alternative to the Crushinator 9000."-- Jane
Bu
            

            "Cat
leader, to all the other cats, to finally get those dogs. (The head cat learned
about Moses from a very cool Bible.)"-- J. Kamensky
            

            
"Martha Stewart, on using the proper blender setting for pulverizing 'those
f**king tomato skins.' She gets a little obsessive about her sauce."-- M.
Koegel ( Norm Oder had a similar answer.)

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            With the glorious
exception of the St. Crispin's Day speech from Henry V , there is nothing
more demoralizing than an inspirational address. That sort of thing generally
entails a coach or an east regional sales manager exhorting you to do something
pointless, painful, or profitable to someone else. Physics has few
inspirational speeches: Unify that Field Theory! Writing novels, performing
surgery, preparing a light and elegant soufflé--each must be done without
rousing declamation. Sex sometimes includes a heartening oration, but usually
toward the end, urging you on to mutual victory; such remarks are rarely
delivered at halftime, when you're lurking in the locker room, glum and
battered. (The exception here is phone sex, where the inspirational speech
pretty much is the sex.) "For the Senate and the Roman People"--that's what
gladiators used to say. Not too many people today seek inspiration from the
Senate, although a surprising number do seek sex there, frequently for money.
But they think themselves accurs'd and hold their manhoods cheap. Poor
bastards.

            
               Motivational
Answer
            

            Coach Pat Riley tried to
inspire his Miami Heat to beat the New York Knicks. They didn't.

            
               From Bad to Verse
Extra
            

            Below, a new form of cut and paste poetry.

            The rules:

            

               Four lines, each with the same number of words.

               The words in each line must originally appear adjacent to each other in a
newspaper headline.

               The headlines must all come from a single edition of a single paper.

            

            

               Two samples:
            

            Daredevil soprano
Cow valve
Heart boy
Smart toilet

            
               --New York
Times , May 18, 1999

            New Jersey rabbi
Dutch mental patient
Crack, not ping
Pittsburgh awaits fate

            
               --New York
Times , May 18, 1999

            Participants are invited to submit similar
poems.

            Also welcome--a good
name for this verse form.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Personification of uncompromising
belligerence--Bill Gates.

            Close second--Eisner/Katzenberg.

         
      
   
