
   
   
      
         
             Community Kills

            The massacre at Columbine
High School prompted op-ed writers across the land to diagnose a shocking "lack
of community" as the cause of the madness. As if! There is no public
institution in America that works harder to forge a sense of belonging than the
suburban public high school. Assemblies, homecoming week festivities, car wash
fund-raisers, pep rallies, proms, graduation ceremonies--these rituals instill
in their participants the "school spirit" that persuades many alumni to return
to town every five years for reunions to celebrate high school's glory
days.

            Representing the "lack
of community" position were essayist Richard Rodriguez and biographer Neal
Gabler, writing separately in Sunday's Los Angeles Times "Opinion"
section.

            Rodriguez took the standard communitarian tack, arguing
that newly landscaped suburbs such as Littleton produce deracinated teens who
can't become individuals because they lack a sense of community: "[Y]ou cannot
become an individual without a strong sense of 'we,' " he writes. Gabler
combined a squishier communitarian criticism ("it may be too simple to say that
rootless malleable communities ... give rise to rootless malleable children
with little identity of their own, save the identity borrowed from mass
culture, but it may not be too far off, either") with his media monism:
Identitiless teens play "Doom" on the PC, then try it out in the enhanced 3-D
perspective of real life.

            But neither Gabler nor
Rodriguez appear to have attended a suburban high school. If they had, they
would know that such high schools suffer from an overdose of community,
not a deficit. In Columbine, community killed.

            Columbine evidently overflowed with this sort of school
spirit, most of which revolves around student athletics. The latest consensus
from Littleton is that rage directed at student athletes and their perceived
protectors, the school administration, drove Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold to
meticulously prepare and then execute the killings. At Columbine and suburban
high schools elsewhere, athletics are the biggest tool in creating the sense of
"we" that Rodriguez extols. The community--both on and off campus--worships the
basketball and football gods, and favoritism for the top jocks is
institutionalized in the name of fostering a sense of community. It's more than
curious that at institutions supposedly dedicated to academics,
spectator-friendly athletic competitions are the only activities considered to
be worthy of regular praise and attention. Gabler notes that Columbine's
closed-circuit TV system played sports highlights regularly. Can one imagine
the Rocky Mountain News , or any other newspaper, replacing high-school
sports coverage with debate team transcripts?

            The skewed community
values created by administrators, teachers, parents, and the media exacerbate
the natural volatility of high-school social groups. Just as rape and other
felonies committed by star athletes at the NCAA powerhouses are tolerated with
wearying predictability, today's high-school administrator will allow the
barely controllable gangs from the gridiron free rein to commit verbal and
physical aggro upon the castes below. Most victims of the harassment and
ostracism survive. Some drop out of school or transfer. In my day, one hassled
student ended his life by hanging himself from a basketball rim. In Harris and
Klebold's case, the endgame was a spasm of violence.

            While Harris and Klebold have established--one hopes--the
extreme end of inappropriate response to high-school hazing, their crimes were
anticipated by popular culture. It's particularly strange that the supposedly
media-savvy Gabler didn't acknowledge in his piece the popular-kid killing
classic Heathers and its less acute echo Jawbreaker . Even the
mild snarkiness of MTV's Daria should have put Gabler, for whom mass
entertainment is the only important reality, on notice that high schools are
communities that are hardly tolerant, accepting, or even rational. Are the
public vows to rebuild Columbine also a vow to resurrect the very community
that shaped Harris and Klebold?

            You can't feel like an outsider if you don't want
to get inside. Viewed from this angle, Harris and Klebold's rampage can be
interpreted as an extreme desire to join a community whose values they had
bought into. By embracing Nazi sloganeering, Harris and Klebold may have
thought that they had cast out Columbine's influence. But they absorbed
Columbine's football team community values--aggression, planning, cohesion, and
physical sacrifice for the goal--in the methodical planning and execution of
their atrocity. Yet right up to their donning black trench coats for the last
time, they would probably have preferred being honored at a Columbine pep rally
than at the Nuremberg rally.

         
      
   
