
   
   
      
         
            Milosevic, Trapped

            

               
                  Economist
               
               
                  , June 5
            

            An
article argues that Yugoslav President Slobodan
Milosevic is trapped. Slobo made financial arrangements for a luxurious exile,
but since his indictment as a war criminal the most he can hope for is a safe
haven in Belarus. Not beloved by his people, Milosevic might be hard-pressed to
retain power even with the support of his secret police, political cronies, and
state-controlled media. ... The cover story argues that the German economy has stalled
because of a complicated tax system, overgenerous welfare, and excessive labor
costs. Germany is dragging down the euro, but both might rebound because the
new government is deregulating, unions are learning accommodation, and a
cheaper euro may boost exports.

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , June 21
            

            The
cover story argues that the vice presidency is worth more
than a bucket of warm piss. As veeps Nixon and LBJ were administration
outsiders, but Al Gore is a "Principal" who enjoys Cabinet-level authority and
has weekly one-on-ones with the president. Unfortunately for Gore, the press is
likely to focus more on his stilted campaigning than his eight years of insider
experience. ... An article mocks Elizabeth Dole's scripted stump appearances.
Opinion-makers may be tired of her act, but she is savvier than she seems. Her
pro-gun-control stance and neutrality on abortion appeal to the increasingly
prosperous and moderate GOP electorate, allowing her to seem like a
maverick. ... A piece attacks the rumormongering about George W. Bush's
past. Clinton raised the bar for bad-boy behavior. Americans won't care about
what Bush did, and nor should they. (Disclosure: 
                  Slate
               's Timothy
Noah wrote the article.)

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               
               , June 6
            

            
Adventure is the theme of the third installment in the magazine's millennium
series. ... A writer explores his own brain through magnetic resonance
imaging, finding the physical locations for his ability to speak Italian, his
recognition of familiar faces, and his storytelling ability. ... White
novelist Richard Ford and black essayist Stanley Crouch re-enact Huck Finn and
Jim's voyage down the Mississippi River and pen their respective reactions:
Crouch rejoices that it's no longer anomalous for a black man and a white man
to share a boat; but the trip leaves Ford unsettled about his own latent
racism. ... A photo essay documents competitors in an "adventure
competition" in which teams had to hike, kayak, Rollerblade, and swim across
360 miles of Philippine jungles, mountains, lakes, and islands. Each team had
to include at least one woman, use traditional, nonpolluting modes of
transportation, and perform a social service project along the way.

            

               
                  Time
               
               , June 7
            

            The
cover report slams the Cox report for asserting more than it
proves and hysterically claiming that all Chinese visitors to the United States
are asked to spy for their government. The report actually documents the theft
of only one warhead's technology. ... A related article contends that
China's military is no challenge to the United States'. China has no aircraft
carriers or long-range strategic bombers. One ominous note: If China did steal
American technology, it could take a great leap toward nuclear parity.
... A piece urges national mental-health reform. One good step: A
Senate bill to require insurers to cover mental-health treatment just as they
cover other kinds of medical care.

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , June 7
            

            The
cover story exults that now is the best time ever to be black
in America. Black employment, home ownership, academic achievement, and college
enrollment are up; out-of-wedlock births, violent crime, poverty, and welfare
enrollment are down. Blacks aren't celebrating because they fear an economic
downturn and because equality is still elusive. Whites still outearn blacks,
black unemployment is twice the rate of white unemployment, and 13 percent of
black men are disenfranchised because of felony convictions. ... An
article profiles middle-class black homesteaders who are
regenerating ghettos. One common and successful idea: church-run credit
unions.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , June 7
            

            The
cover story clucks over the dismal state of Sino-U.S.
relations. One vivid detail: After the embassy bombing, Chinese officials
produced an anti-NATO music video. ... Horrified by the rise of casual
office wear, the garment industry is launching a PR campaign to popularize
formal attire, says an article . All kinds of designers are getting in on the act:
Sean "Puffy" Combs' "fall collection is full of dressier sportswear."

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , June 7
            

            An
article questions the canonization of Edith Stein, a Jew-turned-Catholic nun
who perished in the Holocaust. Stein's dubious miracle--a prerequisite to
sainthood--was to "cure" a Boston girl named after her who overdosed on Tylenol
in 1987. ... A piece describes the manifold accomplishments of National
Institutes of Health Director Harold Varmus, who has won bipartisan support for
the research center, focused the NIH on nuts-and-bolts research rather than
disease-of-the-week fads, and artfully guided the human genome project. Varmus'
peaceful reign could be interrupted when the government decides soon if it
should fund research performed with scientifically valuable but politically
controversial stem cells from human embryos and fetuses. ... A writer
joins American women trekking through Bhutan--a remote, devoutly Buddhist, and
unusually fecund country--in search of fertility blessings. None of the
pilgrims produce children, but all are charmed by the enormous penises that
decorate the country's walls, stores, and homes.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , June 7
            

            An
editorial darkly warns that China is modernizing and expanding its military in
order to displace America as Asia's dominant power. The Cox report might
finally rouse Washington to the hostility of the Chinese government and end our
destructive policy of engagement. ... The cover story denounces the
National Museum of American History. Multicultural prejudice distorts its
presentation, stripping America's history of its heroic high points. ...
An article flays Rep. Patrick Kennedy, D-R.I., the head of the Democratic
Congressional Campaign Committee: He is an artless buffoon whose only asset is
his family name, which he uses to woo donors and to intimidate opponents.

         
      
   
