
   
   
      
         
            Belgrade Gets the Baghdad Treatment

            The lead story at most
papers is that NATO has decided to begin bombing a wider range of government
buildings, including some in downtown Belgrade. The Times of London runs the
headline "Belgrade to get the 'Baghdad treatment.' " An editorial argues that
airstrikes have been (and will continue to be) more effective at destroying the
Serbian military than most people think. Nevertheless, the article concludes,
if the strikes don't stop the atrocities in Kosovo within a "few days," ground
troops should be sent in. Another editorial urges the United Kingdom to donate
humanitarian supplies and eventually grant immigration visas to "our share" of
the refugees.

            The Independent of London
has posted a reporter on the border between Macedonia and Kosovo to
interview the incoming flood of refugees. He writes:

            
               The stories are too horrific to tell in
detail. I heard of murder, rape, looting, and persistent abuse--by rifle-butt
and boot. I heard of several hundred people hiding in a cave that once formed
an old marble quarry, being taunted from outside by men firing machine-pistol
volleys into the air. ...
            

            
               There were a dozen, almost identical
accounts of the operational technique of ethnic cleansing. First the roar of
tanks coming down the valleys, then the sound of whistles being blown and the
firing of automatic weapons, as the villages and hamlets that dot southern
Kosovo ... are surrounded by regular soldiers who order the people to
move.
            

            
               Then come the hard men, often masked, who
separate the important ones from the peasants. The peasants are forced south,
taking only what they can carry, where they must brave further "checkpoints" in
the form of armed robbers, before they reach the border. The "important ones"
stay behind.
            

            The angry reporter
complains that in the Macedonian capital, 15 miles away, NATO swells are eating
"steak au poivre ... washed down with the fiery Macedonian wine." Meanwhile, no
international agency has bothered to set up aid stations at the border to
distribute hot porridge or first aid to the dehydrated and hypothermic
refugees.

            Most papers mention that three American servicemen were
been captured by Serbian forces, though there are few details. The United
States claims the men were in Macedonia when arrested; the Serbians say they
had crossed the border into Serbia. A picture of the men--one with a badly
bruised face--was displayed on Serbian TV and reproduced in newspapers around
the world.

            An article in the
Moscow Times
reports that Russia has sent a warship to the Mediterranean and is prepared to
send six more. President Boris Yeltsin has promised not to intervene militarily
in the Kosovo situation. Nevertheless, commenting on the ship movements,
Yeltsin's defense minister ominously said, "The Defense Ministry is also
considering more decisive actions that will be recommended to the leadership if
the situation changes." Another article says that foreigners from NATO
countries are feeling increasingly unsafe in Russia. The U.S. Embassy has been
attacked, the windows of a restaurant called Uncle Sam's Café were smashed, and
the U.S. Consulate in St. Petersburg urges Americans not to speak English too
loudly on the street. The article interviews many Westerners who feel
threatened, but none has been physically injured.

            The Irish Times reports "speculation" that NATO is thinking about creating a
"safe haven" in Kosovo. The area would be secured by ground troops. Amazingly,
the article doesn't say who exactly is doing the "speculating." The news peg
for the article is a visit to the Albania-Kosovo border by NATO's deputy
commander.

            But the big news in Ireland is the peace
negotiations between British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Irish Prime Minister
Bertie Ahern. The latest news is that, after four days of negotiations, the two
sides failed to agree on when the Irish Republican Army must disarm. Protestant
leaders are refusing to share power with the IRA in Northern Ireland until the
IRA disarms. IRA leaders want to create the coalition government before
disarming. Talks will resume April 13.

            
               Most Boring Headline
Ever? "Capital Legislator Want More Facts on Daylight Savings Time" from
Mexico's News . A close second is "Why Farm Sheep at All?" from the
Falkland Islands' Penguin News .

             

             

         
      
   
