
   
   
      
         
            How Free Is Louise?

            The
indictment of President Slobodan Milosevic by the International War Crimes
Tribunal in the Hague was variously interpreted Friday in the European press.
The hawkish papers of Fleet Street raised loud hurrahs, while some of the more
dovish ones on the continent were gloomy about its effects on the Kosovo war.
There was also widespread suspicion that NATO's war leaders had more to do with
the timing of Chief Prosecutor Louise Arbour's announcement than she, insisting
on the independence of her U.N. role, cared to admit. There was general
unanimity, however, that her decision made a peace settlement much more
difficult to achieve and increased the prospect of NATO ground troops being
eventually deployed in Kosovo against Serb resistance.

            In
London, the Times and the Daily Telegraph , both conservative papers, were delighted.
The Telegraph said the indictment would put muscle into the United
States because "though Bill Clinton might be happy to compromise with a
fugitive from justice, the American people could not stomach such a peace with
dishonour." The Times said the West "has to thank the brave Canadian
judge" for ending any chance that NATO would grant Milosevic immunity from
arrest and prosecution--one of his principal peace conditions. Such immunity
would not only be "morally repellent," it was "now illegal," it said.

            The
liberal Independent of London was no less pleased, saying Milosevic
should have been indicted long ago. Its main front-page headline said the indictment has split the allies, but this was
effectively contradicted in an article by its political editor, Donald Macintyre, claiming that
the European allies were holding much closer to the U.S. and British positions
than was generally imagined and that German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder's
much-reported statement that a ground invasion was "unthinkable" had actually
meant only that German troops would not participate. Clearly relying on British
government sources, Macintyre wrote that even the Italians don't rule out
entering Kosovo in "non-permissive" circumstances, but instead he described it
as "hypothetical" (though in an interview Thursday with the Italian magazine
Panorama , Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini warned that Italy would
"dissociate itself" from an invasion).

            The
liberal Guardian of London, while leading with the headline "War
crimes move dims peace hope," pronounced the indictment "overwhelmingly
positive" and said it augured well "not just for the resolution of this war,
but for the world of the twenty-first century." Its international commentator,
Martin Woollacott, wrote that the indictment, combined with the commitment of
more ground troops, a hardening of NATO's peace terms, and the intensification
of the air campaign, represents "a new strategy." It marks a moment when "NATO
ceases to be ready to deal with Milosevic and declares itself ready, instead,
to deal with Serbia." Woollacott noted that Arbour's words in the Hague, while
underscoring the independence of the tribunal, "suggested quite directly that
the timing of the indictment had been affected by the disclosure of
intelligence by certain countries. The control by the United States and Britain
of intercepts and other secret information has always meant that the war crimes
card could be played at a moment they deemed would best serve their
interests."

            In
Paris, Le Monde ,
welcoming the indictment as an important new step "in the fight against
impunity and barbarism," said Arbour had acted with full independence and
freedom, but this view was questioned south of the Alps. In Corriere della Sera of
Milan, the 90-year-old columnist Indro Montanelli, one of Italy's most
influential journalists, said he hoped it wasn't so, for this would mean that
the tribunal had deliberately timed the indictment to sabotage peace
negotiations. While British papers were expressing the hope that it would lead
to the overthrow of Milosevic by the Serbs, Montanelli predicted the opposite.
So did Libération of Paris, which said in an editorial that
President Jacques Chirac's call Thursday for an internal coup against Milosevic
was most unlikely to come about. Le Figaro also said that to think the Serbs would now desert
their leader showed "a deep misunderstanding of the psychology of a people
which considers itself persecuted and besieged." Writing from Belgrade for
La Repubblica
of Rome, Bernardo Valli reported that despite Milosevic's unpopularity and lack
of charisma, he now appears to have the country behind him.

         
      
   
