
   
   
      
         
            No. 236: &quot;Tragedy Plus Time Minus Taste&quot;

            

               Columbine students resumed classes Monday at nearby Chatfield High
School. Many wore white T-shirts imprinted on the front with "We Are ..." and
on the back ... what?
Send your answer by noon ET Wednesday to 
                  newsquiz@slate.com .
            

            

               Monday's Question (No. 235) "Pork Quoi?": A big half-page ad running in
many papers today features a photo of four piglets vigorously suckling a sow's
teats. An ad for what?
            

            "A law
firm specializing in medical malpractice suits (photo is of Pamela
Anderson)."-- Ellen Macleay
            

            "The
Montreal Expos' all-new, low-budget 'farm' system."-- Neal Pollack
            

            "I
don't know, but Michael Medved's CONVINCED that this ad directly leads to
school shootings."-- Andrew Milner
            

            "Bob
Barr's 'Open Letter' tribute to the NRA."-- Richard Nikonovich-Kahn
( Barry Johnson had a similar answer.)

            "Got
Pig? The other white milk."-- Steve Joynt (similarly, Bruce Oberg ,
James Poniewozik , Bjorn , and Steven Davis )

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            To most participants, the pig symbolizes greed.
None associated the pig with its traditional attributes, dirty or foul
smelling. None exploited "pig" as an epithet for policeman. There were no pigs
in pokes, no when pigs fly, no in a pig's ear, no Pigmeat Markham, no pork
salad Annie, no Gadarene swine, no Piggly Wiggly, no E. B. White's Wilbur, no
there in the wood the piggy-wig stood. No three littles. No pearls before. No
turning men into. How did we lose our rich tradition of porcine references? Did
it all go wrong when we left the farm? Many's the happy hour we spent by the
sty, a volume of Greek mythology in our trotters, contemplating the
particularly rank aroma of our enemies. Well, we're city folk now, and our foes
wear deodorant. And carry Prada bags. Made of ... oh, my lord! No!

            Perhaps the pig has
always been a comical animal because it's so much like us--a college graduate
with 2.3 children, yacking away on a cell phone while it's stuck in traffic in
its rotten SUV. OK, bad example. But pigs can pretty much eat everything we do.
An ecological theory of the kosher laws suggests that they're meant to
proscribe animals who'd compete with us for the foods we need. This theory is a
little hazy about lobsters. Who, by the way, can also be made into a durable
and attractive handbag. If you eat a whole lot of lobster, people will call you
a pig. But not the other way around. Lobsters: not funny. Pigs: funny. A pig
dancing with a monkey: hysterical.

            
               Porcine on the
Dotted Line Answer
            

            The copy reads: "After
all she's done for you, doesn't mom deserve flowers for Mother's Day, and to be
compared to a barnyard animal?" except for the final phrase, which is merely
implicit. It's an ad for an online flower service. In a curious bit of marketing, the offer
of $10 off on Mother's Day flowers doesn't expire until July 31. So, buy your
mom something nice, eventually, when you get around to it.

            
               Tim Carvell's
American Highways Extra
            

            Since moving to Los Angeles, I've noticed that
about every tenth car has a vanity plate. People want the world to know their
names (HERMAN), their tastes (BLU MNMS), their dreams (KRE8 IT). And sometimes
it seems they just want to confuse you. (I've puzzled over SHAKYPL for long
stretches of freeway. Why pay $40 so your car can say SHAKYPL?)

            At the California
Department of Motor Vehicles' vanity-plate-availability site, you can input a plate, and see if
it's already taken. Hence the following quiz: Which of the following plates
have been spoken for, and which are still up for grabs?

            1. UNIQUE

            2. UNIQUE 2

            3. MANLY

            4. BIGOT

            5. RACIST

            6. 4SKIN

            7. HERPES

            8. MARILU H

            9. SATAN

            10. BOBDOLE

            11. MANSON

            12. KINSLEY

            13. YUGO

            14. NEWSQIZ

            15. UGLY

            16. GOYZ

            17. BEDWETR

            18. DIANETX

            19. LIAR

            20. ANORXIC

            

               Answers
            

            Both UNIQUE and UNIQUE2
have been claimed, which is just sad ("I'd like my plate to read UNIQUE. Oh,
it's taken. Well, then how about UNIQUE2?"). MANLY is available for at least as
long as it takes me to get to the DMV. BIGOT is taken, RACIST is not. Go
figure. 4SKIN is taken; HERPES, oddly, remains available. MARILU H, SATAN, and
BOBDOLE have all been claimed, although the site doesn't specify by whom.
MANSON and KINSLEY are both still available. YUGO is taken, NEWSQIZ is still up
for grabs, as is UGLY. GOYZ and BEDWETR are both taken, which means that
somewhere out there there's a car being driven by an unashamed incontinent
person. And, finally, depsite what you might expect for a state that's home to
the entertainment industry, DIANETX, LIAR, and ANORXIC remain unclaimed.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Kosher and its discontents, Babe, "Got Milk?"

         
      
   
