
   
   
      
         
             The Peril of Faith

            For years it has been an
American article of faith--as cherished as our belief in free enterprise--that
politicians are corrupt, venal, and incompetent: This was established by
Watergate, left unshaken by Jimmy Carter, and reinforced by Iran-Contra.
Impeachment was supposed to affirm it once and for all. But now the unthinkable
has happened: Americans have regained their faith in politicians.

            Fully 60 percent of
Americans now trust the federal government to handle domestic problems, and
more than 70 percent trust the feds on foreign policy. President Clinton's job
approval ratings remain near record levels.

            Nowhere is this Great Awakening more alarming than in
governors' offices. A March Washington Post poll pegs job approval
ratings for governors nationwide at 73 percent, up from 49 percent in 1991.
Republican governors are especially favored. While Republicans in Congress
struggled in the 1998 elections, most Republican governors routed Democrats by
record margins. Some Republican govs, such as George W. Bush of Texas, now
score approval ratings above 80 percent.

            This faith in Republican
governors has two consequences for the GOP. The first relates to the 2000
presidential campaign. Desperate for a hot candidate, the GOP has--as Lamar
Alexander jokes--all but carved Bush's image onto Mount Rushmore already. And
the happy numbers have made any Republican who lives in a governor's mansion
think he deserves a promotion to vice president. Among those touted as
potential Bush running mates are New York's George Pataki, Wisconsin's Tommy
Thompson, Pennsylvania's Tom Ridge, Michigan's John Engler, Massachusetts' Paul
Cellucci, Kansas' Bill Graves, New Jersey's Christine Todd Whitman, Utah's Mike
Leavitt, and Montana's Marc Racicot.

            The second consequence of the govs' popularity is that it
is persuading Republicans that the governors have found the Holy Grail. The
governors, Republicans believe, have invented a brilliant new politics that
transcends ideology. The admirers of the governors (who include, not least, the
governors themselves) use the same phrases over and over to describe them: The
govs are a "third party" and a "new breed." They have "a distinct approach" and
"a new way of governing."

            What is this magical new
way? They combine fiscal conservatism and softer social policy. They have
turned deficits into gigantic surpluses while still cutting taxes. They have
slashed welfare rolls and unemployment. They have increased funding for popular
social policies: teacher training, health care for kids, environmental
cleanups. George W. wants to spend $1 billion more on teacher salaries and an
extra $116.5 million on child care for the poor. Pataki just boosted education
spending by $600 million.

            Unlike the savage congressional Republicans, the governors
have perfected the soothing language of politics. Bush, for example, has
abjured "English-only" education: He calls his program "English-plus."
"English-only says you don't count, you're not important. English-plus (says)
we recognize the treasures of your language and heritage," the governor's press
secretary told the National Journal . "The policy is the same , but
the tone is different" (emphasis added).

            The governors have
learned how to form multicultural coalitions, another feat that has eluded
their congressional confreres. Florida's Jeb Bush won a majority of the
Hispanic vote in his run; his brother George W. polls extremely well among
blacks and Hispanics. The governors have allied with moderates in the
Democratic Party and borrowed their best ideas. They are even willing to offend
the die-hards of their own party: Few of the governors talk much about
abortion. Bush has irritated conservatives by emphasizing public education and
largely eschewing vouchers.

            So, essentially, the new form of government invented by
Bush, Pataki, & Co. is ... Clintonism: fiscal conservatism, deficits into
surpluses, welfare reform, sweeteners for social programs, lots of euphemizing,
and a willingness to co-opt the other side.

            Not that there is anything wrong with what the
governors have done. Their accomplishments are genuine and their states are
thriving. But the GOP's eagerness to embrace them does suggest a certain
hypocrisy. Conservatives, after all, have spent the last year crediting
Clinton's polls to alchemy: He has lucked into the best economy in history. But
if Clinton's popularity is alchemical, then so is the governors'. (Likewise, if
the governors' popularity is legitimate, then so is Clinton's.) All of them owe
their sky-high poll ratings to the economy and a few ounces of good sense. Of
course the governors and the president managed to turn deficits into surpluses.
Of course they cut welfare rolls. Of course they have delighted voters by
goosing popular social programs with extra millions. You would have to be a
moron not to have been a popular governor while tax revenue surged,
unemployment vanished, and crime fell.

            It's easy to be a statesman when all the options
are good. The test of the governors' "new way"--and the test of America's
rediscovered political faith--won't come till the lean years follow Clinton's
seven fat ones.

         
      
   
