
   
   
      
         
            A Racist <STRONG><EM>Slate</EM></STRONG>?

            On
March 23, the House of Representatives debated a proposed resolution condemning
the Council of Conservative Citizens, a racist group that Senate Majority
Leader Trent Lott has come under fire for addressing. Rep. J.C. Watts Jr. of
Oklahoma pre-empted consideration of the bill by introducing an alternative
resolution denouncing all forms of racism and bigotry without mentioning the
CCC specifically. After Reps. Charles Canaday of Florida and John Coyners of
Michigan criticized the Watts substitute (which failed to get the two-thirds
vote required for passage), Watts answered them from the floor:

            
               ... I would
just say to my friend, the gentleman from Florida, that it is an amazing thing
to me that over the last 4 years when I have been attacked, when I have had
racist comments made about me, my friend from Florida never came to the floor
and spoke up. The gentleman from Michigan, when I have had racist attacks made
against me by people in the white community back in Oklahoma, the State
Democrat Party back in Oklahoma, 
                     Slate
                   magazine,
which is a national magazine, no one ran to the floor to condemn
that.
            

            Bruce Gottlieb of our
Redmond office called Rep. Watts' office to ask what he thought

                  Slate
                had done that constituted a racist attack.
Watts's press secretary Pam Pryor pointed to a "Strange Bedfellow" column that
I wrote in May, 1998, titled "The Football Caucus." Gottlieb then forwarded the
article by e-mail and asked what in it Watts found racist.

            
               From : Pam
Pryor

            
               Sent :
Thursday, March 25, 1999 3:16 PM

            

               To : Bruce Gottlieb

            Bruce, the part in the story that says, "But despite
his go-along, get-along ... (through) if he weren't black," is the part we find
offensive in particular. Doubtful you would have said that about a Black
Democrat.

            And if you did, many
voices would have risen against you ...

            I then replied:

            
               From:
Jacob Weisberg

            
               Sent:
Friday, March 26, 1999 3:45 PM

            

               To: Pam Pryor

            Dear
Ms. Pryor,

            I can understand how Rep. Watts might be annoyed by
my article, and how any number of people might disagree with it for a variety
of reasons. But on what basis did he go onto the floor of the House and call

                  Slate
               , and by implication me, "racist"?

            You cite this passage: "But despite his go-along,
get-along affability, Watts is unlikely to accomplish much in the House. The
problem is that Watts would never be given a leading role in his party if he
weren't black."

            I can only guess at what Rep. Watts might have
found offensive here. The phrase "go-along to get-along" has no racial
implication that I'm aware of. It's a standard description of party loyalty,
applied most often in my experience to white Democrats.

            Next we come to the phrase, "unlikely to to
accomplish much in the House." This is my prediction based on my assessment of
Rep. Watts' record thus far and my opinion of his abilities. I might be wrong
in this forecast. But either way, it's got nothing to do with the fact that
he's black. Indeed, I say nearly the same thing about Rep. Largent elsewhere in
the same article.

            The final sentence in the passage you cite contends
that Rep. Watts has been elevated within the Republican Party in part because
of his race. In other words, I think that affirmative action has played a role
in Rep. Watts' rapid ascent within GOP. Do you actually dispute this? Would you
seriously maintain that Rep. Watts would have been chosen to give the
Republican response to President Clinton immediately after the 1994 election
and to speak at the San Diego Convention in 1996--to name only a few of his
honors and distinctions--if he happened to be white? But again, whether or not
I'm correct in my analysis, there's nothing racist about arguing that a member
of a minority group--whether a Democrat or a Republican--has benefited from a
desire for diversity.

            Supportive of the party line ... not especially
capable ... beneficiary of affirmative action. I most certainly would say any
of these things about a black Democrat to whom they applied. In fact, I did say
them in a column about Alexis Herman a few months earlier. No one accused me of
bigotry. And if someone had, I would have been just as offended as I am
now.

            Unless I'm missing
something here, I really think Rep. Watts owes 
                  Slate
               ,
and me, an apology.

            Yours
sincerely,

            Jacob
Weisberg

            To date, we have received no answer from Rep. Watts
or his office. 's a link to my original article. Readers can make up their own
minds about whether it constitutes a racist attack.

         
      
   
