
   
   
      
         
             Maureen Dowd

            Two of this year's Pulitzer
Prizes were awarded for wit: one for Margaret Edson's play of that name, about
a scholar of 17 th -century English poetry facing ovarian cancer, and
another for the quality most evident in the writing of New York Times
columnist Maureen Dowd. Newspaper commentary, a dying art (see Jacob Weisberg's
on its last great), is nowadays dominated by sententiousness, not satire. On
the flat, windy landscape of the nation's opinion pages, Dowd stands out for
her sharp one-liners and her brisk aperçus . Woody Allen's recent movies
are versions of The Catcher in the Rye Bread . Al Gore ("Prince Albert")
"grew up as the capital's version of Eloise at the Plaza." The Lewinsky matter
is "the first scandal with product placement." "C-SPAN has turned politics into
a TV series that nobody has the power to pull." And let's not omit Dowd's
incisive summary of the moral and constitutional crux of the Clinton sex
scandal, almost worthy of Oscar Wilde: "These are not grounds for impeachment;
these are grounds for divorce."

            Like anyone who tries to
be funny, Dowd sometimes strains for effect and falls flat: She posed a choice
between New York's Rudolph Giuliani and Washington's Marion Barry as one
between "the mayor who cracks down on crime and the mayor whose crime was
crack." At other times, her glibness gets in the way of her insight:
"Historians will long ponder how Mrs. Clinton came in as Eleanor Roosevelt and
left as Madonna." They will? Like anyone who must produce 700 words of
headline-based observation twice every week, she appears on occasion to phone
in her copy, as when she imagined a series of U.S. history documentaries
directed by Oliver Stone. ("Abigail Adams is really Lucianne Goldberg.") And
she could set a welcome example for pundits everywhere if she took a solemn,
public oath never to write another word about Ally McBeal . Still,
occasional lapses aside, no other regular newspaper columnist matches her
gimlet eye, her sense of phrase, or her unpredictability.

            One measure of Dowd's importance is that even people who
profess to despise her seem to read her religiously--and to recycle her jokes
at parties. Another is that she is subject to frequent, sometimes scathing,
criticism in publications of every ideological stripe and market niche. Her
unalloyed contempt for the Clintons managed to infuriate even as lukewarm a
Clintonite as Garry Wills, who wrote, more than a year before the Pulitzer,
that "any journalist must be super strenuous to take the vileness award from
Maureen Dowd." But Dowd's disgust with the president's persecutors and her
merciless flaying of Ken Starr, including the famous Sept. 23 column of last
year that began, "He couldn't stop thinking about the thong underwear," earned
her some brickbats from the anti-Clinton right. The National Review
called her "a writer of relentless orthodoxy," by which of course it meant
liberal orthodoxy.

            But Dowd's politics are
nearly impossible to glean from her columns. Most of her colleagues on the
Times op-ed page represent an identifiable and more or less consistent
position: Thomas L. Friedman is the voice of liberal internationalism, Russell
Baker was the voice of New Deal liberalism, Bob Herbert is the voice of liberal
populism, William Safire is the voice of libertarian conservatism, and A. M.
Rosenthal is the voice of sheer ranting lunacy. Dowd, in contrast, plays her
ideological cards close to the vest. Her published views on matters of policy
would scarcely fill a chapbook: She favors gun control, hates the tobacco
industry, and welcomes the prospect of peace in Northern Ireland.

            These positions are hardly evidence, in the Clinton era, of
a heterodox temperament. They are as likely, these days, to be held by a
Republican as by a Democrat. But it's not Dowd's views that irritate her
critics so much as her style and her attitude. The case against Dowd, taken up
lately by Michael Wolff in New York magazine ("she is derisive, mocking,
hyperbolic, bitchy") and by Dan Kennedy in the Boston Phoenix ("Call her
our most celebrated bad columnist") was most cogently laid out in a 1992 piece
by Katherine Boo in the Washington Monthly . At the time, Dowd was still
a reporter, following the presidential campaign after having covered the Bush
and Reagan White Houses. (She was anointed a columnist in 1995, replacing Anna
Quindlen in what National Review calls the Times ' "liberal Irish
woman's seat.") Boo's brief boils down to two main charges: that Dowd's breezy,
sardonic style has inspired a flood of stilted, self-conscious imitators; and
that "the Dowd crowd" contributed to the erosion of political discourse by
placing style and personality above seriousness and substance.

            The first charge is
easily dismissed. A writer with a strong and original voice will always
influence lesser talents: Imitation is the tribute mediocrity pays to genius.
You might as well blame the Beatles for the Monkees or Matt Groening for The
Family Guy . But the second accusation is both more interesting and more
complicated, especially because the trivialization of politics has long been
one of Dowd's obsessions. In Clinton's Washington, according to Dowd, the
celebrity culture and the political culture have become indistinguishable.

            But the merger of politics and celebrity was one Dowd
herself helped broker. Or, to switch metaphors, she is simultaneously a
brilliant diagnostician of the political disease of our time and a symptom of
it. It was Dowd, after all, who wrote the story of Frank Sinatra's alleged
affair with Nancy Reagan, as chronicled in Kitty Kelley's biography of Nancy,
on the front page of the New York Times . (Dowd protests that the piece
was an assignment and, quite rightly, that editors, not reporters, decide what
goes on Page One.)

            And it's Dowd who last
year wrote a hilarious column called "Of Frogs and Newts," which linked the
doomed speaker with, yes, Ally McBeal. And Dowd who speculates about what kind
of a president Tom Hanks would make, and who calls Al Gore "the Saving
Private Ryan of presidential candidates"--meaning that the aura of
inevitability that surrounds him now may turn out to be a curse in 2000. (Does
this make Bill Bradley Shakespeare in Love ?)

            The politics of celebrity is also a politics of
personality--of confession and "healing," of narcissism disguised as empathy.
Unlike Clinton's (but kind of like Gore's), Dowd's moments of self-revelation
are carefully rationed and, therefore, unusually effective. She recently wrote
a powerful piece about the shooting of Amadou Diallo in New York City that
began with an account of her father, a D.C. policeman, killing a suspect in
self-defense. Last year, in a defense of the concept of sexual harassment, she
recalled her own humiliation, years before, by a powerful editor she had gone
to see about a job. And in a remarkable (and notorious) column from June of
1998, she detailed her encounter, at a popular D.C. Indian restaurant, with
Monica Lewinsky herself, whom Dowd had mercilessly cast as a fat, insecure,
bubble-headed Valley girl. ("You can take the girl out of Beverly Hills, but
you can't take Beverly Hills out of the girl.") "Do you mind if I ask you
something?" Lewinsky said to Dowd, "Why do you write such scathing articles
about me?"

            The fact that Dowd was
struck dumb by this question has been used against her. The Phoenix 's
Kennedy sees it as proof of her "utter disengagement" and her "detachment from
the people she writes about." But we wouldn't know about Dowd's failure to
muster a response, or about Lewinsky's poise and forthrightness, unless Dowd
herself had chosen to tell us. And while perhaps an explicit admission that
she'd been unfair to Lewinsky would have been sporting, the column as written
is at once more artful and more honest.

            Last October, in a column that featured selections from
some of the predictably misogynist hate mail she has received from both
liberals and conservatives, Dowd permitted herself to fantasize about a
parallel universe in which she could be "a champagne farmer in France in love
with a neighboring cognac farmer. Or an archaeologist in the Yucatan who flies
her own plane and owns a supper club called The Fuzzy Slipper." "Anything," she
concluded "as long as I am not a Washington journalist in the era of Clinton
and Gingrich and Starr, covering this horrible grudge match between the right
and the left that has been building since Watergate."

            Don't believe a word of
it. Dowd is the only writer on her paper's op-ed page fully in tune with the
political and cultural moment. Other pundits beam their opinions at us as
through a time warp, from the hazy days of past administrations. George F. Will
is stuck in Reagan's first term (though he tries to convince us that he's stuck
in the Madison administration). Safire's a Nixon man to the end, and Frank Rich
recalls the glorious presidency of Eugene McCarthy. But Dowd is, mutatis
mutandis, the H.L. Mencken of the Clinton era--the president's symbiotic
scourge. He may have the numbers of a lot of women, but Dowd alone has his.

            Like the rest of his most loyal supporters and his most
intractable enemies (and she has been, uniquely, both), Dowd is part of the
baby boom generation. "Historians will record," she has written, elaborating on
something Leon Weiseltier once wrote about Clinton, "that our generation's
contribution was to be the generation that worried about its contribution."
Another feature of this generation's passage through American culture--shared
by liberals and conservatives, cynics and true believers, Clinton, Gingrich,
Steven Spielberg, and Dowd herself--is a misty sense of some better, earlier
time before they came along and screwed everything up.

            The body of Dowd's work as a columnist, and in
particular the Flytrap pieces that won her the Pulitzer, is one of the most
brilliant examples yet of boomer self-castigation. The Clinton presidency is,
of course, another example. And one worries a bit about what Dowd will do when
it ends. She has been practicing for this inevitable terrible event lately,
scoring Elizabeth Dole as Nurse Ratched from One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest , admitting to a fondness for John McCain, and having great fun at the
expense of Al Gore and George W. Bush, the two scions likely to fight it out in
2000. But while she will no doubt be splendid on their millennial campaign,
it's hard to see how her intemperate wit will find adequate targets in either a
Gore Jr. or a W. Bush administration.

            Is it too selfish of us to ask for a repeal of the
22 nd Amendment--for four more years of Clinton and another $40
million for Ken Starr?

         
      
   
