
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Easy
Answers
            

            It is often said that there are no easy answers,
but in fact there are. In a former life I used to interrogate politicians on
television, and in six years there was never a subject on which they were
unable to come up with an easy answer. Not necessarily a correct answer--or
honest or heartfelt or logically coherent--but easy.

            What is an easy answer?
An easy answer, for a politician, is one that assures you will never be proved
wrong. Or at least that if you seem to have been wrong, another easy answer
will be available to explain why you weren't. "There are no easy answers" is
itself an easy answer--if you can get away with it. Often, you not only can get
away with it, but you can also enhance your reputation for being "thoughtful"
(high praise that in the culture of politics means indecisive in a classy way,
rather than kindly or considerate of others or anything like that). Sometimes,
though, you have to do better, and this is when easy answers become hard
work.

            War and peace issues are the worst. A famous joke among
academics is that scholarly disputes are especially passionate because the
stakes are so low. By contrast, when the stakes are as high as they can get,
there is a special need for elected officials to avoid having a forthright
opinion. Easy answers to the rescue!

            The current issue of American military involvement
in Kosovo, for example, seems to be a yes-or-no question to which either
conventional answer--call them "yes" and "no"--is decidedly uneasy. "Yes" means
risking American lives in a faraway land that has no apparent connection to the
only thing that really matters, which is the Dow Jones industrial average. "No"
means doing nothing, as the world's only superpower, while a thug government
commits daily televised atrocities against white people in Europe (not just
some unmediated Africans). Unless you're extraordinarily lucky, the outcome of
making either choice will leave you morally implicated in some dead bodies
(with larger raw numbers making up for lack of American citizenship in the case
of a "no").

            Fortunately, even for
Kosovo there are answers available besides yes and no. They will be familiar
from intervention disputes dating back at least to Vietnam, but they are
especially useful for the summer-squall-style military actions of today, in
which we all agree to be frenzied about the occupation of Kuwait or a
drug-smuggling dictator in Panama or warlords in Somalia or genocide in Bosnia
on the strict understanding that we will be allowed to forget all about these
matters and places in six months, max. Here are half a dozen consumer-tested
easy answers on issues like Kosovo:

            1."Well, Cokie, my concern is that if we go into [INSERT
LOCATION], we should do so with the resources necessary to get the job done.
Airstrikes alone [or 'only 200,000 troops' or 'a mere half a dozen hydrogen
bombs' or whatever is on the menu] just aren't enough. It is immoral to put
American soldiers at risk without a guarantee of overwhelming superiority for a
certain and speedy victory."

            This is perhaps the most
prestigious dodge: the Powell Doctrine, named for Gen. Colin Powell (who is
responsible for the doctrine but not its use as a dodge). The Powell Doctrine
holds that the lesson of Vietnam is do it right or not at all. Go in full force
from the beginning rather than escalate yourself into a quagmire. Or don't go
in at all. Finish quickly before the public loses patience (or ideally, as in
the case of Grenada, before the public has even heard of the place). Or, of
course, don't start at all. As to which of these alternatives--all or nothing
at all--is the right one in any situation, the Powell Doctrine does not say. So
this is a great way to sound tough and sophisticated without actually
committing yourself. Since any actual military engagement is not going to
involve every last wing nut in the Pentagon's "miscellaneous screws" jar, you
are well positioned to say "I told you so" if things go badly. Yet you never
actually opposed the action, so you're OK if things go well. And no one can
accuse you of wimping out if the military action doesn't take place: Hey, you
wanted to go in with more force!

            2."Where is our exit strategy, Ted? That is what I'd like
to know."

            "Exit strategy" became a
fashionable term during the Gulf War. It really sounds like you know what
you're talking about. And what does it mean? As I understand it, an exit
strategy is a sort of poor man's Powell Doctrine. It does not demand certain
and prompt victory. It merely demands a certain and prompt conclusion to the
exercise that is acceptable to the United States. When invoking this concern,
it is not necessary to specify--and indeed it is hard to imagine--what
conclusion short of victory a guy like you, who flings around terms like "exit
strategy," would find minimally satisfactory. And no military action (except
for actual movies) can be fully scripted in advance. So you're golden. If
things go wrong: "Ted, I pleaded with the president to make sure we had an exit
strategy." And if the action goes well or disaster occurs because we didn't
intervene: "Ted, I was behind this all the way. I've always said that victory
is the best exit strategy."

            3."Tim, I support the president. American credibility is at
stake. The commander in chief has made a commitment on behalf of the United
States, and the United States must honor that commitment."

            This is the sneakiest
dodge and probably the most popular--especially among Republicans. You get to
be patriotic and hawkish. And if things go well, you were behind the commander
in chief all the way. But if things go badly, it is the president's fault for
making the commitment. Tragically, you had no choice but to support him once
the commitment was made, but of course making it was irresponsible folly.
Please note that, like a reheated stew, this dodge works even better after a
military action has begun. "Tim, we never should have got into this quagmire,
but now we have no choice but to ..."

            4."I'm not persuaded this is so important, so vital to the
nation's interests that we ought to intervene."

            That's an almost exact quote from a real senator,
Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, and illustrates a nifty linguistic evasion. You don't
say you're against it, you say you're "not persuaded" to be for it. Not only do
you evade the tough choice, you also evade responsibility for your decision.
It's the president's fault, even if he's right, because he didn't persuade
you.

            You can also say (like
Sen. Max Baucus of Montana) that there are "unanswered questions." Being
undecided and wanting ever more information is another great way to be
designated as "thoughtful." And with a bit of skill and a bit of luck, you can
keep taking your own temperature until it doesn't matter any more. Meanwhile,
you're OK no matter what happens. "Not persuaded" can be spun as a yes or a no.
A nice variant is to say, "The American people must be persuaded this is the
right thing, and the president hasn't made the case." Not only is whatever
happens not your fault (unless it's good), it's not even the public's fault.
It's the president's fault, either because we did what he wanted or--if we
didn't--because he didn't convince us to do so.

            5."I don't think we should begin bombing unless and until
the Serbs really begin a very significant massacre against the people in
Kosovo."

            That is Don Nickles of
Oklahoma in Tuesday's Wall Street Journal (where most of these quotes
come from). In a way, this is not a dodge. It is a sort of madcap Solomonic
approach. Sen. Nickles is saying: "Why must we guess whether Milosevic is going
to kill a lot more people? Let's wait and see if he does it! And why must we
choose between saving a lot of Kosovars and saving none? Let's split the
difference and save half of them." As a bonus, Nickles retains a valuable fudge
factor in the question of what qualifies as "a very significant massacre."
Depending on what happens, Nickles is in a position to accuse the president of
failing to defend American interests and values, or of recklessly endangering
American lives on the basis of a massacre that was merely "significant" but not
"very significant."

            6."What's happening in [WHEREVER] is a tragedy and an
outrage, Wolf. Intervention to stop the bloodshed is absolutely essential. But
it's a job for [INSERT NAME OF CLOSER COUNTRY AND/OR REGIONAL GROUP], not for
the United States."

            This final dodge is slightly different. You're
claiming credit for sharing whatever humanitarian or geostrategic concern
dictates military action, while opposing the use of the only military power you
yourself bear responsibility for. I once interviewed an especially moronic
senator, since defeated, who declared that some worthy military action was "a
job for the United Nations." I asked him why other countries should risk their
soldiers' lives if the United States wouldn't, and he replied, "I didn't say
'other nations,' I said the United Nations." When it was pointed out to
him that U.N. troops don't come from Mars, he was stymied. That point had never
occurred to him.

            But exposing the logical flaw here does not depend
on any huffing and puffing about America's leadership role. An American pol
going on American television to say that the Europeans should tidy up the
former Yugoslavia without our help is like the Economist running (as has
been known to happen) a stuffy editorial saying that a corrupt dictator in some
Third World country should resign. Of course he should. And the sun should
shine in London every day. But even the Economist 's opinion cannot
affect these matters. When an answer moves beyond difficult to completely
impossible, it becomes easy once again.

            Watch for these easy
answers on the TV talk shows and in the newspaper. Practice on your own. Soon
you too can be ducking responsibility like a real-life member of Congress.

            
               For more Kosovo
coverage, click .
            

         
      
   
