
   
   
      
         
            Go E-Mail Yourself

            
               
                  Slate
                is pleased to
announce a new feature: E-mail This Article. Just click on the words "E-mail
This Article" at the top of each article. That's all there is to it.

            Well, obviously, there's more to it than that. If
that was all there was to it, we would have made it something like, "Give Me a
Million Dollars" or "Send Milosevic to Hell" or "Have a Nice Day."

            But clicking on the words E-Mail This
Article is all you have to do. 
                  Slate
                Program Manager
Andrew Shuman and his crack team of developers take it from there. Your click
sets off an alarm in their lair, Shuman kicks awake his nearest dozing acolyte,
and he or she will personally retype the 
                  Slate
                article in
question and e-mail it to anyone you choose. Or so they've explained it to me.
You can even e-mail it to several people at once, thanks to the miracle of
carbon paper, or something. What gets e-mailed is not just the URL (Web
address) and not the HTML page, which some e-mail programs can't handle, but a
plain text version of the article itself.

            Who should you e-mail

                  Slate
                articles to? Friends, enemies, members of Congress,
potential subscribers, and advertisers (thanks!) ... the possibilities are
endless! One option you should not overlook is e-mailing to yourself. Why would
you wish to do that? After all, 
                  Slate
                readers are all much too
popular, successful, and psychologically secure to send themselves flowers or
any such thing. You are not the sort of folks who need to artificially inflate
your in-boxes, thank you very much. But consider:

            

               E-mailing yourself an article is a way of putting it aside to read
later.

               Reading e-mail at your desk looks more like working than reading

                     Slate
                  's elegantly designed Web pages. (Caution: this should not
be interpreted as an attempt by the Microsoft Corp. to collude with you to
deprive your employer of your services. Solitaire is for that.)

               If you download your e-mail, you can read 
                     Slate
                   articles
without going online.

               You can print out the e-mail using fewer pages than printing out directly
from the Web.

               If you finally think of someone else to e-mail the article to, you can do
that.

            

            Do remember that spamming is bad form, and avoid
e-mailing 
                  Slate
                articles to people who wouldn't want to get them.
Unless, of course, in your opinion the article is so insightful and brilliant
that it must be forced upon the ignorant and wrongheaded. In that case, e-mail
away.

         
      
   
