
   
   
      
         
            Glass Wear

            About 30 years ago I attended an exhibition of
corsets at a great costume collection in Manchester, England. In a dim room
were gathered a dozen elegant undergarments, each in its own glass case, and
each accompanied by at least three paragraphs of scholarly labeling about
materials, structure, and shape.

            Chosen from a collection of hundreds of corsets,
these garments dated only from the second quarter of the 18 th
century. They were masterpieces of delicate craftsmanship; no two were exactly
the same. Looking at them was like looking at ancient Etruscan bronzes or
Renaissance enameled boxes. But it was also like a private showing: Nobody else
was there. In those days, "costume" was dear only to a few obsessed
antiquarians, with no connection to the mad scuffle of fashion in real life. A
show back then at the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute might have
displayed a tired ecclesiastical vestment from 17 th -century Spain or
a stiffly embroidered linen nightcap looking inert and inscrutable.

            No longer. The current Costume Institute show, "Our
New Clothes: Acquisitions of the 1990s," vibrates with modern energy. Under
curator Richard Martin's direction, fashions of the moment resonate backward
into the past, and the modes of olden days awaken to new life next to their
modern revisions. Martin also succeeded in intermingling history and the
present day in an earlier show called "The Ceaseless Century," by which he
meant the 18 th .

            There were reasons for
picking that century. Chic outfits in good condition date back only as far as
about 1700, or maybe a little before that. Except for bits and pieces, no
gorgeous suits from Shakespeare's day survive, no gold-bordered gowns from Mona
Lisa's wardrobe, none of King Richard III's rich doublets fitted to his
humpback. The dazzling styles of the distant past live only in pictures.

            A fashion designer can put old imagery to use. But a museum
collector needs history in material form, the better to display its links with
the productions of more recent ateliers. The earliest and most magnificent item
in the current show is a bright salmon-pink English lady's ensemble from 1708,
made of silk damask brocaded in bold patterns with multicolored silk floss and
metallic thread. The strong color and buoyant presence of this ornate dress
command our attention; the dress has no mustiness at all. Another, French,
ensemble from around 1760, all in canary-yellow silk taffeta, self-trimmed in
miles of applied pleated ruffles, creates a similar effect. These dramatic
dresses easily compete in intensity or sensationalism with the vivid works by
Issey Miyake and Alix Grés nearby.

            Some
18 th -century men's outfits are equally bold, especially a French
coat dated between 1787-92--which is to say, just at the Revolutionary moment.
This lean, unadorned, high-collared garment in plain fire-engine-red wool
contrasts wonderfully with a peach velvet and green satin coat-and-waistcoat
men's ensemble from about 1765, its cuffs and vest covered with embroideries,
its buttons glittering with paste diamonds. The latter was made at a time when
the king's head was still on, and refined elegance could still relax and keep
refining. A bright blue checked linen tailcoat from America dated around 1815,
neat and tight fitting with self-covered buttons, is a nice contrast to both of
these. Its summery simplicity suggests fresh American artlessness and love of
convenience.

            The antique menswear in this show has a clarity of line and
color that claims an affinity with the surges of invention in men's clothes
right now. There's Tom Ford's red velvet suit from his 1996-97 winter
collection, displayed next to the red wool French Revolutionary coat: Its
old-fashioned 1970s redness sets up vibrations with older-fashioned 1790s
redness, and both look timely. A brotherhood of male expression communicates
across time, and we start to imagine the red coats of the future. Jean-Paul
Gaultier, of course, has already begun (after all, this is the only designer
who has repeatedly offered skirts for men). Gaultier's dark red and white man's
jacket in silk-and-rayon twill has a modern classical shape, but it's printed
with variably modulated stripes that form the vision of a nude Greek classical
torso, complete with arms and thighs. At the groin, the two sides of the jacket
discreetly curve apart to unveil the wearer's own black-trouser-clad
crotch.

            Numerous white dresses are gathered in a group. The
earliest is another French 18 th -century damask ensemble. It's in
ivory and dates from 1770, and its flavor and trimmings are consciously echoed
by an American wedding dress from about 1880. The intervening snowy marvels are
in cotton--crisp and vigorous, or frothy and delicate--followed by the modern
silky columns that cling, fall, or drape in unexpected ways. The possibilities
of feminine white turn out to be infinite, to mirror any emotional and erotic
nuance in the souls of women for three centuries.

            The exhibit made me hope that the fashion of the
future will be all the more liberated for seeking its sources in the liberties
of the past. But the show made me realize something else as well: that our
present clothes are already museum pieces. The largest change in fashion since
1968 has been an immense new consciousness of what clothes mean, so that people
have got used to thinking about what their own outfits "say." By bringing
together old and new, this exhibition encourages that habit of looking for
significance in our own garments. While we stare with detached sociological
attention at the garb of generations who lived in complex past times, we're
invited to stare the same way at contemporary modes, to see them as the
historical artifacts of our own fraught epoch. And the gulf between Those Days
and These, once unbridgeable, starts to disappear.

         
      
   
