
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Hideous
Kinky
                (Stratosphere Entertainment). Kate Winslet's first
post- Titanic film, the tale of a British woman's journey to Marrakech in
the 1970s in search of adventure and Sufi wisdom, gets high marks on aesthetics
and so-so marks on plot: It's "better at creating a picturesque travelogue than
at building a compelling narrative and full-bodied characters" (Susan
Wloszczyna, USA Today ). The New York Times ' Janet Maslin goes
gaga for the whole package, saying Winslet's performance as the naive young
woman who drags her two daughters to the ends of the earth "perfectly captures
[her] as a well-meaning mother who has no notion that she need be anything but
self absorbed." (This Hideous Kinky fan site offers
stills from the film, a chat room, and information on the novel the film was
based on.)

            

               
                  Life
                (Universal Pictures). Eddie Murphy and Martin
Lawrence star in a "disposable vehicle for two comic superstars" that has "more
heart and soul than usual" (Ann Hornaday, Baltimore Sun ). The comedy
chronicles the adventures of two innocent men sent to prison for life. Despite
a nice turn by Murphy, "it's hard to miss the basic unfunniness of the
situation," says Maslin ( New York Times ). Makeup artist Rick Baker wins
kudos for transforming Lawrence and Murphy from young 1930s hipsters into aging
'90s geezers. (Check out this Martin Lawrence fan page, which has information on
Life as well as fun bits from Martin , including video clips of Lawrence as everyone's
favorite weave technician, Sheneneh Jenkins.)

            
               
                  Goodbye,
Lover
                (Warner Bros.). Critics say this murder-filled comedy-noir
strains to be funny and off the wall but fails royally on both counts: It has
an "offbeat eccentricity that feels like the comic equivalent of silicone
implants" (Desson Howe, the Washington Post ). The ensemble cast includes
Ellen DeGeneres, Patricia Arquette, and Don Johnson, and none performs well in
critics' eyes. The New York Times ' Stephen Holden wonders why
Goodbye, Lover didn't go straight to video and asserts that Arquette,
the film's sexpot, "exudes all the erotic energy of an inflatable doll with a
taped voice muttering potty-mouthed come-ons." The film receives an upbeat
review from Andy Seiler of USA Today , who gives it 3.5 stars and calls
it a "darkly funny, brashly cynical" thriller that "breaks every Hollywood rule
that deserves to be broken." (Try this
somewhat funny Ellen DeGeneres word lib.)

            
               
                  SLC
Punk
                (Sony Pictures Classics). Most critics like this
"surprisingly genial and affecting comedy about the trials and tribulations of
teenage rebellion during the Reagan '80s" (Jami Bernard, Daily News ).
The title refers to two Salt Lake City punks whose tentative attempts at
rebellion are more funny and halfhearted than seriously anarchistic: It's "an
absurdist coming-of-age comedy" that's "better defined by its polish than by
punk trappings" (Maslin, New York Times ). Some are not impressed with
the film's watered down rebellion: "[T]his energetic but poorly structured,
rather self-congratulatory look at spike-haired rebelliousness in mid-'80s Utah
could strike unbiased viewers as more grating than gratifying," and the film
"doesn't quite grasp how its slick, flashy package undermines any actual punk
cred" it might have (Dennis Harvey, Variety ). (Brush up on your own punk
cred by seeing how many of these bands you know.)

            

               Books
            

            
               
                  The Girl Who Loved
Tom Gordon
               , by Stephen King (Scribner). Stephen King's unscheduled
quickie novel gets a warm response. The story follows Trisha, a 9-year-old girl
who gets lost in the woods with only a Walkman and common sense to keep her
alive as she wanders for eight nights. She listens to Red Sox games on the
radio and fantasizes about pitcher Tom Gordon, her hero and crush. As she
struggles for survival, she takes a page from Gordon's book and relies on God
to get her through. "For those who have spent years of adulthood circling
around questions of faith, it may be a little jarring to witness Trisha's hasty
conversion," says Rebecca Ascher-Walsh in Entertainment Weekly . Most
critics describe it as a departure from King's usual style--it's overtly
religious and a mere 250 pages long. It is "almost old-fashioned in how
satisfyingly scary it is" (Sherryl Connelly, Daily News ). David Kipen of
the San Francisco Chronicle finds the book tedious: Nine days is "an
awfully long time to spend in the largely unrelieved company of one little girl
lost." (Find out more about Tom
Gordon at ESPN's SportsZone .)

            
               
                  A Prayer for the
Dying
               , by Stewart O'Nan (Henry Holt). Critics heap praise on O'Nan's
latest, the gruesome tale of a man who returns to Wisconsin after the Civil War
to find his hometown engulfed by a diphtheria epidemic and hemmed in at the
edges by wildfires. Dan Cryer of Newsday calls it an "urgent,
economically told novel." This "deeply unsettling and sophisticated horror
story" (Megan Harlan, Entertainment Weekly ) is "more than a brilliant
exercise of darkness," (Richard Eder, the New York Times ), it is a work
of unusual emotional impact and craft. Eder says the prose has "so much that is
implicit and hollowed out, so much emptiness between the sentences, that the
reader is called upon to enter, invent and rearrange," and with "a shivery
economy of means and a dreadful lavishness of effect, Mr. O'Nan advances the
horror on parallel tracks." (Read O'Nan's 
                  Slate
                "" and the
first chapter of his last novel A World Away [requires
free registration].)

            Find a
movie playing near you on Sidewalk.com.

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Go ;

               
                  Movie -- The Dreamlife of Angels ;

               
                  Movie -- Never Been Kissed;
               

               
                  
                     Movie --Metroland ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Ground Beneath Her Feet , by Salman
Rushdie;

               
                  Theater--
                  The Iceman Cometh , by Eugene
O'Neill.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  The Matrix
                  ;
               

               
                  Movie--
                  10 Things I Hate About You ;

               
                  Movie--
                  Cookie's Fortune ;

               
                  Movie -- A Walk on the Moon ;

               
                  Movie- - The Out-of-Towners ;

               
                  Book--
                  Morgan: American Financier , by Jean
Strouse;

               
                  Book--
                  The Times of My Life and My Life With the

                  Times , by Max Frankel.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Mod Squad ;

               
                  Movie -- EdTV ;

               
                  Movie -- 20 Dates ;

               
                  Television -- Futurama ;

               
                  Book -- All Too Human: A Political Education , by
George Stephanopoulos;

               
                  Book -- For the Relief of Unbearable Urges , by Nathan
Englander.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  True Crime ;

               
                  Movie -- The King and I ;

               
                  Movie -- Forces of Nature ;

               
                  Television--
                  The Oscars ;

               
                  Book--
                  Years of Renewal , by Henry Kissinger.

            

         
      
   
