
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  My
Dear,
               
            

            
               How could anyone
with all mental faculties intact believe that ? Good God, anyone can see that
"his" purse does not match "his" outfit.
            

            

               --Joanna
            

            Dear Jo,

            Prudie knows that purple
homosexuals everywhere thank you for your vote of confidence in their style
sense. And isn't the power of television characters wonderful? Murphy Brown was
a loose and thoughtless woman, thereby being a rotten role model, and now Tinky
Winky is sending secret messages.

            
--Prudie, conspirationally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I read with interest the letter from "." I am a
Young Entrepreneur and have had the sometimes unnerving task of interviewing
... a skill that is learned. Until it is perfected we young'uns rely on
business magazines and books as to how to interview. In fact, I have used both
the "Tell me about yourself" and "Why do you want to work here?" lines verbatim
because I was following the experts' advice about what makes a good
interview.
            

            
               What the gentleman may have perceived as
amateurish and obnoxious could have been a combination of nervousness and
inexperience. Here was an obviously experienced man coming into this young
upstart's company, probably extremely well-dressed and with credentials earned
before the CEO was even born. It is quite humbling for me to have people with
much more experience than I call and ask to be considered for a
position.
            

            
               I am sorry that the
writer didn't get a call back, but there still could be an opportunity there.
He could call back and offer to be a mentor. This would give both parties a
chance to learn about each other. Better yet, start a business as a
professional mentor in his area of expertise: charging a monthly retainer for
the privilege of calling him to ask questions whenever they wish. He has so
much experience and, as shown by the last interview, there are a lot of us out
there who could benefit from it.
            

            

               --Future Young Entrepreneur of the Year in Canada
            

            Dear Fu,

            Thank you for being a Prudie and offering a positive
suggestion to our Crank. It will no doubt lift his spirits to hear from one of
the young'uns who is respectful of his age and experience.

            The generation gap, as
you illustrate, has different ways of being bridged.

            
--Prudie, appreciatively

            

               
                  Madame,
               
            

            
               In a a person wrote wondering how to respond to
the "how are you question." Might I offer a suggestion from Maine?
            

            
               "I'm all right as long as you don't ask for
details."
            

            
               As an alternative,
"Middling."
            

            
               Yours,
            

            

               --RWH
            

            Dear R.,

            Prudie likes humorous responses to standard
questions. A Texan she knew used to reply to "How are you?" with, "Damn near
perfect." As Prudie has said before, the "how are you" gambit is really a
greeting, not a question.

            --Prudie,
responsively

            
               
                  Dear Ms.
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I am a high-school
senior who has met with fantastic failure when attempting to interact with
women. It's not that they necessarily dislike me, nor I them, it's just that
everything feels so uncomfortable. Prom is coming up, and I am currently
wondering whether or not to ask anyone. Everyone around me is telling me I HAVE
to go, but it just seems like an uncomfortable hell. Yet if I don't go, I fear
I will regret it for the rest of my life. Any suggestions?
            

            
               Sincerely,
            

            

               --Apprehensive ( Slate reader since age 16)
            

            Dear Ap,

            To be 18 and experience difficulties "interacting
with women" means that emotionally and developmentally you are still working
things out. Everyone does not hop into the boy-girl thing with ease and
comfort. What supposedly comes naturally can take awhile to arrive.

            That everything feels uncomfortable may mean that
you're more than normally shy and insecure. Or it could mean that you're more
than normally shy and insecure. Time will reveal what is comfortable. As for
the prom, there is no need to push yourself into something you would be just as
happy skipping. Plus, it sounds as if you have no one in mind.

            You are 18, Prudie is
not. Trust her that if you decide to do an end run around prom night you will
not, decades from now, be bemoaning that fact.

            
--Prudie, promisingly

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I work with a guy
I've tried to befriend. In fact, I even introduced him to the woman he's going
to marry. The problem is that he does things like inviting me to lunch,
then--when I'm trapped in his car--says he needs to run errands first. He even
returned one of those grip-squeeze things I'd given him because he wore a hole
in it, and it was spilling the stuff inside. Is he just a jerk? And if so, how
do I continue my friendship with his fiancee, whom I still like?
            

            

               --Split Loyalty in San Rafael, Calif.
            

            Dear Split,

            Prudie is never sure what the word "jerk" means.
This chap, however, sounds like a clod, and certainly someone deficient in the
social graces and good sense departments. If you choose to continue with him,
you might try to fluff up his social skills by example. An instance might be if
he tries the lunch/errands stunt again, simply request that he do his chores
without you because your intention was to have lunch. If he is a super boor and
tries to override you, request that he stop the car and let you out.

            Your friend, his
fiancee, may be a lost cause as a continuing friendship if you call it a day
with Mr. Clunk. Them's the breaks, kiddo.

            --Prudie,
realistically

         
      
   
