
   
   
      
         
            No. 230: &quot;Whoooo's Johnny?&quot;

            

               "Johnny has been such an effective spokesperson for us because he truly
believes in the power of our products," says the president of New Jersey's
Franklin Electronics. Who is endorsing what?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 229)--"Don't Think So":
            

            

               
                  Fill in the blank in this quote from cognitive scientist Bruce
Bagemihl: "We shouldn't have to look to __________ to see what's normal or
ethical."
               
            

            
"Story of O ."-- Jeff Hoover
            

            "The
gun control laws of the world's civilized nations."-- Eric
Donaldson
            

            "Our
friends, clergy, or family. 'We should be able to get all our ethical input
from television, movies, and popular music,' Bagemihl added. 'Can I get you
anything? Coffee, tea, heroin, prostitute?' "-- Tim Carvell ( Dale
Shuger had a similar answer.)

            
"Giraffes. Likewise, there's really not much point in turning to Quentin Crisp
for advice on browsing in the tree canopy of wooded grasslands."--Jennifer
Miller
            

            "Pamela
Anderson. 'But now that she's back to a C cup we can,' continued a smiling
Bagemihl."-- Beth Sherman
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Randy's
Self-Reference Wrap-Up
            

            Today's question, a cunning trap set by guest host
Daniel Radosh, forces me to acknowledge authorship of a column in the New
York Times Magazine , "The Ethicist," a sort of jumped-up "Dear Abby,"
responding to ethical queries from readers. I'm meant to analyze each question
and extract a general ethical principle, a rule--i.e., to apply the skills of
the lawyer. This, of course, is the least interesting approach. We all know you
shouldn't shoot the guy. It would be more entertaining to consider mixed
motives, mitigating circumstances, conflicting social pressures, complicated
histories, and then find that in this unique situation you really should shoot
the guy. It's the difference between the lawyer and the dramatist, between the
general and the particular. (That, and the fact that show people have it all
over lawyers when it comes to parties and shoes.)

            What compels the lawyerly approach is not
priggishness on the part of the Times (well, not entirely) but
limitations of space. While the lawyer needs only a brief summary of the case,
the dramatist needs a richly detailed scenario. Alas, the column permits only
400 words for each letter and response, so I necessarily take an approach that
might generously be called concise but is frequently called (via reader e-mail)
cursory (actually, "cursory, you idiot").

            The oddest thing about the job is not its
limitations but the curious caricature that illustrates each column. This
sketch of a pensive moralist, the personification of the column, the Uncle Ben
of ethics, the Betty Crocker of morals, looks not at all like me. It does,
however, bear a striking resemblance to Michael Kinsley. Is that ethical?

            (Send questions to
ethicist@nytimes.com.)

            
               Don't Tell Pat
Answer
            

            "We shouldn't have to look to the animal
world to see what's normal or ethical."

            Bagemihl is the author of Biological
Exuberance , a new book about homosexual behavior among animals, in which he
writes that same-sex shenanigans have been documented in more than 450
different species, including goats, dolphins, elephants, and bonobo apes.
Penguins and geese maintain same-sex matings for life. Homosexual bears raise
offspring together. Gay male trout move in with their straight female best
friends and then the fun begins.

            But in the current issue
of Time , Bagemihl warns that beyond a vague statement that "diversity is
part of human heritage," it's inappropriate to make claims about human behavior
based on his findings. And yet, just look at that adorable picture of two boy
giraffes with their necks entwined, and tell me you're not dying to turn it
into a movie starring Rupert Everett as the one on the left and anybody but
Nathan Lane as the other one.-- Daniel Radosh
            

            
               Randy's Return
Extra
            

            Everybody's got a jury duty story, so I won't go on
and on about mine except to mention two highlights--Anne Meara and a bomb
scare. You'd have thought it would discourage her but, jeez, she just kept
coming back. Of course, you'd have thought she'd discourage us, but we kept
coming back, too. State law.

            I'm grateful to Daniel
Radosh for filling in with disconcerting skill and to all of you for
attenuating the pranks while he was the substitute. Now I'm going to leave the
room for a few minutes, and while I'm gone I expect whomever took it to return
Mr. Radosh's prosthetic head. Just put it on my desk, and we'll say no more
about it.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Preachy cognitive scientists.

         
      
   
