
   
   
      
         
            No. 247: &quot;Does This Look Inflected?&quot;

            
               The author of a
new book charges that a prominent American not only betrayed him, but also
"[h]is mocking pronunciation of my name ... sounded like a jeering mob." Who is
this insensitive American, and how did he mispronounce the author's
name?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 246)--"Unundercover":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              "We're not hiding it," says
Capt. Michael Fallon of the Hartford Police Department, hoping to ease
community fears. In fact, they plan to take it to fairs so children can climb
on it and have their pictures taken with it.
What?
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            
"Another poorly directed NATO bomb."-- Beth Sherman ( M.D.C. Bowen
had a similar answer.)

            "Rhode
Island?"-- Herb Terns
            

            "Boris
Yeltsin."--Alison Rogers
            

            
"McGruff, the drug-sniffing, suspect-devouring crime dog."-- Matt
Sullivan (similarly, Mike Behn , Jean Campbell , Chuck
Lawhorn , and Judith Spencer )

            "L.
Ron Hubbard's mmmphphph ..."-- Max Novak
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Overly
Sensitive Wrap-Up
            

            While News Quiz has avidly solicited sardonic
comments on Kosovo and Littleton, the Abner Louima case confounds me. I
understand a joke with a Volpe punch line or a joke about the NYPD's sincere
efforts to increase minority recruitment (no kidding, this time they mean it)
or to make the many other reforms persistently resisted by both the department
and the mayor (I'm serious, this time they really, really mean it). But I do
not feel comfortable with a punch line that alludes to the plunger. And while I
don't think I've received a single response to today's question that seeks to
trivialize Louima's suffering, I still feel uneasy, and so I've omitted those
replies. It is, of course, a matter of sensibility. No offense meant. Now
everyone go on out and tease a fat guy on me.

            No, wait, come back. I
was only ...

            
               The Right Tools
for the Job Answer
            

            The Hartford Police Department is not hiding its
new armored personnel carrier.

            And, besides, they prefer to call it a "tactical
rescue vehicle," says Capt. Fallon. "I call my night stick a 'happy wand' and
my gun a 'puppy,' " he did not add.

            The department has
stocked up on pepper spray and smoke bombs and has given additional riot
training to 45 officers, alarming many Hartford residents, tensely awaiting a
prosecutor's decision about whether to charge a white officer who fatally shot
a black 14-year-old in the back. Police Chief Joseph Croughwell denies that he
is preparing to suppress a riot. He does understand how these misconceptions
can occur, "I can see how people would add one and one and get four." Or
two.

            
               Pomp and
Circumstance and Then Some More Pomp Extra
            

            Match the actual twaddle
from a recent commencement speech with the fatuous blowhard who ladled it
out.

            
               The
Twaddle
            

            1. "The people who are
crazy enough to think they can change the world, they do."

            2. "We must take
responsibility for the society that our children live in. We must teach them
the sense of right and wrong, good and evil."

            3. "Real fulfillment in
your life will come not from leisure, not from idleness, not from
self-indulgence, but rather from striving with all your physical and spiritual
might for a worthwhile objective."

            4. "If you are like me,
you are far more likely to regret what you did not do than what you do do."

            5. "Let us realize that
education is the greatest anti-poverty program."

            6. "The only certainty is
that there is no certainty."

            7. "Your parents have been
the builders. Wouldn't it be wonderful if you could be the healers."

            8. "It is more important
than ever that we be staunch in our convictions."

            9. "We must think bigger
and do better."

            10.
"Shoot for the moon, shoot for the sun. Even if you miss, you will only land
among the stars."

            
               The
Blowhards
            

            A. Charlie Rose, Long
Island University

            B. Bill Bradley, Mount St.
Clare College

            C. George Mitchell,
Fordham University

            D. Charlie Rose, Long
Island University

            E. Al Gore, Graceland
College

            F. Robert Rubin, New York
University

            G. David Gergen, Yale

            H. Elizabeth Dole, online
at www.collegeclub.com

            I. Bill Clinton, Grambling
State

            J.
Charlie Rose, Long Island University

            
               The
Answers
            

            
               1-A, 2-B, 3-C, 4-D,
5-E, 6-F, 7-G, 8-H, 9-I, 10-J.
            

            
               Build Your Own
Penis Joke
            

            "The stiffness was
absolutely spectacular. That's when I said, 'Aha!' I knew then and there it was
an important discovery."--Chemist Stephanie Kwolek, 75, reminisces about her
invention of Kevlar.

            
               Neal Pollack's
Headline Haiku
            

            Beneath Albanian sky
Ivy League parents
close to renewal
with nation's woes

            -- Chicago
Tribune , May 20, 1999

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Plungers.

         
      
   
