
   
   
      
         
            Hitchens Bites Clinton

            

               Books
            

            

               
                  Making People's Music: Moe Asch and Folkways Records
               ,
by Peter D. Goldsmith (Smithsonian). A book about the extraordinary, if messy,
career of the founder of Folkways Records wins polite reviews, but it's no
masterpiece of biography. Moe Asch created Folkways and ran it for 38 years,
until his death in 1986, releasing 2,200 records, including sides by Leadbelly
and Woody Guthrie and artists from all over the globe playing everything from
children's music to jazz. Asch's tale is compelling, but Goldsmith concentrates
too much on the business story, writes the Dallas Morning News ' Stanley
Trachtenberg: "[S]ometimes Making People's Music reads like a
discography." Similarly, David Nicholson (the Washington Post ) dislikes
the book's sometimes clotted prose and odd lack of personality: "The real
problem is Asch himself. Variously described as a 'very lonely man' and lacking
'much of an interior life,' he is--for all the aforementioned
complexity--strangely absent here. Names, dates, and facts abound, but Asch
remains elusive." (Click here for a dictionary of folk music terms.)

            

               
                  No One Left To Lie To: The Triangulations of William Jefferson
Clinton
               , by Christopher Hitchens (Verso). Hitchens' jeremiad
against Bill Clinton argues that the president's personal life is part and
parcel with his political one. "Hitchens ... directs his argument at his fellow
leftists, those turtlenecked worrywarts who hate welfare reform and the bond
market and still get hoppin' mad about Sacco and Vanzetti," writes Andrew
Ferguson in Fortune . Says Elizabeth Drew in the Los Angeles
Times : "Hitchens obviously loathes Clinton, finds him a lying, ruthless,
low-life. But in this compelling, disturbing, entertaining, necessary book, he
raises questions that cannot be ignored." What worries reviewers is the
relentless negativity of the Clinton portrait. Writes Karen Lehrman in the
New York Times : "What's good about a well-done polemic is that
everything fits neatly into place. What's bad about a well-done polemic is that
everything fits neatly into place." (To read more by Hitchens and to purchase
memorabilia, visit the Christopher Hitchens Web .)

            

               Movies
            

            

               
                  Besieged
                (Fine Line Features). The critics are mostly
respectful of Bernardo Bertolucci's sparse romantic tale about a wealthy
British pianist and an African housekeeper. "From the start of ...
Besieged , a film that combines a stunning sensuality with a rigorous
economy, you know that you're in the hands of a filmmaker who trusts in the
storytelling power of the camera," writes Kevin Thomas in the Los Angeles
Times . "Besieged is a thrilling reminder of what moving, personal
art the director of The Conformist and The Last Emperor can make
when inspired by the right material," says Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa
Schwarzbaum. Most don't even mind the ending, which is invariably described as
O. Henry-esque. Naysayers are Time 's Richard Schickel ("[T]here's ... a
portentousness in the silence that's distancing and annoying, especially since
it leads to a too perfectly ironic ending.") and an irritated Variety ,
whose Derek Kelly lashes out at everything he can: "The butter is spread pretty
thinly over the bread. ... [It's] structured in a rambling manner, often
borderline risible in its dialogue."). (Click to read David Edelstein's review
in 
                  Slate
               .)

            

               
                  The Thirteenth Floor
                (Columbia). The Thirteenth
Floor is the latest alternative-universe special-effects extravaganza,
following Dark City , eXistenZ , and The Matrix . A team of
virtual-reality technicians operates in an alternative universe, circa 1937.
The critics agree that the movie suffers when the initially interesting
conception falls apart. Jack Mathews of the New York Daily News calls it
"a virtual reality thriller so caught up in its time and character confusions
that it takes the entire movie to explain it." Some don't even think the basic
premise is all that hot. "When a movie quotes Descartes's 'I think, therefore I
am' right at the beginning, you should probably consider yourself warned,"
writes the Washington Post 's Desson Howe. The critics cite solid
performances by Vincent D'Onofrio and Armin Mueller-Stahl, and nearly all
admire the film's production design (Kirk M. Petruccelli) and camera work
(Wedigo von Schultzendorff). (Click here to try an "immersive simulation" of 1937 Los
Angeles.)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            
               Book
            

            
               
                  Bone by
Bone
               , by Peter Matthiessen. Mixed takes on the third volume of a
grisly Everglades trilogy. "This dense, mesmerizing novel will leave readers
stunned, as if waking from a horrific sunburnt daydream," pronounces Gillian
Flynn of Entertainment Weekly . Says Time 's John Skow of the
"quirky trilogy": "a reader might conclude: brilliant, obsessive,
panoramic--and two novels too many."

         
      
   
