
   
   
      
         
            Europe Goes Bananas

            With the Italian government
involved in what Corriere della Sera of Milan last Friday called "the gravest
crisis in relations between Italy and America since the end of the Cold War,"
Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini declared in an interview Monday with the same
paper that "the alliance with the United States and Italy's loyalty to NATO are
not in question." The same point was emphasized in an interview with
La Repubblica
of Rome by Italian Justice Minister Olviero Diliberto, who said that he would
nevertheless go to the United States "as soon as possible" to discuss with
Janet Reno how to bring to justice those responsible for the deaths of 20
skiers in the Italian Alps last year when a plane flown by U.S. Marine Capt.
Richard Ashby sliced through cables carrying a gondola and sent it crashing to
the ground.

            National outrage over
Ashby's acquittal last week on charges of involuntary manslaughter encouraged
Communist leader Armando Cossutta to demand the removal of American bases from
Italian soil and generated an internal crisis within Italy's coalition
government, La Repubblica reported. Prime Minister Massimo D'Alema was
caught in cross-fire between the Communists and the Atlantic loyalists, it
said.

            The U.S. Marine court decision provoked an outburst of
anti-American comment in the Italian press that is without parallel in recent
years. As Prime Minister D'Alema left for Washington last Friday to meet
President Clinton, he was warned by Corriere columnist Ennio Caretto not
to be "too diplomatic" because the United States was guilty "almost of an act
of war in our country" and, if Clinton wanted the continued unconditional use
of bases in Italy, he must be told to stop "treating it as a province of his
empire."

            Sunday, after the
Clinton-D'Alema talks, Eugenio Scalfari, the founding editor of La
Repubblica who is now a columnist at the paper, was hardly less harsh. "Any
court that wasn't a Marine court would either have condemned the pilot of the
homicidal plane or would have shifted the focus of the trial onto the
responsibility of his superiors," he wrote. The justice "solemnly promised" by
the United States after the tragedy had been denied, he added, with "the
arrogant contempt that the military of the empire shows toward satellite
countries and their citizens." Scalfari rejected anti-American posturing, but
said that, given the transformation of the situation since the U.S. victory in
the Cold War, there was now an urgent need for a revision of NATO "to construct
an international community in which there would no longer be masters and
servants but free and equal men."

            The death of Stanley Kubrick was big front-page news in
Britain, Italy, and France, but not in Germany. In Britain, perhaps because he
lived there from 1961, hermitlike in his country house north of London, he was
generally saluted as a genius. Even more so in Italy. In Corriere della
Sera , a front-page comment by Tullio Kezich, headlined "Shame on you,
Hollywood," complained that "this undisputed giant of the Seventh Art" won only
one Oscar, and that only for the special effects in 2001: A Space
Odyssey . In La Repubblica , in which his death was the main
front-page lead Monday, Michele Serra compared him to Salman Rushdie, but as a
fugitive from "another kind of fatwa, a typically Western one: condemnation to
fame, photographs and interviews, television and awards ceremonies, juries and
society; because he was, after all, the most famous and celebrated living
author of the most important language of the century, the cinema."

            The "banana war," another source of major tension
between Europe and the United States, rumbled on noisily in the British press,
with the Financial Times leading its front page Monday with a story
saying that, in retaliation for Washington's stance on the matter, Caribbean
countries were threatening to renege on a treaty with the United States to
fight drug trafficking. "The Caribbean Community (Caricom), a 15-member
regional trade group, said at the weekend that its members were reconsidering
the drug control pact and would also not honour several economic treaties
because of Washington's decision to impose sanctions on European imports," the
FT said.

            The liberal Guardian of London said
Monday in an editorial, headlined "US must not go bananas," that only 9 percent
of European Union bananas now came from the Caribbean, compared with over 40
percent from the three giant American corporations--Chiquita, Del Monte, and
Dole. "Free trade has obvious benefits," it went on, "but the rules must take
into account the needs of developing nations and the new world of multinational
companies." Pointing out that "the latest US complaint came within 24 hours of
another big Chiquita donation to the Democratic Party," the Guardian
said it supported the view of the International Institute for Environment and
Development that "trade disputes brought by governments that have received
financial support from likely beneficiaries should be null and void."

            The Daily Telegraph of London led Monday with the looming crisis in the
Northern Ireland peace process as a result of the Irish Republican Army's
failure to make even a token hand over of weapons to allow a new Ulster
executive to be formed. Britain's Daily Express reported that everything now depends on
President Clinton achieving a compromise between Republican and Unionist
leaders at a meeting in the White House next week. In Israel, Ha'aretz led its
front page Monday with a report that Yasser Arafat is to ask Clinton, when they
meet in Washington March 23, to give formal support to the Palestinian right to
establish an independent state. "Arafat's meetings with Clinton without
parallel invitations to [Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin] Netanyahu are viewed
in Israel as an international affront to Netanyahu during an election period
and as encouraging Arafat's promised declaration of independence,"
Ha'aretz said.

            By the time Monica
Lewinsky arrived in Britain Sunday to begin an 18 city book signing tour, the
British press seemed to have exhausted its interest in her. After massive
coverage last week, her arrival was peremptorily reported, but interest will
doubtless build up during the week. In London's Evening
Standard last Friday, firebrand columnist Julie Burchill called
Lewinsky a saint and a sister. "The sweet, sly, man-pleasing sister of all of
us who don't know whether to hit or hug, who gives herself in a heartbeat to
the wrong men for all the right reasons," Burchill wrote. "Let's love her while
she's here, and be thankful that she never took that swallow dive off the roof,
for truly she has added to the gaiety of nations as no-one ever will
again."

             

         
      
   
