
   
   
      
         
             Race Bait and Switch

            More than a century after
freeing African-Americans from slavery, Republicans are promising to liberate
blacks from a newer type of government-sanctioned exploitation: Social
Security. As part of their effort to seize the Social Security issue, and in
particular their campaign for privatization, they argue that the Social
Security system rips off blacks for the benefit of whites. Sen. Daniel Patrick
Moynihan, a Democrat, has also taken up the cry. And so have some of the media.
The March issue of Essence magazine invites readers to visit a
"community activist" Web site about Social Security and become involved "to
ensure that we get our fair share." The Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel
editorialized recently: "The average black male can expect to work all his life
to help finance a comfortable retirement in Florida for middle and upper class
people, then drop dead a month or two after he collects his first Social
Security check." Ron Walters, a professor at the University of Maryland and one
of America's best-known black political scientists, has called Social Security
"a form of 'reverse reparations.' "

            Their argument is simple
and plausible: Everybody pays into the system during his or her working years
then gets a monthly check during retirement. Since blacks have a shorter life
expectancy than whites, they are getting a worse deal and, in effect,
subsidizing longer-living whites.

            So, why is this wrong? First of all, Social Security is
progressive by design. Everybody pays the same share of income into the system
each year (about 6 percent, plus another 6 percent from your employer). But the
formula for benefit payouts isn't proportionate to what is paid in: Low-income
people get more (not in absolute terms, but compared with their contributions),
while affluent retirees get less. A February report by the General Accounting
Office confirms that this formula outweighs the effect of lower life expectancy
for all low-income people, including African-Americans.

            Second, Social Security
benefits don't go just to elderly retirees. The program pays benefits to
younger people with disabilities that prevent them from earning a living, and
also to surviving spouses and minor children of deceased participants. Blacks
benefit disproportionately from these aspects of the system. Although only 12
percent of the U.S. population is black, African-Americans get almost a quarter
of the Social Security benefits paid to surviving children.

            The main source for the Social Security Screws Blacks
campaign is a study by (who else?) the Heritage Foundation. Its study has been
pretty well demolished by the GAO's actuaries and by a counterstudy by the
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal think tank. Among other
distortions, it assumes that everyone retires at 65, although two-thirds of all
workers stop paying in and start collecting benefits earlier than that--which
reduces the disadvantage of a shorter life span.

            Heritage calculates that
a low-income, single, black male born after 1959 would face a rate of return on
his investment in Social Security of -.66 percent, compared with a 1.38 percent
rate of return for a random low-income male from the general population. The
"rate of return" on Social Security is calculated by imagining that each of a
person's payments into the system over the decades is deposited in an account,
from which payments from the system are subsequently withdrawn. Then you
figure what interest rate on that account would cause the payments in--plus
interest--to exactly cover the payments out, and that is the rate of return on
Social Security as an investment.

            Even if Heritage's calculations were accurate, its choice
of year would be tendentious. Almost all current retirees are getting a
positive rate of return on the very low payments they made for most of their
working lives, even if some are getting a better return than others.
Conversely, people in their 20s and 30s today will get a negative rate of
return, though some will be more negative than others. Heritage chose a year
when, by its calculation, the general population was still just barely in
positive territory while blacks had moved into negative numbers, in order to
claim that blacks' losses were subsidizing whites' profits. That would never be
true of the system as a whole, even if it were true of people born around
1959.

            The analogy to an investment with a rate of return
is only one way to think about Social Security, and not necessarily the best.
Another is as insurance against poverty in old age or disability at any age.
When you buy auto insurance, you don't hope for a lot of accidents to improve
your rate of return on the premiums. Social Security is also a transfer
program. The reason the rate of return is so poor for people under 40 is that
their money is going to today's retirees, rather than being invested for their
own benefit. Proposals to improve the rate of return for Gen X and after,
through privatization and what not, invariably omit the money current workers
will have to supply to current retirees one way or another from their
calculations.

            In any event, a government-staffed study of the rate
of return on Social Security, the only one based on records of actual workers
and retirees, puts Social Security's rate of return at 9.1 percent for whites
and 9.6 percent for blacks.

         
      
   
