
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Kosovo 
               update : 1) NATO leaders met in Washington
to mark the alliance's 50 th birthday. The media noted that this was
supposed to be a party but has turned into a grim strategy meeting, thanks to
Kosovo. 2) NATO bombed Yugoslavia's main TV network and leveled a home
belonging to President Slobodan Milosevic. President Clinton's spin: "We are
targeting his command and control facilities." Everyone else's spin: We're
trying to kill him. 3) Russia conveyed a proposal from Milosevic to allow an
"international presence" in Kosovo under U.N. auspices if NATO halts its
bombing and withdraws its troops from Yugoslavia's borders. Clinton and British
Prime Minister Tony Blair rejected the proposal but portrayed it as a sign that
Milosevic's will is breaking. 4) NATO leaders reopened the question of sending
in ground troops. Clinton says it's just a contingency plan. The half-cynical
spin: They intend to launch a ground war and are just using the "contingency
plan" shtick as cover. The completely cynical spin: It really is just a
contingency plan, showing once again how gutless and unrealistic they are.
(4/23/99)
            

            
Update on the
Colorado high-school massacre : Based on the discovery of a large propane
bomb and other explosives planted by the two killers, investigators think they
had accomplices. Meanwhile, several bomb threats and trench coat pranks at
schools in Colorado and elsewhere over the last two days are being treated as
copycat incidents. Editorialists and politicians continued to debate whether to
blame the massacre on 1) guns; 2) violence in the media; 3) secularism and
cultural decline; or 4) inadequate monitoring and counseling of troubled
students. (The assailants were allegedly devotees of shock-rocker Marilyn
Manson. Click for the 
                  Slate
                "Assessment" of Manson and
here
for an analysis of the wave of PR opportunism that followed a similar slaughter
in Oregon last year.) (4/23/99)
            

            
President
Clinton postponed the destruction of the U.S. government's last samples of
smallpox . The U.S. and Russian governments have the only known samples of
the virus, which was eradicated in the 1970s after it had killed 500 million
people this century. The previous world consensus was that the samples would be
destroyed this year to make sure smallpox never comes back. The new thinking is
that rogue states may already have obtained samples of the virus for developing
a biological weapon and that the United States should work with Russia to
develop a new vaccine and to test drugs against the virus. The political
question is what happens if the rest of the world wants the virus destroyed but
the Americans and Russians don't. (4/23/99)
            

            
The theory
that male homosexuality is genetic suffered a setback . A previous study had
found a specific genetic pattern among gay men, but a new study does not find
the same pattern. The most interesting version of the theory is that the gene,
passed along on the X chromosome, makes the bearer attracted to men--and that
this trait is supposed to be passed on to daughters but is sometimes passed on
to sons. The author of the old study says the new study is flawed, and
reporters agreed that the new study raises doubts but doesn't necessarily
refute the old one. The conservative spin: This proves homosexuality is a
choice, not a natural condition, so it's OK to stigmatize it. The gay spins: 1)
Homosexuality is genetic and therefore natural. 2) If it turns out to be
genetic, conservatives will just try to eradicate it with gene therapy. 3)
Forget the genetics debate and just treat us equally. (4/23/99)
            

            
Scientists found
a new candidate for the missing link between apes and humans . The 2.5
million-year-old creature, dubbed Australopithecus garhi , evidently used
stone tools to carve up the animals it killed and had much bigger teeth than
its apelike ancestors. The theory is that the creature's tools enabled it to
augment its diet with meat and marrow, which gave it the nutrition and energy
that eventually allowed it to develop a larger, more human brain and to spread
throughout the world. (4/23/99)
            

            
A government
study concluded that some New Jersey state troopers pulled over drivers and
searched their cars because they were black or Hispanic . At least 77
percent of drivers who were asked by troopers for permission to search their
cars were minorities. The ostensible reason for this racial "profiling" is that
New Jersey highways are a conduit for drugs and that the troopers think blacks
and Hispanics are more likely to be culprits. One consequence of the study
could be to help black and Hispanic defendants get the results of their car
searches thrown out of court as a violation of the Fourth Amendment. The spins
from Gov. Christine Todd Whitman, R-N.J.: 1) I'm surprised. 2) This is awful.
3) The vast majority of troopers are not racist, and I'm issuing orders that
will stop this practice right away. The reactions from blacks and Hispanics: 1)
Duh. 2) This is the way the world is. 3) Right. (4/21/99)
            

            

               India's 
               government collapsed. The ruling Hindu
nationalist coalition lost a no-confidence vote because a small party pulled
out of the coalition. Now the opposition Congress Party, led by Sonia Gandhi
(former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's widow), is trying to form a parliamentary
coalition large enough to support a new government. The early betting is that
this will prove impossible and that new elections will have to be called. The
key questions at stake are 1) whether Gandhi will become a candidate for prime
minister; 2) whether the new government will sign the nuclear test ban treaty;
and 3) whether India will seek to cool tensions with Pakistan.
(4/19/99)
            

            

               CNN 
               is dumping Peter Arnett. Having kept Arnett
on its payroll but off the air for months, the network will reportedly use an
escape clause in his contract to get rid of him in July. Everyone assumes the
reason is Arnett's role as correspondent in last year's CNN Newsstand
report that alleged use of lethal nerve gas by the U.S. military in Vietnam.
CNN had retracted and apologized for the report but let Arnett stay on the job
after he argued that he had played no substantive role in the report and had
simply performed as an on-air mouthpiece. The pro-Arnett spin: It's unfair to
treat a reporter this way after 18 years of loyal service. The anti-Arnett
spin: His reputation has been dead for months, and it's about time CNN
mercifully pulled the plug. (4/19/99)
            

            
Kenyan runner
Joseph Chebet won the Boston Marathon . The heartwarming spin: He finally
won the race after finishing second in his last three marathons. The cranky
spin: Now that nine consecutive Kenyans have won the Boston Marathon--and four
of them finished among this year's top 10--how about giving some other country
a chance? Ethiopian runner Fatuma Roba reinforced the theme of dominance by a
single country, winning the women's marathon for the third straight year.
(4/19/99)
            

         
      
   
