
   
   
      
         
            On With the Show

            One of the pleasures of
working in theater or film is hanging out with actors and sundry showbiz
exhibitionists. True, they tend to have the emotional autonomy of 8-year-olds,
but they're less of a labor to "read" than ordinary mortals: It's their
business--you might say their existential orientation--to communicate their
thoughts and feelings in an engaging fashion every millisecond . I
mention this because the first thing that struck me about the much-hyped
satirical comedy EdTV , which purports to show the effect of TV cameras
brought into the homes of real people, is that almost no one on-screen seems
ever to have met a real (i.e., nonshowbiz) person, let alone to be able to
embody one. The director, Ron Howard, and his screenwriters and actors have
spent much of their lives in the business, and I'd trust them to depict the
anxieties of TV executives and the madness of network board meetings. I'd trust
them to skewer the vanity of models and actors and directors. What I don't
trust is their ability to convey what it's like simply to have a meal with a
loved one or to walk across a street or to wake up from a sound sleep without
the self-consciousness that comes from a constant proximity to media. When they
project their particular self-consciousness onto society as a whole, the upshot
is a sour, self-congratulatory muddle.

            
               EdTV is based
on a 1994 French Canadian film that no one I know has seen called Louis XIX:
King of the Airwaves . (The mock imperial title alone suggests more wit than
the whole of its Hollywood counterpart.) EdTV takes off from the
increasingly less outlandish idea that a cable network might, in the face of
declining ratings, decide to have its cameras traipse around after an
"ordinary" person 24 hours a day--a scenario somewhat different from last
year's The Truman Show , in which the cameras were hidden, the universe
manufactured, and the TV protagonist unwitting. There is already something like
EdTV--albeit with one camera--on the Internet, and the number of auditioners
for MTV's Real World and for a spot on various "trash" talk shows
suggests that the United States has no shortage of exhibitionists who'd love to
be "validated" by TV cameras. (On these terms, Monica Lewinsky is the most
valid human being on the planet.) Under the leadership of a gung-ho producer,
Cynthia Topping (Ellen DeGeneres), the network holds auditions in public places
around the country and comes up with Ed Pekurny (Matthew McConaughey), a
31-year-old San Francisco video store clerk who is cute and unthreatening and
unformed. ("I have a dream, I just don't know what it is yet.")

            The problem with EdTV is that Ed's life looks and
sounds like a tedious sitcom before the TV cameras ever show up. McConaughey's
manner is TV-talk-show bashful. (Is this supposed to be the point? That he's
deformed by television before he's ever on television? I don't think so.) Ed's
rambunctious brother Ray is played by Woody Harrelson, a Cheers veteran,
and his mother by Sally Kirkland, who could never be anything but an actress.
His wheelchair-bound stepdad is Martin Landau, who makes sitcom-style, raunchy
old guy wisecracks. His brother's squeeze--and, later, his own--is Jenna
Elfman, of television's Dharma and Greg . At one point, the door swings
open and there stands Dennis Hopper. "What an inspired touch!" I thought. "A
lazy, ham actor shows up to explain to poor Ed the secrets of Lee Strasberg's
"Method"--how to be "private in public"--just like on Bravo's Inside the
Actors Studio !" It turned out that this wasn't Dennis Hopper, however, but
Dennis Hopper in the role of Ed's long-lost father--and few things can dispel
the illusion of watching real people than a hack actor feigning naturalness via
mannerisms recycled from James Dean and Montgomery Clift.

            Before the movie even gets going (it doesn't seem to
begin for half an hour), it's clear that Howard and his frequent collaborators
Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel are too deep inside the mentality that they're
trying to satirize to come up with anything fresh. EdTV has none of the
edge of such "mockumentaries" as Albert Brooks' Real Life (1980) or
This Is Spinal Tap (1984) or even HBO's The Larry Sanders Show ,
all of which exploit in hilarious fashion the tension between just being and
performing for a camera. Where the filmmakers are most comfortable is back in
the studio, so they throw in Jay Leno, RuPaul, and a panel of repugnant
pundits--Harry Shearer, Michael Moore, George Plimpton, and Arianna
Huffington--to discuss the "Ed phenomenon." Howard and his writers are so in
love with their own hip self-consciousness that it's a wonder they don't
feature film critics discussing their movie.

            As it turns out,
EdTV isn't really about the impact of television on ordinary people.
It's about the problems of being famous--like how you can never get any
privacy. In common with The Truman Show , the film eventually evolves
into a melodramatic revolt against a repressive corporate patriarch, here an
executive (Rob Reiner) who doesn't want to turn off the cameras and leave Ed
alone when Ed's life is in a shambles but his ratings are high. ( The Truman
Show took a higher, more metaphorical route; in EdTV , liberation
comes down to exposing the fact that Dad has a penile implant.) Reiner has the
fatted, self-centered TV exec's demeanor down pat, but the movie degrades him
while holding the same attitude toward human beings that he has. As Ed's
unconvincing life runs its increasingly public course, Howard cuts to the folks
at home--a Black Couple, a Gay Couple, an Old Couple, a bunch of Single
Guys--who wince at him cutting his toenails or cheer on his conquests. When
USA Today polls show that The People overwhelmingly prefer a flagrantly
insincere model (Elizabeth Hurley) to the sweet and awkward UPS girl (Elfman)
with whom Ed has found love, you have to ask: Are The People supposed to be
shallow boobs? Or is this just how the world looks from certain Beverly Hills
ZIP codes?

            A more true-to-life--alas--version of EdTV is 20
Dates , a microbudget documentary directed by and starring Myles Berkowitz.
At the beginning of the film, now in wide release, Berkowitz--thirtyish and
divorced and unable to get his directing career off the ground--explains that
he has received a sum of money from a private investor (heard cursing the
director via a hidden tape recorder) to go on 20 dates with 20 attractive women
and thereby capture something unglimpsed in commercial movies about the single
life, the nature of love, etc., etc., ad nauseam. All that is captured, of
course, is Berkowitz's ambition to put himself in your face: He comes out of
20 Dates with a trophy fiancee and a feature film in major release, but
absolutely no insight into dating, love, or human chemistry. The audience,
meanwhile, ends up cringing and squirming on behalf of his dates, some of whom
are appalled to the point of violence and litigation by the revelation of a
hidden camera. (Only two of the 20 had the camera concealed from them--both
sued.) The masochistic fascination of 20 Dates is something that the
makers of EdTV can only dream about, but I wouldn't exactly call it
entertainment; I found myself wanting to apologize on behalf of obnoxious
heterosexual Jewish men the world over. I also wondered: What about those
women, some of them pretty, bright, and articulate, who admirably recoiled from
this clown when they discovered they were fodder for his Hollywood ambitions?
When they saw Berkowitz on the big screen with a 20 th Century Fox
logo behind him, did they think, "Wow, I really missed the boat on this one. I
should never have let him get away"?

            The best reason for seeing Forces of
Nature --a sporadically funny but uneasily revisionist screwball comedy in
which straight-arrow Ben Affleck is tempted from his imminent nuptials by free
spirit Sandra Bullock and assorted natural disasters--is a scene in which the
heartsick jock ex-boyfriend (David Strickland) of Affleck's fiancee (Maura
Tierney) sings an a cappella version of Phil Collins' "Against All Odds (Take a
Look At Me Now)" into her ear in the middle of a party. The gesture is as
embarrassing for the character as anything in EdTV or 20 Dates ,
but Strickland sings with such quavering soulfulness that the bit lifts up and
floats out of the movie like a weird but beautiful balloon. I was going to
mention this scene anyway, as the picture's highlight; I dwell on it because
word comes that the 28-year-old Strickland, a regular on the sitcom Suddenly
Susan , has been found dead in Las Vegas, apparently having hanged himself.
It's no consolation, but he has left behind an exquisite moment in film.

         
      
   
