
   
   
      
         
             Ground War Euphemisms

            On March 24, President
Clinton went on television to explain the rationale for U.S. participation in
the bombing of Yugoslavia. "I do not intend to put our troops in Kosovo to
fight a war," Clinton assured the public. A week later, Dan Rather observed
that Clinton's verbal gymnastics about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky
("It depends upon what the meaning of the word 'is' is") had made people
suspicious of how Clinton was "parsing" his words about Kosovo. "When you say
you have 'no intention' to commit ground troops to accomplish the mission in
Kosovo," Rather asked Clinton, "does that mean we are not going to have ground
troops in there--no way, no how, no time?"

            It's possible that
Clinton can still avoid a ground war. But the probability that he will have to
reverse that position--and explain his way out of it--is now at least as high
as the probability was a year ago that he would have to admit to an
"inappropriate" relationship with Lewinsky and explain away his previous
denials. If an about-face on the question of a ground war becomes necessary,
the phrase "no intention" will be only one of Clinton's escape clauses. His
promises to avoid a ground war, like his denials of the Lewinsky affair, are
laced with convenient loopholes.

            1. "Permissive environment." Clinton has pledged not
to send U.S. ground forces into a "hostile environment." Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright and National Security Adviser Sandy Berger have promised not
to use American troops to "invade" Kosovo or enter a "combat situation."
However, administration officials have held out the possibility that U.S.
soldiers would be sent into a "permissive environment."

            At first, everyone assumed that a "permissive"
environment was one in which Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, his will
broken by the bombing, had agreed to "permit" NATO troops to enter Kosovo
unchallenged. Lately, however, American officials have enlarged the meaning of
"permissive." Last Sunday, Albright acknowledged that Milosevic might never
willingly yield. "There are other ways, however, to create a permissive
environment," she added. "What we are doing is systematically diminishing or
degrading his ability to have that kind of control over the area."

            The next day, in a
cat-and-mouse game with reporters over the meaning of "permissive environment,"
Clinton spokesman Joe Lockhart alternately defined it as a) "one where there is
a political settlement"; and b) "an environment where the Serbs and Milosevic
don't have the ability to impose their will." On this theory, once the Serbs'
defenses are sufficiently crippled by bombing, U.S. ground forces would enter
Kosovo without significant resistance.

            2. "Peacekeeping force." In his March 24 speech,
Clinton said U.S. troops would join a "peacekeeping force" to "implement"
NATO's peace plan if Milosevic accepted it. A week later, when a reporter
pointed out that the peace plan was dead, Clinton insisted that the Kosovars
must nonetheless be allowed to return home and live safely. "That will require,
clearly, for some period of time, some sort of international force that will be
able to protect their security," Clinton conceded. U.S. officials have
alternately described this entity as an "international peacekeeping force,"
"international security presence," "implementation force," and
"post-implementation force."

            But ever since the Serbs
captured three U.S. soldiers snooping around the Yugoslav-Macedonian border a
week ago, "peacekeeping" has become a plastic term. Clinton insisted the
soldiers "were carrying out a peaceful mission in Macedonia--protecting that
country from the violence in neighboring Kosovo." The next day, when reporters
asked what the soldiers had been up to, Lockhart insisted "they were left there
in a peaceful and peacekeeping fashion, as a peacekeeping force." This may be
just the first of many armed confrontations NATO plans to attribute to "peace."
When asked Sunday about NATO's plans to return Kosovar refugees to their homes,
NATO's military spokesman told CNN that the "peacekeeping forces" in Macedonia
"were always planned to make sure that the Kosovar Albanians could live in
peace and harmony."

            
3. "Protectorate." From the outset,
Clinton stipulated that U.S. troops wouldn't fight for Kosovar "independence,"
and Albright said the United States wouldn't impose an "occupying force" in
Kosovo. Clinton told Rather it would not be "appropriate" to discuss "creating
a Kosovar enclave that would keep [NATO troops] there forever." When Rather
pointed out that Clinton's pledge to guarantee the Kosovars' "security"
amounted to the same thing, Clinton asserted that this wasn't so and argued
that he was only saying that the Kosovars were "entitled" to security. This
mirrors Clinton's favorite domestic policy spin: arguing that Americans are
"entitled" to assistance or protection (e.g., a "patients' bill of rights")
while avoiding discussion of what it will cost. Once Clinton ruled out an
"enclave," anonymous senior administration officials came up with a new phrase
for the NATO-guarded territory to which the Kosovars would return: an
"international protectorate."

            4. "Supporting the air campaign." Clinton's original
promise to deliver "air strikes against Serbian forces responsible for the
brutality in Kosovo" without putting "troops in Kosovo to fight a war" has
proved to be self-contradictory. To hit the Serbs who are committing the
brutality, NATO has to bring its forces down to the ground. The first step in
this transition is the delivery of 24 U.S. Army helicopters to Albania. The
helicopters are more like ground weapons than like air weapons: They will fly
low over Kosovo, shoot at Serbian tanks and troops, and risk being shot down in
return. That's why they belong to the Army, not the Air Force. To protect the
helicopters, the United States is also sending 18 surface-to-surface rocket
launchers--indisputably a ground weapon.

            To operate, service, and guard the helicopters,
Clinton is supplying 2,000 Army troops, adding to the 8,000 NATO soldiers who
are arriving in the region to help refugees. Everyone knows these troops are
trained for combat and can be quickly converted into an invading force.
Alternatively, the fuel and communications networks they will build can be used
to support an invasion. U.S. officials insist that at most these troops might
be dispatched to "escort" Kosovars back to their villages once "hostilities"
have ended. Presumably, these are alternative euphemisms for a "peacekeeping"
mission in a "permissive environment." Nevertheless, U.S. officials assert that
the helicopters and Army soldiers are "an expansion of the air operation,"
"supporting the air campaign," and "not a ground force."

            American hawks have
complained for weeks that Clinton underestimated Milosevic's rigidity. By
swearing off ground forces, they argued, Clinton tied NATO's hands, giving
Milosevic confidence that he could destroy Kosovo without effective resistance.
But Milosevic, in turn, may have underestimated Clinton's agility. A president
who can talk his way out of a perjury rap can talk his way into a war.

         
      
   
