
   
   
      
         
            No. 250: &quot;Musa vs. Ake&quot;

            
               On Wednesday,
Musashimaru defeated Akebono to become the 67 th yokozuna. Why is
this noteworthy?
            

             

            Send
your answer by 5 p.m. ET Monday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 249)--"Cam Com Can Gal":
            

            

               
                  The list includes cameras, laptop computers, canvas bags of
tools, and 665 gallons of water. List of what?
               
            

            "Award
inducements to Belgrade telephone users who are ready to switch to MCI local
service."-- Marshall Efron
            

            
"Things used as stand-ins for Liam Neeson while Star Wars was being
filmed."--Justin Warner
            

            "To
the horror of environmentalists, soon the Yangtze River will be composed
entirely of these items."-- Jennifer Miller
            

            
"Once-hidden details of Da Vinci's The Last Supper , now clearly visible
beneath the table."-- Peter Carlin
            

            "Robot
punch. Serves 10,000."-- Chris Kelly
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's Large
Intestine Wrap-Up
            

            Although many of you submitted enema jokes, I ran
none--an aesthetic not a political decision, if such a distinction is possible.
Some laugh at colonic humor, some don't. I have no doubt that several entries
were particularly fine examples of rectal comedy. These I have passed along to
my London counterpart, Sophie Rhys-Cohen, who plans to run them in "Naughty
Scamp," the English edition of News Quiz, along with many comical pictures of
men in women's clothing and a terrific photograph of Queen Elizabeth's left
breast. (At least they said it was hers when Sophie R-C handed over £100,000 of
Bill Gates' money.)

            Incidentally, Naughty
Scamp is still encouraging participants to suggest better things to do with
fresh fruits and vegetables than eat them.

            
               Five Americans, a
Canadian, and a Russian Walk Into an Answer
            

            All are packed in the cargo bay of the Space
Shuttle Columbia for a scheduled Thursday launch.

            And if it does take place, that launch will end a
string of six consecutive failures. The unmanned six-failure record was broken
Tuesday by the Thaad anti-missile system, when the rocket that was to serve as
its target, in the words of Defense Department spokesman Kenneth Bacon,
"tumbled chaotically out of control." I guess we've all done that. The Thaad
project, incidentally, has already cost more than $3 billion. Neither Congress
nor the Defense Department is discouraged by its unbroken record of failure. I
call that plucky.

            If the Columbia does get off the ground, its
crew of five Americans, a Canadian, and a Russian will transfer those supplies
to the Russian-American space station, in one of the 160 space walks on 86
flights needed to complete the station--and no doubt worth every penny.

            Canvas? Can that be
right--canvas tool bags in outer space? Shouldn't the tools be stowed in
something spectacularly light and strong and expensive--Kevlar or woven Tang or
something? But that's what Beth Dickey reports in the New York Times ,
and that's good enough for me.

            
               Chris Kelly's
Medical Extra
            

            I don't know if this
counts as an "extra" or anything, but what the hell is going on with George
Lucas' neck? I mean, you'd think a guy with all that high-tech know-how could
do something about that sucker. It's less like a wattle and more like a Siamese
twin. Maybe he could computer-animate some paisleys on it and claim it's a
scarf. Am I the only person this unsettles? Am I just jealous?

            
               Headline
Haiku
            

            Local Press Looking
human experimentation lab
Barak and Arafat
Promote Good Citizenship?

            -- Charles
Waugh
            

            Ex-Cons Find
A Drag Racer
Touching and Fondling
NRA's Favorite Hobbyhorse

            
               Wall Street Journal , May 25, 1999

            -- Tim Carvell
            

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Colonic discomfort.

         
      
   
