
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Valid
License
            

            As a Berkeley resident who still insists he's a
Chicagoan, it's nice to see a Royko remembrance (see ""). But one point that
Weisberg raises about Slats Grobnik and Royko's occasional fictionalizing and
whether readers understood it bothers me. It doesn't give enough credit to
readers, for one thing, and it neglects the implicit bargain columnists strike
with their audiences to be on the level.

            It seems like everyone I knew who read his
column--and that's nearly everyone I knew growing up, even in the
suburbs--understood that Slats and others were inventions. And everyone, I
thought, knew the difference between the columns in which Royko would create a
situation to make a broad point and the columns in which he was talking about
flesh-and-blood people and life-and-death matters. When he got someone real on
the spit, you could smell it.

            One of the big
differences between Royko on one hand and Mike Barnicle and similar truants on
the other is that Royko himself didn't confuse his fictions with reality, and
he didn't promote confusion about them. Whatever license he had was earned over
a long, long time by drawing a clear line between his creations and his
journalism, and by scrupulously honoring an unarticulated deal with his readers
that he wouldn't lose track of which was which, so they wouldn't, either.

            -- Dan Brekke
            

            
Berkeley, Calif.

            
               Brooks
Brothers
            

            In his "Assessment" of ,
A. O. Scott says the success of The Simpsons "resulted from the unlikely
collusion between Groening ... and Rupert Murdoch." Not really. The real
creative story is the collusion between Groening and James L. Brooks, former
Mary Tyler Moore Show staffer and creator of flicks such as Broadcast
News and Ordinary People . Brooks (and his protégé, Sam Simon)
brought with him the story discipline that made The Simpsons such great
television. (For the first few years all three men shared the "created by"
credit, but that has since changed.) The staff of talented, bitter ex-Ivy
League writers, led for years by Conan O'Brien, is responsible for the show's
lasting greatness. Groening's a genius and all that, but any moving picture is
a collaboration, especially in weekly comedy TV. Writers covering televison and
movies should tell their readers that the auteur theory isn't really relevant,
especially when a new episode (complete with perfect three-act story
structure!) needs to be cranked out once a week.

            -- Ben Swett
            

            Santa
Monica, Calif.

            
               Lack of
Resolution
            

            To Michael Kinsley's
on-the-mark "" about linguistic dodges served up by "thoughtful" commentators
on the conflict in Kosovo, let me contribute the following, perhaps the
grandest of them all--the congressional resolution of "support for our troops."
I've never been on the receiving end of such support but, at the risk of
appearing ungrateful, I would probably rather know whether Congress also
happened to support the mission I was being asked to risk my life for.

            -- J.B. Howard
            

            
Baltimore

            
               Affirmative
Reply
            

            I read Jacob Weisberg's that J.C. Watts Jr. attacked
as racist. I'm no fan of Watts. I think you are right that the Republicans
place him in the forefront because he's black. The party is trying to appear
inclusive when it really is not. However, to say that is his position is a
result of affirmative action is offensive. Your premise that affirmative action
promotes or gives positions to people of color who don't deserve or are
unqualified for these positions is what I find racist.

            It's the promulgation of ideas and derogatory
comments such as yours that debases affirmative action, and misleads and
misinforms people about affirmative action policies. Affirmative action is just
that--affirmative. It gives people who are qualified and knowledgeable an
opportunity to display their skills. It opens doors that might have otherwise
been left closed because of race. It promotes the inherent value of diversity
in any given organization or business.

            Call J.C. Watts Jr. a
front man, or say that he's being prostituted, or whatever. But don't say he's
a result of affirmative action.

            -- Karen Archia
            

            Carrboro, N.C.

         
      
   
