
   
   
      
         
            No. 229: &quot;Don't Think So&quot;

            

               Fill in the blank in this quote from cognitive scientist Bruce
Bagemihl: "We shouldn't have to look to __________ to see what's normal or
ethical."
            

             

            by noon
ET Thursday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 228) "Still Not Sure"
            

            

               At yesterday's ceremony honoring the Teacher of the Year, Bill Clinton
recalled that his sixth-grade teacher once told him, "If you don't learn the
difference, I'm not sure whether you're going to be governor or wind up in the
penitentiary." What difference?
            

            "None,
apparently."--Ellen Macleay
            

            
"Between 'Voulez vous couchez avec moi, ce soir ?' and 'Kiss it.'
"--Norman Oder
            

            "The
difference between 18 and 17 is 20 years."--Brooke Saucier
            

            
"Between 'principal' and 'principle.' As we know, the school principal is our
'pal' and 'principle'--well, President Clinton is still having trouble with
that one."--Leslie Goodman-Malamuth ( Kathryn Wetherbee had a
similar answer.)

            "Sorry,
but I am not going to give aid and comfort to Slobodan Milosevic by lampooning
our president during wartime. At least not until John McCain gives me the
go-ahead."--Greg Diamond
            

            Click
for more responses.

            
               Daniel's
Wrap-Up
            

            Teacher of the Year Andrew Baumgartner is the kind
of educator who has delighted his kindergarten students with a wedding for
Sleeping Beauty, complete with limousine and cake, teaching them, I suppose,
that nothing is worthwhile unless it is entertaining. By that standard, I owe
more than I thought to my junior high-school social studies teacher. I'm still
not clear what "social studies" are, exactly, but I'll never forget his stories
about the UFO that sometimes hovered outside his window, conducting experiments
through a metal cable attached to his neck (he showed us the marks). I'm more
conflicted about my high-school writing teacher, who announced that his lessons
were so valuable that he deserved 10 percent of the profits from our first
books. At the time I agreed, but now he goes around saying he learned more from
us than we did from him, and I still haven't seen a dime from Angela's
Ashes .

            The Teacher of the Year
program is sponsored by Scholastic Inc., best known among impressionable school
children for distributing cool magazines whose exclusive advertiser is the U.S.
Armed Forces.

            
               Indiscreet
Answer
            

            The difference between
"when to talk and when to keep quiet." The teacher's name was Mary Kay
Letourneau.

            
               Long Shot
Extra
            

            In the following quotations from Tuesday's New
York Times , the italicized sentences were spoken by scientists discussing
the search for extraterrestrial life. The nonitalicized sentences were spoken
by Bill Bradley and others discussing Bradley's run for the White House.

            

               "I'm at the top of my game. I'm going to run for President of the United
States. The idea that we're not going to live to see it is not one that's
holding us up in particular."

               "I don't get into it unless I can see my way through 270, which are the
electoral votes needed to be President. Scientists know it's a worthwhile
pursuit, but this makes it known to the wider public."

               "Will we find intelligent life in space in my lifetime? The answer
is, 'Absolutely.' "

               "Now the question is, 'Can you win?' It's a very remote
possibility."

               "The University of California doesn't provide chairs to little green men
from Mars. Too Eastern, too liberal, too intellectual."

               "Now I'm out campaigning for the Presidency, and it's the ultimate
exhilaration. There is a general belief that while it is a difficult
pursuit, this is so important that it is worth the time."

               "It's Al Gore and I, one-on-one, for 11 months. I've pretty much reached
the conclusion that the occurrence of technological life is an extremely rare
occurrence."

            

            
               Farewell
Extra
            

            After four days of deliberation, Randy Cohen voted
with 11 other jurors in favor of lethal injection. There's one New Yorker
who'll never walk his dog off the leash again. Finishing my week as guest host,
I'd like to thank you all for making me feel welcome. Your inspired
contributions over the last few days are all the gratification I require. There
is no need to e-mail me with praise, nor to cc: jackshafer@msn.com.

            Now please welcome back
the master--Obi-Wan to my Anakin--Randy Cohen. Believe me, this job isn't as
easy as he makes it look.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The elusive meaning of "is."

         
      
   
