
   
   
      
         
            

            

               
                  Economist
               
               , April 24
            

            
               (posted Saturday,
April 24, 1999)
            

            The cover editorial warns NATO to do some birthday
soul-searching. The alliance must establish an international protectorate in
Kosovo that guarantees refugees the right of return, and it must reassure a
wary world that it will not make a habit of waging war on sovereign nations.
Failure could mean "terminal decline." ... A long, fascinating
survey of NATO says the narrow interests of some
European members conflict with America's "broader vision" and wonders whether
members' conflicting positions on Iraq, Iran, and Israel could strain the
alliance in the future. ... An article describes a kid-run Florida anti-smoking
campaign. One billboard features a bikini-clad tobacco executive, poolside with
cigarette and black socks. The campaign is demonstrably successful, but the
governor wants to slash its budget.

            
               
                  New
Republic , May 10
            

            
               (posted Friday, April
23, 1999)
            

            The cover story , "Milosevic's Willing Executioners," says that
Serbs actively support the ethnic cleansing of Kosovo and the murder of
Muslims. Serbs honestly believe themselves to be victims. Milosevic did not
need to push them into violence. The piece is full of chilling anecdotes about
Serbs' "gratuitous sadism" and indifference to Kosovar suffering. ... An
article slams CNN for acting as a conduit for Serb
propaganda. Rather than try to subvert or oppose Belgrade's censorship, CNN has
happily accepted it in exchange for "access."

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , April 25
            

            
               (posted Thursday,
April 22, 1999)
            

            The cover story deplores
the Americanization of Israeli politics. The American political consultants
hired by the leading candidates for prime minister--Arthur Finkelstein for
Benjamin Netanyahu, James Carville and others for Ehud Barak--have brought
sound bites, attack ads, and wedge issues to the campaign. Sadly, this has
removed all the substance from Israeli politics and left it just as vapid as
the American system. ... A profile of Montenegrin President Milo
Djukanovic calls him the West's best hope for Yugoslavia. Once a Milosevic
stooge, he has become an anti-Milosevic, free-market democrat. Problem:
Milosevic may take the opportunity provided by the NATO bombing to depose
Djukanovic and install a more subservient leader. ... A feature marvels
at military food, which now includes a barbecue chicken sandwich that lasts
three years without spoiling and airdrop rations that "flutter, rather than
plummet, down to earth, lest they take anyone out in the process." Next step:
"a transdermal nutrient delivery system"--that is, a food patch.

            

               
                  Time
                
               and

               
                  Newsweek
               
               , April 26
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
20, 1999)
            

            
               Time 's cover depicts soldiers in the
spring's most anticipated war--in other words, actors from Star Wars: The
Phantom Menace . Time 
               gushes over the "fresh, handsome, grand" new movie and
publishes a fold-out guide to its new characters and techno-military toys. Bill
Moyers interviews George Lucas about the series' "true theology."
(Moyers: "In authentic religion, doesn't it take Kierkegaard's leap of faith?"
Lucas: "Yes ... that is what 'Use the Force' is.")

            The real war in Kosovo is featured inside, as it is
in Newsweek . Time 
               berates NATO for its self-congratulatory and ill-timed
birthday celebrations. Newsweek 
               berates NATO for its obfuscation of civilian casualties.
Time 
               dusts off NATO Commander Gen. Wesley Clark's 1975 thesis,
which doubted the "coercive effects ... of air attacks." Robert McNamara
tells 
               Newsweek that "it is totally inappropriate for
an ex-Secretary of Defense, in the middle of a war ... in which there are great
difficulties ahead ... to be talking about mistakes." He then blames military
leaders for overestimating the effectiveness of bombing.

            
               Newsweek 's cover story argues that North America was first peopled by "a
Rainbow Coalition of ethnic types," not just the Bering Strait-crossing Asians
commonly depicted in history textbooks. New evidence suggests that Asians
migrated from the Pacific Rim in canoes and that Europeans followed the frozen
shoreline to the East Coast. An expert predicts that the research could
relegate today's Native Americans to "just another Ellis Island group" and
threaten their hard-won legal rights.

            
               Time reports on
new research showing that at least 450 animal species--including giraffes,
goats, and dolphins--become sexually aroused through homosexual rubbing,
entwining, and kissing. Dissenting researchers question whether close genital
contact is really sex. The piece does not include reaction from the White House
or Kenneth Starr.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               
               , April 26
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
20, 1999)
            

            The cover story frets about widespread hearing loss. Noisy
appliances will soon sport warning labels, and earplugs and earmuffs will
become ubiquitous. ... The magazine reports that earlier this month U.S. officials met secretly
with Kosovo Liberation Army rebels but decided not to arm them. A story says that half the Kosovar refugees are children under
the age of 15. ... A piece says that Christian colleges and universities have
fueled an enrollment boom with deep tuition discounts and open enrollment
policies. ("It's against our Christian perspective to be elitist or
exclusionary," explains one administrator.)

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , April 26 and May 3
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
20, 1999)
            

            The magazine devotes a
double issue to money. One piece chronicles the frenetic days of Mary Meeker,
the investment banker who orchestrated stock offerings for Netscape, Priceline,
and America Online. ... A writer who once worked in a sweatshop defends
them. Conditions aren't as bad as union protests indicate, and immigrant
laborers grouse only about losing work to cheaper factories abroad. ...
An author gripes about how tough it was to grow up rich. She doesn't even know
how much is in her trust fund.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
                
               , April 26
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
20, 1999)
            

            A piece opines that
Richard Holbrooke, not Madeleine Albright, is responsible for U.S.
underestimation of Milosevic's obstinacy. Holbrooke is adding a dark afterword
to new editions of his book on Balkans diplomacy. ... The cover story
charts America's "struggle to rediscover a compelling patriotic language" and
exults in the "new, crunchier" patriotism embodied by John McCain.

            
               
                  The
Nation
                
               , May 3
            

            
               (posted Tuesday, April
20, 1999)
            

            The cover story charts Michael
Milken's attempt to become "the Sam Walton of gray matter" by acquiring a
"cradle to grave" series of education businesses, from preschools to vocational
training firms. The piece chides Milken for failing to include critical
assessments of the '80s junk bond markets in his textbooks. ... The
magazine publishes an anti-voucher screed by Ron Unz, the conservative activist behind
California's ban on bilingual education. Unz writes that public schools are
vital to social cohesion and proposes an ideological truce on the issue: If the
left will acknowledge that its efforts to reform public schools have failed,
the right will stop pushing "to turn our public schools over to ideological
zealots or the marketing division from Nike."

         
      
   
