
   
   
      
         
            Stalling for Time

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               When behind the
wheel of a car, I would never consider parking in a spot designated for a
fellow driver with disabilities, as I don't belong to this group. However, when
shopping or recreating and in need of a public restroom, I always opt for the
bathroom stall designed for my fellow citizens with disabilities. (They are
uniformly more spacious, better stocked, and I like the handrails.) I have yet
to emerge from such a spot to find someone more deserving of such amenities
cooling their heels (so to speak), and since my caffeine intake is too high,
these pit stops are more or less regular events. Am I being callous and
insensitive, or appropriately opportunistic?
            

            

               --Doubting
            

            Dear Doubt,

            Funny you should bring
this up. Prudie does exactly the same thing, preferring, as you do, the larger
space, along with the private mirror and sink. Like you, Prudie has never seen
a disabled person waiting, though that would not be the end of the world.
Considering the length of time one may park vs. the time needed in the
restroom, the issues are clearly different. Prudie often sees women take the
handicapped stall simply because it becomes available first. (Prudie is hardly
ever in the men's room ... unless, of course, it is an individual bathroom, and
the girls' room is taken.)

            
--Prudie, practically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I am surrounded by exercise nuts, both in my
family and at work. Almost everybody I know is either coming from or going to
the gym. I am a size 10, feel fit, and make it my business to walk wherever I
can--sometimes skipping the elevator or the escalator.
            

            
               Could it be that
I should be engaging in a more formal kind of exercise? My health is
good, by the by.
            

            

               --Black Sheep
            

            Dear Black,

            This must be Prudie's
week for identifying with her correspondents, for she could not agree with you
more. Too many people are too involved with lats and pecs and excessive
sweating. The important thing is just to move ... somehow, somewhere. Prudie's
philosophy is the same as the very wise Carol Leifer's: "No pain, no pain."

            
--Prudie, cautiously

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               A longtime friend is
getting married to a guy of whom I am not a big fan. This is my friend's second
marriage, but at her fiance's insistence, she is once again having a full-blown
formal affair--including all the gift registries. I do not want to get them a
gift (or at least an expensive one). I gave my friend a very special and
expensive gift for her first marriage, and I know the first time around she
received every gift one might give to a newly married couple. What is my
obligation here? Am I letting my feelings for her fiance influence me too
much?
            

            

               --TH
            

            Dear T,

            Prudie's instinct tells
her your feelings are less about her fiance and more about your finances. And
this is all right. Prudie's rule for the serially married may be roughly stated
as One Knock-Your-Eyes-Out Gift Per Bride Per Lifetime. There are people, by
the way, who feel that two full-dress blowouts is pushing it a little.
Of course you must crash through with something, but it can be both modest and
in good taste. And for your own tranquility, when you write the card have your
ladyfriend in mind, not the groom, so that your warmer feelings will be read
between the lines.

            
--Prudie, festively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My daughter's March
wedding was beautiful. The reception was lovely, too, and when the time came
for my daughter to toss her bouquet, all the single women gathered. So did the
children at the wedding, my four nieces. They range in age from 10 to 13, but
the 10-year-old is an especially energetic child--and tall for her age, too.
So, before the toss, I dashed over to whisper in her ear that there were older
ladies right behind her and to take care not to trip them. One of those ladies
was my daughter's new mother-in-law, who is my age, which is to say, not old
... just not agile enough in high heels to compete with an athletic little girl
who may not know her own strength. My niece did indeed catch the bouquet, and
no one was hurt. My question is this: Should children not old enough to date,
much less marry, be included in the bouquet toss? I don't think wild horses
could have kept those girls away, but I'm wondering if this is a new
custom.
            

            

               --Bride's Mom
            

            Dear Bride's,

            The catch-the-bouquet
custom is meant as symbolic fun. No one really thinks the catcher is destined
to become the next bride. And certainly no one expects an injury to result,
meaning, of course, that decorum should be maintained at all times.

            
--Prudie, traditionally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               You and your
correspondent "" should both read the recently published Silicone
Spills , by Mary White Stewart. Anyone with a bit of scientific or legal
knowledge of implants (whether silicone or saline) would never dream of having
them. Factual knowledge is important in making any decision, especially one
like this.
            

            

               --PG
            

            Dear P,

            Ah, yes, the old
conundrum of dueling scientific findings. Without wishing to become
Amazon.Prudie, you and any other interested parties might wish to read the
authoritative book Science on Trial: The Clash of Medical Evidence and the
Law in the Breast Implant Case , by Marcia Angell.

            --Prudie,
informationally

         
      
   
