
   
   
      
         
            

            
               The Academy's
Awards
            

            Thanks to Michael
Kinsley for buying into our list at the beginning of his recent "." But his
later point about "gratuitous meritocracy" did not seem up to his usual level
of argument. Of course we evaluate (unscientifically) the merit--the relative
merit--of novels, paintings, Dylan songs, New Yorker editors, etc. Could
there be art without such evaluations? (This is a philosophical, not an
economic, question--and a serious one.) Top 100 lists and Oscars are simply a
rather formal, inevitably somewhat pedestrian method of evaluation. Our list
certainly has a target or two on it for everyone (including us list makers).
Still, I thought the whole thing was worth doing because journalism is rarely
compared across decades; because such comparisons make for enlightening
discussions (like the one you, all too briefly, embarked upon); because our
memory for good journalism tends to be awfully short; because most of the work
on our list (like that in item No. 67) deserves to be honored; and because in
so doing we hope to inspire more gutsy, eye-opening journalism. Could a similar
case be made in support of the Cable Ace Awards? Perhaps. But our list does
have the advantage of including Hersey, Carson, Tarbell, Steffens, Murrow, and
that Lemann fellow.

            -- Mitchell
Stephens
            

            Chair, Department of
Journalism, New York University

            New
York City

            
               The (Little) Girls'
Room
            

            As a female musician, I found the in "The Music
Club" on women in rock fascinating. Bill Wyman asserted that Liz Phair is
trying to maintain an indie sensibility while flirting with mainstream
commercial music. This seems to be a time-honored argument leveled at women
from all walks of life. It seems that if a woman shows any duality in her
opinions and/or her career endeavors, she is either confused about what she
wants (and therefore weak), or she shouldn't be venturing out into the big, bad
world of rock 'n' roll. Ooh, too scary!

            I find the whole issue of
"Women in Rock" a bit off-putting as well. There shouldn't be a delineation
between where one creative process ends and another begins. It is a universal
language, or should be in an ideal world. I am constantly amazed at the number
of people (yeah, they've been men) who have told me that my musical career
would be bolstered if I would just be willing to "work the sex angle."

            -- Hudson
            

            San
Diego

            
               Everybody's Got a
Hungry Heart
            

            The argument in "" seems really stretched,
particularly to anyone who's ever done something like lock his refrigerator (I
don't, but I keep it empty for a similar reason). The irrational act isn't
"locking the fridge," it's "snacking at midnight"--you gain weight, use up
food, and get less sleep. The momentary pleasure isn't remotely worth the
drawbacks.

            So why do it? Because of
an irrational urge to eat, doubtless a holdover from some ancient time when
eating whenever possible was a survival trait. As long as you're positing an
evolutionary urge with no present-day benefits, why assume the most complicated
explanation is correct? Or that people are too stupid to realize what's bad for
them?

            -- Aaron
Mandelbaum
            

            
Redmond, Wash.

            
               The Ron
Around
            

            I note one glaring
omission from the "" item in "Chatterbox." Juanita Broaddrick's story arrived
in the press after Bill Clinton had established a pattern of behavior toward
women and of soon-to-be-inoperative denials. But prior to the Walters
accusation in the Kitty Kelley book, no one had ever accused Ronald Reagan of
anything remotely approaching the sort of behavior alleged. There was no
pattern to match the behavior and, therefore, the press did not pursue it or
demand a forceful denial. To add further injury to the premise that the
Broaddrick and Walters accusations are "remarkably [a]like," the Broaddrick
story was exhaustively researched by NBC News' Washington bureau and its
reporter Lisa Myers, whose reputation for honest, nonscandal reporting is
unquestioned. The Walters accusation was "reported" by Kitty Kelley (whose
reputation for veracity is questionable at best) and People magazine.
Not exactly Woodward and Bernstein, is it?

            
               --Robert Laing
            

            
Seattle

            
               Core
Values
            

            Jacob Weisberg's "" is in many ways a sophisticated
look at the University of Chicago, the best exemplar of American higher
education. But it does repeat a few inaccuracies.

            The University has only one name, under which it
was incorporated in 1890. That is "The University of Chicago." Weisberg may
have been misled by a poorly reported story in a local newspaper that confused
discussions about the various shorthand versions of our name.

            The new curriculum does not dilute the general
education Weisberg lauds. It provides a strong foundation in all the large
knowledge domains of humankind and in analytic thinking skills, a bit more
choice to explore the ideas and fields introduced in students' first two years,
and a series of courses taught by full faculty in a small, focused discussion
style that has long been Chicago's hallmark. The "core" curriculum will now
constitute 15 courses plus a year of foreign language, of the 42 required for
graduation. This is three fewer than the 21 required since the latest
curriculum revision in 1984, but it also means students will take three more
courses in their concentration(s) (or major) or in other areas. Additionally,
the curriculum is under constant scrutiny by the faculty, and is revised
regularly (typically at intervals of about a decade) in a process that
culminates in a vote of the college faculty. Their vote in March 1998, by a
3-to-1 margin, approved the new curriculum.

            Education at the
University of Chicago will continue to be great fun, in the traditional,
Chicago sense in which our students have always found some of life's greatest
satisfactions in the enthusiastic, unbridled pursuit of the life of the
mind.

            
               --Larry
Arbeiter
            

            
Director of Communications, the University of Chicago

            
               Brownian
Emotion
            

            In "The Best University in America," Jacob Weisberg
writes: "Consider Brown, whose undergraduates have a higher average SAT score
than those at Chicago, and which gets three times as many applications
precisely because it has a reputation for being a blast and lacks any real
requirements."

            Your one sentence
explanation of Brown's attractiveness to prospective students is an insult to
Brown alumni and alumnae, to those who have applied to Brown, and to

                  Slate
                readers who hate seeing arguments built on unsupported
stereotypes instead of facts.

            -- Daniel Flynn ,
Brown '96

            Boston

         
      
   
