
   
   
      
         
            What Do You Mean by &quot;Violence&quot;?

            At his White House summit on youth violence this
week, President Clinton summed up the prevailing wisdom about entertainment and
its connection to the Littleton, Colo., murders. "We cannot pretend that there
is no impact on our culture and our children that is adverse if there is too
much violence coming out of what they see and experience," he said. In other
words, the issue is the quantity of violence that kids absorb from
television, video games, and movies. Countless academic studies frame the
problem this way. They seek--and usually find--a correlation between how much
violent entertainment children consume and how aggressively they behave.

            This view isn't wrong, it's just way too crude.
Asking whether violence on screen foments violence in life is like asking
whether drinking liquids leads to car accidents. In a dumb way, the answer is
yes. But you're not going to get anywhere until you distinguish between
alcoholic beverages and nonalcoholic ones.

            Hollywood types prefer
to address this issue at this level of generality because it lets them off the
hook. "If you're looking for violence, what about the evening news?" David
Geffen asked in the New York Times just before the White House
conference. "America is bombing Yugoslavia; it's on every day. It's not a
movie, it's real." If the problem is merely the quantity of violence kids see,
Geffen is right. Teen-agers can get plenty of gore without ever renting a
slasher film. But we all know from personal experience that different sorts of
screen violence have drastically varying emotional effects. Some depictions
whet our appetites for brutality, while others do just the opposite. These
all-important distinctions are not ones that epidemiologists or sociologists or
psychologists can measure very effectively, because they involve a strong
subjective element. But until we begin to distinguish among the different ways
violence is portrayed, we can't begin to understand what those portrayals may
do. Here are some categories that may be helpful in thinking about the
issue:

            T ragic 
               Violence: Needless to say,
tragedy is often very violent. Take Kenneth Branagh's four-hour film version of
Hamlet . Having punctured Laertes and launched him over a balcony,
Hamlet, in the climactic scene, impales Claudius with a flying sword, brains
him with a swinging chandelier, and force-feeds him poison. (View the scene
above.) A 12-year-old watching this sequence in isolation might say that the
violence is "cool," in a low-tech sort of way. But how does this violence make
the adult viewer feel? In the context of the play, the most prominent emotions
it arouses are the ones Aristotle identified as the essence of tragedy: pity
and fear. We pity a tragic hero such as Hamlet because his misfortune is
undeserved, and we tremble at the realization that he is like us. Tragedy
doesn't stir violent urges but rather inhibits them. That is why war films like
All Quiet on the Western Front are often described as "pacifistic." The
tragic context of the violence sensitizes us to its horror and makes us revile
it.

            

               Righteous Violence: The Aristotelian opposite of the pity and
fear is righteous indignation. This is the feeling we get when we see bad
people flourish. It is stoked when we see them get their just deserts. That's
what Clint Eastwood movies are all about. Typical of this type of drama is the
1976 film The Enforcer , a sequel to Dirty Harry . Eastwood pursues
a gang of hippie terrorists who murder assorted innocents and kill his female
partner in a shootout. (See Clint remedy the situation with a handheld mortar
above.) The way you feel watching this act of violence is very different from
the way you feel at the end of Hamlet . You experience satisfaction and
glee, not pity and fear. You want to exclaim "Yes!" instead of "No!" In this
category are most war movies as well as the oeuvres of Arnold
Schwarzenegger, Charles Bronson, and Steven Seagal. In such films, the bad guys
become increasingly subhuman and thus deserving of more and more grotesque
forms of torture and dismemberment. In this sense, the old Hays Office
production code, which required that films teach a moral lesson by having
evildoers punished, had it backward. If you want to discourage violence, you
should show the innocent suffering, not the guilty.

            G raphic 
               Violence: Is a more
realistic depiction of gore, in which someone's head is chopped off, affording
a glimpse of severed tendons and gushing arteries, worse in terms of inuring
viewers to violence than generic mayhem, in which the bad guys fall over dead?
The body-counters tend to assume that graphic violence is worse. But more
realistic depictions may prevent violence from becoming an abstract idea. Once
again, the context is what matters. In a tragic story, graphic violence makes
horror more horrible. A retributive context makes extreme gore less horrible.
If I were a parent of adolescents, I'd try to keep them away from Marked for
Death but not from Saving Private Ryan , even though the latter is
far more vividly gruesome.

            

               Pornographic Violence: In horror films such as the Friday
the 13 th
               , the issue of whether anyone deserves torture and
dismemberment is immaterial. The deliciousness of the violence is the whole
point. (Watch a clip from Scream , in which Drew Barrymore gets stabbed
in the breast and dragged about her yard by a masked serial killer above.) If
you're squeamish, you may cover your eyes when seeing this in a theater. But
the horror is undeniably thrilling, in a sexual way. There's an obvious
parallel between the blood-splatter climaxes in horror movies and the "money
shots" in sex-porno. Indeed, the only difference between this kind of slasher
film and snuff films is that no animals are harmed in the making of the
former.

            I ronic 
               Violence: There
are people who will tell you that Scream and the meta-horror subgenre
that developed from it are not crudely sexualized violent films. They're
self-conscious, postmodern comments on crudely sexualized violent films.
Critics of violent entertainment tend to hate this defense. It doesn't matter,
they say, whether people are butchered ironically in films such as Oliver
Stone's Natural Born Killers or Quentin Tarantino's Reservoir
Dogs . Here, I think the difference between the response of an adult and
that of a child becomes crucial. (Check out the torture-dungeon scene from
Tarantino's Pulp Fiction , in which drug dealer Marsellus promises sweet
revenge to the man who has just raped him, above.) Adults, or at least most
adults, recognize this as a species of black comedy, albeit one that expresses
a real sadism on the part of the director. But to immature minds, the message
may be simply that brutality is cool and funny. In other words, ironic violence
may be desensitizing and stimulating to the young in the same way that
pornographic violence is.

            

               Cartoon Violence: What of films such as Lethal Weapon
4 , in which the violence is not quite ironic but rather so hyperbolic and
unreal that it becomes a cartoon? Or, for that matter, what of cartoons
themselves, which are filled with calamities without consequences? (Watch Wile
E. Coyote blown up, reconstituted, flattened, and reinflated above.) You might
think that such portrayals teach the false lesson that violence doesn't have
real effects. Perhaps for those too young to distinguish fantasy from reality,
that's the case. But there's not much basis for thinking that this confusion
persists. By the time a child is old enough to borrow his dad's guns (say, 10),
he understands that cartoons and comics don't describe the real capacities of
human beings.

            S chool 
               Violence: Since
the Columbine killings, there's been a special focus on depictions of
adolescents committing mayhem in school. The two films cited most often are
Heathers , in which Christian Slater is foiled in an attempt to detonate
his school, and The Basketball Diaries , in which Leonardo DiCaprio
fantasizes about gunning down his classmates and a priest
Terminator -style while his buddies cheer. (View a clip from the movie,
above.) This scene is now the centerpiece of a lawsuit by parents in Paduchah,
Ky., who say the 14-year-old shooter who killed three children was motivated by
the movie.

            Of course, it is always possible that an unbalanced
individual will misunderstand something in a crazy way, as John Hinckley did
with Taxi Driver . But you can't protect yourself against the criminally
insane by cutting off their sources of possible inspiration, which are
limitless. Sane adolescents seeing either of these films would understand that
it is the violent characters who are supposed to be deranged--in the case of
The Basketball Diaries because of drugs. I'd worry more about The
Rage : Carrie 2 , which mixes righteous indignation with pornographic
violence in a school setting. The issue isn't how much violence. It's what
kind.

         
      
   
