
   
   
      
         
            No. 207: &quot;TK&quot;

            

               It happens in Colorado for an hour a day, and former prosecutor Steven
Cohen calls it "the oddest kaffeeklatsch in the history of Western
civilization." What goes on?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Wednesday's
Question (No. 205)--"Nothing but Cash":
               

               

                  
                     
                        Devise a pair of words to fill in the two blanks--one
word each--as Thomas Rogers, president of NBC cable, describes his shift away
from the old network economic model: "Our goal over time is to turn viewers
into __________ and __________."
                     
                  
               

               
"Hunters and gatherers."-- M.G. Lord , Marshall Efron , Jon
Delfin , and Joe Shaw
               

               "Dharma
and Greg."-- Jon Hotchkiss
               

               
"Readers and writers. (He was promptly fired.)"-- Paul Tullis
               

               "Cash
and checks."-- Steve Lyle ( Marshall Efron had a similar
answer.)

               
"Imbeciles and quick."-- Tamar Haspel
               

               
"Malcontents and loners. ('We're going to steal the Internet's
thunder!')"-- Doug Strauss
               

               "Gays
and lesbians. (Turns out Falwell was right all along.)"-- Tim
Carvell
               

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

               It's a little too easy to
disdain television, although please do, especially that Animal Medical
Center , where, just the other night, I saw some kind of vomiting Chihuahua,
which, let me tell you, after a long day working for some big jerk at the ...
No, wait, I lie: It wasn't Animal Medical Center , it was 20/20 ;
and it wasn't a Chihuahua, it was Barbara Walters; and she wasn't vomiting,
that was me. But the point stands: Television is like tap water or take-out
pizza; it's not really good, but it's so conveniently available that we dully
consume it instead of making the effort to go out for really good pizza or some
truly magnificent water from, like, a solid gold tap. And yet, if you ask
people about their actual No. 1 recreational activity, it's watching
television. And if you ask them their imaginary No. 1 recreational activity,
it's stripping naked and firing out the window at passing cars with that
actress from that show, you know, the pretty one. So perhaps it's a little
facile to blame all our problems on some sap from NBC cable, when the fault, my
friends, is with some whole other sap entirely. If you write me, I'll send you
his name.

               
                  Ace Award Winning
Answer
               

               "Our goal over time is to turn viewers into
buyers and customers ."

               Tired of relying on ad
revenues from so-called "popular" shows, NBC, the first broadcast network to
own part of a home shopping channel, is expanding its efforts to sell
souvenirs. The network did well hawking a music CD, a tie-in to its miniseries
The '60s , and expects to sell viewers a lot more stuff once it ties
together TV shows, home shopping, and the Internet. "We've made it clear that
figuring out ways to drive sales of product through our broadcast platform is a
key ingredient we see in the overall mix," said Rogers. "And that means one
thing--an anatomically enhanced Tom Brokaw Action Figure," he did not add.

               
                  New Furby/New Dole
Extra
               

               A new version of the annoying yet popular toy and a
new presidential candidate from the awkward yet enduring political family are
aggressively courting acclaim.

               Some comparisons:

               
                  Oft-Cited Personality Trait
               

               New Furby: Spunky playmate.

               Elizabeth Dole:
Thin-skinned perfectionist.

               
                  Core Belief
               

               Furby: Provide cuddly animatronic fun.

               Dole: Cut taxes, build
anti-missile system.

               
                  Positions on Other Major Issues
               

               Furby: Undisclosed.

               Dole: Undisclosed, but
promises, "We're going to be laying out positions on all these issues."

               
                  Handicap for Presidential
Candidate
               

               Furby: Overly programmed.

               Dole: Same thing.

               
                  Slogan
               

               Furby: "Collect them all for phenomenal Furby
fun!"

               Dole: "Let's make this a
crusade!" (Antecedent unclear.)

               
                  Nickname
               

               Furby: Pretty much just "Furby."

               Dole: "Miss 3-by-5 Index
Card" (as a Duke undergrad).

               
                  Hair
               

               Furby: Three "wild" fur designs in all new wildlife
colors and patterns.

               Dole: Can't tell from
newspaper, but former aide Alex Castellanos says, "She's a tough lady; she's as
hard as her hairdo."

               
                  Recent Innovation
               

               Furby: "Deep sleep" lets new Furby go to sleep
quicker and stay asleep until turned completely upside down.

               Dole: Same thing
(unconfirmed rumor only).

               
                  Common
Denominator
               

               Crummy TV shows, crummy
snacks.

            

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
