
   
   
      
         
            That's a Wrap!

            If the rowdy and facetious new film The
Mummy suggests anything, it's that we've come to what Francis Fukuyama
might call "the end of horror movies." The horror genre lost its life's blood
when filmmakers began to worry about being laughed at by teen-agers who'd seen
it all before, and to incorporate kids' imagined responses into their
pictures--so that you got the movie and the Mystery Science 
               Theater
3000 burlesque of the movie at the same time. Forget about the vague fear
of the nameless, otherwise known as "dread." Forget about awe, too, unless it's
short for "Awesome, dude!" in response to some pricey special effect. Bring on
the ironic one-liners and the slapstick ghoul-bashing kung fu--and let's
party!

            Postmodern jokiness can only undermine the mummy
subgenre, which has at its heart the most ancient of scary ideas: If you
presume to violate an alien culture and make off with its sacred objects,
you're going to be visited by a monster that's beyond the power of your own
culture to combat. There's a big dollop of xenophobia here--old mummy pictures
are full of stilted English actors pretending to be icily vengeful
Egyptians--but there's also a less chauvinistic implication: a rebuke to our
Western-imperialist sense of entitlement. For all its nonsensical trappings,
the mummy narrative is serious business, because when other peoples'
passionately held taboos are casually flouted it is serious business.
Just ask Salman Rushdie. The invasion of a mummy's tomb results in a
fatwa made flesh--or, if not flesh, then bandages and bones rendered
really really nasty by righteous wrath.

            Some of these ideas can
be found in the new The Mummy , but they have been stripped of their
weight and cultural resonance. In their place is a lot of sub- Raiders of the
Lost Ark swashbuckling, plus sight gags pilfered from Sam Raimi's 1993
Army of Darkness (the last of his The Evil Dead trilogy) and
genre-deflating banter that's like an untalented sophomore's stab at Butch
Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969). (The juvenile script is by the
director, Stephen Sommers.) There isn't a mummy at the center of The
Mummy , exactly, but a mutating Industrial Light and Magic Special Effect.
Under it, supposedly, is Imhotep (Arnold Vosloo), an ancient priest
discovered--in the movie's prologue--in a compromising position with the
Pharaoh's mistress, who kills herself in an act of feminist defiance. ("My body
is no longer his temple!")

            When Imhotep goes to Hamunaptra--the City of the Dead--to
revive her, he is stopped by the Pharoah's guards, shorn of his tongue, then
wrapped in gauze and buried alive with a swarm of scabrous beetles. Legend has
it that if he's ever revived, he'll visit the 10 plagues of Egypt upon the
world. Legend has it right, as it turns out, but it's a long hour before
roguish adventurer Brendan Fraser can transport dimwitted 1920s Pandora heroine
Rachel Weisz to Hamunaptra so that she can open the Book of the Dead and start
stupidly incanting. It takes another hour to search for the Book of the Dead's
opposite number, which will theoretically send Imhotep back to the cosmic soup
from which he sprang before he can transfer the heroine's soul to the embalmed
remains of his lady love.

            The Special Effect (a k a
the mummy) reminded me of the Ghost of Christmas Future in the Bill Murray
comedy Scrooged (1988). It's tall and mottled and has a wiggly mouth
that can suddenly distend itself and emit a Jurassic Park -style roar. It
has all manner of superpowers, turning itself into a puff of smoke, a
hurricane, and a swarm of ravenous locusts. It can appropriate pieces of its
victims' anatomies in an effort to reconstitute itself (an idea cribbed from
Clive Barker's 1987 Hellraiser --but less gorily executed, for the sake
of a kiddie-friendly PG-13). It can also revive its mummified fellow priests
and send them into battle against our heroes. The Special Effect can do almost
anything--except look scary. It's not solely the fault of Industrial Light and
Magic: Slapstick and horror aren't an easy mix. Sam Raimi might be the only one
who can pull it off--when his spastic, hyperkinetic ghouls come at you they
seem genuinely invasive. The ghouls of lesser artists just bash into one
another like Keystone Korpses.

            T he Mummy isn't as inept as last year's
Godzilla --it more or less hits its marks, and some nonindustry people at
the preview I attended claimed to have been entertained. The cast is certainly
game. Fraser has a long, rangy body and a gee-whiz openness that makes him
perfect for a comic-book hero, and the lovely Weisz--whose eyes are so far
apart that they're almost in different time zones--brings a screwball aplomb to
the dizzy distaff Egyptologist. As her brother, John Hannah (Gwyneth Paltrow's
love-struck Scottish lapdog in last year's Sliding Doors ) is too
stridently the Comic Relief in a movie in which the hero and heroine are
already busy comedically relieving themselves, but he's a hard chap to dislike.
The villain is another kettle of leeches. I adored Vosloo as Lance Henriksen's
black-garbed, femininely insinuating henchman in the John Woo-Jean Claude Van
Damme action picture Hard Target (1993). But Vosloo doesn't have the
physiognomy for a role incarnated variously by the gaunt Boris Karloff (1932)
and the totemic Christopher Lee (1959). Bald and round-headed, he's about as
imposing as Curly of the Three Stooges.

            T he Mummy is a debauchery but not a true
defilement: Mummy movies don't constitute an especially glorious cinematic
legacy. Only the Karloff original, directed by Karl Freund, qualifies as a
classic, with its sleek Egyptian-Deco décor and its matchlessly eerie scene of
the mummy's awakening. (Bramwell Fletcher's hysterical laughter in the
creature's wake--"He went for a little walk!"--echoes in the annals of horror
film history.) Still, I have a soft spot for all those dreary Lon Chaney Jr.
sequels that ended with the lurching, half-blind golem lugging a slack blonde
through the swamps while George Zucco in a turban hisses something like,
"Faster, Kharis! Before the torch-wielding infidels converge on the sacred tomb
of Ananka!" I can't make a case for the dim Hammer Films remakes, either,
although it's always fun to watch Peter Cushing get strangled by Christopher
Lee. No, Sommers hasn't blasphemed. He doesn't deserve to have his eyes and
tongue sucked out, his brain dashed against the side of a tomb, or to be
consumed by scarab beetles or flayed by locusts. But he has put another nail in
the horror genre's sarcophagus. He should at least lose a hand.

            In some cultures, they cut off hands (and even more
vital body parts) when they find out you're gay. Steven Carter (Ben
Silverstone), the stringy English hero of Get Real , merely faces
parental disapproval, social ostracization, and a dishy jock lover (Brad
Gorton) who doesn't want to acknowledge him in the halls of their high school.
Still, it's enough. The strength of this agreeable comedy, directed by Simon
Shore from a screenplay by Patrick Wilde, is that it makes even the tiniest
sexual encounters seem emotionally momentous. They would be anyway, at this
age, but Steven has fewer avenues for self-expression than his heterosexual
peers, and the pressure builds. Despite its gay subject matter, Get Real
is rather wholesome and didactic: Steven writes an essay for the yearbook
called "Get Real," and the film climaxes with a speech about wanting to be
recognized and loved for who you really are. There's nothing glib about
Silverstone's performance, though. At times, he's believably stricken, at
others believably affectless--as if every emotion has been wrapped up so
tightly for fear of discovery that there's no such thing as a "natural"
response. He's in danger of becoming a true mummy.

         
      
   
