
   
   
      
         
            No. 211: &quot;A and Q&quot;

            

               I give President Clinton's answer; you give the question from his rare
and recent press conference: "I think it's very important. And I think that
what young people will learn from my experience is that even presidents have to
do that, and that there are consequences when you don't."
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Thursday's Question
(No. 210)--"Let Us Now Praise Famous Me":
               

               

                  "You like me! You really like me!"-- Sally Field
                  
               

               

                  "I'm the king of the world and the lord of Monkey Island!"-- James
Cameron
                  
               

               
                  Every Academy
Awards broadcast yields one perfect remark. Participants are invited to predict
the comment from Sunday's Oscars that will be most quoted in Monday's
papers.
               

               

                  ( Topic courtesy of Greg Diamond. )
               

               
"Fernanda Montenegro: 'Why is the sickly girl holding my Oscar?' "-- Beth
Sherman
               

               
"Roberto Benigni: 'Yes I'm look nuts, but I'm the winner. I want to thank Stan
for 2,000 mics of acid. I am a lacto-vegetarian. You can give me milk and
spinach. I like cheese and radish. Now I am biting the moon.' "-- Marshall
Efron
               

               " 'Oh
God! Someone just shot Joan Rivers!' (or was that 'THANK God'?)"-- Al
Petrosky
               

               "James
Coburn: 'And I especially want to thank my life partner, Cardinal John
O'Connor; this one's for you, honey!' "-- Susan Vance
               

               
"Academy President Arthur Hiller: 'I'm terribly, terribly sorry.' (Rescinding
the Academy Awards given to Joe Pesci, Marisa Tomei, Goldie Hawn, and Kevin
Costner, and reassigning them to Martin Scorsese, Judy Davis, Lauren Bacall,
and Albert Brooks.) 'Also,' Hiller added, 'Al Pacino's Oscar is no longer for
Scent of a Woman but for The Godfather . That is all.' "-- Tim
"They Don't Have the Met Here, but They Do Have Back to the Future: The Ride,
and That Counts for Something" Carvell
               

                

                

                

                

                

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

            

            I no longer watch the
Oscars. They're neither good enough to take straight--the choices convey no
aesthetic authority; the performances make no earthly sense--nor consistently
awful enough to enjoy as camp. (Yes, Rocky was claptrap, but
Shakespeare in Love was indeed wonderful.) Or perhaps I've simply lost
my taste for cleavage and greed. There's a relentless evolution in this sort of
event, from genuinely interesting, to ludicrously bad, to soporifically bland.
The Oscars are in the terminal stage, having achieved the tone of a shopping
mall, a corporate charity event, frozen Cajun food, Al Gore. So each March,
instead or watching the Academy Awards, I rent All About Eve and heave a
smoke bomb through Democratic Party headquarters. And the best thing about my
evening: It's Whoopi-free.

            
               Politics and Poetry
Extra
            

            Both the New Republic and the Academy of
American Poets have announced major changes. A comparison.

            
               Most Apparent
Change:
            

            AAP: More people of color on board of
chancellors.

            
               NR : More color photographs of Rudy
Giuliani.

            
               What the Changes
Mean:
            

            AAP: "The board is more representative of the many
things going on in poetry today," says President Jonathan Galassi.

            
               NR : "It's going to be fresh and frisky," says
publisher Will Lippincott.

            
               Will it Be
Fuddy-Duddy?:
            

            AAP: No official position.

            
               NR : "It's not going to be fuddy-duddy,"
insists Mr. Lippincott.

            
               Biggest Prize
Offered:
            

            AAP: $100,000 Tanning Prize.

            
               NR : Winner of new subscriber sweepstakes
gets to attend NR editorial meeting; loser forced to attend two edi ...
oh, you know how this one goes.

            
               Possible Impetus
for Change:
            

            AAP: Maxine Kumin and Carolyn Kizer resign from
board in protest.

            
               NR : Stephen Glass dragged from office in
handcuffs.

            
               Means of Avoiding
Stasis:
            

            AAP: Rotation system instituted for board of
chancellors.

            
               NR : Frequent firings and resignations
instituted for editors in chief.

            
               Means of Avoiding
Pro-Gore Bias:
            

            
               NR : Martin Peretz's public pledge to do
less boosting of Al Gore.

            AAP: John Galassi's
implicit pledge to discourage erotic sonnets about Al Gore.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Elia Kazan.

         
      
   
