
   
   
      
         
            No. 254: &quot;Too True To Be Good&quot;

            
               I give the New
York Times headline; you give a one-sentence summary of the story:
"Presidential Hopeful Displays Humanity."
            

            
               
                  (A tip of the
Hatlo hat to Daniel Radosh.)
               
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Tuesday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Thursday's
Question (No. 253)--"Pesca Milagrosa":
            

            

               
                  "It is terrible that something so frightening should be given
the name of something so pure and beautiful," says Luz Marlene Sierra Mayorga,
a Bogotá engineer, referring to "miraculous fishing"--which is
what?
               
            

            "Wow,
the pro-choice movement has topped itself in the euphemism department with this
one!"-- Matt Sullivan
            

            
"Changing lepers into loaves and fishes."-- Leigh Bardugo
            

            "A
winter's day in New Hampshire for Dole and McCain."-- Dan Wolfe
            

            
"Reaching down the front of the pants of the guy standing next to you on the
subway platform just for the hell of it."-- Ken Tucker
            

            "The
Makah tribe's new strategy of whale hunting with plutonium-tipped
harpoons."-- Peter Carlin
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Quiz Regular M
Pesca's Nominal Torment Wrap-Up
            

            I have noticed that nearly every one-syllable first
name is a homonym for an actual word. (Jeff, Steve, and Clyde being
exceptions--and therefore unfortunately discriminated against during Zoom
casting calls.) If my name were the translation of Pesca (Fish) it would be
punnable but would preclude my moving to Pittsburgh.

            I have long maintained that in the '70s and early
'80s the Yankees acquired and promoted players based on how their names worked
in headlines. How else to explain the mysterious presence of Oscar Gamble and
Mickey Rivers?

            All the world's Michael Jacksons (like the Indians'
reliever) now go by Mike, simply because of one androgynously desiccated freak.
The exception is beer expert Michael Jackson, the explanation being 1) he had
the name first; 2) he's too drunk to realize; 3) no one would mistake a fat
pretentious hop-head for the king of pop.

            For the past few years I have gauged the popularity
of hockey by the fact that no one has linked my name to Mike Peca ,
captain of the Buffalo Sabres. This may speak more to the popularity of all
things Buffalo, but now that the Sabes are in the cup final, I still expect no
one to mention it. But maybe I'll catch a double take if I'm ever in the
Niagara Falls region.

            If this miraculous
phrase to the Pesca people becomes ubiquitous, I will join the ranks of the
punnable and will forever be able to step forth from the shadows of my maternal
ancestors Philip and Sylvia Lipshitz.

            
               Fishin' Magician
Answer
            

            Random group kidnappings.

            Here's how Larry Rohter describes it in the New
York Times : "A band of guerrillas appears out of nowhere, sets up a
roadblock on a main highway, stops every car or bus that happens along, takes
away all the passengers who seem likely to have a good job or a prominent name,
and holds them captive until a hefty ransom is paid."

            The practice takes its name from a Colombian party
game where kids reach into a barrel with a hook or with bare hands and pull out
a surprise gift.

            Since January 1996, at
least 4,925 people have been abducted.

            
               Bloated Indulgence
Extra
            

            Tim Carvell sought a
published sentence exemplifying conspicuous consumption 1999, like this from
the New York Times : "Today, the urinal has taken its stand alongside the
bidet and the working fireplace as the latest must-have in the well-appointed
bathroom suite."

            "When did you first notice
you had become quietly wealthy?"

            Bank of New York ad

            
               New York Observer
            

            
               --Tamara
Glenny
            

            " 'There are all these
people out there who have made all this money and don't know what the best
sheet is or what the best cufflinks are,' said Ms. Gross, who intends to help
them learn."

            
               New York Times
            

            
               --Chris
Hammett
            

            "[H]er favorite item in
the store is a pair of stone spaniels ($9,000). 'They're happy dogs--they look
like dogs I'd like to own.' "

            
               The New Yorker
            

            -- Heather
Williams
            

            "When, in the Course of
Human Events, it becomes necessary for one People to rise up against such
tyranny, we offer our own modest proposal: A Diners' bill of rights, one
designed to inspire a new dialogue between restaurant-goers and restaurateurs
and to make the dining experience as pleasant as it always promises to be."

            
               
                  Slate
               's own Zagat diary
June 3, 1999

            
               --Liz
Rounsavall
            

            "The house that is for
sale is located in the heart of Oregon's burgeoning wine country, and this
property could be converted into a small destination vineyard."

            
               --Alison "I Think
Opening Up the Vineyard to Anyone Other Than the Servants Is Really Tasteless"
Rogers
            

            "Explaining why
23-year-old Stephania Lo Gatto paid $6,000 over new sticker for a used Mercedes
CLK320 convertible, instead of getting on a one-year waiting list: 'If I waited
that long, I would be sick of it.' Now, wherever she and her boyfriend drive
around town, 'Everybody looks at us, which is what we wanted to achieve.' "

            
               Wall Street Journal
            

            
               --Barry
Fischer
            

            
               Mike Madden's
Headline Haiku
            

            Doors at 2 school
buildings
Face back-to-back crises:
Police trap rabid cat;
Business goes belly-up.

            
               Philadelphia

               Inquirer , June 3, 1999 (South Jersey Metro section only)

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Christians, cocaine, and dynamite--it's going to be
the best Burt Reynolds comeback movie ever.

         
      
   
