
   
   
      
         
            Shoot Hooligans, Not Hoops

            Littleton. Springfield.
Paducah. Pearl. Jonesboro. Our once-safe schools have become slaughterhouses,
our children sitting ducks for any pot-smoking, Marilyn Manson-listening,
trench-coated deviant with a grievance.

            President Clinton and
his Democrat allies will undoubtedly exploit the tragedy of Littleton to push
for still more restrictions on the constitutional right to bear arms. Any day
now, you should expect to hear Clinton and lackeys proposing to expand
"gun-free school zones," the supposedly "safe" areas around schools where guns
are banned. (Given recent history, perhaps they should be called "school-free
gun zones.")

            It's time to recognize the naiveté of such legislation, a
foolishness that has turned our schools into killing grounds. National Rifle
Association President Charlton Heston wisely declared this week that the
presence of an armed guard might have saved the lives of Columbine High School
students. And Gov. Jesse Ventura pointed out that the presence of "someone who
was armed" could have "stabilized" the situation. As usual, Moses and the Body
were on target, but they didn't go far enough. As it turns out, there was a
security guard at Columbine, but a single, lightly armed person is not
sufficient deterrence. American schools don't just need several armed security
guards or even armed teachers. They need armed students. Immediately, before
another student fires another shot, Congress should pass the Right To Carry
Concealed Weapons in the Classroom Act of 1999.

            There is no disputing:
When guns in the classroom are outlawed, only outlaws in the classroom have
guns. President Clinton calls our gun-free schools "safe zones," but this is a
perverted idea of safety: Law-abiding students are defenseless while predatory
juvenile delinquents, armed to the teeth, are free to roam. Why do you think
Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold chose Columbine High for murder? Because they
knew their victims would be unarmed! But they would not have dared to invade
that school had they known they would be confronted by well-trained,
well-prepared, and well-armed classmates. Studies have proven that society is
safer when law-abiding citizens carry concealed weapons. Our schools will be,
too.

            Not every student has to carry a concealed weapon. It is,
of course, a matter of personal choice. But any child who is willing--whether
she's 18 or 15 or even 8--should be free to arm herself and walk the halls of
her school without fear. If our teens and pre-teens are old enough to kill--and
the schoolyard massacres have proved that--they're certainly old enough to
defend themselves. Let's put classroom safety in the hands--and the
holsters--of those who need it most.

         
      
   
