
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Please settle an ongoing dispute between my
husband and me. My husband believes it is OK to floss his teeth while driving
his car. (I am not making this up.) His teeth are very nice, but I believe this
activity should be restricted to the privacy of the bathroom only. He does not
see a problem doing this in public. Please respond.
            

            
               Sincerely,
            

            

               --Mrs. Floss
            

            Dear Mrs.,

            Prudie hesitates to ask
what he is steering the car with. Flossing is not a one-handed maneuver. You
are correct that it is not an activity meant for public viewing but, more
important, seeing to one's dental hygiene while driving a car poses a threat to
oneself, as well as to others. Do tell Mr. Floss that Prudie implores him to
find four minutes to do his admirable oral upkeep when he is outside of his
automobile.

            
--Prudie, nervously

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I usually agree with your advice 100 percent,
but there were two cases where I'd have suggested something different. I wonder
if we actually disagree, or if my solutions just didn't occur to you.
            

            
               For the woman put off by her old , I agree that
the best solution would be for the roommate to change her ways, but leveling
with her would more than likely end the friendship. It sounds as if things are
just fine as long as your correspondent doesn't have to visit her friend's
house. So, why not just develop a convenient "cat allergy"? The white lie is a
time-honored solution for situations like this.
            

            
               And for "," the
person who wants to keep weight off but can't control what's served at dinner
parties, it's only good manners to eat what your host serves you--with gusto
and gratitude. You can fast the next day. (Well, OK, one bowl of Special-K with
skim milk.) Just a thought or, rather, two.
            

            

               --I'm a Southerner and Manners Are Our Thing
            

            Dear I'm,

            Thank you for being a Prudie. White lies are,
indeed, meant for situations like this, but in the case of "Nauseously Yours,"
there is the chance that straight shooting would be of real help to the
roommate living in filth.

            As for scarfing down
whatever party fare is offered, Prudie will split the difference with you.
Granted, one can't get into terrible trouble with an indulgence now and then,
assuming one is eating conscientiously, but to inhale a whole meal of rich food
is counterproductive. Let's say that when at a dinner party where the sky's the
limit--calorie-wise--it is permissible to treat oneself to something
particularly wonderful ... which of course would involve small tastes of
everything, wouldn't it?

            
--Prudie, moderately

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I'd like to rely on
your unwavering good taste and style to answer a fashion question. Does the
rule of no white clothing before Memorial Day and after Labor Day still apply?
I learned at a very young age that dressing in white clothing before Memorial
Day or after Labor Day was inappropriate. Are the standards still alive, or are
we living under the rule of the "casual Friday" ilk that has pervaded the
standards of dress?
            

            

               --Waiting on Hat Pins and Darning Needles for Your Reply
            

            Dear Wait,

            Prudie supposes that the
calendar's rules regarding white are still operative for the old guard. Even
for them, however, fashion has weighed in with a wild card: winter white. To be
perfectly candid with you though, Prudie's own style sense veers toward the
more individual: Wear what is flattering and what you like. (This is why no one
has seen Prudie's knees in eons.)

            
--Prudie, sartorially

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Whatever happened to courtesy? When I am out and
about, whether getting food or shopping for other goods, I seem to encounter
clerks who equate "There you go" with "Thank you." I can't tell you how many
times I have heard "There you go" as I am handed my change, or my bag, with no
thanks given. "There you go" seems to imply "Get the hell out," whereas a
thank-you is an appreciation of my helping to keep the staff employed.
            

            
               I am not some crotchety old fool. I have worked
retail for several years myself, and I say, "Thank you" because I realize that
if I do not act appreciatively, the customer may well go on down the
road!
            

            
               Thank you for you
time.
            

            

               --Courteous Carol
            

            Dear Court,

            My dear, with all due respect, Prudie thinks you
have the wrong take on this. Actually, Prudie finds "There you go" to be a
rather chipper bon voyage at the end of one's transaction. Have you
noticed how certain phrases seem to take hold? Like "Have a nice day" (which
Prudie happens to loathe). "There you go" is simply one more evolution of our
spoken language ... perhaps meant to refresh commonly said things.

            You are correct, of
course, that a thank-you is always appropriate, but that does not mean a
substitute phrase is improper. Prudie, frankly, cannot fathom how you've
decided that "There you go" is code for "Get the hell out." All you can do,
really, is not go there, yourself, when speaking.

            --Prudie,
linguistically

         
      
   
