
   
   
      
         
            No. 222: &quot;Zanimax&quot;

            

               The Iranian daily newspaper Zan (Farsi for "woman") and the
American movie company Miramax (English for "Big Mira"?) are in trouble for
similar offenses. What?
            

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Wednesday's
Question (No. 221)--"No Carrying On":
            

            

               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Fill in the
blank on this comment by State Sen. Harry Wiggins, jubilant over the voting on
a new proposal: "Missourians do not want __________ carried into football games
and bars and
schools."
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            "To be.
We like it at home."-- Kate Wing
            

            
"Scantily clad state senators."-- Heather Williams ( Dan Simon and
Floyd Elliot had similar answers.)

            
"Footballs, beers, and textbooks. What? Really? Well there goes my
re-election!"-- Daniel Radosh
            

            
"Chihuahuas ... or was it hand guns? No: Chihuahuas with handguns!"-- Tam
Doey
            

            "The
lifeless bodies of our vanquished foes."-- Michael Roche
            

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

             

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            One of the most
exhausting lessons of adolescence is discovering that just because you've
settled an issue in your head--i.e., racism is bad; my history teacher is such
a liar--does not mean it is settled in the actual world. Racism persists and
you must still write your report on the opening of the American frontier. One
of the most exhausting lessons of adulthood is discovering that just because
you've settled an issue in the actual world--i.e., abortion is legal; my
computer is fixed--doesn't mean you won't have to keep settling it again and
again. History is not a synonym for progress. No issue is ever settled. No case
is ever closed. And so, even after the death of Jesse James, the people of
Missouri must vote on the same policies over and over. But at least I won't
have to write an essay about it on my balky computer, and that's progress. Or
decrepitude.

            
               Unconcealed
Answer
            

            "Missourians do not want guns carried into
football games and bars and schools."

            Tuesday, despite a $3.7
million campaign by the National Rifle Association, Missouri voted down an
attempt to lift the ban on concealed weapons. Forty-three states currently
permit concealed weapons.

            
               Jon Delfin's Inside
the Industry Extra: M*A*S*H
               
            

            I'm told that every now
and then a memo would arrive from above, demanding a TV Guide -type
precis for the next episode. Since the episode might well not have been written
yet, they had a stockpile of generic descriptions: "It's winter at the 4077,
and all hell breaks loose in the OR" One week, hearing that CBS had begun
developing a new show, Trapper John, M.D. starring Pernell Roberts, they
sent in "Hawkeye receives word from home that Trapper John is dead." CBS didn't
see the humor in this.

            
               Ultradull Weekend
Bonus Question
            

            A big third-of-a-page ad on the op-ed page of
Wednesday's New York Times criticizing military procurement policies was
placed by Business
Leaders for Sensible Priorities, perhaps the most boring name ever devised
for an organization. Separately, each of these words is dense with tedium, but
collectively ... Sorry ... where was I? Must have dozed off.

            Participants are invited
to create an even more torpid name for an even more lackluster
organization.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Books--so illiterate are those illiterate
Midwesterners, they're just illiterate.

         
      
   
