
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Intellectuals Go
to War
            

            NATO's intervention in
Kosovo has made strange bedfellows among European and American intellectuals.
In England, left-wing British playwright Harold Pinter has pronounced the
bombing "misjudged, miscalculated, disastrous," and conservative historian
Niall Ferguson scoffs at the campaign's inadequacy in a Financial Times
op-ed ("Bleeding Hearts and Bloody Messes"). Elsewhere, opponents of the
bombing include Germaine Greer, Pierre Bourdieu, Christa Wolf, Regis Debray,
and Noam Chomsky. Germany's Hans Magnus Enzensberger, who advocates arming the
Kosovo Liberation Army, begs to differ: "Europeans themselves are not merely
capable of intervening [in this conflict], we are morally obligated to do so."
Novelist Günter Grass supports the NATO campaign and regrets only that it did
not come sooner, and he is seconded by Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Zizek, who
denounces the hypocrisy he sees in the Belgrade demonstrations against NATO
bombs. "In Belgrade," he writes, "people are defiantly dancing on the streets
while 300 kilometers to the south, a genocide of African proportions is taking
place." Serb historian and former Harvard research fellow Aleksa Djilas told
the Financial Times that although he would never have fought with the
Serbs in Bosnia, if drafted now, "I would probably not resist."

            
               Service
Economy
            

            California Gov. Gray
Davis has proposed community service as a requirement for graduating from the
state's public universities and colleges. California State University at
Monterey Bay already gives students course credit for performing two semesters
of mandatory public service. Maryland was the first state to require community
service from its high-school students, following the Clinton administration's
emphasis on public service in the early '90s. Who could object to such
civic-mindedness? In response to students' objections, the Ayn Rand Institute
offers an internship of its own: Participating students earn their community
service credit by working against volunteerism.

            
               This Class Is
Rated "R"
            

            A University of Arizona
student who enrolled in a class called "Women in Literature" was dismayed to
discover that the class addressed gay and lesbian issues. As a result, the
Arizona legislature is now considering warning labels for courses with
potentially "objectionable" content. Says Arizona Regents President Judy
Gignac, "The students are our customers and they are paying to be taught. They
need to know in advance what it is they're paying for." Some proponents of such
course labels have suggested classes be rated like TV programs--but, Gignac
points out, "that might increase enrollment in some classes" with particularly
racy ratings.

            
               The Kitschy
Holocaust
            

            Is there a difference
between denying the value of Holocaust scholarship and denying the Holocaust
itself? One might think so. But when Commentary Senior
Editor Gabriel Schoenfeld published scathing attacks on the kitschiness and
obscurity of contemporary Holocaust scholarship in Commentary and in the
New York Times , he found out otherwise. Steven Feinstein, acting
director of the Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies at the
University of Minnesota, wrote on an e-mail discussion list that Schoenfeld
"has done as much damage as deniers." The Rev. Franklin Littell, an organizer
of a Holocaust studies conference, accused Schoenfeld of "subtle denial." In
response, Schoenfeld says, "Littell is not merely using vicious rhetoric
against a detractor, but engaging in behavior that itself undermines the cause
of Holocaust remembrance."

            
               The Polish
Revolution
            

            On the 10 th
anniversary of the liberation of Eastern Europe, we often refer to that event
in shorthand as the "fall of the Berlin Wall." But should we refer instead to
"the beginning of the Polish round-table negotiations"? The University of
Michigan thinks so, and on the weekend of April 9, it gathered an array of
dissidents, Communists, and priests to make the case. Most of the conference
attendees, including Solidarity leader Adam Michnik and Poland's President Alexander Kwasniewski,
participated in the 1989 talks that led to a Solidarity government. At the
conference, they defended their activities against numerous
critics: Solidarity leaders denied they made too many compromises; priests
denied they had been co-opted by the party; and Communists denied they had
committed treason. "We were not servile to the Soviet Union," said Poland's
last Communist Party prime minister, "we were helpless before that huge force."
Several Polish-American groups had planned to protest the conference, upset
that the university was paying to put former Communist leaders up in fine
hotels. In fact, the protests did not occur.

            
               "I'd Like To Thank
Members of the Academy"
            

            Academia's most popular
one-year fellowship, the Guggenheim, has been awarded to dozens of academics, including
the University of Chicago's Neil Harris, who will research the history of the
American urban newspaper building, and Williams College's Richard Stamelman,
who will study the literature and culture of perfume. Meanwhile, the New York
Public Library's brand new Center for Scholars and Writers unveiled its first class of
fellows, each of whom will receive a $50,000 stipend and an office in the
venerable library. Chosen under the auspices of the center's director,
historian Peter Gay, the fellows include cultural critic Paul Berman, at work
on a literary and political history of the Nicaraguan revolution; technology
historian Gregory Dreicer, who will study the architecture of racial
segregation; and historian Marion Kaplan, who studies the daily life of Jews in
Nazi Germany.

            
               For Whom the Calls
Toll
            

            George Mason University
has dropped three star runners from the track team for the wrongful use of
campus phones--and fired their women's track coach, Norm Gordon. According to
the Washington Post , assistant coach Joe Showers allowed three members
of GMU's women's track team--all of whom hail from Jamaica--to make
long-distance personal calls from his office. After a routine audit of the
departmental phone bill, GMU discovered the calls and found them to be in
violation of NCAA rules intended to curb recruitment abuses. Even if the NCAA
allows the athletes to regain their eligibility by reimbursing the school,
GMU's athletic director has decided they will not run with the team this
semester.

            

               www.nazistudent.com
            

            Students at Wofford
College in Spartanburg, S.C., staged a protest March 3 against one of their
fellow students, white supremacist Davis Wolfgang Hawke, a Web-savvy junior who
runs a neo-Nazi organization from his dorm room. Hawke is also double-majoring
in history and--sensibly enough--German. While his fellow students aren't
banding to his racist wagon, the Southern Poverty Law Center reports that Hawke
has garnered about 100 faithful adherents, most of whom are linked to him
through his Knights of Freedom Web site. The Atlanta
Journal-Constitution reports that Wofford officials don't feel they can do
much about the situation because of Hawke's First Amendment rights, but the school's dean says, "There is no
feeling here that we just say it's free speech and go the other way. The
institution has the obligation to speak out forcefully against speech that is
offensive."

            
               Honk if You Love
Honkies
            

            Meanwhile, Florida State
University psychology Professor Glayde Whitney has given David Duke his
scientific blessing. In a foreword to Duke's latest book, a 700-page autobiography judged by hate group watchers to
be the most naked statement yet of the former KKK grand wizard's racist views,
Whitney calls Duke a "seeker of truth," comparing him to Enlightenment
philosopher Voltaire and declaring his vision of racially segregated societies
to be based on "good science." The endorsement--along with the revelation that
Whitney has quietly pursued race-based research for 30 years--has provoked a
furor at FSU, which has the second-highest number of black students among the
state's public institutions. At a town meeting, FSU President Sandy D'Alemberte
declared Whitney's beliefs "obnoxious" but defended the tenured professor's
right to publish them.

            
               Look for the Union
Label
            

            Abetted by AFL-CIO outreach
campaigns, students are mobilizing in the name of labor on college campuses. On
April 16, demonstrators at Harvard, Yale, Stanford, and Kent State spoke out on
labor issues ranging from graduate student unionization, academic stipends, and
teaching loads to sweatshop abuses. At Yale, the protest was organized by the
Graduate
Employees and Students Organization, which is fighting for recognition from
university administrators. Turning out to support GESO and its recent study
claiming that 70 percent of undergraduate instruction at the college is
performed by poorly compensated graduate students and adjuncts were 500 student
activists and labor leaders, including an AFL-CIO vice president and
Nation
columnist Katha Pollitt. Meanwhile, in California, the state's Public
Employment Relations Board has ruled in favor of allowing union elections at
the seven University of California campuses by the end of the semester.

            
               Friday the Rabbi
Went to a Gay Bar
            

            Confronted by an increasingly vocal faction of
rabbinical students and liberal rabbis, New York's Jewish Theological Seminary may be
forced to reconsider its ban on admitting homosexual students. According to a
recent article in the Forward , the matter is expected to spark heated debate at the
late April meeting of the Conservative movement's religious leaders, the
Rabbinical Assembly. In 1992, citing Torah
prohibitions on homosexual acts by men, the Conservative Committee on Law
and Standards declared a ban on gays within the rabbinate. A backlash against
the ruling has been growing ever since. At the very least, Rabbi Gordon Tucker,
a former dean of the Jewish Theological Seminary told the Forward that
the Rabbinical Assembly should provide "assurances to members ... that their
sexual orientation will not be a factor in limiting their options in furthering
their careers."

         
      
   
