
   
   
      
         
            

            
Update on the
bombing of Yugoslavia : 1) Serbian forces captured three U.S. soldiers
who were patrolling the Macedonian-Serbian border. There is a dispute over
which side of the border they were on. The Serbs reportedly plan to
court-martial the soldiers. The U.S. government called the soldiers' capture
"illegal" and said it will hold Yugoslavia responsible for their safety. 2) A
Kosovar Albanian leader, Ibrahim Rugova, was shown on Serbian television asking
NATO to halt the bombing and meeting with Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic
to sign a document urging a "political" solution to the Kosovo conflict.
Skeptics are questioning whether Rugova has sold out or has been coerced and
whether the meeting with Milosevic was actually videotaped before the bombing.
3) Reports indicate that the bombing has begun to inconvenience Serbian
civilians and to cause shortages of supplies to Serbian forces in Kosovo. 4)
The new endgame under consideration is to bomb Serbian forces until their
capacity to fight in Kosovo is so impaired that NATO can easily recapture
Kosovo and set up an ethnic Albanian enclave under NATO protection.
(4/2/99)
            

            
Four white
New York City police officers were arrested on charges of second-degree
murder for firing 41 bullets at Amadou Diallo, an unarmed black man. He
died of 19 bullet wounds. The officers pleaded not guilty, and their attorneys
said the officers had fired their weapons in the "reasonable belief" that they
were in danger. The case has triggered protests in New York, passionate
defenses of law enforcement from Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and other supporters,
and a national debate over police tactics in black and Hispanic neighborhoods.
Johnnie Cochran and Barry Scheck are preparing a civil suit against New York
City once the criminal trial ends. The high-minded spin: It's a conflict
between public safety and civil liberties. The cynical spin: It's a conflict
between whites and blacks. (4/2/99)
            

            
The FBI is
tracking down the creator of the Melissa computer virus . The virus,
which replicates itself in e-mail messages it automatically transmits from
computers it has penetrated, infected more than 100,000 computers this week,
causing significant problems throughout the Internet. Federal agents have now
confiscated a computer in Orlando, Fla., that may contain clues to the virus's
author, and they have secured a court order to obtain apparently confidential
information from America Online, since an AOL account seems to have been used
to launch the virus onto the Internet. (4/2/99)
            

            
The Dow
Jones industrial average closed above 10,000 for the first time.
This marked a 30 percent rise in the last seven months and a 300 percent rise
since 1990. Newspapers wheeled out prepackaged articles boasting about the
breadth of stock ownership among U.S. households and the growing dominance of
U.S. companies in the world economy. The pessimistic spin: Asia and Latin
America are still a mess; U.S. stock valuations are completely out of whack;
the Internet investment mania will burst any day now; and the Dow will
collapse. The optimistic spin: That's what pessimists have been saying for a
decade. (4/1/99)
            

            
The University
of Connecticut won its first NCAA men's basketball championship . UConn
beat the consensus favorite, Duke, with outstanding defense and hot shooting.
Although observers agreed it was one of the best-played finals in recent
memory, the TV audience fell to a record low. Sportswriters credited UConn's
victory to its refusal to be intimidated by Duke's reputation. The New York
Times spin: Duke's defeat demonstrates the price of arrogance. The
counterspin: UConn's victory demonstrates the power of arrogance.
(4/1/99)
            

            
New York
authorities are sorting out an interracial embryo mix-up . A white woman
and a black woman went to the same clinic for in vitro fertilization. The black
woman didn't get pregnant, but the white woman gave birth to two children, one
white and one black, who are now three months old. Once the black child's
parentage was ascertained, the black couple sued the clinic. This week, the
white couple relinquished the black child to the black couple. The spins: 1)
What is in vitro fertilization doing to our concept of parenthood? 2) Would the
media be making such a fuss over this story if all the kids and parents were
the same color? 3) Would the mix-up have been discovered if all the kids and
parents were the same color? 4) How often do these mix-ups go unnoticed?
(4/1/99)
            

            
Dr. Jack

               Kevorkian was convicted of second-degree murder . He faces 10 years to
life in prison. The shallow analysis: The case was open and shut, since
Kevorkian taped the incident (in which he administered a lethal injection to a
terminally ill man, with the man's consent) and had the tape aired on 60
Minutes . The sophisticated analysis: Kevorkian tried to make the trial a
political debate over assisted suicide, but the judge and jury refused to go
along. Kevorkian's spin: He's a martyr for the assisted suicide movement. The
conservative spin: His conviction proves that assisted suicide is murder. The
dull liberal spin: He's an embarrassment to the assisted suicide movement and
good riddance to him. The clever liberal spin: His conviction shows that if
people can't get assisted suicide legally, they'll turn to murderers such as
Kevorkian. (3/29/99)
            

            
The navigator
of the Marine jet involved in last year's Italian ski lift accident, Capt.
Joseph Schweitzer, is pleading guilty to obstruction and conspiracy
charges. The charges relate to his alleged destruction of an on-board videotape
that recorded the accident. The interesting question now is whether the plea
deal means that the navigator will testify against the pilot (who was acquitted
of manslaughter in the incident by a military court several weeks ago) on
similar obstruction and conspiracy charges. (3/29/99)
            

            
An Ohio town has
banned the use of cell phones while driving . The ordinance allows
exceptions if the car is in "park" or if the driver keeps both hands on the
wheel (e.g., by using a speakerphone). It was prompted by an accident caused by
a cell phone user who wasn't paying attention to the road. This is believed to
be the first such ordinance in the nation. Similar legislation has reportedly
been considered in other states. (3/29/99)
            

            

               For more Kosovo coverage, click .
            

         
      
   
