
   
   
      
         
            <SPAN class=470222513-07051999>Blowhards and Blowups</SPAN>

            
               
                  New
Republic , May 24
            

            The
cover story questions Sen. John McCain's beatification by the press. His
oft-recounted experiences in Vietnam and well-publicized stances for campaign
finance reform and against tobacco make him seem noble, rugged, and
enlightened. But the media have ignored his unsavory side, which includes
skirt-chasing and fervent social conservatism ("he's a thousand percent
anti-gay," says Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass.). ... A story gauges the intellectual heft of the presidential
candidates' platforms. Too-vague Bradley touts "lofty ideas but no proposals,"
too-specific Gore hawks "a profusion of proposals that obscure his big goals,"
and too-vague, too-unspecific Bush hasn't shared "either goal or proposal."
... A piece says that the White House's response to the China
intelligence scandal epitomizes Clinton's dangerous tendency "to substitute
damage control for foreign policy." The administration has brushed off the
charges with the same deft techniques--the dodge, the denial, and the claim of
irrelevancy--that characterized its handling of Flytrap.

            

               
                  Economist , May 8
            

            The
cover editorial, "A Bungled War," asserts that NATO should scrap its initial
goals of establishing autonomy and democracy in Kosovo, and settle for a
Bosnia-style peacekeeping force. Milosevic is despicable, but his removal would
further destabilize Yugoslavia. ... A story diagnoses what ails the World Trade Organization:
too much legalism, too little leadership, and the heavy new burden of
monitoring trade issues (such as food regulation and environmental protection)
that were once domestic concerns of individual countries. ... The
magazine lauds a recent crop of video games that emphasize strategy
and good judgment over violent combat. Even though the games are populated by
assassins and commandos, they are not excessively bloodthirsty; one even
subtracts points for gratuitous kills.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine
               , May 9
            

            The
cover story profiles prodigal mogul Mike Ovitz. After trying his hand at
Disney, philanthropy, Broadway, and professional sports, he is returning to the
pinnacle of the Hollywood hierarchy through his new Artists Management Group,
which purports to give clients more control of their "product." The piece
retreads his feud with his former company, Creative Artists Agency. Ovitz is
sure to make tons of money and infuriate his former colleagues, but there is no
guarantee that this will satisfy his gargantuan appetite for power.
... A piece trails Vice President Al Gore on his quest to
raise $55 million by the 2000 convention. Gore has been tending his network of
money men all his political life, but his focus on fund raising might
overshadow his campaign message. (Evidence that this is already happening:
articles like this one.)

            
               
                  Vanity
Fair , June 1999
            

            A
profile asks if hedge fund manager and journalist Jim Cramer is a financial
wizard or just an attention-happy blowhard. From a journalist: "He really knows
what he's talking about." From an investment banker: He's "a very, very good
self-promoter" and "entertainment" only. ... The magazine excerpts a new
oral biography of the members of Monty Python's Flying Circus. Eric Idle
expresses relief that the all-male troupe had "no girls to sulk or feel left
out," while John Cleese admits that they almost called the show Bunn Wackett
Buzzard Stubble and Boot . ... The cover story lambastes journalists
for pawing through Julia Robert's personal life, but reveals her shoe size, bra
size, and romantic history anyway.

            
               
                  The
Nation , May 17
            

            Katha
Pollitt announces her resignation from the magazine's masthead, though she will
continue to write her column. She was chagrined at The Nation 's recent
publication of a column by conservative education activist Ron Unz arguing that
liberal education reform has been an unmitigated failure. (See a previous for
details). ... The cover story asserts that Kenneth Starr's indictment of Julie
Hiatt Steele is based on unbelievable assertions by Kathleen Willey, who
"choreographed" her allegations to make them more "marketable." ... A
piece profiles new for-profit prisons specializing in geriatric felons and
worries that they will cut services to bolster profits.

            
               
                  ARTnews ,
May 1999
            

            Yet
another best-of-century list: the 25 most influential artists. The magazine's
panel makes mostly predictable choices, including sculptor Constantin Brancusi,
Surrealist Salvador Dalí, Abstract Expressionist Willem de Kooning, architect
Le Corbusier, Neoplasticist Piet Mondrian, photographer Man Ray, Impressionist
Claude Monet, and "probably the most influential" Henri Matisse. The unusual
picks include Robert Smithson and Donald Judd. Surprising omissions: Mark
Rothko and Alexander Calder.

            
               
                  Time and
Newsweek , May 10
            

            The
newsweeklies' cover packages pander to anxious parents. Newsweek shows
them "the secret life of teens," while Time tells them
how to protect Web-surfing kids from online perils. Newsweek 's paranoid
cover package ("it's Lord of the Flies on a vast scale") urges early childhood intervention for difficult toddlers and
"zero tolerance for bullies." Time 's cover instructs parents to check
the ratings listed on video game boxes, block offensive content on their
computers, and click the "history" button on their browser to see where their
kids have been. A handy foldout "quality
meter" rates games and Internet sites. (Any 12-year-old could predict the
results: educational software gets a "wholesome"; sex and hate sites are
"gruesome.") ... Tipper Gore beseeches Time readers to attend to youngsters' mental
health ("If we knew a child had a broken arm, we would take that child to an
emergency room.") ... 
               Time reports that lawyers are
already cozying up to the parents of slain Columbine High students. Possible
litigation targets: the killers' parents and the local police. Parents of the
children killed in West Paducah, Ky., have already filed suit against the
producers of The Basketball Diaries , the film said to have inspired the
rampage there.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
                  , May 10
            

            An
article asserts that Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic,
supported by a network of student volunteers, is winning an Internet propaganda
war. The volunteers argue politely in chat rooms, maintain a sophisticated Web
site, and encourage activism by Serbian expats. In contrast, a Pentagon
official says that American anti-Serb radio programming reaches "an area the
size of my desk."... A piece explains a new Republican plan to revamp Social Security,
savvily designed to pre-empt criticism from both conservatives and liberals.
The plan gives workers a 2 percent income-tax rebate to be invested in a stock
market fund. At retirement, you choose a payout based on that fund's
performance or on a set of guaranteed benefits. ... In the
cover story, U.S. News becomes the latest publication to warn about the declining effectiveness of antibiotics. Some are
prescribed so heavily that bacteria are growing resistant to them. Children,
more susceptible to microbes than adults, are in the most danger.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker , May 10
            

            A
piece describes how the dog genome is being combed for clues about human
genetic diseases. Because dogs are deliberately inbred, genetic diseases are
easier to isolate and track. One researcher--aided by a team of 27 sleepy
Doberman pinschers--has already targeted the gene for narcolepsy.
... An article profiles J.S.G. Boggs, an artist whose medium
is counterfeited money. Boggs creates exquisite mockups of real bills and
convinces his patrons to use them as real cash. He claims to have "spent"
upward of $1 million in drawn money. He has been exonerated on counterfeiting
charges in Britain, Australia, and the United States.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard , May 10
            

            The
cover story canonizes Littleton victim Cassie Bernall, the born-again Christian
teen-ager killed after declaring her faith in God. Her death is called a
divinely ordained act, intended to inspire others to spread the gospel.
... A piece lauds Al Gore's response to the Littleton
shooting. He has become a "born-again Hollywood basher" and was the only
presidential candidate to deliver a compelling moral response to the shooting.
... An article reminds readers that the next president will
likely fill three Supreme Court seats. ... An editorial berates congressional Republicans for last week's
"deeply irresponsible" isolationist votes on Kosovo.

         
      
   
