
   
   
      
         
            Endgame Over

            

               Kosovo update: Serbia approved a peace deal proposed by the
European Union and Russia. The plan mandates a withdrawal of all Serb troops
from Kosovo, to be followed by a halt in NATO bombing and the return of the
dispossessed Kosovars under the supervision of a unified, allied-led
peacekeeping force. The Kosovo Liberation Army will be "demilitarized," and
Kosovo will eventually become autonomous but not independent. Click here to read the text of the agreement. NATO's
taciturn official reaction: Bombing won't stop until the Yugoslavs actually
withdraw. NATO's jubilant unofficial reaction: Victory is ours. The consensus
political spin from newspapers both and domestic : Milosevic's capitulation vindicates
President Clinton's bombing-only strategy. The counterspins to all the huzzahs:
1) The KLA will never agree to its own emasculation or abandon its goal of
Kosovar independence. 2) By bowing out now, Milosevic will retain his hold on
power.

            

               China suppressed commemoration of the 10 th anniversary of
the Tiananmen Square uprising. The police arrested dissidents,
disbanded a public memorial service, and excised all mention of the anniversary
from the media. The Chinese spin: President Jiang Zemin made no mention of the
date's significance but stressed the importance of "stability above all else."
To survey the current American spins on China, see this week's "" column by
David Plotz.

            

               Japan legalized the Pill. Health officials approved birth
control pills after several decades of debate. Women's groups asked why it has
taken so long. Answer 1: The Japanese government is hostile to women's
concerns. Answer 2: The Japanese government is hostile to foreign medicines in
general, even Tylenol isn't on the market yet. Answer 3: Then why was Viagra
legalized after only six months?

            

               NBA playoffs news: New York Knicks center Patrick Ewing will
miss the rest of the NBA playoffs because of a torn Achilles' tendon. The
Knicks and the Indiana Pacers have split the first two games of their NBA
semifinals series. The injury deprives Ewing of his last best chance to play
for the NBA championship, which he has never won during his 14-year career. The
sentimental spin: The Knicks can't afford to lose Ewing's fire and courage.
(He's been playing hurt for months.) The realistic spin: The Knicks are
younger, faster, and better without him. The cynical spin: This is the first
interesting story of the playoffs.

            

               South Africa held its second free elections. The unsurprising
news: The African National Congress will win handily and will appoint Thabo
Mbeki, the current deputy president and Nelson Mandela's successor-designate,
to the presidency. The more surprising news: The election was free of the
racial violence that accompanied the first all-race elections in 1994. Read the
Washington Post 's two-part overview of the new South Africa here .

            

               The Federal government will investigate the marketing of violent
entertainment to children. President Clinton said the study will
explore whether or not media companies intentionally lure young customers with
violent imagery. Why the study won't be useful: The First Amendment protects
marketers from being legally forced to tone down their pitches. Why the study
will be useful: It will give Al Gore a reply to Republican accusations that the
administration is soft on Hollywood.

            

               Merrill Lynch will introduce an online discount trading
operation . Traditional trades through Merrill currently cost up to
hundreds of dollars; the online fee will be $29.95. Previously, the brokerage
house had loudly vowed to stay off-line and boasted that its customers would
cough up fat commissions in exchange for handholding and top-flight financial
analysis. Spin 1) Merrill's move proves that the Internet is transforming Wall
Street. Spin 2) Merrill's late arrival proves how slowly the Internet is
transforming Wall Street. Spin 3) By the time the operation is up in December,
Merrill will already have lost out to scrappier, more nimble competitors. Spin
4) Merrill has already lost out to scrappier, more nimble competitors. Spin 5)
Merrill's brokers will revolt at the prospect of reduced commissions.

            

               Hackers hijacked several government Web sites--including those of the
Senate, White House, and FBI--freezing or replacing official content.
(Click here to see the hackers' mischief posted on the Senate
home page.) Reportedly, the vandalism was in retaliation for FBI raids on
suspected hackers. The hacker community's reaction to the press: vigorous
denial of wrongdoing. The reaction within hacking circles: vigorous jockeying
for credit.

            

               Russia will abandon its Mir space station because the Russian space
program is broke. Set on cruise control, Mir will eventually burn up
on re-entry. The Russian reaction: dejection and wounded pride. NASA's
reaction: relief that Mir won't drain financing from the international space
station, along with the usual orbital traffic worries about a large abandoned
satellite.

         
      
   
