
   
   
      
         
             Why You're So Screwed Up

            Let's stipulate that you
are unique, unfathomable, singular, sui generis. Now, let's find out how to
categorize you, classify you, and sort you into a group that explains your
temperament, your career choices, the strength of your immune system, and your
ability to make up puns.

            Here follows an
admittedly random guide to four popular methods designed to explain who you
really are. I deliberately picked systems that purport to pinpoint something
intrinsic in our natures. I judged the ease of use and
applicability of each system, and since all of them illustrate their
points with the lives of famous people, I also gauged how successfully each one
explains the process by which Gandhi became Gandhi .

            
               BIRTH
ORDER
            

            Would your friends and family say you are more like:
a) Carlos the Jackal or b) Martin Luther King Jr.?; a) Phyllis Schlafly or b)
Florence Nightingale?

            According to Frank J. Sulloway, author of Born To
Rebel: Birth Order, Family Dynamics, and Creative Lives , if your loved ones
chose a), you are a typical firstborn--an achieving, status conscious,
defensive, incipient fascist terrorist. If you're a b), you are certainly a
"laterborn"--a bold, compassionate iconoclast.

            Sulloway is hardly the first to extract personality
distinctions from birth order. His twist is to use Darwinism to show how the
familial struggle among siblings for parental attention accounts for everything
in society from social rebellions to scientific revolutions. In Sulloway's
universe, firstborns are dictatorial types who just don't get it, but they're
happy to oppress freedom-loving laterborns who do. So how does Sulloway explain
that the greatest scientific revolutionary of the 20 th century,
Albert Einstein, is a firstborn? He doesn't.

            Sulloway (surprise! he's the third of four) also
thinks his findings should be applied to selecting corporate leaders. In a
nutshell: Oldests need not apply. As devoted as he is to birth order as a
personality determinant, Sulloway allows other variables to creep into his
theory to account for those rare firstborn revolutionaries. "Whenever one
encounters a firstborn radical (and family life does occasionally produce
them), such individuals are likely to have experienced substantial conflict
with a parent. Parent-offspring conflict makes honorary laterborns out of some
firstborns." This is a little like saying all men prefer dogs and all women
prefer cats. So a man with a cat is either an honorary woman, or the cat is an
honorary dog.

            
               
                  Ease of Use:
                Excellent.
You already know your own status and it's easy to ask others, "Do you have
siblings?" Sulloway also provides a 10-variable formula to measure "Your Own
Propensity To Rebel."

            
               
                  Applicability:
                As a method
of understanding yourself and others, Sulloway's theory seems rather limited,
except if you're in charge of hiring for Slobodan Milosevic.

            
               
                  Gandhi
Explanation:
                He was the youngest of four.

            

               PERSONALITY
            

            Why do people act like that? Hippocrates believed
the answer was in the balance of four bodily fluids, or humors--blood, black
bile, phlegm, and yellow bile. This notion lives on in our language today. We
all know people who are essentially hotblooded, or melancholy (which literally
means "black bile"), or phlegmatic, or who view the world with a jaundiced eye.
Plato, less interested in humans' inner states than in their behavior as
members of the state, redefined the four humors in social terms: as artisans,
guardians, rationals, and idealists. According to psychologist David Keirsey,
you are one of Plato's four types, you were born that way, you will always be
that way, and you can find out which one you are by taking the temperament
sorter quiz on his Web
site. Sample questions: When the phone rings do you: a) hurry to get it
first? or b) hope someone else will answer? Do you find visionaries and
theorists: a) somewhat annoying? or b) rather fascinating?

            Keirsey does not muck
around in your excretions in order to determine your personality. His criteria
come from Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung by way of an American mother-daughter
team named Katharine Briggs and Isabel Briggs Myers, who created the
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator. The two women translated Jung's idea that
personality is composed of four pairs of preferences--the most famous being
extroverted and introverted--and created a systematic test to discern people's
types. Keirsey has redefined these four pairs this way:

            Expressive (E) or Reserved (I)

            Observant (S) or Introspective (N)

            Tough-minded (T) or Friendly (F)

            Scheduling (J) or
Probing (P) [Probing might better be defined as looking for alternatives]

            The four sets of pairs can be matched up 16
different ways--with Keirsey organizing these into those Platonic groups of
four. For example, I'm an NT, which makes me a Rational, therefore naturally
curious, restless, and doubting. More specifically I'm an ENTP. As Keirsey
writes: "A rough draft is all they need to feel confident and ready to proceed
into action. ... [They] have been known to engage in brinkmanship with their
superiors. ... [ENTPs] like to spar verbally with their loved ones."

            OK, he nailed me. As an example of how uncanny the
type sorter can be, take Bill Clinton, who Keirsey classifies as an ESFP. In
Keirsey's book Please Understand Me II , ESFP's are described as
"inclined to be impulsive and self-indulgent, which makes them vulnerable to
seduction. ... Pleasure seems to be an end in itself ... they will do what they
feel like in the moment rather than what is good for them in the long run ...
blaming someone else if things don't turn out well. ... Intent on pleasing
everybody, [ESFPs] can appear fickle, even promiscuous, to other types." On the
other hand, maybe Clinton is just too hotblooded.

            
               
                  Ease of Use:
                Good. I
recommend taking the Temperament Sorter II and ignoring the Character Sorter,
which I found confusing and not particularly accurate.

            
               
                  Applicability:
                High. I
feel I now understand better why I keep acting that way. It's also given me the
sly sense that I know why other people are acting their way. Of course, that's
very ENTP of me.

            
               
                  Gandhi
Explanation:
                According to Keirsey, Gandhi is an Idealist (an NF),
what else? More specifically, an INFJ. "INFJs have an unusually strong desire
to contribute to the welfare of others. ... INFJs are scarce, little more than
one percent of the population, which is too bad, considering their usefulness
in the social order."

            

               INTELLIGENCE
            

            Until Harvard professor Howard Gardner came along,
intelligence was like the Soviet Union: It was large, permanent, and unified.
Then in 1983 he published his book Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple
Intelligences , which cleaved intelligence into seven components. Recently,
like a breakaway republic, Gardner has added an eighth intelligence and is
considering a ninth.

            Gardner rejects the notion that intelligence is a
"single, general capacity" that can be measured by taking a test. He believes
an intelligence is the ability to "solve problems or create products" in a way
that society values--that having it must have conferred an evolutionary
advantage to us, and that there is biological evidence for it. That is, an
intelligence can be destroyed due to brain injury, which could be called the
"man who mistook his wife for a hat" criterion. Gardner says if you excel at
one type of intelligence, it has no bearing on whether you'll be skilled at
another. Instead of burdening people with eight ways to be inadequate instead
of one, multiple intelligence advocates says the theory liberates people to
find their own set of strengths.

            The seven original intelligences are: linguistic,
musical, logical-mathematical, spatial, bodily-kinesthetic, interpersonal, and
intrapersonal (my favorite, since I have a genius for self-absorption). The
latest addition is naturalist intelligence. Gardner defines it as "the ability
to recognize and classify plants, minerals and animals." Gardner says you can
see it in action in people who know every kind of dinosaur, or sneaker, or
automobile. He is also considering adding existential intelligence, which, he
says, refers to the inclination to ask: "Who are we? Where do we come from?
What's it all about? Why do we die?" This could also be known as the "Oy
gevalt " intelligence. Since I felt that his theory left out people who
are skilled at the use of the senses of taste and smell, I lobbied him to add
culinary intelligence. Gardner wasn't biting. I decided to forgo making a pitch
for my own area of brilliance: procrastination intelligence.

            One of Gardner's missions is to apply his work to
the classroom, since he believes schools are designed by people excelling in
linguistic and logical-mathematical intelligences to reward people who share
those intelligences. He also believes that while our propensity toward certain
types of intelligence is inborn, our abilities are not fixed. Understanding our
areas of strength and weakness, he says, can provide more self-awareness and
help users move to a "higher level of skill."

            
               
                  Ease of Use:
                Fair. Gardner
says, "Common sense, self-observation, and talking to others should suffice to
tell you what is distinctive about your mind." But we want a quiz, Dr. Gardner!
One is available in the book 7 Kinds of Smart: Identifying and Developing
Your Many Intelligences , by Thomas Armstrong, which offers choices such as,
"I enjoy entertaining myself or others with tongue twisters, nonsense rhymes,
or puns" and "I find it difficult to sit still for long periods of time." The
MIDAS Web site provides descriptions of the intelligences, links to
other multiple intelligence sites, and sells multiple intelligence testing
materials (prices range from $10 to $35).

            
               
                  Applicability:
                Assessing
multiple intelligences probably has most value for schoolchildren or people who
feel they have made a wrong career choice.

            
               
                  Gandhi
Explanation:
                In Frames of Mind Gardner writes that Gandhi
exemplified interpersonal intelligence.

            
               BLOOD
TYPE
            

            What would Hippocrates think of a recent best
seller that asserted that our health, diet, and even our personality are
determined by our blood type? He would probably get to work on The Bile
Bible . But if Hippocrates were Japanese, he wouldn't be at all surprised.
They've been obsessed with blood type and personality for almost 30 years. They
also choose mates with "compatible" blood types and their corporations assemble
work teams based on blood type. Luckily, the Japanese economy died in time to
save us from the corporate bloodletting fad. Until now.

            In Eat Right for Your Type , naturopath Peter
J. D'Adamo writes that our ancient genetic heritage is represented today in the
four human blood groups--O, A, B, and AB--and that we must follow the
nutritional dictates that evolution laid down. He says Type O is the most
ancient blood group, the one of the carnivorous big-game hunter, the
self-reliant, risk-taking optimist. A later mutation is Type A, he writes, that
of people adapting to an agrarian diet, who were cooperative, law-abiding, yet
high-strung. Next came Type B from the Mongolian nomads, the most flexible and
creative of the blood types. Finally, a modern quirk, is the rare AB, people
who are somewhat confused, edgy, sensitive, yet charismatic. According to
D'Adamo, eat the right foods for your type and your immune system will be
strengthened and you'll lose weight.

            Unfortunately, D'Adamo's understanding of human
origins is, according to Dr. Eric Meikle of the Institute of Human Origins at
Arizona State University, "completely worthless." According to Meikle, there is
no evidence that Type O is the earliest blood type--quite the opposite since A
and B occur in chimpanzees. Nor is it likely that humans went from being
primarily carnivores to omnivores. Among living hunter-gatherers, he says, most
of their calories come from vegetable matter, because bagging game is
difficult. "People who are able to eat the most meat are agriculturists," says
Meikle. "They keep [animals], raise them, and eat them."

            Not surprisingly, this kind of information is of
little interest when you've got a new companion volume ( Cook Right for Your
Type ) to your best seller. Greg Kelly, a naturopath who works in D'Adamo's
practice says, "It's not a productive way for me to spend my time debating with
people who have a different belief system. We try to help sick people get
better."

            
               
                  Ease of Use:
                Ouch. If you
know your blood type, it is easy. If you don't, march down to the Red Cross,
donate a pint, and they'll tell you.

            
               
                  Applicability:
                Scientific
questions aside, I'm an AB (OK, OK, I am charismatic), and I'm not
following any diet that encourages me to eat a lot of snails.

            
               
                  Gandhi Explanation:
                None.
But D'Adamo's promotional materials do quote Elizabeth Hurley (Type O), in a
Cosmopolitan interview, saying she read D'Adamo's "absurd book,"
followed his plan, and "lost an astounding amount of weight."

         
      
   
