
   
   
      
         
            Yugo Home 

            Ever since the United
States began contemplating doing something about war and ethnic cleansing in
the collapsing state of Yugoslavia in 1991, all sides have invoked history as a
guide to action. Those who opposed involvement in Bosnia in the early '90s--and
who doubt that NATO can bring peace to Kosovo today--argue that the long record
of intractable ethnic tension among the Balkan peoples means we should stay
out. Any settlement, they say, is doomed to be temporary. Robert Kaplan's book
Balkan Ghosts , which advances this thesis regarding Bosnia, reportedly
convinced President Clinton to steer clear of military action there for a
time.

            Interventionists also
invoke history. They note the longstanding claim of ethnic Albanians to the
territory of Kosovo dating back to 1200 B.C., when the Albanians' supposed
ancestors, the Illyrians, settled there. This ancient history forms the basis
of demands for self-determination on the part of the long-suffering Albanian
Kosovars. But the Serbs, too, stake a historical claim. Their Slavic forebears
migrated to Kosovo around A.D. 500, and they contend that Serbs have lived
there ever since.

            In fact, each of these assertions is subject to
qualification, as is made clear in Noel Malcolm's masterly (but misnamed)
Kosovo: A Short History (my main source along with Hugh Poulton's The
Balkans: Minorities and States in Conflict ). The tie of today's Albanian
Kosovars to the ancient Illyrians is fairly attenuated. And while Slavs did
move into the area around 500, when the Bulgarian Empire conquered the Balkans,
the Serbs didn't gain control of Kosovo until the 12 th century, when
a dynasty of their leaders known as the Nemanjids invaded it after a period of
Byzantine rule.

            For two centuries the
Nemanjids basked in their Balkan kingdom. Serb nationalists today are fond of
noting that in 1389 it was in Kosovo that the Serbian Prince Lazar and his
armies made their last stand against the invading Ottoman Empire at the Battle
of Kosovo. They're less likely to note that the Albanians of Kosovo fought
alongside them. (Explicit references to the Albanian people as opposed to the
Illyrians begin to appear around the 11 th century.)

            During Turkey's 500-year rule, most of Kosovo's
Albanians--and Albania's Albanians, also subjects of the Ottoman
Empire--converted to Islam. The Serbs remained Orthodox Christians. That may be
one reason that the Serbs sought independence first. In 1804 they rose up and
in 1828 broke free. Kosovo, however, remained largely content under Turkish
rule. Serbs, believing that Kosovo still rightfully belonged to them, did
briefly conquer it in 1877 when, along with Russia, the new Serbian state made
war on Turkey. But under the Russian-Ottoman armistice a year later, Serbia was
forced to withdraw.

            At this point, the
Albanians--of both Kosovo and Albania proper--commenced their so-called
"national awakening." A group called the League of Prizren, named for the
Kosovo town where it met, lobbied for autonomy within the Ottoman Empire. A
generation later, this movement flowered into insurrection, as Albanians
throughout the western pocket of the Balkans revolted. Albania secured
statehood in 1912, but before the status of Kosovo could be resolved, the
entire region was rocked, in quick succession by the First Balkan War (1912),
the Second Balkan War (1913) and, for good measure, World War I (1914-18).

            First to invade Kosovo in these years were the Serbs. The
Serbs were knocked out by the Austrians, who were knocked out by the French.
The French handed the province back to their allies the Serbs. After the war,
the Allies, following Wilsonian ideals of self-determination, straightened up
Europe into tidy nation-states. With minimal thought on the part of the
mapmakers, Kosovo was folded into Serbia, which joined five neighboring Balkan
territories to form the new state of Yugoslavia. Albania appealed to the Allies
for control of Kosovo but, considered an insignificant state, was rebuffed in
deference to Serbian claims.

            As the largest republic
in the multinational state, Serbia dominated Yugoslavia. Its capital of
Belgrade, for example, was the nation's capital too. Under Serbian rule, Kosovo
again became a battleground. In the late 19 th century, Serbian
nationalists had built up national myths about the heroics of Prince Lazar and
cast Kosovo's status as a Jerusalem-like holy land populated with Orthodox
religious shrines. Throughout the 1920s and '30s, the central government in
Belgrade pushed Albanians out of the region and moved Serbs in--efforts the
Albanian majority resisted, often to their peril.

            In World War II, Kosovo again resembled Europe's Grand
Central Station. The Axis powers rolled in and carved up the region: Albania's
Fascist government, headed by a puppet of Mussolini's, seized the biggest
chunk, while Bulgaria and Germany each occupied a strip. Communist partisans
retook the province in 1944, and when the war ended, the partisan leader Josip
Broz Tito became dictator of the reconstituted Yugoslav federation. The
Communists considered ceding Kosovo to Albania but instead decided that it
should revert to its antebellum status quo. They deemed Kosovo not an
autonomous republic but a province of Serbia.

            In the name of Yugoslav unity, Tito suppressed most
assertions of ethnic identity. He jailed or killed thousands of Albanian
Kosovars and banned Albanian-language publications. But he was, to some degree,
an equal opportunity tyrant: He also halted Serbian efforts to settle Kosovo.
In 1968, with uprisings sweeping the globe, student protests triggered a wave
of demands for greater Kosovar autonomy. Tito acceded to a series of reforms,
culminating in a new Yugoslav Constitution in 1974, which gave Kosovo control
over much of its internal affairs. That year marked the high point for Kosovar
aspirations to independence, and it remains the benchmark for NATO's demand at
Rambouillet for a restoration of Kosovo's "pre-1989" autonomy.

            Tito died in 1980. The
next year, Albanian Kosovar students erupted again, with some Kosovars
clamoring for republichood. Belgrade, no longer restrained by Tito's aversion
to exacerbating ethnic conflict, cracked down. Polarization followed: Slobodan
Milosevic--first as a Communist and then as a Serbian nationalist--whipped up
anti-Albanian sentiment. In 1989, he stripped Kosovo of its cherished autonomy.
Meanwhile, Albanian Kosovars proclaimed their territory a republic and, through
channels violent and nonviolent, sought actual independence. Unrelenting,
Milosevic undertook the massacres of the last year, which finally precipitated
NATO's bombing.

            That, in a nutshell, is the history of Kosovo. If you can
find a solution to today's mess in there, let me know. Take a snapshot at 1200
B.C. and the Albanians can claim it; look at A.D. 1200 and it's a Serbian
kingdom. The United States prefers to use the 1974 benchmark. Milosevic points
to 1989. But even at those points, the snapshot looks pretty blurry.

            Before NATO began bombing
Yugoslavia March 24, the proposed Rambouillet solution--restoring Kosovo's
autonomy but not granting it independence--seemed like a plausible outcome. Now
it's hard to imagine Kosovars accepting any kind of Serbian rule. If
victorious, NATO may grant Kosovo independence or perhaps divide it up. History
won't decide Kosovo's fate. Our actions in the weeks ahead will decide
history.

             

         
      
   
