
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Apples and
Oranges
            

            In "," Eliza Truitt discusses installing Linux on a
PC with Microsoft Windows already installed on it. She doesn't compare the
reverse; that is, installing Windows from scratch on a machine with Linux
pre-installed on it. It is no piece of cake, if not downright impossible, for
the average user to perform this sort of install. Installing Linux on a PC with
Windows already loaded is far easier.

            In fact, people like Truitt do not generally
install their own operating systems of any type and make heavy use of help
desks on a day-to-day basis to keep their systems running. She talks about
configuring printers, connecting to networks, and so forth on Linux--I wonder
if she has ever done the same on a Windows machine. Very few computer users
install their own operating systems these days; they buy their computers with
the system pre-loaded. There are plenty of vendors who sell Intel boxes with
Linux pre-installed, including Dell, VA Research, and so on.

            Truitt writes, "compare that with Windows 98: $199
for a full setup, $89 for an upgrade, or bundled for 'free' as part of nearly
every non-Macintosh computer." I think that it is pretty nonsensical to make
the statement that Windows is "free" under any circumstances. Nor does Truitt
note that when you get Linux from any of a variety of sources you get far more
than just the OS that Windows 98 users are accustomed to. You get a full
development system with an unlimited server-based OS. The equivalent software
would cost upward of $15,000 if you were to try to duplicate it from
Microsoft--an unlimited client version of Windows NT costs $5,000. The
databases, programming tools and applications included in Linux are worth many
thousands more--if you can find them at all for Windows NT.

            If you expect to attract
readers to 
                  Slate
               , you really need to do a better job in
presenting balanced, factual reporting.

            
-- Eric Larson
            

            
               Free for
All
            

            I just read Andrew Shuman's "," and I feel I have to
write to make a few points. The very first paragraph contains a stunning number
of errors. Linus Torvalds is the original author of the Linux kernel, but he is
by no means the author of Linux. There are literally thousands of
people, both programmers and non-programmers, who have made contributions to
the Linux distributions. Linux is not derived from an operating system
called GNU. GNU is not an operating system but a software suite that runs on
many operating systems (mostly Unix-based OS's, but Windows is also supported
by many of the packages). The proper name for Linux is Linux, not "GNU/Linux."
And just for your information, there is a "GNU operating system" in
development, it's called the HURD and it is different in a number of respects
from Unix.

            Shuman makes the claim that just because software is
freely distributable, the authors have no means of recompense for their work.
That is simply untrue--there are many ways that software can remain free but
still allow the authors to get paid (just look at RedHat or Netscape).

            Then Shuman claims that Linux provides no graphical
user interface. The truth is that you have a choice--if you want a text
interface you can have it, if you prefer a graphical interface that's fine too.
Shuman also makes the totally unsubstantiated (and untrue) claims that there is
very little in the way of application software for Linux and that very few
people use it: The latest estimates of the number of Linux users run into the
millions--how can that be "so few"?

            Then Shuman claims that free software is less tested
than commercial software. I use both commercial software and free software in
the course of my work (I'm adminstrator of a large number of NT and Unix
computer systems), and it's pretty clear to me that it's the free
software that is rigorously tested and the commercial software that gets
released just as soon as it appears to run. Why? Because the incentive to an
author of free software is to make her package the best, so releasing
inadequately tested software will do the author's personal reputation no good
at all. The incentive to a commercial author is to get the application on the
shelf so she can derive income from it; if Version 1 happens to have bugs in
it, the bug fixes become a selling point for Version 2.

            I'm not anti-commercial
software or even anti-Microsoft. I am in favor of choice and freedom though,
and your article doesn't exactly encourage readers to exercise their choice and
freedom.

            -- Steve
Bennett
            

            
Lancaster, England

            
               Zero Zero
Sum
            

            It doesn't make a big difference to me--or, I
suspect, to most Linux users--whether Truitt, Shuman, or any other Windows
users like Linux or not (see ""). Most Linux contributors don't primarily
care about competing with Microsoft, or decreasing Bill Gates's wealth, or
giving away something for free. Linux contributors simply are creating systems
they themselves enjoy using and find productive.
            

            The main reason Linux users are increasingly
concerned about Microsoft is because Microsoft increasingly attempts to set
proprietary standards for how data are exchanged. That is, technical and legal
documents are often found in Microsoft Word formats, access to online and
banking services often requires the use of Microsoft-only software, multimedia
data often come in Microsoft-only formats, and hardware often only ships with
Microsoft-only drivers. This is not because Microsoft-based systems are
necessarily better, but because Microsoft is the biggest player, and that's
what companies are going to focus their efforts on when writing drivers and
software; there are, after all, only limited resources for writing drivers and
front-end software.

            So, the concerns Linux users have about Windows are
related to whether network effects involving proprietary content formats are
going to exclude them from some areas of public and commercial life. Just like
Truitt would not enjoy being forced to struggle with Linux, most Linux users
don't enjoy being forced to do their work on Windows using its "WIMP"
interface.

            Microsoft needs to
become more sensitive to concerns about interoperability and open standards.
Recent efforts by Microsoft in the areas of XML and other Web standards are
encouraging. Clear support for Sun Java would also be good (and would, in the
long run, benefit Microsoft). I hope that, as Microsoft matures, so will its
attitude toward standards and cooperation. The computer market is big enough
that it does not need to be winner-take-all.

            -- Thomas M.
Breuel
            

            San
Jose, Calif.

            
               Simple
Elegance
            

            Eliza Truitt's article,
"A Labor of Linux," on her experiences with her Linux installation provides
wonderful inspiration for the intimidated. But a word to Truitt: The term
"elegant" in science and technology has a special meaning apart from common
use. Elegance is not synonymous with "simple." Rather, it refers to the most
terse solution to a problem. Such a solution will tend to be cryptic to
the uninitiated. Therefore, "elegant" is most often used by those after the
fact of having used a procedure successfully. For the others, I would venture
to say, their word for it would be arcane.

            -- Roger Imai
            

            
Nashville, Tenn.

            
               Emperor Has No
Clothes
            

            Please note in your fascinating "" on hara-kiri
that there is one point on which I believe you are mistaken. In feudal Japanese
society, the person who would order suicides in place of executions was the
shogun, or military leader of Japan. Emperors, excepting the period from the
late 19 th century to the end of World War II, have yielded little if
any power in Japanese society.

            One fascinating example
of ritual suicide in 18 th century Japan that still regularly appears
in movies and television in Japan is the story of the 47 samurai. According to
this actual historical account, an adviser to a Tokugawa period shogun
antagonized a rival to the point where this rival drew his sword. This all
occurred in front of the shogun, which meant serious trouble, because
displaying a weapon in the shogun's presence was punishable by death. Despite
the fact that he was forced into this situation, the offending adviser was
sentenced to death and committed suicide as you described in your magazine.
After this, 47 of the condemned official's samurai decided to take revenge.
They coordinated an attack on the enemy adviser and murdered him. Honor called
on them to avenge their master's death, but the laws forbade murder. After
regaining their master's honor, all 47 samurai went to their master's grave and
also committed hara-kiri to take responsibility for breaking the law. The site
of these samurai's graves is still a well-visited location in Tokyo.

            
               --Mike
Cojerian
            

            Princeton, N.J.

         
      
   
