
   
   
      
         
             Let's Mask a Deal

            Three weeks ago, when NATO
launched its airstrikes against Yugoslavia, President Clinton swore off further
talks with Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and ruled out a ground
invasion. Since then, events have obliged Clinton to rethink his options. he
floated weasel words that would let him wage a ground war while calling it
something else. This week Clinton's aides are floating weasel words for the
opposite scenario: negotiations.

            Now that everyone has
declared Milosevic a war criminal and has agreed that the United States'
manhood is at stake, the "N word" is verboten in Washington. On Sunday's
talk shows, pundits asked various U.S. officials how they could even
"contemplate negotiating with Mr. Milosevic after what he's done." The
officials dutifully ruled out the idea, all the while sketching concessions by
which Milosevic could persuade them to halt the bombing. The operative question
is no longer how American representatives could dare negotiate with Milosevic.
It's how they're doing it already while pretending not to by masking it in less
polite terms. Here are the various characterizations, in ascending order of
preference.

            
1. Cutting a deal. This is the most
noxious formulation, slung as an insult by hawks such as the Weekly
Standard and the Wall Street Journal . "This man who is engaged in
this massive ethnic cleansing," Standard publisher Bill Kristol spat on
This Week --"We're going [to]cut another deal with him? ... They cannot
cut another deal with Milosevic." Warnings against "cutting a deal" are
invariably accompanied by descriptions of Milosevic as a "war criminal." The
implication is that cutting a deal with a criminal is unethical, if not
illegal.

            2. Negotiation. U.S. officials hate this word because
it connotes capitulation. They've learned to deflect it by juxtaposing it with
"bombing." When asked on Face the Nation whether the United States would
"negotiate" with a "war criminal," Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott
sternly replied: "We're not negotiating with Milosevic. We're bombing him."
U.S. Ambassador to Macedonia Christopher Hill likewise told CNN: "We're not
negotiating right now. We're conducting an air campaign." The false,
glossed-over premise that bombing and negotiation are incompatible goes
unchallenged.

            Indeed, in this case,
the bombing is part of the negotiation. While hitting Milosevic over the
head, NATO is offering terms under which it is willing to stop. Conversely,
Milosevic is offering lesser concessions. Though NATO rejected his initial
offer, the latest proposals by Germany and U.N. Secretary-General Kofi
Annan--which would suspend the bombing in exchange for partial compliance with
NATO's demands and would put the United Nations, rather than NATO, in charge of
settling the conflict--suggest there will ultimately be a compromise. A few
days ago, when a reporter asked about the N word, White House spokesman Joe
Lockhart answered, "We have a military objective now, which is to bring
President Milosevic to meet these conditions that we have laid out." By calling
this objective "military," Clinton's aides obscure its negotiatory aspect.

            
3. Diplomacy. Like negotiation, this word
smells of weakness. Again, administration officials deflect it by contrasting
it with a tougher word: "force." "Fourteen months ago, when Milosevic started
this crisis, our policy was one of diplomacy backed by force," Talbott argued
last weekend. "Now we have force backed by diplomacy." Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright and her spokesman, Jamie Rubin, are fond of the same
formulation. But the contrast between "diplomacy" and "force" is just as
deceptive as the contrast between "negotiation" and "bombing." NATO hopes to
bomb Milosevic to the table. Therefore, force is still serving diplomacy.

            
4. Political solution. This is the
administration's code word for "deal." Clinton says he wants a "political
solution." Albright and Rubin want "a political settlement" and a "political
framework based on Rambouillet." Toward that end, Albright welcomes Russia's
"support for dealing with the problem in a political way." Last week, when a
reporter asked whether the United States wanted Russia to undertake "diplomatic
mediation with Belgrade," Rubin replied, "I would put it a little differently.
... The Russians have been part and parcel of our effort to try to find a
peaceful solution." Rubin expressed hope that the Russians might succeed in
"convincing the Serbs to turn around" and "accept our conditions." But
diplomacy? Never.

            5. Harder and harder. Part of the indignity
of negotiation is the implication that during the bargaining NATO will offer
more and more concessions. So, American spokesmen tailor their words to create
the opposite impression: that NATO will offer fewer and fewer concessions as
the conflict wears on. As Defense Secretary William Cohen put it Sunday, "every
day that goes by" with further evidence of Milosevic's "brutality" would "make
it far more difficult to deal with him."

            Last week, a reporter
asked Lockhart whether it was "right for an American negotiator now to sit down
with Milosevic to try to cut some deal." Lockhart replied that such a scenario
"gets harder every day. But I am not going to ... rule anything out." The
reporter pressed: "But it's not off the table yet?" Lockhart answered: "Dealing
with him gets harder." When asked whether "at some point" dealing with
Milosevic would "become impossible," Lockhart scoffed, "I am not going to spell
out a timetable or what he has to do." Refusing to "spell out" demands or to
"rule anything out" is a classic negotiating posture--which Lockhart
effectively obscured by repeating the word "harder" five times during the
exchange.

            6. Demands. This is the administration's favorite
description. Confronted recently with a coarse question as to whether the
United States was "willing to talk to Milosevic," Lockhart stonily replied,
"The NATO alliance has made demands, and he needs to meet them." Lest anyone
confuse these demands with negotiation, Albright insisted, "We're not trying to
please President Milosevic. ... The goal of this is to be able to get him to
understand these five demands that the international community is making."
American officials also speak of NATO's "terms," "conditions," and
"requirements." There was only one slip-up last week, when Rubin referred to
them as "our position."

            The administration's spin is that "demands" and
"conditions" are the opposite of "negotiation." Milosevic "knows precisely what
the conditions are, so we're not negotiating," Ambassador Hill declared on
Late Edition last weekend. On Meet the Press , White House Chief
of Staff John Podesta vowed: "We're not negotiating, Tim. He knows what he
needs to do to stop the war. ... That's not a negotiation." But minutes later,
Sen. Joe Biden, D-Del., betrayed the spin: "No, I don't think we can negotiate
with him--if you mean can we, in fact, work out something other than those
minimal demands that were stated" by NATO. It depends, in short, upon what the
meaning of the word "negotiation" is.

            If the German and U.N.
proposals lead to a settlement with Milosevic, Clinton and his diplomats will
have to finesse the discrepancy between the "demands" they touted and the deal
they signed. Somehow I'm confident they can work it out.

         
      
   
