
   
   
      
         
            France in the Doghouse

            France has been barred from
some of NATO's top-secret military plans because the United States fears they
will be passed on to the government of Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic,
the Daily Telegraph reported Friday from Washington, quoting "a senior
Western military source." The source said, "Washington has started cutting
Paris out of the loop on some operations because of the worry of information
being handed either to the Serbs direct or indirectly through the Russians." In
an editorial headlined "Send in the troops," the
Telegraph said that, with an impetus building to NATO's advantage, the
alliance "should seize this moment to announce a new goal and new means to
achieve it. The first is the independence of Kosovo; the second is the
commitment of ground forces, a move that senior military leaders consider
essential to success."

            The deployment of ground
troops has been gathering ever-greater support in the British press since it
became clear that the bombing is strengthening rather than weakening
Milosevic's resolve to complete the "ethnic cleansing" of Kosovo. A majority of
papers, both conservative and liberal, have now come out in favor of it, with
one important exception: Rupert Murdoch's tabloid Sun , Britain's
largest-circulation paper. While the upscale Murdoch papers the Times and the
Sunday
Times now support ground intervention, the Sun backs Prime
Minister Tony Blair in his promise not to send in British troops. While it
bursts with aggression against Milosevic--"Clobba Slobba" being its rallying
cry--the Sun threatened Monday to withdraw its support for Blair if he
changed his mind. "Don't Send Our Troops off To Die" was its front-page
headline.

            The weightiest British opponent of the war remains the
Times ' op-ed columnist Simon Jenkins, who, writing from the United
States Friday, said that "the misreading of Mr Milosevic by Nato deserves to
rank with Gallipoli and Pearl Harbor in the annals of military incompetence."
He wrote, "It is grimly intriguing that the American pro-war lobby is made up
of mostly younger people who do not remember (or have forgotten) the Vietnam
escalation. The issue, once again, is not the plausibility of the operation but
the esteem of Uncle Sam and confidence in America's military omnipotence. As
for whether a Kosovan war will be anything but an American one, you can hear,
read and talk about this subject from dawn to dusk and not hear a word about
British involvement--beyond the complaint that 'America is having to rescue
Europe from another of its messes.' "

            French papers Friday
contained reports from Kosovo by a group of French journalists who spent time
with combatants of the Kosovo Liberation Army. Le Figaro reported that the
KLA claims to control "just about 40 percent of Kosovo" and to be in close
contact with NATO forces, from which it could call in air support at any time.
It quoted Capt. Florin Kulaj, commander of the KLA's 850-strong
136 th Brigade, as saying that he had identified ground targets for
NATO attacks, such as a bridge used by Serb forces, which had been bombed on
Wednesday. But Capt. Kulaj also admitted that the KLA was surrounded by Serb
troops and short of weapons. "New recruits hardly get one Kalashnikov between
two of them," he said. "We don't ask the West to send ground troops. If our men
are given the means to fight, we will be able to defend the civilian population
of Kosovo." But Libération reported from Washington that the United States is
still reluctant to arm the KLA because it doubts its democratic
credentials.

            According to Le Monde Friday, most of the Russian media are "deaf and
blind" to the Kosovo refugee crisis. "After two weeks of conflict, most
newspapers continue to see it only as a showdown between NATO, confused with
the United States and considered the 'aggressor,' and the regime of Slobodan
Milosevic, 'president of Yugoslavia,' " it reported. "Accordingly, not a single
newspaper has devoted a front-page story, or even a headline, to the exodus of
hundreds of thousands of [ethnic] Albanians from Kosovo." Russian press
comments from the past week, selected by Le Monde 's Moscow
correspondent, included the following: Vremia said, "The horrible
descriptions of massacres of Albanian Kosovars in the West are wrong and
exaggerated"; New Izvestiya offered, "While the president of the Unites
States plays golf, tens of thousands of innocent people are fleeing from the
hell unleashed by NATO airplanes"; and Nezavissimaya Gazeta said that
NATO was conducting "barbaric bombardments ... under the false pretext of a
humanitarian catastrophe."

            While Le Figaro
in a front-page editorial said that the tide is now turning in NATO's favor and
marveled at the "astonishing unity" of the alliance so far, Milan's Corriere della
Sera berated Italian Prime Minister Massimo D'Alema for condoning open
revolt against the war within his coalition government. Noting that Communist
Party leader Armando Cossutta was seeking a meeting with Milosevic and that
another coalition party was calling on the government to distance itself from
NATO "while Italy is at war and its airmen running the risk of being shot
down," Sergio Romano wrote in a front-page comment, "I have tried to find a
precedent that would allow me to justify these initiatives and the prime
minister's silence, but I cannot find one."

             

         
      
   
