
   
   
      
         
            Rape and Murder

            Russia's re-emergence as a
big player in the Kosovo crisis was a major story across Europe Wednesday, with
papers giving contrasting interpretations of this week's talks in Moscow
between U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott and the Russian special
envoy to Yugoslavia, Victor Chernomyrdin. In Germany, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
ran a front-page headline reading "Rapprochement between Washington and Moscow"
and stressed their commitment to future cooperation. The Italian papers, by
contrast, generally pronounced the negotiations a failure. La Repubblica of Rome said
that peace is now more remote, La Stampa of Turin that the meeting produced no result, and
Corriere della
Sera of Milan that Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic is resisting
Russia's efforts at a diplomatic solution. There was much uncertainty, too,
about the significance of Yugoslav Deputy Prime Minister Vuk Draskovic's
statement that Milosevic would accept a U.N. peacekeeping force. "What does
Draskovic stand for? Who stands behind Draskovic?" asked the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung in an editorial that didn't provide answers.

            Rapprochement or not,
the Financial Times of
London reported from Moscow that vehement opposition to NATO's actions in
Yugoslavia is "the most consensual issue in Russian politics today." Most
European papers gave prominence to Alexander Solzhenitsyn's saying that the
world has entered a new era of lawlessness and that NATO's disregard for the
United Nations was comparable to Hitler's contempt for the League of Nations.
Corriere della Sera carried an interview with Russian Prime Minister
Yevgeny Primakov, who said that Milosevic will never surrender. "NATO would
have to send in 200,000 ground troops, and who's to say that even they would be
sufficient. There would follow a long war, the first real one in Europe since
World War II, that would cause many, many dead and even more refugees."
Answering the accusation that Russia hasn't done enough to help the Kosovars,
Primakov said it could have done more if it hadn't been excluded from the
Rambouillet conference.

            Primakov said that the Balkan conflict has undermined his
efforts to democratize Russian institutions, combat corruption, guarantee free
expression, and bring Russia closer to Europe, because it has reopened Russian
religious, political, and ethnic divisions and, above all, revived Russian
hatred of the West. "If Russia were to become an Asiatic power again, world
equilibrium would be at risk," he said. Primakov added that he had tried in
vain to understand the logic of NATO's actions, but they had served only to
consolidate the Milosevic regime and eliminate all political opposition in
Serbia. If NATO's attacks were initially directed at military targets, "they
are now ruining the economy of rather a poor country. When Western troops cross
the Yugoslav border, they will find nothing but graves and hatred. With what
advantages? To what purpose?"

            In Britain, the Kosovo
conflict has been squeezed off the front pages of many papers this week by
extensive coverage of the murder Monday of Jill Dando, a popular TV presenter,
who was shot in the head with a pistol on her front doorstep in west London.
But Wednesday, the tabloid Daily Mail managed to link even this event to
the war with front-page speculation that her murderer might be a Serbian gunman
seeking revenge for NATO's bombing of a Belgrade TV station last week.

            Tuesday's Guardian of London carried a rare, perhaps unique, interview
with a volunteer Serbian "cleanser," a 50-year-old Belgrade truck driver named
Milan Petrovic, who recently spent 10 days in Kosovo helping to drive thousands
of ethnic Albanians from their homes. Petrovic said that the cleansers are
under orders not to kill, beat, or mutilate their victims and that most obeyed.
"One in a hundred, I'd say, did raping or killing or that kind of thing--not
more," he said. While claiming that the cleansers generally "respected human
rights," Petrovic didn't attempt to conceal his racial prejudice. "They're
cowards, those Albanians, they run like rabbits," he said. The rich
Albanians--"all criminals you know, with satellite TVs and big houses"--are
tougher to move than the others, "but if you push hard enough, they all go in
the end."

            Petrovic claimed to feel
sorry for the children he expelled from their homes, but said that, as
Albanians, they had no right to be in Kosovo. "I had to follow my orders, and
anyway, I knew there would always be someone to meet those women and children,"
he said. As for the KLA "terrorists," he would have liked to kill them and
their families on the spot, but his orders had been to hand them over to the
army. "I don't know what they did to them--they're probably holding them as
prisoners of war." Petrovic said he had signed up as a cleanser when the war
started to show his disgust for NATO. He was one of about 2,000 volunteers who
assembled in the southern Serbian city of Nis before leaving there to start
cleansing operations in the Kosovo village of Silovo. He said he saw little of
NATO's war, "We heard the planes way up above us, but I think they were
concentrating on Pristina so they didn't give us any trouble."

            In London Wednesday, the tabloid Daily Express
reported from Kukes in Albania that 100 Kosovar women gave the same account to
UNICEF counselors of how they had been repeatedly stripped, sprayed with
perfume, and then raped by Serb soldiers who held them hostage in three houses
for several days. The subject of rape also cropped up in an interview Wednesday
by Corriere della Sera with the wife of the suspected war criminal and
former Bosnian Serb President Radovan Karadzic. Ljiljiana Karadzic, who like
her husband is a psychiatrist, said that in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serb soldiers
had been accused of raping 150,000 women. "If we compare this figure with the
number of our soldiers, it means that every one of them must have raped three
women," she said. "So when did they find the time to fight?" Referring to one
claim by a Bosnian woman that her 75-year-old cousin had been forced to rape
her at rifle point, Karadzic commented: "I am also a sexologist. To think that
I could have cured my patients of impotence by pointing a pistol at their
temples!"

            The British satirical
magazine Private Eye had an exceptionally tasteless cover this week of
President Clinton photographed in intimate conversation with British Foreign
Secretary Robin Cook under the headline "Clinton--Ground War Latest." Clinton
is saying, "I'm not going in--it's too risky." "I expect you say that to all
the girls," replies Cook.

             

         
      
   
