
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               I work in a small office (10 people). Two
employees (married male, unmarried female) are spending an inordinate amount of
time together during office hours. People are beginning to talk. These two
spend at least an hour a day in closed-door "meetings," another 15 minutes here
and there during the day chatting and occasionally whispering. They go out to
lunch together, and she even came into the office on a Saturday just to talk to
him. (They went into her office, shut the door, and emerged a half-hour later.
Then she left.)
            

            
               Neither of them has any business reason that
requires "meetings." It is at the point now where other employees are making
comments about this relationship. These two monopolize each other's time, and
the bad part is that now he is telling colleagues he is too busy to do some
tasks.
            

            
               Prudie, I don't think this is anything more
than a flirtation (I guess I'm an optimist). But my colleagues and I cannot
figure out a way to tell him (or her) that this is affecting the work
environment, their reputations, and our morale.
            

            
               I'm writing because I need to know who should
talk to him or her. My colleagues don't feel close enough to either of them to
say what needs to be said, but neither do we want to make a big thing of it by
telling his manager. He is the senior of the two people involved. How should we
handle it?
            

            
               Thanks,
            

            

               --Anonymous
            

            Dear An,

            Let's review: He is married, they have no business
reasons to get together, the whole office is chirping about their lengthy
closed-door "meetings," they whisper, leave to have lunch together, and you
think there is no more than a "flirtation." This is like imagining that a
dinosaur died in a standing position at the museum of natural history.
Of 
               course they're having an affair, but Prudie compliments you on
your high-minded and generous assessment of the situation. Now, what to do
about it?

            You and your colleagues must rethink your reticence
about not saying anything to anybody. The fact that you are an office of only
10 people, and Lothario now finds himself too busy for some tasks, means the
involvement has begun to impinge on the workplace.

            Do you have a human
resources department? It is pledged to confidentiality and could intervene.
(Prudie agrees that speaking directly to the parties would probably not be
useful.) If your company is too small to have an HR unit, then a designated
representative must go to the man's superior--he being senior to the woman--and
lay out the situation. Prudie is all for romance (she doesn't even mind it in
the office), but when it complicates the lives of co-workers something needs to
be done. Please note that we are not dealing with the fact that the man is
married because that is none of our business.

            
--Prudie, proactively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Your response to ""--recommending that a
soon-to-be-married couple break off relations with highly unsupportive
soon-to-be in-laws--struck a deep, dark chord in me. My problem is similar
except that my fiance doesn't always realize the extent of his mother's
manipulations or their possible effect on our relationship. Mostly she tries to
make him feel like hell via barbed remarks and/or the silent treatment for
"deserting his family" in order to be with me. (She has always relied heavily
on him for emotional support following her divorce from his father.)
            

            
               Obviously I can't
point out what a horror his mother is, but it's very difficult to watch him
take these unrelenting guilt trips. Plus, I worry that this ever so slightly
Oedipal situation is going to get in the way of his commitment to me. Is there
any hope?
            

            

               --Do Tell
            

            Dear Do,

            There is not only hope, there is a strategy. Prudie
will now give you the roadmap.

            Do not point out that the beloved's mother is a
witch. He already knows. This is a wonderful opportunity to cement your
relationship as partners: Be his ally, not his attacker. In the interest of
seeing the big picture, Prudie hopes you can get him to talk about what he is
feeling when Jocasta does a number on him. Discuss, in general terms, the
nature of guilt and point out--as sympathetically as you can--that her divorce
had very unhappy consequences for her. For that is the crux of her acting out:
She has made your intended into a husband-substitute.

            You also might try
killing the old girl with kindness. Include her when you can, and let it be
your suggestion. It will disorient her totally. Just know that her
neurosis has nothing to do with the love you and the beloved have for each
other ... and then see to it. You can do an end run around her by understanding
the game and by not responding in a destructive way.

            
--Prudie, strategically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               I truly like my wife's sister's husband, but is
he technically my brother-in-law--as her family insists--or--as I believe--a)
my sister-in-law's husband or b) my wife's brother-in-law? The polite answer
is, of course, call him whatever he wants to be called, but we are all curious
as to which appellations are technically correct.
            

            
               Yours
faithfully,
            

            

               --Genealogically Confused in New York
            

            Dear Gene,

            Though Emily Post is long gone, her answer to your
question has been preserved. She relied on the dictionary, which said, "A
brother-in-law is a brother of a husband or wife, a sister's husband, or
loosely, a wife's sister's husband."

            So ... your wife's
sister's husband is a "loosely," and Prudie is sure he's a swell guy.

            
--Prudie, Postally

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               Recently a friend of mine posted something
untrue about me--using my real name--on an electronic bulletin board. The
subject of his posting has caused me real embarrassment and discomfort. What
should I do?
            

            
               Thanks for your
help.
            

            

               --Good Golly
            

            Dear Good,

            Prudie is thinking of the
forest ranger's adage: Fight fire with fire. Make your own posting on the same
bulletin board refuting the erroneous message. Prudie would also question your
appellation of the person as "a friend."

            
--Prudie, correctively

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               My girlfriend wants
to have sex even though we have only been going out for four weeks. I feel that
this will change our relationship and make it more complicated. She says that
if I were a real man I would have sex with her. Should I hold out until I feel
the time is right or give in now?
            

            

               --Luke
            

            Dear Lu,

            If your dilemma is
genuine (though Prudie feels a faint pull on her leg) by no means should you be
maneuvered into bed. Tell your shy violet that if she doesn't approve of your
timetable you're certain she can find someone who will accommodate her.

            --Prudie, suspiciously

         
      
   
