
   
   
      
         
            No. 249: &quot;Cam Com Can Gal&quot;

            
               The list includes
cameras, laptop computers, canvas bags of tools, and 665 gallons of water. List
of what?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 248)--"Re Place":
            

            

               According to Justice Anthony Kennedy, it's a place where people
"practice newly learned vulgarities, erupt with anger, tease and embarrass each
other, share offensive notes, flirt, push and shove in the halls, grab and
offend." Where is this wonderful, magical place?
            

            
"HBO."-- Larry Amoros
            

            "The
Routledge Press."-- Dan Ricci
            

            "Los
Alamos Security."-- Beth Sherman ( Heather Williams had a similar
answer.)

            "Camp
Rosie O'Donnell."-- Jon Hotchkiss
            

            
"drudgecharterschool.com."-- Ken Novak
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            It's much noted that if
you saw what goes on in a restaurant kitchen, you'd never eat out again.
Similarly, you're advised to avert your glance from the making of sausages, and
laws, and presumably laws about the manufacture of sausages to be fried up in
some restaurant that you won't be visiting. And yet, it really would be nice if
the Supreme Court were televised. Lower courts are televised without
diminishing our respect. Charlie Rose is on television every night, without
diminishing our ... OK, bad example. But what is the argument against putting
the Supreme Court in a glass-walled, street-level studio, cranking up the theme
music, hiring a second-tier comic to warm up the gallery, and ... OK, again,
there is no doubt some kind of case to be made against that. But if the court
could be televised discretely, in black and white, surely justice would not be
imperiled, and might even be improved. At least we'd get a more vivid idea of
how justice works. And each December, when the networks do all those
year-in-review shows, there'd be swell footage of mighty impressive fatuity.
And of some guy vomiting up sausage all over the waiter. And the name of that
guy? Anthony Kennedy.

            
               "In the Final
Analysis, This Case Is About Federalism" Answer
            

            Justice Kennedy fondly recalls his school days,
what he terms "the real world of school discipline."

            In a dissent that ran longer than the decision, he
argued against the federal government's tampering with school fun, just as it,
presumably, ought not have messed around with slavery, or what Kennedy would
call "the real world of agricultural labor."

            Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who wrote the 5-4
decision, found that school districts can be liable for damages for failing to
stop a student's severe and pervasive sexual harassment of a classmate. She
said that Kennedy's dissent, endorsed unsurprisingly by William Rehnquist,
Antonin Scalia, and Clarence Thomas, would "teach little Johnny a perverse
lesson in Federalism," but the majority found a way that "assures little Mary
may attend class."

            LaShonda Davis--little
Mary--was a fifth-grade girl subjected to five months of harassment from a
classmate. Her school refused to help her, even by changing her seat. Her
harasser was eventually charged and convicted of sexual battery in juvenile
court.

            
               Arlene Hellerman's
Infelicitous Metaphor Corner
            

            "These
theories have all been tried before and have all been shot down before."--Steve
Sanetti, vice-president and general counsel of Sturm, Ruger & Co., the
largest and only publicly traded gun manufacturer in the United States,
poo-poos legal arguments against his company.

            
               Tim Carvell's
Philosophy Corner
            

            Why is it that when J.D.
Salinger sends love letters to Joyce Maynard, she forwards them to Sotheby's,
but when I do, she sends them to the FBI?

            
               Rough Translation
Extra
            

            IN THE ORIGINAL LANGUAGE:

            "It is particularly
disturbing in this instance that Trooper Burke jeopardized the public trust and
his career over less than $200."--Paul Zoubek, Acting Attorney General, New
Jersey

            IN ENGLISH:

            "This is New Jersey: big
bribes only."

            
               Headline
Haiku
            

            Anticipating family
grief

            Hadassah open meet

            Dressler, star of old

            Orthotics alter
walking

            
               --Stuyvesant Town & Village , May 20,
1999

            Barbara Lippert

            Battle for Funds

            GOP Upstarts Challenge

            A Home Movie

            As Overly Violent

            
               --Wall Street Journal , May 20, 1999

            Mary O'Driscoll

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            It's a flirty, pushy, shovey, grabby world after
all.

         
      
   
