
   
   
      
         
            

            
               Early
Developers
            

            I always enjoy Jacob
Weisberg but wanted to correct the impression from "" that teen movies began in
the '50s. While it is true that films such as Blackboard Jungle , The
Wild One , East of Eden , and Rebel Without a Cause tapped into
the baby boom audience, the teen demographic was identified at Warner Bros. in
the 1930s with the popular films starring the Dead End Kids. At MGM, Louis B.
Mayer produced the bourgeois counterpart, the obscenely successful Andy
Hardy series starring Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland, later teamed in the
archetypal teen pix Babes in Arms and Babes on Broadway .
Universal made a likewise profitable series with Deanna Durbin, and over at RKO
in the '40s, the teen-age Shirley Temple starred in movies like The
Bachelor 
               and 
               The Bobby-Soxer . It is in 1949 that the
echt misunderstood teen film Knock on Any Door was made, starring
John Derek as the misfit who wanted to "live fast, die young, and leave a
beautiful corpse."

            -- Carrie
Rickey
            

            
Philadelphia

            
               Leak
House
            

            William Saletan missed a
clear third spin in his "" item on Charles Bakaly's investigation and
resignation: Starr is throwing Bakaly to the wolves for leaking to deflect
attention from Starr's own leaks in late January and early February of 1998.
Bakaly's disclosure would not violate the Rule 6(e), as it is more a legal
conclusion than evidence. Thus Bakaly suffers little and can be the whipping
boy for all leaks.

            
               --Bill Rudman
            

            Castro
Valley, Calif.

            

               Gunplay
            

            Jeffrey Goldberg's "middle ground" on gun control
(see his "") seems to be that only untrained people kill people. That
would be like the "untrained" 6-year-old who gets daddy's Glock down from the
closet shelf, or the drunk boyfriend who gets out his old service revolver and
goes over to ex-girlfriend's house, or your convicted-felon neighborhood drug
dealer who bought his streetsweeper from a guy who, it turns out, bought three
dozen of them at a gun show. See, it wasn't the guns' fault--it was the
goshdarned untrained people! If everybody just took NRA gun safety courses none
of this would've happened!

            Come on, Jeffrey. It's
really cool to be postmodern and hip; but you have to pick your targets a bit
more judiciously.

            
               --Michael J.
Berla
            

            
Columbia, Md.

            
               Beating Around the
Bush
            

            William Saletan's "" takes George W. Bush to task
for coyly sidestepping stands on significant issues. But the first primary is a
year away, and the general election a year and a half away. It's already crazy
that candidates have to run shadow campaigns for years and then form
exploratory committees before formally announcing their candidacies. I suppose
in the election cycle for 2004 (which, by my calendar, starts in about three
weeks) potential candidates will first announce plans to pick a committee to
determine if the potential candidates should form an exploratory committee to
determine if they should run for president.

            The absurdity here for
potential voters is that we don't want to hear a potential candidates'
positions repeated ad nauseum for 12 or 18 months. Take the spotlight
off of them until the Christmas tree lights come down in January 2000. If TV
lights aren't there, the candidates will be forced to do something practical to
bide their time. And potential voters won't have to be concerned about
establishing committees to determine if they should throw out their televisions
and delete their bookmarks to e-zines until a more reasonable time next
year.

            
               --Paul Clark
            

            Oak
Park, Ill.

            
               A Wife's
Defense
            

            There is a curious symmetry between David Plotz and
those government officials who would like to see my husband, Jonathan Pollard,
remain in prison forever. In "," Plotz presents his own damning opinions on the
Pollard case as if they were fact, in much the same way that these government
officials accuse my husband in the media of crimes for which he was never
indicted.

            Jonathan Pollard did not commit, was not charged
with, and was not convicted of the outrageous charges now being hurled at him
in the media. There is no substance to the latest pack of lies proffered by
Seymour Hersh in The New Yorker , nor to the charges invented by David
Plotz in 
                  Slate
               . Moreover, no evidence to support any of these
false charges was presented 14 years ago when my husband entered into a plea
agreement with the American government. In other words, these charges are very
recent fabrications that have suddenly surfaced in the press to serve political
ends. Based on the evidence that the government presented 14 years ago,
Jonathan was indicted on one count only--passing classified information to an
ally, Israel. He was not charged with intending to harm the United States. He
was not charged with treason.

            The one count of passing classified information to
an ally that Jonathan was charged with usually carries a sentence of 2 to 4
years. No one in the history of the United States has ever received a life
sentence for this offense--no one but Jonathan Pollard. As a result of a last
minute secret submission to the sentencing judge by then Secretary of Defense
Casper Weinberger--which Jonathan and his attorneys have never in 14 years been
given the opportunity to challenge--the judge ignored the plea agreement and
meted out a life sentence without parole. Who plea bargains for a life
sentence?

            The "new" crimes that Jonathan Pollard is now being
accused of in the media were, in fact, committed by a host of Soviet spies
including Aldrich Ames, David Boone, and Ronald Pelton. But that has not
stopped U.S. officials from continuing to publicly blame Jonathan Pollard--and
by extension, Israel--for the damage done by these enemy agents, nor has it
stopped irresponsible journalists from parroting these unsubstantiated lies.
What Jonathan Pollard did do is warn Israel that Saddam Hussein had amassed
American-approved and American-financed weapons of mass destruction, which he
intended to use to scorch the Jewish state. Jonathan deeply regrets that he
broke the law in order to warn Israel about this threat to her existence. He
had tried everything in his power to get the information released to Israel
through legal channels but was thwarted every step of the way, right up to the
top of the Pentagon. It would appear that certain U.S. officials--Casper
Weinberger, Adm. Bobby Ray Inman, and others--were more concerned with the
world finding out that America was arming Iraq at that time, than they were
about covertly violating their information-sharing agreement with Israel. It
was in desperation that my husband acted on his fear for the Jewish state and
finally sought out the Israelis to warn them about this betrayal.

            Contrary to Plotz's contention, Jonathan has
expressed his remorse repeatedly--privately and publicly--and in various
mediums. He deeply regrets not finding a legal means to act on his concerns for
Israel in the face of the Iraqi threat.

            There is still enormous embarrassment in Washington
today over America's arming of Iraq and the ongoing threat from the "Madman of
Baghdad." The release of Jonathan Pollard would bring this shameful episode to
the forefront. For that reason fearful officials hurl false charges at him in
the media--never in court--to try to keep him in prison forever and to make
people forget about how he blew the whistle on a secret American pro-Iraqi
tilt, long before it became public knowledge.

            Today the Clinton administration is doing with
China just what the Reagan-Bush administration did with Iraq. For political and
economic reasons, a blind eye has been turned to Chinese espionage in the
United States for years. As a result, China is now armed with nuclear munitions
that could pose a major threat to the United States. This administration, just
like its predecessors, wants people to look the other way, so it can downplay
the story in the media and give implausible explanations for why a top level
spy who provided nuclear munitions information to a hostile country should be
fired from his job instead of being brought to trial!

            Interestingly enough, journalists like Plotz don't
see fit to utter a peep of protest about the mishandling of the Chinese spy
case. Mindlessly they swallow whole what they read in the press and continue to
focus their hostility and anger on the wrong target. Wen Ho Lee stole American
information on nuclear warheads for China and was fired. Jonathan Pollard gave
information to an ally, Israel, about a threat to that country's survival and
he got life. Proportional justice or political vengeance? Why is it that the
same officials who are so relentless and vociferous in their condemnation of
Jonathan Pollard and Israel are so utterly silent about all the other recent
spy cases where the charges were far more serious and the damage was
measurable?

            By mangling the truth
and presenting uninformed opinion as if it were fact, Plotz and

                  Slate
                have done a great disservice not only to the case of
Jonathan Pollard but to the ongoing battle he is waging to restore the
principle of equal justice for all Americans.

            
               --Esther
Pollard
            

            
Toronto

            
               
                  David Plotz
replies: I agree with Esther Pollard on one crucial point: The fact that
the most damning allegations against her husband were never made
publicly--though Pollard himself did see them--has muddied his case. No matter
how credible the allegations in the Seymour Hersh piece are--and they are
extremely credible--they are unverifiable and irrefutable as long as the United
States' damage assessment remains secret. This secrecy allows Esther Pollard to
make bold claims about her husband's innocence and to dismiss these damning
allegations as the malevolent fabrications of Pollard-haters.
            

            
               But observers who
aren't married to Pollard are left with a choice: Do we trust Jonathan Pollard,
an admitted, unapologetic spy, who told lie after lie after lie in the course
of stealing U.S. secrets, when he says he didn't take anything serious? Or do
we trust the judgment of the secretary of defense, the secretary of state, the
director of the CIA, the chairmen of the House and Senate Intelligence
Committees, all of whom know exactly what Pollard did, and all of whom are
adamant he should be kept locked up?
            

            
               To Whine Own
Self
            

            In "" Michael Sandel makes the lovely point that
Monica Lewsinky might be guilty of a betrayal of herself. He notes that being
merely honest or truthful may not be the end-all of integrity, that integrity
is based on an identity, not primarily moral but ethical, the identity of and
with one's life-narrative. For Monica to be guilty of such a betrayal, though,
she would need to have a life-narrative, an explicit or implicit
understanding of the person she would like to be. She clearly doesn't.

            The given complexity of
desires and adaptations that make up the ego suffice. "Be true to yourself" has
been reinterpreted to mean either "Getting what you want" or, more
aggressively, "Express yourself (don't repress yourself)."

            -- Matthew
Feeney
            

            Washington

         
      
   
