
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Analyze
This
                (Warner Bros.). Robert De Niro and Billy Crysal star as a
panic-ridden mobster and his shrink. It's a one joke movie, but the one joke is
good, and the actors are great: "Laughs battle formulas and laughs win" (Jay
Carr, the Boston Globe ). As the mob boss, "De Niro parodies his own
persona with huge relish" (Joe Morgenstern, the Wall Street Journal ),
and Crystal's put-upon analyst is refreshingly underplayed. Some critics note
the conceit's similarity to HBO's new series The Sopranos , which
features a mobster on the couch as well. (
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein
the movie hilarious and calls it "a slapstick fever dream.")

            
               
                  Cruel
Intentions
                (Columbia Pictures). The fourth screen adaptation of
the 1782 novel Les Liaisons Dangereuses , this time set amongst
Manhattan's rich teens, gets a mixed reaction. Some like it: a "foxy, snotty,
enjoyably trashy update," says Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly .
Others find the idea of such young actors in this tale of sexual intrigue and
betrayal ridiculous: "The liaisons here aren't dangerous, they're incongruous"
(Jami Bernard, the Daily News ). Critics are either entranced by the
youngsters' acting or find the whole concept of fresh-from-the-WB kids as
Vicomte De Valmont and Marquise De Merteuil "faintly ridiculous" (Stephen
Holden, the New York Times ). (This site has links to information on all the film versions of
the novel, as well as sound clips and photos.)

            
               
                  Lock, Stock
& Two Smoking Barrels
                (Gramercy Pictures). Great reviews for
this "cheeky, blackly comic heist picture" (Schwarzbaum, Entertainment
Weekly ), the debut from British director Guy Ritchie. The plot is
labyrinthine and the body count high, but critics agree that the film is "dark,
dangerous, and a great deal of wicked, amoral fun" (Kenneth Turan, the Los
Angeles Times ). Many compare Ritchie's style to Quentin Tarantino's.

                  Slate
               's Edelstein pooh-poohs all the critical oohing and aahing,
and dismisses the film's combination of "the music video syntax of
Trainspotting with the jokey nihilist bloodletting of Pulp

               Fiction ." (Read the rest of his review .)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  Monica's
Story
               , by Andrew Morton (St. Martin's Press). Most critics are
more interested in highlighting the tasty details than debating the literary
merits of Princess Di biographer Andrew Morton's as-told-to tell-all about
Monica Lewinsky. No.1 favorite detail: Clinton was "enthralled, actually
sexually aroused" by Lewinsky's description of her trip to Bosnia. One of the
few reviewers who delves into the book's form, as opposed to its content, is
the New York Times ' Michiko Kakutani. She says it lacks sourcing and
attribution, "reverberates with the cloying sound of the talk-show
confessional," and has a "propensity for Gothic melodrama and romance-novel
prose." Judith Shulevitz writes in 
                  Slate
                that Morton is our poet
of female self-pity. (Read the rest of her review , and read excepts from the
book here courtesy of the New York Times [requires free
registration].)

            

               Theater
            

            
               
                  Annie Get
Your Gun
                (Marquis Theatre, New York City). Advance word from
tryouts in Washington was overwhelmingly negative, and the show does get plenty
of bad reviews, but it also gets some good ones. Those who like the show call
it "immensely enjoyable" (Jess Cagle, Entertainment Weekly ) and say it
"takes a new bead on the familiar old target and hits the bull's-eye with ease"
(Richard Zoglin, Time ). Those who don't like it say that the new version
(expurgated of several un-PC songs) is an uneasy mix of '40s and '90s
sensibilities and falls flat. "Every so often, though not close to often
enough, something sharp and radiant pierces through the acrid smog that is
being called 'Annie Get Your Gun,' " (Ben Brantley, the New York Times ).
The radiance mentioned is all from Annie as played by Broadway vet Bernadette
Peters, who everyone agrees is top-notch. (Find out about show times and
tickets at sidewalk.com.)

            
               
                  Bright
Lights, Big City
                (New York Theatre Workshop, New York City).
Harsh pans for Rent director Michael Greif's musical based on Jay
McInerney's novel of debauched young Manhattanites: "The musical is sung
through, and there's something comically embarrassing about hearing people say
things like 'You got any blow?' in recitative." (Nancy Franklin, The New
Yorker ). Worst bits: 1) Paul Goodman, who wrote the show's music, book, and
lyrics, has inserted himself into the musical, strolling onstage with a guitar
and narrating in his thick Scottish accent; 2) songs with titles such as "I
Love Drugs" and "I Wanna Have Sex Tonight." As Charles Isherwood writes in
Variety , "nothing fades more quickly than fabulousness"; the
name-dropping glitter of the novel seems hopelessly old hat in the '90s.
(Read an interview with McInerney in Salon .)

            Find a movie playing
near you on Sidewalk.com.

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  8MM ;

               
                  Movie -- 200 Cigarettes ;

               
                  Movie -- The 
                  Other Sister ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Houdini Girl , by Martyn Bedford;

               
                  Book -- Perfect Murder, Perfect Town , by Lawrence
Schiller;

               
                  Theater--
                  Not About Nightingales .

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  October Sky ;

               
                  
                     Movie --Jawbreaker ;

               
                  Movie -- Office Space ;

               
                  Music--
                  The Hot Rock , by Sleater-Kinney;

               
                  Book--
                  Traveling Mercies: Some Thoughts on Faith ,
by Anne Lamott;

               
                  Book -- The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and
the Quest for the Ultimate Theory , by Brian R. Greene.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Blast From the Past ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Message in a Bottle ;

               
                  Movie
                  --My Favorite Martian ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Testament , by John Grisham;

               
                  Book
                  --South of the Border, West of the Sun ,by Haruki
Murakami;

               
                  Theater--
                  Death of a Salesman (Eugene O'Neill
Theatre, New York City).

            

            :

            

               
                  Movie -- Payback ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Simply Irresistible ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Rushmore ;

               
                  Movie
                  --Dry Cleaning ;

               
                  Book -- Werewolves in Their Youth , by Michael
Chabon;

               
                  Theater -- You're a Good Man,
Charlie Brown .

            

         
      
   
