
   
   
      
         
            The Unhappy Warrior

            Last
Thursday, in a speech at the National Defense University, President Clinton
passionately disavowed the theory that ethnic slaughter is an incurable Balkan
disease. "If people make decisions to do these kinds of things, other people
can make decisions to stop them," he asserted. "If the resources are properly
arrayed, it can be done." But five days later, when asked why the United States
was refusing to send Apache helicopters and ground troops into Kosovo, Clinton
cited prudence, objective difficulties, and the "risk" to American soldiers.
"The military leaders will make their decisions about when and under what
circumstances to use the Apaches," said Clinton. "It is not a political
decision in any way."

            These
two statements--one ambitious and imperative, the other cautious and
detached--underscore a paradox in the war over Kosovo. In foreign policy, there
are two rival schools of thought--realism and idealism--and Clinton, as usual,
is trying to have it both ways. Each school has its values, virtues, and spins.
Idealists emphasize free will; realists emphasize determinism. Idealists
believe in subjective resolve; realists believe in objective constraints.
Idealists preach responsibility and courage, which realists dismiss as hubris
and folly. Realists preach humility and prudence, which idealists dismiss as
complacency and selfishness. Idealists tell us what we can do; realists tell us
what we can't do. Idealists tend to be liberal; realists tend to be
conservative.

            On the
fundamental question of whether to intervene in the Balkans, Clinton is an
idealist. Thursday, in what many deemed a slap at--and arguably an
oversimplification of--the theories of Balkans scholar Robert D. Kaplan and
Holocaust scholar Daniel Jonah Goldhagen, Clinton repudiated those who "justify
looking away from this kind of slaughter ... by saying that these people are
simply incapable of civilized behavior." The president asked, "Do you think the
Germans would have perpetrated the Holocaust on their own without Hitler? Was
there something in the history of the German race that made them do this? No.
... This is something political leaders do." Yugoslavia's Balkan
neighbors, Clinton argued, show that "there is another path ... that discord is
not inevitable, that there is not some Balkan disease. ... Serbs simply must
free themselves of the notion that their neighbors must be their enemies."

            
Realists regard Serbian resistance to NATO as a fact of life, an immovable
constraint on American ambitions in the Balkans. "The bombing has not made much
difference" and has "strengthened the resolve of the Serbian people," House
Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, alleged Sunday on Meet the Press .
Likewise, realists view American lack of resolve as an objective limit
on the war's prosecution. As long as Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic is
willing to withstand airstrikes, "there is no real end in sight," former
Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger cautioned this weekend. Former Joint
Chiefs of Staff Chairman Colin Powell agreed: "It is up to Mr. Milosevic ... to
decide when he has had enough. And that makes it difficult for us." Sen.
Richard Shelby, R-Ala., concluded, "I'm not sure we have the will to win."

            
Idealists regard such helplessness as self-delusion. In their view, our "will
to win" is something to be mustered, not dispassionately assessed. While it may
be "difficult" to outlast Milosevic, they posit that we can and must do so.
"It's because he's determined that we have to be determined as
well," NATO spokesman Jamie Shea argued on Late Edition . On Face the
Nation , host Bob Schieffer skeptically asked Defense Secretary William
Cohen, "How long are you prepared to do this?" "As long as it takes," Cohen
replied. Crystallizing the idealists' credo, Clinton declared Friday, "We
cannot fundamentally alter human nature, but we can alter the rules by which
all of us let our nature play out, and we can call forth our better
selves."

            On
this view, just as we are free to persist in the war, the Serbs are free to
back down. Here idealists divide into two camps. Moderate idealists claim
merely that we don't have to accept the way things are--that we can
fight on, and the Serbs might not prevail. Radical idealists posit that
we can dictate the way things are--that we will fight on, and Milosevic
cannot prevail. Clinton and his allies are taking, or at least mouthing,
the radical position. Milosevic faces "an unwinnable conflict," Clinton
asserted Thursday. "NATO actions will not stop until the conditions I have
described for peace are met." Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and her
British counterpart, Robin Cook, took the same hard line in a Sunday
Washington Post op-ed: "We will carry on attacking Milosevic's military
machine until he yields. ... His people are ignoring his call to fight in a
conflict they do not want and know they cannot win."

            All
this sounds stirring until you hear Clinton's less-than-idealistic excuses for
the war's shortcomings. When asked this weekend why the United States was
withholding helicopters, Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen. Hugh Shelton and NATO
spokesman Shea answered with mumbo jumbo about "training," "operational
matters," "procedural matters," and the "moving parts" of a "complex
operation." Clinton, like Shelton, mentioned the "risk" to American pilots,
depicting this as a military "judgment" rather than a "political decision." But
from an idealist's perspective, the decision to let Kosovars die rather than
risk American lives is indeed political--and the purpose of Clinton's allusions
to "judgment," "strategy," and "circumstances" is, as with all such realist
language, to obscure our indifference and cowardice.

            
Pressed about their cautious conduct of the war, Clinton's putative idealists
invoke the classic realist alibi: impossibility. Why haven't we halted Serbian
atrocities? "You cannot, through air power, stop individual soldiers
oppressing, murdering, and burning the homes of individual Albanians,"
Undersecretary of State Thomas Pickering pleaded Sunday. Then why haven't we
sent in ground troops? "When you start with a coalition, you have to hold that
coalition together," said Cohen. "There is no consensus within the alliance for
a ground force." A true idealist would lobby the coalition hard for ground
troops, as British Prime Minister Tony Blair has done, or would jettison the
coalition and send in his own ground troops anyway. Instead, the Clinton team
accepts the coalition's reluctance and tells us this is just the way things
are.

            And
what about the hundreds of civilians killed by errant NATO bombs? "It is simply
not possible to avoid casualties of noncombatants in this sort of encounter,"
Clinton pleaded Thursday. Albright and Cook agreed. "Some people argue as if
Milosevic can be opposed militarily through a campaign of 'immaculate
coercion,' in which no mistakes are made and no innocent casualties occur. But
that is not the nature of conflict," they wrote in the Post , borrowing
every realist buzzword in the book. "Perfection is unattainable," they
counseled, and "it is impossible to eliminate such casualties."

            On
other questions as well, U.S. officials use fatalism and objective language to
minimize American responsibility and rule out options. Have we antagonized
Russia and China? Yes, conceded Pickering, but only "because nationalism is
endemic in both of those countries." Are we backing the Kosovo Liberation Army?
No, said Cohen, but "Milosevic is going to find that his military forces are
systematically being diminished at a time when the KLA will come back," since
it is "getting money and support and some arms from other countries, no doubt."
Could we curb Milosevic's aggression through diplomacy rather than bombing?
Impossible, argued Albright and Cook: "He will not stop until he is forced to
do so."

            Behind
these explanations lies a coldly realistic assessment of America's character:
If our soldiers are killed, the public will turn against the war; and if the
public turns against the war, Clinton will have to withdraw our forces. This
assessment rules out idealistic scenarios: that the public might accept the
sacrifice and continue to support the war, or that Clinton might persist and
try to win back public confidence rather than bail out. Based on this
assessment, NATO has kept ground forces out of Kosovo, allowing atrocities to
continue, and has kept its planes high above Serbian anti-aircraft batteries,
limiting our pilots' ability to distinguish refugees from Serb forces on the
ground.

            None
of this proves that realism is corrupt. Realism tempers the romanticism of
idealists with a sense of tragedy. It's not our job to police the whole
world , says the realist. Even if it were, we couldn't afford it. Even if
we could afford it, we don't have the will to do it. Even if we had the will to
do it, we couldn't stop killings everywhere. Even if we stopped killings
everywhere, we couldn't do so without killing people ourselves. Even if we
avoided killing people, we couldn't repair every war-torn region. Nor is
Clinton's blend of realism and idealism necessarily corrupt. Perhaps we
should be idealistic about intervention in general but realistic in how
we go about it.

            But
the realist/idealist distinction does clarify two puzzles about the war. One is
why almost nobody wholly supports it. Idealists don't like the way it's being
fought; realists think we shouldn't have started it in the first place. The
other puzzle is the incoherence of Clinton's critics, punctuated by DeLay's
bizarre complaint that Clinton has 1) "hollowed out our forces while he's
running around having these adventures all over the world"; and 2) fallen short
of "victory" in Kosovo by using "excessive rhetoric supported by underwhelming
force" in a conflict involving "no strategic interest of the United States."
You can fault Clinton's piety and recklessness from a realistic standpoint. You
can fault his cowardice and cynicism from an idealistic standpoint. But the
only way to combine piety, cowardice, cynicism, and recklessness is to hit him
from both sides.

            
               Photograph of Bill
Clinton on the Slate Table of Contents by Kevin
Lamarque/Reuters.
            

         
      
   
