
   
   
      
         
            No. 202: &quot;Death Sentence?&quot;

            

               Under pressure from the Federal Trade Commission, R.J. Reynolds will
add a single sentence to each print ad for Winston. Saying what?
            

             

            by 5
p.m. ET Sunday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Wednesday's
Question (No. 201)--
                  "No-Stick Finish":
               

            

            

               
                  Fill in the blank. Ending her China trip yesterday, Secretary
of State Madeleine Albright was disappointed with that nation's position on
human rights but has few ways to alter it, says Nicholas Lardy of the Brookings
Institution. "The administration has got only one carrot--that is
_____________."
               
            

            
"Baywatch ."-- John Mott
            

            "A
sentence with which the Freudians will have a field day."-- Tim
Carvell
            

            "Louis
Vuitton handbags and Scottish cashmere sweaters ... oops, wait, not
anymore."-- Ananda Gupta
            

            
"Hoo-hoo! There's a guy named 'Lardy' at Brookings! Lardy-butt, lardy-butt,
cannot get the bathroom door shut! Ha!"-- Kate "Cruel things were done to my
name in childhood" Wing
            

            "Uh ...
Dammit! Did anyone remember to tape 20/20 for me last
night?"-- Leslie Goodman-Malamuth
            

            Click
for more answers. 

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            What have we got that
others envy? What are the crowning accomplishments of our society the world
yearns for? Cheap consumer goods, crappy fast food, and bland mass
entertainment! That's what News Quiz players cite. And, incidentally, when
George W. announces his candidacy, I believe that that will be his official
slogan. Can't fit it on a bumper sticker? You can if the bumper's on a big
enough SUV--seven miles to the gallon and it'll crush anything in its path,
comrade! Want one?

            
               Flies With Honey
Answer
            

            "The administration has got only one carrot--that is
permanent trade status ."

            Weary of facing an annual
vote in Congress, China wants to be enshrined as a "most favored nation" with
the same economic rights as the major trading partners of the United States.
This might induce the Chinese to take action on human rights and is even more
likely to urge them toward membership in the World Trade Organization. Joining
this body, American officials believe, would lead to lowered Chinese tariffs
and increased adherence to international trading laws, such as copyright.

            
               CCC
Extra
            

            South Carolina GOP activist and Republican National
Committee member Buddy Witherspoon announced last week that he was severing his
ties to the Council of Conservative Citizens: "I am a Christian. I am a
conservative. But one thing I am not is a racist." (One thing he will remain is
a man voluntarily known as "Buddy.")

            In January, he had refused to leave the group,
saying it was not racist but merely an advocate for causes such as displaying
the Confederate battle flag and playing "Dixie" at public events.

            The Southern Poverty Law Center says the CCC is "the
reincarnation of the racist white Citizens Councils" that battled integration
in the 1950s.

            Decide for yourself by
visiting the CCC Web site.
Some highlights from the table of contents on its home page:

            
               OUR
WAR
            

            A multi-part exegesis of
the CCC's ideology. "The Northern liberals have been waging a religious war
against the Southern whites all this time: secular humanism is intent upon
stamping out Christianity."--I believe we've got American church attendance
down to 90 percent and representation in the Senate to a meager 95 percent.

            
               VIEWS
            

            Various opinion pieces,
including "American Troops Don't Belong in Kosovo," by Phyllis Schlafly.--I
thought she was kept pretty busy writing for When Animals Attack .

            

               LINCOLN
            

            Including astonishingly
nutty anti-Lincoln links.--These guys are going to be so upset when they find
out he's dead.

            
               M. L.
KING
            

            A man of durable
fascination to the CCC, the first article: "Liar? Sex Addict?
Fellow-traveler?"--Buddy, Buddy, Buddy ...

            

               MILLARD
            

            An endless river of
goofball theories from the CCC's most prolific thinker, H. Millard, including:
"Betty Crocker Gets Blended," "Clarence ('I Am Not A Hater Of Southern Whites')
Page," "The Vanishing American White In Search of White Identity for the Next
Century," "Growth in Anti-Whitism," "Clinton's Stupid Race Panel Bashes Whites.
Surprised?"--It's about time someone had the guts to take on that Clarence
Page.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            The comedy of
literalism.

             

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will 
               become the property of

               
                  Slate
                
               and will be published at

               
                  Slate
               
               's discretion.

               
                  Slate
                
               may publish your name on its site in
connection with your submission .

         
      
   
