
   
   
      
         
            No. 207: &quot;Samaranch Hand&quot;

            

               As it prepares to convene in Switzerland this week, the International
Olympic Committee has invited a well-known American to join its reform panel.
Who and why? (Question courtesy of Andrew Staples.)
               
            

             

            by noon
ET Tuesday to e-mail your answer to newsquiz@slate.com .

            

               
                  Thursday's Question
(No. 206)--"How Do You Take It?":
               

               

                  
                     
                        
                           It happens in Colorado for an hour a day, and
former prosecutor Steven Cohen calls it "the oddest kaffeeklatsch in the
history of Western civilization." What goes
on?
                        
                     
                  
               

               "The
trees talk about how to kill another celebrity."-- Jennifer Miller
               

               "Tim
McVeigh, Ted Kaczynski, and Ramzi Yousef get together to try and solve the
JonBenet Ramsey case."-- Cliff Schoenberg ( Norm Oder et al. had
similar answers.)

               "Adolph
Coors studies for his bar mitzvah."-- Jon Snow (similarly, but rappers
not brewers, Leigh Bardugo )

               
"Barbara Walters, Meredith Vieira, Joy Behar, and Ramzi Yousef at the taping of
their TV show The Parallax View ."-- Meg Wolitzer
               

               
"Finally, a question to which I know the answer: Murderers yell at each
other."-- Sharon Smith
               

               Click
for more answers.

               
                  Randy's
Wrap-Up
               

               To play News Quiz
requires the willful suspension not of disbelief but of genuine knowledge: An
awareness of the actual answer so easily eclipses the inspiration for a comic
response. And, clearly, everyone knew the facts of the matter today. But
there's more about Colorado you might not know. To condense from (but not
otherwise alter) the 1960 edition of the World Book Encyclopedia: "About two
thirds of the people of Colorado live no more. ... Streams tumbling down from
the snowy peaks of the Rockies form ... cantaloupes. ...The Cherokee Indians
found gold on ... President Andrew Johnson, who became a leading ... brandy.
... He surveyed friendly relations." In this context, it's hard to know what
makes a kaffeeklatsch odd. Or a klatsch.

               
                  Fresh Air
Answer
               

               Luis Felipe, the Latin Kings leader convicted of
murder and racketeering, is about to join Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh,
World Trade Center bomber Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, and Unabomber Ted Kaczynski for
conversation in the exercise yard at the federal "Super Max" prison in
Florence, Colo.

               Kept in solitary confinement 23 hours a day in
7-by-12 cells, the men can not even look into the eyes of another prisoner.
They are permitted to spend one hour per day in separate cages in the exercise
yard, where they can speak to each other through mesh fences.

               Because Felipe is believed to have ordered murders
from his cell in a New York prison, he has been kept even more isolated, but a
ruling by federal Judge John Martin allows Felipe into the exercise yard.

               The conversation? Yousef's lawyer, Bernard Klienman,
said, "They talk about innocuous things like the movies. They don't talk about
anything they shouldn't be talking about."

               Steven Cohen was a
prosecutor on the Latin Kings case.

               
                  Infectious
Extra
               

               "Epidemic!," the
wonderful new exhibit at New York's American Museum of Natural History, must
have presented a challenge to the gift shop managers, but they rose to it. Some
actual items for sale in the museum shops:

               

                  Rat Hand Puppet, $25--Plague-infested fleas not included.

                  Cockroach Earrings, part of a series that includes mice, flies, and
mosquitoes, $8--It's a formal affair: Should I go with the malaria or the
hantavirus?

                  Biohazard Martini Glass, "playfully reminds us of the effects of
overindulgence on our immune system", $5--Remind me: What's the difference
between "playful" and "heartless"?

                  Virus Coaster Set (includes Influenza A, Hepatitis B, Adenovirus, T4
Bacteriophage), $12--How many times must I tell you: Don't put your glass on
the table, put it on something that will give you searing abdominal
cramps.

                  Influenza A Squishy Rubber Ball, $5.50--Hey, catch ... a dose of this!

                  "Transfusion™ fruity body and hairwash gel" sold in a realistic IV bag,
$12.50--From the people who brought you the Body Bag poncho.

               

               
                  Common
Denominator
               

               JonBenet.

            

            
               Disclaimer: All
submissions will become the property of Slate and will be
published at Slate 's discretion. Slate may
publish your name on its site in connection with your submission.
            

         
      
   
