
   
   
      
         
            Dark Side Lite

            Those poor souls who've been camping out in front
of theaters for six weeks: Who can blame them for saying, "To hell with the
critics, we know it will be great!"? The doors will open, and they'll race to
grab the best seats and feel a surge of triumph as their butts sink down. We've
made it: Yeeehaww!! They'll cheer when the familiar John Williams
fanfare erupts and the title-- Star Wars Episode 1: The Phantom
Menace --rises out of the screen and the backward-slanted opening "crawl"
begins: "A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away ..." Yaaahhhhhhh!!!
Then, their hearts pounding, they'll settle back to read the rest of the
titles: "Turmoil has engulfed the Galactic Republic. The taxation of trade
routes to outlying star systems is in dispute." Taxation of trade routes:
Waaahoooo!!!!
            

            How long will they go with it? At what point will
they realize that what they've heard is, alas, true, that the picture really is
a stiff? Maybe they never will. Maybe they'll want to love The

               Phantom Menace so much--because they have so much emotional energy
invested in loving it, and in buying the books, magazines, dolls, cards,
clothes, soap, fast food, etc.--that the realization will never sink in. In
successful hypnosis, the subject works to enter a state of heightened
susceptibility, to surrender to a higher power. Maybe they'll conclude that
common sense is the enemy of the Force and fight it to the death.

            Look, I wanted to love
The Phantom Menace , too. I was an adolescent boy and would enjoy being
one again for a couple of hours. But the movie has a way of deflating all but
the most delusional of hopes. If someone had given Ed Wood $115 million to
remake Plan Nine From Outer Space it might have looked like this,
although Wood's dialogue would surely have been more memorable.

            The first thing that will strike you is that George Lucas,
who wrote and directed the movie, has forgotten how to write and direct a
movie. Having spent the two decades since the original Star Wars (1977)
concocting skeletons of screenplays that other people flesh out, and overseeing
productions that other people storyboard and stage, he has come to lack what
one might Michelangelistically term "the spark of life." If the first Star
Wars was a box of Cracker Jacks that was all prizes, The Phantom
Menace is a box of Cracker Jacks that's all diagrams of prizes. It's there
on paper, but it's waiting to be filled in and jazzed up.

            Advance word has been
cruel to the actors, but advance word has it only half right. Yes, they're
terrible, but Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, and Natalie Portman are not terrible
actors, they've just been given scenes that no human could be expected to play.
As a sage Jedi Master called Qui-Gon Jinn, Neeson must maintain a Zen-like
detachment from the universe around him--probably not a challenge when that
universe will be added in later by computers. "I don't sense anything," he
tells his uneasy young apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi (McGregor), as the two sit
waiting to conduct trade negotiations with a bunch of gray, fish-faced
Federation officers who talk like extras in a samurai movie. McGregor furrows
his brow. "There's something ... elusive," he says, working to enunciate like a
young Alec Guinness but succeeding only in nullifying his natural Scots charm.
"Master," he adds, "you said I should be mindful of the future." Neeson thinks
a bit. "I do sense an unusual amount of fear for something as trivial as this
trade dispute."

            A hologram of Darth Sidious, Dark Lord of the "Sith,"
commands the Federation to sic its battle droids on the Jedi ambassadors before
they can apprise Queen Amidala (Portman) of the imminent invasion of the
peaceful planet of Naboo. In come the battle droids and out come the light
sabers, which still hum like faulty fluorescents. Clack, clack, clack. Lucas
can't edit fight scenes so that they're fluid--he cuts on the clack. You get
the gist, though. The Jedi make their getaway, but with gas and tolls and droid
destroyers, it takes them over an hour to land on Naboo, by which time the
queen and the Galactic Senate have already got the grim message. For one thing,
communications have been disrupted: "A communications disruption can mean only
one thing," says someone. "Invasion."

            Queen Amidala, done up
like a white-faced Chinese empress in hanging beads and glass balls and a hat
with curly horns, speaks in tones from which emotion has been expunged, perhaps
on the theory that subjects won't argue with a ruler who puts them to sleep: "I
... will ... not ... condone ... a ... course ... of ... action ... that ...
will ... lead ... us ... to ... war," she drones. Meanwhile, the Jedi whiz
through the underwater core of a planet in a man-of-warlike submersible pursued
by 3-D dragony beasties and a giant catfish with extra movable parts.
Potentially thrilling stuff, but Neeson and McGregor remain peculiarly
unruffled. "The Force will guide us," says Neeson blandly, and the director
seems to share his lack of urgency. There's Zen detachment and there's Quaalude
detachment, and The Phantom 
               Menace falls into the second camp: It
really does take place a long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away. When R2-D2
showed up, I thought: At last, a character with the potential for
intimacy!
            

            Say this for Lucas, he doesn't whip up a lot of bogus
energy, the way the makers of such blockbusters as The Mummy (1999) and
Armageddon (1998) do. It's as if he conceived The Phantom Menace
as a Japanese No pageant and has purposely deadened his actors, directing them
to stand stiffly in the dead center of the screen against matte paintings of
space or some futuristic metropolis and deliver lines alternately formal or
bemusing. ("This is an odd move for the Trade Federation.") Lucas considers
himself an "independent" filmmaker and an artist of integrity. Had he not been
such a pretentious overlord, a platoon of screenwriters would doubtless have
been engaged to rewrite him and make the movie halfway human. A buddy
specialist would have punched up the Qui-Gon Jinn/Obi-Wan Kenobi badinage, and
a black dialogue specialist would have given the comic-relief character, Jar
Jar Binks, a man-size dinosaur with pop eyes and a vaguely West Indian patois,
something fresher than "Ex-squeeze me!" and a lot of Butterfly McQueen-style
simpering and running away from battles. Those of us who complain about the
assembly-line production of "blockbuster" scripts need an occasional reminder
that assembly lines can do much to make empty thrill machines more lively.

            
               The Phantom
Menace didn't need to be barren of feeling, but it took a real writer,
Lawrence Kasdan ( The Big Chill , 1983), to draft the best and most
inspiring of the Star Wars movies, The Empire Strikes Back
(1980), and a real director, Irvin Kershner, to breathe Wagnerian grandeur into
Lucas' cartoonish fantasies. Having lived with the saga for so many years, the
audience was prepared to set aside some of its narrative expectations here to
plumb the origins of Lucas' universe. In The Phantom Menace , however,
the Jedi already exist and the Force is taken for granted--we're still
in the middle of the damn story. The only dramatic interest comes from a young
Tatooine slave named Anakin Skywalker (Jake Lloyd), whom we know will grow up
to father Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) and
then surrender to the dark side of the Force and become Darth Vader. But that
transformation won't happen until the third episode; meanwhile, Anakin is a
conventionally industrious juvenile with a penchant for building droids from
scratch and "pod racing"--an activity that he demonstrates in one of the
movie's most impressive but irrelevant special effects set pieces, a whiplash
hyperdrive permutation of the chariot race in Ben-Hur (1959).

            Later in the film, when Anakin goes before something called
the Jedi Council and meets Yoda and Samuel L. Jackson (together again!), Lucas
dramatizes the interrogation so ineptly that you either have to take Yoda's
word that there's something wrong with the boy ("Clouded this boy's future is")
or to conclude that Yoda, like us, is moving backward through time and has
already seen Episodes 4 through 6. Anakin, he says smugly, has fear in him, and
fear leads to anger and anger to the dark side--which would mean, as I
interpret it, that only people without fear (i.e., people who don't exist) are
suitable candidates for Jedi knighthood (perhaps Yoda will enlarge his
definition of fear in subsequent episodes). There's also some quasireligious,
quasiscientific blather to the effect that the boy was conceived without a
father by "metachorians"--symbiont, microscopic life forms that will speak to
you if you "quiet your mind." In other words, the Force. So, it's not nebulous,
after all! It can be measured. It can be quantified. It can even, perhaps, be
merchandised.

            Yes, the effects are
first-rate, occasionally breathtaking. But the floating platforms in the
Galactic Senate do little to distract you from parliamentary machinations that
play like an especially dull day on Star Trek: Deep Space Nine . The
final military engagement, in which long-headed attack droids are rolled onto
the field as the spokes of a giant wheel, would be awesome if Lucas didn't
routinely cut away from the battle just when he seems on the verge of actually
thrilling you. The chief villain, bombastically named Darth Maul, is a horned,
red, Kabuki-style snake demon with orange pingpong-ball eyes who challenges the
Jedi to a couple of clackety light-saber battles. His appearances are
underscored by demonic chants; he might as well wear a neon beanie that flashes
"Bad Guy." Like all revisionist historians, Lucas cheats like mad. If Darth
Vader had built C-3PO as a young man, how come he never paid much attention to
him in the other movies--and vice versa? As Yoda himself puts it, in another
context, "See through you we can."

            
Still, it's worth reprinting a blistering
e-mail sent to my wife by a relative, after she'd let him know that I hated
The Phantom Menace :

            
               Surprise, Surprise. Star Wars was
never reviewed well by critics. Sometimes a basic story that rests on great
special effects and stupid dialogue can be very entertaining--it's called a
cult movie, and no critic can have an effect on the obvious outcome that this
is going to be the highest grossing movie ever. I myself stood in line for five
hours and already have tickets to see it three times, and I know I'll enjoy it.
Why? Because it plays on my childhood imagination. And I'm sure it's not as bad
as Return of the Jedi , which was the weakest one--but I still liked it
and saw it a dozen times. I get tired of being told I'm not going to like it
because it doesn't adhere to certain basic critic criteria. I say bpthhhh
(sticking my tongue out to review)--don't be sending me anything dissing my
movie:):):)
            

            I'll be curious to know whether he sees The
Phantom Menace a dozen times, or even the three for which he has paid. (I
could imagine seeing it three times only if they sold adrenaline shots at the
concession stand.) Or maybe he'll come out of the movie and say: "No, you
didn't get it, Mr. Snot-Nosed-Criteria Critic Person. It's not supposed to be
exciting. It's laying the foundation for the next chapter, when Anakin and
Obi-Wan defeat the Mandalorian warriors in the Clone Wars and Anakin marries
Queen Amidala. And listen, I'm getting in line even earlier for tickets to
Episode 2 . The Force is with me, butt-head."

         
      
   
