
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Please send your questions for publication to prudence@slate.com.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               Over the past several years it has evidently
become fashionable for restaurants to have all their servers march out singing
birthday greetings to customers. Am I the only person who finds this
intolerable? I've stopped going to restaurants that follow this custom if I can
avoid them. (My wife likes the food at some of these places, so compromises
must be made.) The noise makes conversation impossible, and I can't help but
wonder if that's my meal being ignored in the kitchen during the song.
            

            
               Am I being petty?
Shouldn't servers be respectful of all customers? What can be done?
            

            

               --BH
            

            Honey, get a grip.
Prudie just sang "Happy Birthday" to herself: It takes 11 seconds. If it
is your meal being ignored for roughly one fifth of a minute, Prudie
does not think the delay will harm the flavor. Let Prudie hasten to add that
she, too, finds the wait staff singing the birthday song rather hokey and
believes that the only people who dislike it more than you and I are the
"honorees." It is always embarrassing, but certainly not worth the boycott of a
good restaurant. Prudie thinks you need to hook up your sense of humor to your
tolerance mechanism and find something really objectionable to dislike ... such
as the "suggested" tip printed on the bill.

            
--Prudie, proportionately

            

               
                  A Note From Prudie : What kids call grown-ups is still riling
some readers, so here is a knock for Prudie that was at least
civil.
            

            
               
                  Dear
Prudie,
               
            

            
               You stated, "It
sounds to Prudie as though you and your spouse are a little more formal than
the times," when that he felt children should address adults in a more formal
manner than using their first names. You may be correct that they may be out of
touch with current (rude) customs of our society. In my day, children were
taught respect for their elders, and one of the methods used was form of
address. Today, the television and the mall do the job that once was the
purview of parents. Back then we had no guns in high schools, no drive-by
shootings, no graffiti on the walls, etc. I, for one, am glad that I was raised
by parents who had a value system. I still get up when a woman enters the room,
open a door for her, and offer my seat on a bus. Somehow I am happy to be too
formal for "your" society.
            

            

               --Norm
            

            Dear Norm,

            Prudie applauds your
standing for women and holding doors, but must point out that calling adults by
a first name, if they wish it, is a different issue. Please be assured that
knives in the schools are not caused by calling Mrs. Allen "Jodie."

            
--Prudie, realistically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               While watching the impeachment trial, my
husband of 15 years revealed to me that he had an affair with a friend of ours
some 12 years ago. It went on for the eight months that we were in a commuting
marriage, living in different states. Ten years ago she came out on a vacation
to visit us for two weeks, and has continued to correspond during the holidays.
My husband says he was ashamed of his lie and that they had promised never to
tell me. Over the past years, I have asked him if there was anyone else, and he
always lied. He said the reason for the continued correspondence was that if he
stopped writing I might get suspicious. So, I wrote her and her husband and
told her to stop writing--plus what I thought of her morals.
            

            
               After four months, I
cannot get this out of my mind. I think I love him and want the marriage to go
on, but other days I feel so used that I can't believe I am still with him.
I've spoken to a counselor twice and that helped for a day or so. My husband is
61, and I am 46. What should I do? Am I dumb to try to make this work? I also
suspect him of other lies, but my views of reality are definitely
skewed.
            

            

               --ep
            

            Dear e.,

            Where to begin? Prudie wants to tell you so many
things. First is that you must find the way that is right for you to feel good
again. That old canard that "confession is good for the soul" usually only
seems to work for the person confessing. Lover Boy's disclosure has clearly put
your life at sixes and sevens.

            Of course your husband's behavior was lower than a
snake's tail in a wagon rut. He has not only lied to you but also to the woman
he cheated with. You, however, evened the score somewhat by writing to the
woman and her husband. God only knows what's going on in their
household.

            Therapy that improves
things for only "a day or so" is not Prudie's idea of effective help. You might
want to try someone else. Since you suspect other lies, you might want to have
a trial separation. On the plus side, you say you love this man, and the affair
you know about ended more than a decade ago. On the minus side, feeling you're
never getting a straight story is a major impediment to the comfort one feels
when there is trust. Prudie hopes you find your way to peace and resolution,
and your guide will most likely be a competent therapist, perhaps of the
marriage counselor variety.

            
--Prudie, empathetically

            
               
                  Dear
Prudence,
               
            

            
               You recently ran a letter from about unwanted
sympathy for what was a great example of how to live a life. I also have some
areas where I get very uncomfortable with sympathy. I am the father of three
sons. Two of them died while they were teen-agers, one from an auto accident
and the other from cancer. Yes, I loved them deeply and still have a hole in my
heart for them. The problem is when, in conversation, someone asks general
questions, such as, "How many children do you have?" People are devastated if I
tell them three, but I lost two. If I say one, I am bypassing an important part
of my life. If I just say three, I am not giving a very truthful
answer.
            

            
               I have adjusted well
to these tragedies. It has been hard. I don't want to put people in an
uncomfortable position. There is also a part of me that hurts, but I don't
really want to expose that to a stranger.
            

            

               --Albany Father
            

            Dear Alb,

            Prudie bows low to a man
such as yourself who, having lived through what is said to be life's cruelest
event, is trying to do the honest, philosophically correct, and thoughtful
thing. Prudie suggests that you tailor your answer to the situation. If it is a
passing social encounter, with what you would call "a stranger," say one child.
If you encounter someone with whom you feel rapport, you might say three, with
a brief explanation, and allow that person to express sympathy. Let your
instinct guide you. Prudie wishes to suggest that you are not playing your
history false by not informing people of the two children you lost. Let the
decision about what to say, and to whom, come from your heart, the place where
two of your sons now live.

            --Prudie, respectfully

         
      
   
