
   
   
      
         
             The Kosovo Question

            For the past week,
President Clinton has been preparing to bomb Yugoslavia. His stated reasons are
that the Serb-dominated Yugoslav government, led by President Slobodan
Milosevic, is waging war on the ethnic Albanian population of the Yugoslav
province of Kosovo, and that Milosevic refuses to sign a peace plan to which
Kosovo's ethnic Albanian rebels have grudgingly agreed. Persuading the American
public to support U.S. military action abroad is always difficult because such
action poses risks to our troops, requires moral justification for American
aggression, and threatens to entangle us in commitments we will regret. To win
over the public, Clinton is trying to turn those three issues upside down.

            
               1. Risk. This is the big buzzword
among opponents of the bombing. Speaking to reporters after his meeting with
Clinton Thursday, Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott used this word five times
in three minutes. Another favorite phrase in the anti-bombing camp is "rise to
the level." Last month, Democrats defeated the GOP's impeachment effort by
persuading the public that the charges against Clinton didn't "rise to the
level" worthy of removing a president. Now Republicans are turning the tables,
arguing that the stakes in Kosovo don't "rise to the level" worthy of U.S.
military action.

            Some supporters of the bombing argue that the risk
can be minimized. But this is a losing game, since risk is always more than
zero. The better answer is to reframe the status quo as a parallel option with
risks of its own. "We must weigh those risks [of bombing] against the risks of
in action," Clinton said at his press conference Friday. "If we don't
act, the war will spread. If it spreads, we will not be able to contain it
without far greater risk and cost. ... You have to ask yourself, what will be
the cost and the duration of involvement and the consequences if we do
not move? ... I'm convinced we'll be dragged into this thing under worse
circumstances at greater cost if we don't act."

            To put plausibility and
punch in this theoretical argument, Clinton cited Milosevic's past aggression
and invoked images of slaughtered innocents. Absent intervention, said Clinton,
Milosevic will produce "the same thing that happened in Bosnia"--"refugees" and
"further atrocities." "I would hate to think that we'd have to see a lot of
other little children die. ... I do not believe that we ought to have to have
thousands more people slaughtered and buried in open soccer fields before we do
something." To drive home his point that inaction, like action, requires
justification and bears consequences, Clinton distilled his frame job to a
brilliant sound bite: "In dealing with aggressors in the Balkans, hesitation is
a license to kill."

            2. Aggression. Opponents of the bombing depict the
United States as the aggressor and protest that we shouldn't intervene unless
provoked. "For us to initiate an action such as bombing Serbia is really an act
of war," Senate Majority Whip Don Nickles, R-Okla., told reporters outside the
White House Friday. "I don't think that we should begin bombing unless and
until the Serbs really begin a very significant massacre." Monday in the
Senate, Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, R-Texas, urged her colleagues not to let
Clinton "take an affirmative military action against a sovereign nation that
has not committed a security threat to the United States."

            Clinton has responded by casting the Serbs as the
aggressors. At his press conference, he replied, "I don't think it's accurate
to say we're acting first. I think they have acted first. They have massed
their troops, they have continued to take aggressive action, they have already
leveled one village in the recent past and killed a lot of innocent people." He
added that the Serbs had "stripped away" Kosovo's right to "self-government" a
decade ago. Above all, he argued that the Serbs have repeatedly violated a 1998
agreement with NATO in which they pledged to limit their military presence and
action in Kosovo. This, he maintained, is sufficient to "trigger" bombing: "The
threshold for their conduct has already been crossed." In the Senate Monday,
Sen. Joe Biden, D-Del., agreed: "Everybody forgets we are operating in the
context of an agreement that [Milosevic] signed. ... The Yugoslav government
has flagrantly violated the limits stipulated in the October agreement."

            Together, these points
reverse the aggression argument in two ways. First, they turn the immorality of
aggression into an argument for punishing the aggressors, i.e., the Serbs.
Second, they shift the burden of justification from the pro-bombing to the
anti-bombing camp. The code word for this burden-shifting maneuver is
"impunity." As Clinton put it Friday, "We cannot allow President Milosevic to
continue the aggression with impunity."

            Much of the aggression debate revolves around the integrity
of NATO. Senators who oppose the bombing warn that it would pervert NATO into
an "aggressive" organization. "NATO is a defensive alliance," Nickles observed
Monday on the Senate floor. "Never has NATO [threatened] to go in to another
country that's not threatening neighboring countries, not threatening part of
the alliance ... to quell a civil war."

            Advocates of the bombing
interpret NATO's mission more broadly. Defense, they argue, rests on
deterrence, which rests on credibility in threatening the use of force, which
rests on the use of force when challenged. This argument is weakened by its
abstraction but is bolstered by the fact that the Serbian challenge is in
Europe, NATO's turf. After meeting with Clinton Friday, Sen. Pat Leahy, D-Vt.,
told reporters that "the question" in Kosovo was, "Is NATO relevant? Can NATO
stop massacres right in their own backyard? ... The United States, if it's
going to keep NATO relevant, has to show leadership."

            3. Commitment. Clinton's critics invoke the specter
of Vietnam by warning against an unwise "commitment" to war in Kosovo. Clinton
can't dispute the principle of commitment, so he turns it on its head. We've
already pledged to use force, he argues, and now we must keep our word.
Ostensibly, this commitment was made last year when the United States voted
with its NATO allies to use air power if one side of the Serb-Kosovar war
signed the peace plan and the other refused. After meeting with Clinton Friday,
Sen. Joe Lieberman, D-Conn., told reporters, "The president is resolved. He's
going to keep the agreements made with our NATO allies."

            Just as advocates of
bombing use the word "impunity" to shift the burden of the aggression argument
to their opponents, they likewise use the word "credibility" to shift the
burden of the "commitment" argument. Failure to make good on NATO's
already-delivered threat would "undermine the credibility of NATO, on which
stability in Europe and our own credibility depend," said Clinton. Sen. John
Warner, R-Va., agreed: "The credibility of NATO is on the line. The credibility
of the United States working with its European partners in NATO is on the
line." Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., urged his colleagues to "support NATO" and
"not undermine [its] united effort."

            Clinton is trying to reverse assumptions not merely about
what should happen but also about what will happen. The White
House mantra for the past week has been that Milosevic faces a "stark choice":
Sign the peace plan or NATO will bomb you. The last thing Clinton needs is a
genuine debate in the United States over whether we're serious about that
threat. To shortcut that debate, he is trying to lull Americans into assuming
that we're objectively as well as morally committed--that the bombing is
inevitable. He pulls off this trick by presenting bombing as the default course
with a momentum of its own. "If President Milosevic continues to choose
aggression over peace, NATO's military plans must continue to move forward,"
Clinton decreed Friday.

            The questions posed
before a war are always the same: Should we fight? Can we? Must we? Will we?
Philosophers and theologians try to answer these questions, but smart
politicians rewrite them. That's not fair, you say? Neither is war.

            

               For more Kosovo coverage, click .
            

         
      
   
