
   
   
      
         
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Pushing
Tin
                (20 th Century Fox). The first half of this film
offers an exhilarating peek into the high-pressure world of air traffic
controllers, but despite the best efforts of a choice ensemble cast (John
Cusack, Cate Blanchett, Billy Bob Thornton, Angelina Jolie), the movie tanks by
the end. "[F]or a while, at least, the sheer journalistic energy of what we're
seeing grips us in a casually exotic way" (Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment
Weekly ). The trouble: The plot is horrendous and ends up with an
"obligatory traffic control emergency crisis" (Janet Maslin, the New York
Times ) that takes all the spice out of what had been an unusual study of
group dynamics. (Watch the trailer and clips from the film here [requires free registration].)

            

               
                  Election
                (Paramount Pictures). Critics rave: "The
best and brightest high-school adventure since the groundbreaking
Heathers ... a nearly flawless little film" (Kenneth Turan, the Los
Angeles Times ). Reese Witherspoon turns in a spectacular performance as a
ferociously ambitious goody-goody go-getter who's running for student council
president. Matthew Broderick is the genial teacher who becomes irritated with
Reese's smugness and tries to rig the election. The three-candidate runoff that
results is a loose parody of the '96 presidential election, which makes for "a
moral fable with rare comic bite" (Peter Travers, Rolling Stone ).
(
                  Slate
               's David Edelstein the film "exuberantly caustic." Visit
this site dedicated to the expecting Witherspoon and her fiance Ryan
Phillippe.)

            
               
                  Lovers of the
Arctic Circle
                (Fine Line Features). Critics have a hard time
explaining just what it is they like so much about this Spanish film of fate
and love, but they like it. Maslin says one "needn't really articulate what
makes it so haunting. The evidence is on the screen" (the New York
Times ). Joe Morgenstern writes, "Lest I, too, go round in circles trying to
convey the dense texture of this exquisite film, I'll simply say that [it]
seizes your mind and stays in your heart" (the Wall Street Journal ). The
story follows two lovers who meet at the age of 8 and cycle in and out of each
other's lives through adulthood. Peppered with wordplay, startling visual
imagery, and near misses by the two lovers, the film has only one flaw,
according to critics, namely that all the fancy footwork verges on becoming too
self-conscious. (Visit the film's official site for a sample of the film's
peculiarities.)

            

               Music
            

            
               
                  Mule
Variations
               , by Tom Waits (Epitaph). Tom Waits' first album in six
years, which ditches the junkyard noise experimentation of his previous
releases for a blues approach, gets passable reviews from Rolling Sone
and Spin . "Waits seems to have peaked as a songwriter with 1985's
Rain Dogs ," writes Ben Ratliff, "and he's still writing outtakes from
that record" ( Rolling Stone ). Spin 's Sarah Vowell says, "Waits'
coolie raps often feel a little fake, like he's working at having a good time."
Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times dissents, calling Mule
Variations "personal and accessible"; as does Billboard , "Waits digs
deep and wide into his song psyche and pulls up material rooted in blues,
gospel, and cabaret music but delivered with the utmost originality." (Listen
to a track from the album here.)

            

               Event
            

            
               Nabokov's
100 th Birthday (April 23, 1999). The centennial of Vladimir
Nabokov's birth is marked by the appearance of a biography of his wife, Véra
(Mrs. Vladimir Nabokov) ; a reissue of Speak, Memory ; and a
celebration staged by The New Yorker , Vintage books, and the PEN
American Center. Critics praise Véra for the details it reveals about
the Nabokovs' intense marriage--she was his "editor, typist, secretary,
chauffeur, nursemaid, go-between, buffer, researcher and butterfly-catching
companion" (Michiko Kakutani, the New York Times ). But when you get down
to it, "this is really a potted biography of Vladimir Nabokov, told from an
unusual angle" (Michael Dirda, the Washington Post ). The PEN celebration
featured readings by and about the Nabokovs by Joyce Carol Oates, Dimitri
Nabokov, David Remnick, and Véra author Stacy Schiff. The New York
Public Library is also getting in on the action with an exhibit of Nabokov's
manuscripts and personal effects, such as his glasses and butterfly net. (Click
to read a discussion on Speak, Memory and Véra in

                  Slate
               . This multimedia exhibit on Nabokov on the New York Times ' Web site
includes recordings of him reading his work and a series of photos [free
registration required].)

            

               Book
            

            
               
                  Byron: Child
of Passion, Fool of Fame , by Benita Eisler (Knopf). The 800-page
biography puts forth no new theories on the poet or on his times as it retells
the juicy bits of his life. Sam Schulman complains in the Wall Street
Journal that despite the excellent material, Eisler "cannot capture" the
essence of Byron's power "because her earnestness misses his seductive
combination of modesty, irony, self-doubt and self-confidence." (For more on
Byron, visit this site which includes a portrait gallery and links to other poets'
sites.)

            

               Snap Judgment
            

            

               Movies
            

            
               
                  Lost &
Found
                (Warner Bros.). A "rancid little nothing of a movie"
(Stephen Holden, the New York Times ) that's a grim, gross wannabe
Farrelly brothers flick. Stars David Spade. Thumbs down from all critics. 

                  eXistenZ
                (Dimension Films). Good reviews for David Cronenberg's
virtual reality flick that covers the same ground as the more popular The
Matrix . Jennifer Jason Leigh stars as a video game designer who hides in a
game of her own devising. Features a device called a "gristle gun."

            

               Magazine
            

            

               
                  Nylon
               . Supermodel Helena Christensen starts her own
magazine; critics are mildly interested. It boasts interviews with Liv Tyler
and Mike D and a layout far funkier than any other women's mag, but critics
agree creative director Christensen is "without a doubt the magazine's biggest
selling point" ( Design Week ).

            Find a
movie playing near you on Sidewalk.com.

            

               Recent "Summary Judgment" columns
            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Hideous Kinky ;

               
                  Movie -- Life ;

               
                  Movie -- Goodbye, Lover ;

               
                  Movie -- SLC Punk ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Girl Who Loved Tom Gordon , by Stephen
King;

               
                  Book -- A Prayer for the Dying , by Stewart
O'Nan.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  Go ;

               
                  Movie -- The Dreamlife of Angels ;

               
                  Movie -- Never Been Kissed;
               

               
                  
                     Movie --Metroland ;

               
                  Book--
                  The Ground Beneath Her Feet , by Salman
Rushdie;

               
                  Theater--
                  The Iceman Cometh , by Eugene
O'Neill.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie--
                  The Matrix
                  ;
               

               
                  Movie--
                  10 Things I Hate About You ;

               
                  Movie--
                  Cookie's Fortune ;

               
                  Movie -- A Walk on the Moon ;

               
                  Movie- - The Out-of-Towners ;

               
                  Book--
                  Morgan: American Financier , by Jean
Strouse;

               
                  Book--
                  The Times of My Life and My Life With the

                  Times , by Max Frankel.

            

             

            

               
                  Movie -- Mod Squad ;

               
                  Movie -- EdTV ;

               
                  Movie -- 20 Dates ;

               
                  Television -- Futurama ;

               
                  Book -- All Too Human: A Political Education , by
George Stephanopoulos;

               
                  Book -- For the Relief of Unbearable Urges , by Nathan
Englander.

            

         
      
   
