
   
   
      
         
             A Labor of Linux

            Linux may be impractical
for the masses, but its rebel cachet--"The Man doesn't have me under his
thumb!"--appeals to the motorcyclist in me. Walking out of a bookstore with a
Linux manual under your arm is like swaggering into a restaurant carrying a
motorcycle helmet: You can feel the waves of envy.

            Since my technical education ended with a
seventh-grade "Computer Literacy" class in which we played "Lemonade Stand" on
an Apple IIe for half an hour twice a week, my Linux goals for this article
were modest:

            

               Prove that a computer ignoramus can install the operating system on a
computer that was running Windows 98.

               Install a Linux-compatible Web browser and read 
                     Slate
                   in
it.

               Install a few other Linux applications.

            

            Purchasing Linux in a book, I must admit, was a second
resort. Originally, I intended to download the free version of the
much-heralded operating system, but then I found out that it would take five
hours and that the download doesn't come with instructions. Chickening out, I
visited the computer section of my local bookstore and grabbed a copy of the
friendly yellow Linux for Dummies . But the cashier all but refused to
sell it to me. "You can't get that book," he said, obviously speaking as one of
the Linux initiate. On his advice I paid $34.63 plus tax for Mastering
Linux , a phone-book-sized tome, which includes a copy of Red Hat Software's
5.1 version of Linux on CD.

            Cracking Mastering
Linux open, I was struck by its similarity to motorcycle manuals. "Remove
cylinder head," says the average motorcycle manual, without explaining how you
do that. "Create boot disk," commands Mastering Linux . What's a boot
disk? I found myself turning to a dictionary
of computer terminology on the Web to decipher every third acronym (BIOS?
ATAPI? SCSI?) and figured out that in this case you create an installation boot
disk by copying files from the CD to a floppy.

            
               Making Room for
Linux
            

            After creating the boot disk, I was supposed to
make a new partition on the hard disk of my computer, a Pentium 133 with 32
megs of memory. Partitioning a hard disk means corralling off some space, and
that can be done in Windows with a program called "fips," which I copied from
the Linux CD onto a floppy in Windows. I then restarted Windows in DOS mode
(one of the options when you shut down Windows 98) and ran "fips.exe" from the
floppy. Although I had never used DOS before, I followed the straightforward
directions and made room for Linux.

            The next step was to run
the Linux installation program from the boot disk. I shut the computer down and
put the boot disk in the drive and turned the computer back on. Success! The
boot disk asked me to check boxes for the language and the keyboard I'd be
using, and the source from which I'd be installing Linux. I told it to go to my
CD-ROM drive where the Linux CD resided--and promptly hit a brick wall. The
program refused to recognize my CD-ROM drive, a fairly standard one, and
rejected the 11 nonstandard options from the list. I studied Windows' device
manager for clues on my CD-ROM drive. Mastering Linux suggested that if
the installation program fails to detect your drive, provide very specific
directions for the "IO" and "IRQ." I entered these new settings and still
failed.

            Everyone who talks up Linux mentions how "elegant" it is.
As I tinkered, rebooted, and failed, and tinkered, rebooted, and failed over
and over again to get it to recognize my CD-ROM drive, all I could think was:
yeah, elegant like a Judas
Cradle. And this was only the installation program.

            So I telephoned the
Microsoft Helpdesk. Even though Linux is supposed to demolish Microsoft, the
Microsoft Helpdesk, which provides computer assistance to its employees, was
surprisingly helpful. As I described my trouble, the Help guy replied, "You're
setting up Linux?" Pause. "Um, you know we don't really support that?" Yeah, I
know, but can you help me anyway? "Well, I don't know much about Linux, but
talk to Clarence (not his real name). He'll help you." In 15 or so calls to the
Helpdesk, I encountered only one person who sounded annoyed rather than curious
(and even, dare I say, gleeful) at the fact I was firing up Linux.

            
               A Case of Mistaken
Identity
            

            The Linux that came with Mastering Linux was
never going to communicate with my CD-ROM drive, and I began to lose all
enthusiasm for the project. Just the sight of Mastering Linux induced
the stomach-churning sense of dread that my sixth-grade math textbook once gave
me: "I don't get this. Other people get this. Why don't I get this? I think
I'll go watch TV."

            Instead of watching TV,
I made a fresh start by purchasing a newer version of Linux. The version of
Linux that comes in Mastering Linux offers no technical assistance, but
Red Hat's version 5.2, which costs $39.99, promises one month of free e-mail
support. (CORRECTION: After this article was posted, I learned that
Macmillan Digital Publishing and not Red Hat Software provided the e-mail
support for this version of Linux. That new information is now reflected in the
remainder of the piece.)
            

            The Red Hat manual offered clearer directions, and the new
version automatically partitioned my hard drive. But it still snubbed my CD-ROM
drive. I e-mailed Macmillan with my problem and the company e-mailed back a
one-line response: "Set your BIOS to boot off of the CD." I wrote back: "How do
I do that?" Macmillan's e-mail answer was another one-liner, a URL. I clicked
the link, which led to a page of more links to lots of information on BIOS, but
a half-hour search yielded no information on booting from the CD-ROM drive. I
e-mailed back asking for a more specific URL, and they wrote back, "Look around
there. ... You also may want to check the site of whoever manufactured the
motherboard." Thanks a bunch.

            With Microsoft Helpdesk assistance I figured out
that my CD-ROM drive was probably connected to my sound card and not to the IDE
port, and thus was foiling Linux. I reluctantly returned to Mastering
Linux and found an alternative method for installing the operating system
for people who don't have CD-ROM drives: install from the hard disk. For this
you create a "supplementary disk" from the CD-ROM and use it after booting from
the installation disk. The supplementary disk loaded an unfamiliar blue
"Welcome to Red Hat Linux" page, but after 10 minutes of nothing happening, I
figured I had worn out my welcome. I turned off the computer and went home.

            My next move was to
hornswoggle a friend, a tech guy at the New York Times Web site, into
helping me. I informed him of my CD-ROM/sound card suspicions, and he pried
open my computer's metal box and started gabbing about 40-pin connections. My
troubles were over. Here was someone who knew the acronyms, someone who could
shine a light into the cave I was blindly fumbling in. So with the CD-ROM drive
securely connected to the correct IDE port in my motherboard, we booted up
again. Again, no dice. It was a new low in my Linux morale.

            
               Any IDE Port in a
Storm
            

            After some chin scratching my friend suggested we
look into my BIOS setting. There he discovered my IDE port was disabled. He
enabled it. We booted up and victory! The CD-ROM drive started purring, and
from there the installation was cake. The hard disk whirred away, occasionally
asking for information. I typed it in, it whirred some more, and within an hour
installation was complete.

            I then logged on as "root"--the master user--and
loaded X Windows, Linux's graphical user interface. It looked like a pale and
wan version of Microsoft Windows--with tiny, little crude buttons--even though
it predates Windows. But it worked. I loaded the Netscape browser and tried to
call up 
                  Slate
               , but 
                  Slate
                did not appear. Instead I
got two error messages, one telling me to adjust my SOCKS environment, and
another saying there was something wrong with my DNS server.

            So I was on the phone
with the Helpdesk again, learning about my SOCKS and my DNS server. My
officemate suggested that maybe all I needed to do was adjust my proxy settings
in Netscape and not my SOCKS. He was right, and victory was mine.

            
               I Suffer a Core
Dump!
            

            Next I wanted a word
processing program. I downloaded WordPerfect 8 for Linux from Corel's Web site.
I unzipped and "untarred" (de-archived) the program. I installed it. And it
didn't run. I bribed my tech guy friend to come and help me again. He went back
to the original download and started over, but he couldn't get it to run
either. So he fiddled around with my PATH and a few other things beyond my
comprehension, when a "core dump" occurred. This is some type of serious error,
although I'm still not sure exactly what it is. So we started over and
downloaded again. After reinstalling and receiving increasingly mournful error
messages ("Unable to go on," "Floating point exception") and another core dump,
we called it quits. Three and a half hours of help from a guy who makes his
living working with computers and no WordPerfect to show for it.

            Why would a person like me want to use Linux? The first
reason is price. Linux is free if you download it off the Web. With a manual
and a CD it's about $40. Compare that with Windows 98: $199 for a full setup,
$89 for an upgrade, or bundled for "free" as part of nearly every non-Macintosh
computer. I didn't investigate running Windows software under a Linux
Windows-emulator, mostly because I already have Windows on my system to run
Windows software. I also didn't attach my Linux machine to the company
network--because I couldn't find easy instructions in my books, and further
consultations with the Helpdesk would have been cheating. I'm fairly certain
that setting up a printer is easy, but I'm taking the word of Linux experts on
this.

            Either I'm not ready for Linux, or Linux isn't
ready for me. Or both. I feel guilty about having used not one but two manuals
to install Linux, and worse still that I couldn't make WordPerfect work. I feel
malignantly guilty about having paid cash money for a free operating system and
for enlisting both the Helpdesk and a friend in my endeavor. Yes, I finished
the marathon, but I did it by putting on roller skates and grabbing the
suspenders of those who knew what they were doing.

         
      
   
