
   
   
      
         
            Bombing Kosovo To Save It

            After much previous
controversy, there was surprising unanimity in the western European press
Wednesday over the necessity of a NATO air war against Serbia. There were a few
dissenting voices. In the Times of London, one of its former editors, Simon Jenkins,
wrote in his op-ed column that Western meddling in Kosovo's separatist struggle
"has now brought Nato possibly and Kosovo certainly to a catastrophe." He
asked, "Why does a bloodstained shroud only have to wave over a Balkan village
for otherwise intelligent people to take leave of their senses?" An op-ed
article by David Buchan in the Financial Times of London stressed the threat to NATO's
relationship with Russia, which is "likely to go into the deep freeze." He
concluded, "Over the longer term, the argument with Russia may cast a pall over
further enlargement of Nato--'collateral damage' of the operation against
Serbia before it started."

            But most editorials in
the papers of Britain and other NATO countries were almost unanimous in
supporting the bombing of Serbia. In Britain, the conservative tabloid the
Daily Mail called on NATO "to strike relentlessly and hard"; the
conservative Daily Telegraph said the alliance should "be prepared to conduct an
extended bombing campaign to be followed, as in Bosnia, by the introduction of
ground forces"; and the London Evening
Standard said it was essential for "all the states involved--including
the notoriously short-sighted American administration--to recognise that they
must now commit themselves to the long haul, ground troops and all."

            In the main French papers, the Kosovo crisis ranked second
to the main story of the day--the enforced leave taken because of a
sex-and-money scandal by Judge Roland Dumas as head of the Constitutional
Council, the French equivalent of the U.S. Supreme Court. Libération saw this as a
welcome blow to the traditional arrogance of the French ruling class. The Paris
evening paper France-Soir , on the other hand, said Dumas should have
resigned properly instead of taking an "illegal" temporary leave, which
logically nullified all future decisions by the Constitutional Council, "the
essential guarantor of the good functioning of our democracy."

            In Germany, Die Welt said in a front-page
commentary on Kosovo that Europe will overcome its history only when it is able
to preserve peace across the whole continent without the help of Richard
Holbrooke. The paper said that a European summit on security policy and the
coordination of European diplomatic and military structures is overdue.
Melancholy reflections on European weakness and division also dominated the
Italian press. Vittorio Zucconi, Washington correspondent of La Repubblica of Rome,
highlighted President Clinton's remark that 20 th century history is
largely the history of massacres carried out in Europe by Europeans, and said
that Europe is "once again forcing Americans to take up the sword and die for
villages whose names they don't even know."

            In another front-page commentary in La Repubblica ,
Paolo Garimberti said Clinton was "merciless" in drawing attention to the truth
that even now Europe can't curb its extremist regimes without America's help,
and he added that the NATO intervention in Kosovo "dramatically underscores the
inadequacy of the political and military instruments of which the European
Union disposes." On the front page of La Stampa of Turin, commentator Gianni Riotta heralded
the return of the Cold War. "The NATO alliance that won the Cold War against
the Soviet Union without firing a single bullet is now mobilized against the
Serbs whom the Russians often consider brothers of blood, culture, and
religion," he said, adding that Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov would
certainly exploit this situation to strengthen his uncertain power at home.

            In Madrid, an editorial in El Mundo Wednesday took
Primakov to task for justifying Russia's opposition to the bombing of Serbia by
citing the example of Basque separatism in Spain. People aren't bombing Spain
"because the Basque problem hasn't been resolved," he said. This is a "very
crude comparison," the paper commented: The case of the Basque country, with
its advanced political autonomy, has nothing in common with "an open war and
'ethnic cleansing' against 90 percent of a territory."

            An editorial in the
Independent
of London headlined "This war, at least, is silly and unnecessary" referred to
a new trade war between the United States and Europe over the labeling of
American exports of beef from cows that were fed a bovine growth hormone. The
Independent supported Europe's position on this, but an op-ed piece in
the Financial Times strongly supported the United States against Europe
in the "banana war," which, it said, might "do irreparable damage" to the World
Trade Organization.

            The Times of London carried a report from Bonn
Wednesday that the Kosovo Liberation Army is "a Marxist-led force funded by
dubious sources, including drug money." It said the police forces of three
western European countries are separately investigating growing evidence that
some of the KLA's money comes from drug trafficking. "Should the West back a
guerrilla army that appears to be partly financed by organised crime?" the
paper asked. "Could the KLA's need for funds be fuelling the heroin trade
across Europe?"

            In Albania Sunday, the pro-Democratic Party daily
eAlbaniai blamed the Albanian socialist government's alleged involvement
in organized crime for Italy's recent decision to freeze aid to the country.
Despite Italian protests, trafficking in drugs, weapons, and prostitutes
between Albania and southern Italy has increased rather than diminished, the
paper said. "Moreover, an Italian delegation that visited Tirana two months ago
said that the authorities in Rome had evidence proving that high-ranking
officials in the socialist administration were involved," the paper added.

            On the same day, another
Albanian paper, iKoha Jonei , published some impressive statistics about
corruption in the Albanian government. Attributing its facts to a report by the
country's High Audit Commission, the paper said that 43,000 state officials had
been found to have abused their positions for illegal financial gain. The
guilty officials worked for the ministries of public economy and privatization,
defense, justice, employment, and immigration, as well as in the courts and in
regional customs and tax offices, the paper said. It added that, according to
the Ministry of Social Affairs, 57,306 Albanian firms had paid no taxes at all
in 1998. Meanwhile, the independent daily eGazeta Shqiptarei said
Albania might become the first country in the world to be wholly privatized,
because the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have concluded that
its ruined economy could only be revived by the privatization of all its
national assets.

             

         
      
   
