
   
   
      
         
            Wake Up, Mr. Greenspan

            

               
                  Newsweek
               
               and 
               
                  Time
               
               ,
May 31
            

            
               Newsweek 's
cover story on the future of technology forecasts a post-PC
world where household appliances are connected to the Internet and each other.
Your sprinkler will check with the weather service before it waters the lawn,
your refrigerator will order more milk when your carton expires, and your
toilet will test your emissions and notify your health-care provider when
you're out of sorts. ... Bill Gates, by contrast, envisions a
PC-plus future , where the PC will remain the primary
computing tool but will be integrated with other smart devices.

            
               Time 's cover package on troubled teens includes a poll showing that
20 percent of teens were evacuated from their schools because of post-Columbine
bomb threats. A piece argues that smaller schools might be an antidote to the
gargantuan high schools where adolescents anonymously drift into deep trouble
and despair.

            
               Newsweek 
               reveals that President Clinton has approved a CIA plan to
destabilize Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic: Kosovar rebels will be
trained to commit acts of sabotage such as cutting telephone wires, ruining gas
reserves, and launching cyberattacks against secret bank accounts where
Milosevic has stowed millions of dollars, presumably pilfered from his
people.

            
               Time says that
evangelical youth gained a martyr when the Columbine shooters killed Cassie
Bernall as she affirmed her faith in God. Post-Littleton, campus Christians are
more organized and energized about their evangelizing.

            
               
                  U.S. News
& World Report
               , May 31
            

            The
cover story recounts the story of a black World War II hero
later refused re-enlistment by the Army because of trumped-up charges of
Communist activity. He was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor two years
ago, but his family still awaits an apology. ... A piece describes the fervent campaigning for this summer's Iowa
straw poll. Underdog Republican presidential candidates are seizing it as their
chance for a breakthrough. Frontrunner Gov. George W. Bush faces a dilemma: If
he participates, he risks losing to the social conservatives who dominate GOP
straw polls; if he skips the poll, Iowans may spurn him in February's
all-important caucuses. ... Parents are abandoning the PTA in droves for
groups that are more local and hard-hitting, says a report . The PTA's reformist mandate--it pioneered libraries,
hot lunches, and kindergartens--has degenerated into mere boosterism.

            
               
                  The New
Yorker
               
               , May 31
            

            The
magazine gleefully anticipates a Senate race between Hillary Clinton and
Rudolph Giuliani: "It feels like a government subsidy for wayward journalists."
... In a piece about Ingmar Bergman, the Swedish film director
attributes both his psychologically probing cinematic style and his tumultuous
love life to his emotionally frigid parents. ... An article defends Chai
Ling, who led the Tiananmen Square protests and now runs an American Internet
start-up, from charges of selling out and, more gravely, of guiding the
protests with naive extremism.

            
               
                  Weekly
Standard
               
               , May 31
            

            The
cover package forecasts Al Gore's electoral strategy. One piece says the veep
is likely to take credit for wiring school and libraries to the Internet--even
though this wiring is subsidized by a "universal service charge" on everyone's
phone bill. Another article admits that Tipper Gore is a political asset but
warns darkly of her agenda. She appears to be an apolitical soccer mom, but
she's actually a liberal do-gooder and her advocacy of mental-health issues
threatens to increase health-care costs for most Americans. ... The
Standard rejects the line that Treasury Secretary-designate Larry
Summers is a Robert Rubin clone. Unlike Rubin, Summers believes in lots of
government intervention in the economy and does not trust Wall Street.

            

               
                  Economist
               
               
                  , May 22
            

            The
cover story protests the Fed's failure to hike
interest rates despite early signs of inflation. Alan Greenspan's laxity is
encouraging "speculative excesses." Since higher interest rates take months to
restrain economic expansion, postponing a hike is like waiting "to brake a
runaway car until it is a few feet from the cliff's edge." (For a dissent, see
last week's .) ... The magazine instructs new Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak "to
note what the previous government did and do the opposite." First priorities:
negotiating deals with Syria and the Palestinians. ... An editorial berates the British government's proposal to
eliminate trial by jury for several crimes including theft and weapons
possession. (The home secretary asserted that most defendants demand jury
trials "for no good reason other than to delay proceedings.")

            
               
                  New
Republic
               
               , June 7
            

            The
cover story argues that Hillary Clinton's senatorial
run would harm Democrats whether she won or lost. She would "divert resources
from other candidates, politicize their races in ways that don't play well
beyond the Upper West Side, and become a rallying point for conservatives still
itching to exploit anti-Clinton sentiment," thus thwarting Democratic efforts
nationwide. ... The "TRB " column tells readers not to fret over the rising cost of
health care. The expenditures are worth it because the care they fund is
state-of-the-art, and nothing's more important than health.

            
               
                  New York Times
Magazine , May 23
            

            A
writer visits the designers of the bloodthirsty, hyper-realistic, and immensely
popular video games blamed for the Littleton shootings. They are indifferent to
charges of inciting violence ("Why would I care about that?" one sniffs).
... A novelist criticizes the editing of Juneteenth , Ralph
Ellison's soon-to-be published unfinished novel. Ellison's manuscript was more
convoluted draft than coherent novel. The radical surgery performed by his
literary executor may have removed Ellison's vision from the work. ... A
piece alleges that New York state's services for the mentally ill have
deteriorated under Republican Gov. George Pataki. An example of the tragic
consequences of Pataki's neglect: A demented man, refused care by several
overcrowded health care facilities, recently killed a woman by pushing her
under a subway train. 

         
      
   
