
   
   
      
         
            Bibi, Bye-Bye

            "There
have never been elections in Israel that focused so explicitly on the
personality and leadership of an incumbent prime minister," A. B. Yihoshua, a
distinguished Israeli author and sometime political commentator, wrote Monday
in the Israeli daily Yediot Aharanot . "The main issue that got this
campaign going was not the final status agreement with the Palestinians ... but
the prime minister's problematic personality." In the same paper, Emuna Elon
wrote that Israel could not trust Labor Party leader Ehud Barak: "Israel wants
change, but Israel cannot settle for a non-leader like Barak, a man who until
two months ago was said, even by his supporters, to be 'not taking off' until
he was suddenly reinforced by a battalion of expensive American advisers who
taught him to recite some slogans convincingly."

            As
opinion polls showed Benjamin Netanyahu likely to lose in Monday's national
elections in Israel, the liberal daily Ha'aretz urged a large
turnout by voters opposed to him, so as to ensure his defeat. It described his
statements in the final days of the campaign as "further proof of his lack of
responsibility." The conservative Jerusalem Post said a pall had been cast over the campaign by
the death on Saturday of a Likud campaigner during an altercation with a Labor
supporter who had been trying to deface a Netanyahu poster and replace it with
one of Barak. Representatives of both parties deplored the incident and
described it as murder. La Repubblica of Rome Monday described Netanyahu in a
front-page comment as "the worst of all the heads of government that the Jewish
state has had in its half-century of existence."

            A
flurry of diplomatic activity within NATO to reassess its Kosovo strategy
dominated war coverage in the British press Monday. The Times of London led its
front page with a Newsweek report of the Pentagon warning President
Clinton that the Kosovo war cannot be won without the use of ground troops. In
an editorial, it continued to bang the drum for ground troops and said British
Prime Minister Tony Blair must "convince a reluctant President Clinton to take
those steps that might render plausible an integrated air-ground campaign in
Kosovo. ... Mr Clinton, the candidate who memorably 'smoked but did not inhale'
is for now the Commander-in-Chief who 'bombed but would not fight,' " the
editorial said. "The Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary must now convince
the President that his reputation, and NATO's future credibility, rests upon a
willingness to use the tools at his disposal."

            A day
earlier, the Sunday Times , quoting a British government source, said Blair
is feeling "a deep sense of frustration" with Clinton after failing to persuade
him to commit ground troops to Kosovo. But in another British Sunday paper, the
Observer , Blair dismissed claims of a divide between the
president and himself. "The vast bulk of this military operation is being
carried out by US forces, although Kosovo is a very long way from Kansas," he
said in an interview. "Their commitment and leadership is something for which
President Clinton should be praised, rather than the sneers he receives from
the Right in this country."

            The
Independent
led Monday with the angle that Blair is isolated on the ground war issue. It
quoted a "senior Nato source" as saying that not only the United States but
also Germany is still against committing ground troops because it could lead to
"unknown repercussions from Russia" and "cause governments to fall in Italy,
Greece and the Czech Republic." It quoted a British government source as saying
there is "no threat to the Bill and Tony relationship" but that Britain wants
NATO "to get a move on" and "face up to the decision." In an editorial, the Independent said that Blair, a "hawk
without wings," has been allowed to become isolated by Clinton "as the US
reluctance to commit ground troops has hardened rather than softened and the
President has followed the line of least resistance."

            The
moderate Kosovo leader Ibrahim Rugova told Germany's Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
Monday that the joint declaration he signed last April in Belgrade with
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic was "without meaning." It demanded, among
other things, an immediate end to the NATO airstrikes. Rugova, who was recently
allowed by Milosevic to leave Yugoslavia for Western Europe, said in an
interview that he had only signed to give his family some space, since he was
effectively a prisoner of Belgrade. He said he wanted the air offensive to
continue until Serb troops leave Kosovo and are replaced by a NATO-led
peacekeeping force.

            The
main Italian newspapers led on NATO's rejection of a proposal by Italian Prime
Minister Massimo D'Alema that the bombing should stop if there is agreement in
the U.N. Security Council on a Kosovo resolution supported by both Russia and
China. La Repubblica reported from Brussels that NATO spokesman Jamie
Shea has reiterated that Milosevic must accept the alliance's conditions before
the offensive can be halted. D'Alema discussed his proposal with German
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder at a meeting in Bari, Italy, on Monday. Corriere della Sera of
Milan said Germany's peace initiatives have also been cold-shouldered by the
alliance.

            
China's leading newspaper, the People's Daily , ran an editorial Sunday
headed "Stopping Bombing--Precondition for Any Political Solution." The
government organ said that while the NATO bombing of the Chinese Embassy in
Belgrade provoked widespread indignation, NATO leaders, instead of changing
their stand, "have continued the barbaric raids on an even larger scale against
Yugoslavia." It said, "It is well known that the Kosovo issue is an internal
affair of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia involving complex ethnic and
religious contradictions. ... Events over the past 50 days have demonstrated
that the lunatic bombing of Yugoslavia by U.S.-led NATO has not solved the
Kosovo crisis. Instead, it has caused a larger exodus of refugees and seriously
devastated stability and peace in the Balkans and even Europe."

            On the
failed impeachment of President Boris Yeltsin by the Russian Duma, the daily
Segodnya said that the "hearings in the Duma have proved beyond doubt
that Boris Yeltsin hardly has a match among politicians." But other Russian
papers said the president has little to be proud of. Novaya Gazeta noted
that "not a word in support of the president has been said in the three days of
parliamentary hearings." Moskovsky Komsomolets said that "even those who
opposed the impeachment could not find a good word to say about Yeltsin and
spoke against the impeachment solely in the interests of preserving a semblance
of stability in the country."

         
      
   
