
   
   
      
         
            Yankee Go Home

            Every
time the United States goes into battle, anti-war activists blame the causes
and casualties of the conflict on the U.S. government. They excuse the enemy
regime's aggression and insist that it can be trusted to negotiate and honor a
fair resolution. While doing everything they can to hamstring the American
administration's ability to wage the war, they argue that the war can never be
won, that the administration's claims to the contrary are lies, and that the
United States should trim its absurd demands and bug out with whatever
face-saving deal it can get. In past wars, Republicans accused these domestic
opponents of sabotaging American morale and aiding the enemy. But in this war,
Republicans aren't bashing the anti-war movement. They're leading it.

            Last
weekend, three of the top five Republicans in Congress--Senate Majority Leader
Trent Lott of Mississippi, Senate Majority Whip Don Nickles of Oklahoma, and
House Majority Whip Tom DeLay of Texas--went on television to discuss the war.
Here's what they said.

            

               1. 
               The atrocities are America's fault. "Once
the bombing commenced, I think then [Slobodan] Milosevic unleashed his forces,
and then that's when the slaughtering and the massive ethnic cleansing really
started," Nickles said at a news conference after appearing on Meet the
Press . "The administration's campaign has been a disaster. ... [It]
escalated a guerrilla warfare into a real war, and the real losers are the
Kosovars and innocent civilians." On Fox News Sunday , DeLay blamed the
ethnic cleansing on U.S. intervention. "Clinton's bombing campaign has caused
all of these problems to explode," DeLay charged in a House floor speech
replayed on Late Edition .

            

               2. The failure of diplomacy to avert the war is America's
fault. "I had doubts about the bombing campaign from the beginning,"
Lott offered on Late Edition . "I didn't think we had done enough in the
diplomatic area." Nickles called NATO's prewar peace proposal to the Serbs "a
very arrogant agreement" that "really caused this thing to escalate."

            

               3. 
               Congress should not support the war. When
asked whether they would authorize Clinton "to use all necessary force to win
this war, including ground troops," Lott and Nickles --who had voted a month
ago, along with 70 percent of the Senate GOP, not to support the NATO air
campaign--said they wouldn't. Nickles questioned the propriety of "NATO's
objectives," calling its goal of "access to all of Serbia ... ludicrous."
DeLay, meanwhile, voted not only against last week's House resolution
authorizing Clinton to conduct the air war--which failed on a tie vote--but
also in favor of legislation "directing the president ... to remove U.S. Armed
Forces from their positions in connection with the present operations against
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia." When asked whether he had lobbied his
colleagues to defeat the resolution authorizing the air war, as had been
reported, DeLay conceded that he had "talked to a couple of members during the
vote" but claimed not to have swayed anyone since it was "a vote of
conscience."

            

               4. We can't win. "I don't know that Milosevic will ever raise
a white flag," warned Nickles. DeLay agreed: "He's stronger in Kosovo now than
he was before the bombing. ... The Serbian people are rallying around him like
never before. He's much stronger with his allies, Russians and others." Clinton
"has no plan for the end" and "recognizes that Milosevic will still be in
power," added DeLay. "The bombing was a mistake. ... And this president ought
to show some leadership and admit it, and come to some sort of negotiated
end."

            

               5. 
               Don't believe U.S. propaganda. On Meet
the Press , Defense Secretary William Cohen argued that Yugoslavia had
underestimated NATO's resolve more than NATO had underestimated Yugoslavia's,
and Joint Chiefs vice chairman Gen. Joseph Ralston asserted that Milosevic "had
already started his campaign of killing" before NATO intervened. Nickles
dismissed both arguments. "This war is not going well," he declared. "I heard
Secretary Cohen say, 'Well, Milosevic miscalculated how, you know, steadfast we
would be in the bombing campaign.' But frankly ... we grossly miscalculated
what Milosevic's response would be." Later, Nickles volunteered, "I would take
a little issue with [what] Gen. Ralston said. ... The number of killings prior
to the bombing, I think, has been exaggerated." Moreover, given NATO's
desperate need to "bring Milosevic to the table," DeLay cautioned, "It is not
helpful for the president's spin machine to be out there right now saying that
Milosevic is weakening." The truth, said DeLay, is that "nothing has
changed."

            

               6. Give peace a chance. Cohen said it was "highly unlikely"
that Clinton would meet with Milosevic in response to Yugoslavia's release of
the three captured American soldiers over the weekend, since the Serbs were
continuing their atrocities and weren't offering to meet NATO's conditions.
DeLay called this refusal "really disappointing" and a failure of "leadership.
... The president ought to open up negotiations and come to some sort of
diplomatic end." Lott implored Clinton to "give peace a chance" and, comparing
the war with the recent Colorado high-school shootings, urged him to resolve
the Kosovo conflict with "words, not weapons."

            

               7. 
               We have no choice but to compromise.
Unless Clinton finds "a way to get the bombing stopped" and to "get Milosevic
to pull back his troops" voluntarily, NATO faces "a quagmire ... a long,
protracted, bloody war," warned Lott. Clinton "only has two choices," said
DeLay--to "occupy Yugoslavia and take Milosevic out" or "to negotiate some sort
of diplomatic end, diplomatic agreement in order to end this failed
policy."

            
               8.
We're eager to compromise. NATO has insisted all along that Milosevic must
allow a well-armed international force in Kosovo to protect the ethnic
Albanians. When asked whether "the administration ought to insist" that these
requirements "be met" as a condition of negotiation, DeLay twice ducked the
question. Nickles advocated "a compromise," and Lott expressed interest in
Yugoslavia's proposal for a "lightly armed" U.N. peacekeeping force in Kosovo
rather than a fully equipped NATO force. "Surely there's wiggle room," said
Lott. "Obviously, [the Serbs] don't want them heavily armed, but they've
got to be armed sufficiently to protect themselves. ... So, I think something
can be worked out."

            

               9. 
               We'll back off first. Nickles discounted
the administration's demand that Yugoslavia halt its ethnic cleansing in order
to halt NATO's bombardment: "Secretary Cohen says, 'Well, Mr. Milosevic has to
do all these things, then we'll stop the bombing.' Tim, I strongly believe we
need a simultaneous withdrawal of the Serbian aggressive forces, have a
stopping of the bombing, and an insertion of international police-keeping
force." Lott's formulation put NATO's withdrawal first: "Let's see if we can't
find a way to get the bombing stopped, get Milosevic to pull back his troops,
find a way to get the Kosovars [to] go back in." And DeLay suggested that the
United States should pull out unilaterally: "When Ronald Reagan saw that he had
made a mistake putting our soldiers in Lebanon ... he admitted the mistake, and
he withdrew from Lebanon."

            Some
Democrats call Republicans who make these arguments unpatriotic. Republicans
reply that they're serving their country by debunking and thwarting a bad
policy administered by a bad president. You can be sure of only two things:
Each party is arguing exactly the opposite of what it argued the last time a
Republican president led the nation into war, and exactly the opposite of what
it will argue next time.

         
      
   
