
   
   
      
         
             The Reverse Domino Theory

            During the Cold War,
enthusiasts for American military action abroad invoked the domino theory: If
one country was allowed to fall to communism, many others would follow. In the
debate over Kosovo, opponents of American military action (including many of
those former enthusiasts) invoke a sort of reverse domino theory: If we save
anyone from mass murder or humanitarian disaster, we'll find ourselves doing it
again and again. Moral consistency requires us to do nothing in Kosovo because
we can't intervene every time a thug like Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic
decides to start slaughtering his own citizens.

            That's not the only
argument against the Kosovo intervention. But is it true? Would it really be an
impossible burden to stop every moral outrage on the level of Kosovo?
Isolationist pundits give the impression that the world outside the United
States is a boiling cauldron of centuries-old ethnic rivalries, in which mass
slaughters are everyday occurrences. In fact, attempts at genocide are fairly
rare.

            The term "genocide" is often invoked rather wildly. Russian
newspapers love to talk about the "genocide" against Russian-speakers in the
Baltic states, for example, while European intellectuals like to accuse
Hollywood of committing "cultural genocide." But genocide has a precise and
universally accepted definition: "acts committed with intent to destroy, in
whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial, or religious group," according
to the 1951 Genocide Convention.

            The United States has
been using the term genocide cynically. Washington studiously avoided the "G
word" in describing the killings in Rwanda, where it clearly applied. By
contrast, State Department spokesman Jamie Rubin has been tossing it around
liberally in the last few weeks, even though human rights groups say they
haven't yet been able to document that genocide is underway in Kosovo.

            Suppose the United States, along with its allies, put the
horse before the cart again and committed itself to stopping genocide wherever
it occurred. How many military actions would that have required in, say, the
past 10 years (before Kosovo)? Answer: three definites and one maybe. The
definites are Bosnia, Rwanda, and Iraq, while the maybe is Somalia.

            In Bosnia, genocide was
arguably underway as early as the summer of 1992, but the United States did not
take military action until 1995. In the interim, thousands of lightly armed
troops from NATO countries stumbled around Bosnia in their U.N. blue helmets,
trying to feed victims and stay out of harm's way. This was a gruesome farce,
and the United States should have acted much earlier, with substantial
firepower, to overwhelm the Bosnian Serb leadership.

            Unfortunately, the media have tended to explain genocides
as the spontaneous action of one group motivated by insatiable hatred of
another. But that's not how genocides work. Yes, ethnic hatred runs deep in the
Balkans, but Milosevic had to deliberately fan it in order to start the war,
and the genocide, like all genocides, was planned and executed by a relatively
small group of extremely evil people.

            Rwanda is an even more
salient example of this. Perhaps because Western journalists knew so little
about the country, their reporting suggested that the Hutu-Tutsi conflict was
so deeply rooted, it was unstoppable. One hears it endlessly from "experts" on
TV talk shows: "These people have been killing each other for hundreds of
years, and there's nothing we can do about it." (Even if you know nothing about
Hutu and Tutsi, this argument has no logic. The point is that the two ethnic
groups have been living in peace for a long period, and something happened to
destabilize that peace. That's why it's in the news, and that's why you, you
ignorant windbag, have been invited on television to discuss it.)

            In fact, a relatively small group of Hutu planned and
executed the Rwandan genocide. They had to coerce and intimidate many of their
fellow Hutu to go along with them--thousands of Hutu were also slaughtered in
the genocide for failing to join in. They used the mass media, especially
radio, to broadcast their bloody exhortations. And they used the silence of the
outside world--especially France, Belgium, the United States, and the United
Nations--to justify their actions.

            Saddam Hussein's gassing
of the Kurdish population in 1988 falls outside the arbitrary 10-year rule.
From March to September 1988, the Iraqi army seized every Kurd in a vast
"prohibited area" and carted off nearly 100,000 civilians for execution; it
also used chemical weapons against the Kurdish population. The outside world
did not know the full extent of the killing until reports after the fact. But
those reports established Baghdad as a genocidal regime. So, when the Kurds
came under Iraqi attack again, in 1991, there was good reason to fear that
another genocide was in the offing (although President Bush's real motivation
was defending the stability of Turkey, where the Kurds were fleeing).

            Somalia technically was not a genocide. The 1992-93 famine
lacked the central direction of a genocide, and its victims were not murdered
on the basis of race, ethnicity, nationality, or religion. But it was a
massive, politically inspired slaughter, which certainly justified foreign
intervention.

            The fact that I can't
resist including Somalia shows the difficulty of maintaining any clear line
between situations that justify intervention and those that don't. No doubt
there would be other occasions that clearly met the standard where intervention
was unrealistic. For example, no reasonable person would expect the United
States to invade or bomb Turkey to stop genocide against the Kurds.

            But even a fuzzy and occasionally failed standard would be
an improvement on the ad hoc and random decisions we make now. A standard for
intervention that was universally accepted and regularly if not uniformly
applied might even reduce the number of occasions when intervention would be
needed. If a Milosevic knew with reasonable certainty that ethnic cleansing
would be prevented and punished, he might not attempt it.

            The main point, though, is that there aren't
actually all that many Milosevics in the world. Of the three and a half
genocides in the past decade, the United States and others actually did
intervene--albeit too late or ineptly--in two and a half: Iraq, Bosnia, and
Somalia. Only in Rwanda did the West stand by and do nothing. A cleaner
conscience is not an impossibly ambitious goal.

         
      
   
