
   
   
      
         
             Madeleine Albright

            The last few publishing
seasons have produced a stream of books about the major figures of postwar
American foreign policy: James Chace on Dean Acheson; Kai Bird on McGeorge and
William Bundy; William Bundy on Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger; Henry
Kissinger on himself, to name a few. These books are all works of diplomatic
history, thick with policy analysis, institutional boilerplate, and unabashed
second-guessing. They focus, as one might expect, on the big
issues--containment, détente, China, Vietnam--and on the day-to-day
contingencies of democratic politics and imperial diplomacy. Personality is for
the most part an analytic construct, of interest only to the extent that it can
help in the understanding of historical events.

            The two new biographies
of Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright do the opposite, using historical
events to explain the personality of their subject. Ann Blackman and Michael
Dobbs, the authors, respectively, of Seasons of Her Life: A Biography of
Madeleine Korbel Albright and Madeleine Albright: A Twentieth-Century
Odyssey , are both accomplished Washington journalists and experienced
foreign correspondents. But, for all the light they shed on the substance and
conduct of U.S. foreign policy, they might as well be writing for the style
pages. "Madeleine's story can be read as a personalized version of the
twentieth century," announces Dobbs, the Washington Post reporter who
first broke the story of Albright's Jewish background.

            Blackman, a writer for Time who has served as both
Washington bureau chief and Moscow correspondent, sketches a virtually
identical biography, but her view of Albright is more personalized. "Albright's
greatest appeal," she declares, "is that she is just like us, only wealthier.
She has had bad hair days and skirts with spots, runs in her stockings, a dog
that was skunked. ... Americans see her as vulnerable, a wife rejected, a
single mother who went back to work, prevailed, and raised good kids."

            Continuing in this vein,
Blackman titles her last chapter--about the first year or so of Albright's
tenure as the most visible diplomat in the world--"Celebrity." Undoubtedly,
Madeleine Albright is a "celebrity," a word one would hesitate to apply to
Warren Christopher, Cyrus Vance, or Dean Rusk. Of her predecessors, only
Kissinger exercised a comparable hold over the public imagination, but he
achieved it by exploiting the drama and mystique of his diplomatic
undertakings. Albright's celebrity is less a matter of what she has done than
of who she is: a candid, funny, and appealing woman with a life story rich in
human interest and historical resonance. She has also received the star
treatment usually accorded pioneers of diversity. As the first woman in charge
of a department that traditionally combines gentleman's-club exclusivity with
macho bluster, she has figured out how to present herself to the public, to the
media, and to other world leaders without the benefit of role models.

            She has, for the most part, succeeded brilliantly, becoming
the most popular and visible member of Clinton's second-term Cabinet. According
to an anonymous State Department official quoted in the Washington Post ,
"Madeleine Albright, more than anyone else in this administration, is driven by
her own biography." And she has used her life story--even those aspects of it
that apparently took her by surprise--in the service both of her public image
and of the policies she advocates. Her status as an American who fled both
Hitler and Stalin gives Albright a certain moral authority, just as her
success, against long odds, as a woman in a man's world makes her an appealing
figure. But the foreign policy of the world's superpower cannot be explained
by--and should not be based upon--the life experience of a single person, no
matter how tough, charming, or admirable they might be. Albright's biographers
offer an inspiring narrative of how she succeeded in becoming secretary of
state, but they offer scant grounds for evaluating what has happened since. And
neither, so far, has she.

            Albright was born Marie
Jana Korbelova (Madeleine is the anglicized form of Madlenka, her childhood
nickname) in Prague in 1937, the eldest child of Josef Korbel, a diplomat, and
Mandula Spiegel. Though Josef's birth certificate declared him "Jewish and
legitimate," he habitually wrote "no confession" on official forms that asked
him his religion. His assimilation, like that of many Czechoslovakian Jews
between the wars, seems to have been motivated by a combination of fear,
ambition, and patriotism. Before the Nazis erased his country from the map,
Korbel served as an attaché to its Belgrade embassy. During the war, the
Korbels fled to England. Many of their relatives, including Madeleine's
grandparents on both sides, died in the concentration camps. Korbel returned to
Prague, and then to Belgrade, to serve his government in the brief period
between liberation from the Germans and the Communist coup of 1948. The family
ended up in Denver, where Josef was a revered professor of international
relations until his retirement in 1969. Madeleine and her sister and brother
were raised as Roman Catholics; no mention was ever made of the Korbels' Jewish
origins. Until Dobbs confronted her with evidence of her ancestry and of the
deaths of her relatives in the Holocaust, Albright seems to have lived in a
state of willed ignorance, declining to challenge her parents' account of the
past.

            If Albright's childhood is marked by the catastrophes of
20 th -century European history, her early adulthood unfolded amid the
complacencies of the American '50s. She attended Wellesley on a partial
scholarship, and soon after graduation she married Joseph Medill Patterson
Albright, scion of two prominent newspaper families. As she raised their three
daughters and moved from Washington to Long Island and back in the service of
her husband's rather lackluster career in journalism, Albright inched her way
toward a Ph.D. under Columbia University Professor Zbigniew Brzezinski. In the
meantime, she worked on the staff of Sen. Edmund Muskie, D-Maine, and then,
when Brzezinski became President Jimmy Carter's National Security Adviser, as
his liaison to Congress.

            After her husband left
her for a younger woman, Albright's professional ambition accelerated. In 1984
she was foreign policy adviser to vice presidential candidate Geraldine
Ferraro. By 1988 she was advising presidential candidate Michael Dukakis. In
the course of that doomed crusade she met Bill Clinton and wrote him a letter
of recommendation to the Council on Foreign Relations. A few years later, he
named her ambassador to the United Nations.

            Albright's U.N. tenure is best remembered for two things:
her sandbagging of Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and her proclamation
that Cuba's shooting down of planes flown by anti-Castro exiles took "not
cojones " but "cowardice." Both of these statements were calculated to
play well at home and to outrage the rest of the world. Since becoming
secretary of state in early 1997, Albright has similarly done better on the
domestic front than in the international sphere, enjoying a long media
honeymoon, holding hands with Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., persuading a
recalcitrant Congress to ratify the chemical weapons conventions, and pushing
for NATO expansion. But halfway through her term in office, the Middle East
peace process is moribund, U.S. China policy is mired in incoherence, and the
Indian subcontinent is locked in a nuclear arms race. And this is not to
mention East Timor, Southern Sudan, or Saddam Hussein. It can be argued in
Albright's defense that international affairs is no longer the grand chess
match of the Cold War years--it's more like a floating crap game. But the
complexity and instability of the world are hardly excuses for the muddle and
indirection of the world's only great power.

            It was Albright, after
all, who titled a 1993 memo to Clinton "Why America Must Take the Lead." The
subject of that memo was Bosnia, and while Ambassador Albright emerged as the
administration's leading hawk on a number of fronts, arguing for intervention
in Haiti and in Rwanda, she made the case for how the United States should take
the lead--by threatening and, if necessary, using force--with special passion
about the American role in the Balkans.

            The Bush administration's approach to the unfolding
disaster in Yugoslavia might be characterized as inaction backed up by
indifference. Until last month, the Clinton administration preferred calls for
action backed up by indecision. Writing in the New York Review of Books ,
Mark Danner has argued that the administration's predilection for tough talk,
coupled with its political timidity, did much to make matters worse in Bosnia.
In 1993, Clinton, urged on by Albright, rejected out of hand the Vance-Owen
plan for partition of the country, saying that it rewarded Serb aggression. Two
years later, after the massacres at Srebrenica and Vukovar, the slaughter and
displacement of tens of thousands more Croats and Muslims, the decimation of
Sarajevo, and the Serb conquest of more territory, the administration pushed
through the Dayton Accords. This agreement, which gave the Serbs a great deal
more than Vance-Owen would have, was puffed as a Nobel-worthy diplomatic
accomplishment. In the meantime, Albright had promoted the United Nations'
disastrous "Safe Havens" policy, which placed masses of unarmed Bosnian
civilians under the "protection" of minuscule numbers of U.N. (but no U.S.)
troops--that is, left them at the mercy of Serb paramilitaries, who
systematically set about driving them from their homes and killing them.

            The administration's failure to act effectively in
Bosnia (or in Rwanda) can't be blamed entirely, or even primarily, on Albright,
whose job at the time was peripheral to the making and implementing of policy.
Nor can the Kosovo campaign be called "Albright's war," even though it was the
utter failure of her attempted diplomacy at Rambouillet (along with the failure
of her one-time rival Richard Holbrooke in Belgrade) that helped to precipitate
the current conflict. But the NATO campaign against Milosevic is often, and
rightly, viewed as the victory of Albright's interventionist position over the
more cautious views of colleagues such as National Security Adviser Samuel
Berger and his predecessor Anthony Lake. The genesis of that position, Albright
has insisted, lies in her own life story: Her view of the world, she repeats as
though it were a mantra, was formed not by Vietnam, but by Munich, by the
failure of the great powers to check totalitarian aggression in Central Europe.
But as the war over Kosovo escalates, such analogies prove to be of limited and
rapidly diminishing use. It is likely that future secretaries of state will say
that the formative experience of their lives was Kosovo. What they mean when
they say that, rather than how she got to be where she is, will determine
Albright's place in history.

         
      
   
