
   
   
      
         
             Cody Shearer

            On Tuesday, May 11, Chris Matthews interviewed
Kathleen Willey on CNBC's Hardball , the cable program that aspires to be
to the Clinton scandals what Nightline was to the Iranian hostage crisis
and Robert MacNeil's PBS show was to Watergate. Casual viewers may have thought
they were watching some kind of "best of Monicagate" retrospective--isn't
Kathleen Willey awfully 1998? But to conspiracy theorists, Flytrap trivia
buffs, and media creatures for whom the end of the scandal is likely to mean
extinction, Willey's re-emergence yielded a small, ambiguous, but nonetheless
tantalizing tidbit.

            On Jan. 8 last year, shortly before she was to
testify in the Paula Jones trial, Willey reportedly had a frightening encounter
with a jogger near her house in Richmond, Va.--a complete stranger who
nonetheless seemed to know quite a bit about Willey's children, her car, and
her cat. Though Willey declined to identify the man on Hardball-- Kenneth
Starr's office, she said, had asked her not to--Matthews seemed to have a
pretty good idea who he was. "Is it someone in the president's family,
friends?" He pressed Willey. "Is it somebody related to Strobe Talbott? Is it a
Shearer?"

            What's a Shearer, you
ask? A Shearer is a member of a semi-prominent journalistic/political family
connected to Bill Clinton in a number of ways. To hard-core Clinton-haters,
these connections are evidence of Clinton's true political colors--the
social-democratic, New Left, McGovernite, anti-free-enterprise, America-hating
tendencies he has so brilliantly camouflaged.

            The Shearers are also the kind of people Republican
mugwumps despise most viscerally: privileged, socially and professionally
ambitious dissenters whose liberal-left politics don't prevent them from
enjoying the prerogatives of membership in the establishment. Lloyd Shearer,
the patriarch of the clan, was for many years the editor of Parade
magazine, which, during the Reagan era, interspersed its celebrity profiles and
sensible recipes with anxious warnings about the dangers of the nuclear arms
race. His son Derek, a former professor at Occidental College, served in
Clinton's Commerce Department and then as his ambassador to Finland. Derek also
co-authored a book called Economic Democracy , which served as something
of a manifesto for Tom Hayden when the former SDSer abandoned radicalism for
the California Senate in the early 1980s. Worse yet, Derek's wife, Ruth
Yannatta Goldway, was elected mayor of Santa Monica in 1981 on a
pro-rent-control ticket. To a Southern California Republican, this is like
saying she was the president of North Korea. Derek's sister Brooke worked on
Hillary Rodham Clinton's staff and is married to Deputy Secretary of State
Strobe Talbott, the president's buddy from his Oxford days, long suspected by
the right of being soft on communism. But Matthews did not suggest that any of
these Shearers were stalking Kathleen Willey in a quiet Virginia subdivision on
a damp winter morning. The Shearer in question, he declared, was Brooke's twin
brother, Cody.

            This is not the first time Cody Shearer's name has
floated to the top of the murky stew of supposition, innuendo, and sleaze that
passes for political discourse in America these days. Joe Conason, who debunks
rumors about Clinton and his circle with the same dogged zeal with which
Matthews advances them, defended Shearer in a recent Salon column.
Shearer could not have been Willey's stalker, Conason declared, because he was
in San Francisco Jan. 8. Three days later, flying home to Washington, Shearer
happened to bump into his brother-in-law's old boss former Secretary of State
Warren Christopher. And as a result of being smeared by Matthews, Matt Drudge,
and Rush Limbaugh, said Conason, Shearer had been subject to death threats and
other forms of terror. (The most disturbing instance was the appearance, a few
days after Matthews' interview with Willey aired, of an armed man on Cody
Shearer's lawn. The man, who later surrendered, turned out to be Pat Buchanan's
brother Hank. Go figure.) Matthews has since apologized for mentioning
Shearer's name on the air.

            For his part, Conason
declined to explain why the bare possibility of Shearer's involvement in the
harassment of Willey was so gleefully seized upon by Clinton's own designated
harassers. If Cody Shearer did not exist, Richard Mellon Scaife would have
given someone a grant to invent him. Or maybe, like Lee Harvey Oswald in Don
DeLillo's Libra , Shearer is both real and invented--a creature of
multiple coincidences who seems at the same time to be operating in the service
of a grand, impenetrable design. When members of the vast right-wing conspiracy
talk about their counterparts in the vast left-wing conspiracy, Cody Shearer's
name is bound to come up sooner or later.

            Is Shearer a private citizen unfairly sucked into the
vortex of public scandal? If so, the vortex is awfully good at finding him. In
published reports, Shearer is most often described as a journalist or a
free-lance writer. His byline has been rather scarce during most of the Clinton
era. Through the '80s he co-wrote, with Maxwell Glen, a syndicated column on
politics and culture, which addressed such motley topics as trucking
deregulation and the ill effects of skin magazines on the male libido. In 1989,
the column dug up several embarrassing incidents of drunkenness in the past of
John Tower, whose nomination to be secretary of defense was derailed by
questions about his alcoholism and sexual irresponsibility.

            A conspiracy theorist
might infer that in helping to sink Tower, Shearer was already acting as the
cat's paw of a Democratic dirty tricks operation--or, at least, that the Tower
affair whetted his appetite for political dirt-digging and skullduggery. In any
case, it was Shearer who, during the 1992 presidential campaign, introduced the
world--through the unlikely medium of Doonesbury --to Brett Kimberlin.
Kimberlin, you may recall, was the convicted bomber, habitual liar, and
all-around sociopath who claimed to have sold drugs to Dan Quayle. Was Shearer
acting on behalf of the legendary Clinton "opposition research" outfit, which
had floated damaging rumors during the '92 primaries about Paul Tsongas' health
and Jerry Brown's drug use? Or was he just an enthusiastic free-lancer?

            A similar question arose during Sen. Fred Thompson's long,
comprehensive, and inconclusive hearings into the Democratic Party's 1996
campaign fund-raising shenanigans. There, Shearer's name popped up in the
course of Sen. Don Nickles' angry questioning of Terry Lenzner, the private
investigator who would later, in the thick of the Jones/Lewinsky/Willey/Who
Knows Who Else matter, be accused (by Dick Morris, among others) of
coordinating efforts to smear and intimidate those women. Shearer had
apparently acted as a liaison between Lenzner's firm, Investigative Group
International, and the Cheyenne-Arapaho tribe. The tribe had donated more than
$100,000 to the Democratic Party, hoping, according to testimony, that the
administration would intervene on its behalf in a dispute over drilling rights
on tribal land. Lenzner had been retained to uncover compromising links between
Nickles--who opposed the tribe's claims--and local oil interests. Lenzner,
while he admitted that he had accepted the tribe's retainer, has denied that
Cody Shearer had ever worked for IGI--though the firm did once employ his
sister Brooke.

            Shearer's efforts as a free-lance political fixer
have not been limited to domestic affairs. Much to the embarrassment of his
brother-in-law and the consternation of others in the State Department, details
have recently emerged about Shearer's efforts, in 1996 and 1997, to arrange for
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic to surrender to the International War
Crimes Tribunal in the Hague. According to his lawyer, Shearer took less than
$25,000 from an associate of Karadzic's in France in the fall of 1997. Accounts
vary as to what happened next, but it appears that Shearer was either duped by
the Serbs or double-crossed by them. Karadzic, as the saying goes, is still at
large.

            Cody Shearer is a man
with many connections, able to convince Bosnian Serbs, Cheyennes and,
unintentionally, Washington Clinton-haters that he is a player, a person who
makes things happen. But he may just be a person who things happen to happen
to, a guy with a penchant for pretending to be what others want to believe that
he is. Every time he turns up on the scene--and even when (as in the case of
Kathleen Willey) he doesn't--people ask: What's he doing here? He probably asks
himself the same question.

            
               
                  Editor's note:
Several errors in this piece as originally posted have been corrected. Click to
read a letter to the editor criticizing the original version.
               
            

         
      
   
