
   
   
      
         
            No. 241: &quot;A Very Special ...&quot;

            
               A recent episode
of a popular TV series was postponed because it was frighteningly like an
actual, front-page event. Now the network says it will go ahead and broadcast
the show's season finale, although it too is disturbingly reminiscent of that
same event. How will the listing in TV Guide describe the big
show?
            

             

            Send
your answer by noon ET Thursday to newsquiz@slate.com .

            
               Tuesday's Question
(No. 240)--"So Stop and Ask Directions":
            

            

               
                  
                     Fill in the blank on this thoroughly satisfying
explanation from Defense Secretary William Cohen: "None of those maps indicated
that it was the Chinese Embassy that was being targeted. It was not a human
error or mechanical error--it was a(n) __________
error."
                  
               
            

            "
'Humechanical error?' offered Cohen after an uncomfortably long
pause."-- Beth Sherman ( Dale Shuger and David Duncan had
similar answers.)

            "
'Hilarious error.' (This contributed to China's angry reaction.)"--Justin
Warner
            

            "
'Typographical error.' 'Chinese Embassy' was mistakenly typed 'aspirin factory'
on the map, so the spell-checker missed it."-- Charles Star (similarly,
Ken Novak )

            "
'Cartoon error.' Just try this little trick to defuse the tragedy of the
situation: Missiles through window. Embassy flattened. Staccato violins pluck
out stereotypical Chinese music. Chinese run around, backsides aflame. Cut to
Jiang Zemin positioning boulder on cliff."-- M Pesca
            

            "A
time in my boyhood when the world seemed full of possibility. I and my friends
would take our fishing poles down to the pond and dip our toes in the water and
... oh, I'm sorry--are we out of time? I deeply regret the error."-- Kate
"Please Stop Sending Me Those Autoreplies" Wing
            

            Click
for more answers.

            
               Randy's
Wrap-Up
            

            It is a terrible thing to be dragged in front of
the TV cameras and forced to admit that your own dreadful ineptitude led to
horrible suffering, which is why I pray that none of you will ever have your
divorce hearing televised. But if you do, may you be blessed with the wiliness
of a fox, the agility of a cat, and the creepy ingenuity of a defense secretary
in concocting a dazzling non-acknowledgement: It was nobody's fault. It's the
new heartlessness.

            Whatever happened to the
military's traditional heartless approach of finding a scapegoat? In Stanley
Kubrick's 1957 Paths of Glory , when those French soldiers failed to go
over the top and take the anthill, the general staff arbitrarily picked three
poor, dumb bastards to be tried and executed for cowardice. In the remake, the
general staff will arbitrarily select three saps who will be tried and found
delightfully not guilty. The movie will be called ... oh, pick it--anything
from Tailhook to Aviano . No, wait. One guy was found responsible
for that last one, not for the deaths themselves, but for destroying a
videotape. Patton, I think it was.

            
               Always Check Your
Answer
            

            "It was an institutional error."

            Some ways of cross-checking a map the institution
decided not to try:

            

               Have an American on the ground confirm the location.

               Have a Yugoslav on the ground confirm the location.

               Ask an American official who'd recently been in Belgrade.

               Ask a travel agent.

               Look it up in the phonebook.

               Call the Yugoslav Federal Directorate of Supply and Procurement and ask for
its address.

            

            
               Cartographic Fun
Fact
            

            The National Imagery and
Mapping Agency, the Pentagon bureau that made the map of Belgrade, also made
the map of Aviano, the one without the ski lift. Coincidentally, it was also
nobody's fault that the Marine jet severed the cable and killed those
skiers.

            
               Let Your Fingers
Do the Extra
            

            The just-arrived
Manhattan Yellow Pages is sprinkled with chirpy public-service ads. As every
professional knows, placement is as important as the ad itself. That is, the
way an ad in a magazine is read is affected by the other information on the
page. Below, actual phone book public service messages, the actual paid ads
that accompany them on the page, and the presumed meaning of their
juxtaposition.

            Public Service Ad: "Encourage children to write and
share original stories."

            Paid Ad: "Celebrity signatures and sports
memorabilia."

            Presumed Message: Get
your kids to sign lots of stuff, so years from now, when they're famous, you
can sell it to suckers.

            Public Service Ad: "Volunteer to read to
children."

            Paid Ad: "She-Male Escorts, The Alternative to the
Routine."

            Presumed Message:
Something about reading pornography to kids? I'm as appalled as anyone.

            Public Service Ad: "Hold family storytelling
sessions."

            Paid Ad: "ACI, The Nation's Oldest Private Drug and
Alcohol Treatment Center."

            Presumed Message: Hold
family storytelling sessions about Uncle Milt's three-day benders in Atlantic
City.

            Public Service Ad: "Healthy Advice. Consult your
physician before beginning an exercise program."

            Paid Ad: "Sizzle Escorts. Feel the Heat."

            Presumed Message: Ever
since Rockefeller died during sex, people are so cautious. It's like they're
afraid of being sued or something.

            Public Service Ad: "Household safety. Make sure
everyone in your family knows what to do in the event of a fire."

            Paid Ad: "Accident Victims. You Need an Experienced
Law Firm ... fire and explosion injuries."

            Presumed Message: First
the fire, then the lawsuit.

            Public Service Ad: "New in town? Shop the Bell
Atlantic Yellow Pages."

            Paid Ad: "Asian Club Escorts to Excite You."

            Presumed Message: Don't
know where to find a hooker? Here.

            Public Service Ad: "Start your own family book
club."

            Paid Ad: "Gold Shield Security and Investigations.
Private and Corporate Investigations."

            Presumed Message: Make
big money writing books people will pay you not to publish. Start with Uncle
Milt.

            
               Common
Denominator
            

            Intelligence error.

         
      
   
