
   
   
      
         
            I Have Read the Future

            Since the launch of 
                  Slate
                nearly
three years ago, we've joked about how you'd know when online magazines were
ready for mass consumption. It would be when you could take them, like print
magazines, to the bathroom. Well, I'm here to tell you: I've read

                  Slate
                on the john.

            Among the other places I
have been reading 
                  Slate
               , Salon, an electronic version of
the Wall Street Journal , and the e-texts of various novels and short
stories, in last couple of weeks:

            

               Aloud to my wife in a car at night

               In a taxi, again at night

               While brushing my teeth

               On a plane without an overhead light

               Standing on the subway

               In bed

               While eating Chinese food with chopsticks

            

            These are situations in which reading is ordinarily
either awkward or impossible. They present no challenge, however, to my new
favorite gizmo, the Rocket eBook. I'm not what you would call an early adopter
when it comes to consumer electronics. I don't have a DVD player, an MP3
player, or a Palm Pilot. But I'm ready to blow $499 on a Rocket as soon as I
have to send my demo model back. This chunky little device, which weighs just
under a pound and a half, actually deserves that overused epithet
"revolutionary," because it has the power to change something as basic to human
civilization as the way people read.

            A lot has happened since
I wrote about  last fall. You can now actually buy two different models.
One is the Softbook, which at $299 appears less expensive than the Rocket but
actually costs more because you must commit to spending $479 on books over two
years as part of the package. The Softbook is a writing-tablet-size screen with
a leather cover that gives off what someone must have imagined to be the musty
scent of an old book (but is actually the smell of a new shoe). The Softbook's
one big advantage is that you don't need a PC to use it. You buy books directly
from Softbook and download them into the reader via a phone line. But the
Softbook has two big disadvantages. The first is that it's poorly designed. The
screen is hard to read, navigating text is clumsy, and the whole device has an
unbalanced feel. The second drawback is it doesn't work. After reading a bit of
preloaded text-- The Sea Wolf, by Jack London--I couldn't download
anything else, and my Softbook soon purged its preloaded content as well. The
only other person I know who has a Softbook reports a similar failure.

            By contrast, the Rocket, which is made by a Silicon Valley
start-up called NuvoMedia, is ergonomically sound, with the pleasing heft of a
folded-over paperback. The screen is superb, and you get a choice of large or
small print as well as a variety of lighting settings. You can orient the text
horizontally or vertically and position the grip for left- or right-handed use.
And because it doesn't need to be held open, you can read the Rocket
one-handed. In fact, you can even prop it up and read no-handed if you're
eating something greasy or shaving. All you need is one clean finger to click
the "forward" and "back" buttons that move the text a page at a time. The
battery lasts for some 30 hours before needing to be recharged.

            And while the process of
getting stuff to read on the Rocket is a bit involved, it actually works
remarkably well. First, you load the Rocket software onto your PC. Second, you
register your eBook and get an ID and a password. Third, you go to the Barnes
& Noble Web site, which is (but won't be for long) the exclusive
distributor of Rocket-formatted content, and make your e-purchase. Fourth,
Barnes & Noble sends you an e-mail message with a Web link that allows you
to download what you've purchased into the "Rocket Library" on your PC. Fifth,
you transfer your book from your PC's Rocket Library to your Rocket, which has
4 mb of memory (enough to hold 20 medium-length novels). The only hitch I
encountered in this procedure was that Barnes & Noble took a few hours to
e-mail the link I needed to download books I bought. (I understand that this is
not an uncommon problem.) Instant gratification is an important part of the
appeal of e-books, and I found this delay slightly maddening.

            There are other drawbacks of the sort you would expect from
any infant technology. Barnes & Noble stocks only 524 eBook titles at
present, an unfortunately large number of them in the business and self-help
categories. You can buy Endless Referrals: Network Your Everyday Contacts
Into Sales and Life Without Stress: The Far Eastern Antidote to Tension
and Anxiety (which would seem to cancel each other out) but not
Uncovering Clinton or The Ground Beneath Her Feet . Recent
publications are gratuitously overpriced. The discount price of Angela's
Ashes is $10.40 in paperback, $17.50 in hardcover, and $20 for the eBook
edition.

            This makes no sense when
you consider that the publisher has eliminated such expenses as paper,
printing, binding, warehousing, distribution, and "returns." Another advantage
for publishers is that because a book is encrypted for a single user, it can't
be copied, forwarded, or resold. So, why are publishers setting e-book list
prices so high? Because they fear e-books, even as bookstores, including a
sizable group of independent shops, embrace them. When you think about it,
though, their positions might well be reversed. If e-books become a real
alternative to p-books, publishers stand to gain by eliminating most of their
fixed costs and by being able to keep everything in print forever. They might
even envision cutting out the middleman, namely the bookstore. If I retailed
books, I'd be worried. This, however, is only one scenario. Martin Eberhard,
the CEO of NuvoMedia, thinks booksellers will remain part of the process.
"When's the last time you went shopping for a Simon & Schuster book?" he
asks. And it might be established authors who would try to do an end run around
publishers. "It's not clear who gets disintermediated," he says.

            T he really good news is that readers can disintermediate
both publishers and booksellers and get thousands of books and magazines free.
Just last week, Rocket released a beta version of software that lets anyone
upload texts to its site, creating a kind of open-source library. The site
offers Hamlet , the Art of War, and Aesop's Fables, among
other titles. But more significantly, the Rocket eBook lets you download any
text-based content from the Web or your hard drive. With the Rocket software, I
downloaded Daisy Miller , Our Mutual Friend, and some other
fiction in the public domain from the Project Gutenberg Web site before a
transcontinental flight. Another feature I love is that you can find remembered
passages by word-searching these texts. You can also highlight words and look
them up in the pre-installed Random House Dictionary, though it didn't have
"arras," which James Wood used in last week's discussion of Vladimir Nabokov in

                  Slate
               's"Book Club" (it means "tapestry"). And I figured out how
to download the full weekly text of 
                  Slate
                in one go by converting
the 
                  Slate on Paper
                Microsoft Word file to the HTML
format. (Late-model word processors allow you to use the "Save As" function to
save documents in HTML.)

            E-books are going to evolve. They will get lighter,
their screens will get more legible, and their batteries will last longer.
Soon, they may do what a related device called the Audible can do, and actually
read to you, either via sound files or text-to-voice software. E-books may
converge with other handheld devices. You can use the newest palm-sized
organizers as talking books or readers--though you wouldn't want to read a
novel on one, at least not yet. Most important, e-books will get cheaper. They
may even be given away, or sold at a token price with content purchase
agreements or subscriptions, on the model of cell phones. But I have no doubt
that they're coming. And when they truly arrive, I predict that the Rocket will
be remembered as a landmark: The first demonstration that reading a "book"
didn't require paper, ink, or even an overhead light.

         
      
   
